@@@@@


doc= 30805


Beloe, Robert (1905-1984), educationist, was born in Winchester on 12 May 1905, the eldest of the four sons (there were no daughters) of the Revd Robert Douglas Beloe (1868-1931), headmaster of Bradfield College, Berkshire, and his wife, (Margaret) Clarissa, the daughter of the Revd Prebendary John Trant Bramston, of Winchester College. Throughout his life his career was marked by the twin interests of education and the Church of England. He was educated at Winchester College and at Hertford College, Oxford, where he obtained a second-class honours degree in modern history in 1927. 
There followed a brief apprenticeship in teaching -- at his father's old school, then at Eton, and finally (as some preparation for the very different realities of popular education) at an elementary school in Reading. Beloe married in 1933 Amy, daughter of Captain Sir Frank Stanley Di Rose, second baronet, with whom he had a son and two daughters. In 1931 he had joined the ranks of educational administration as a trainee in Kent, and three years later he was promoted to Surrey, to which the central twenty-five years of his career were devoted. In 1939 he became deputy education officer, and one year later chief education officer. 
Beloe was therefore well placed to become a central member of that significant group of chief education officers who were responsible for putting into effect, in the years after the Second World War, the provisions of the 'Education Act' of 1944 designed by R. A. Butler. The two decades during which Beloe presided over the provision of public education in Surrey represented the high-water mark of the influence of enlightened administrators working amicably with elected councillors. Such influence by local government officers was to be much eroded in the closing decades of the twentieth century. He was among the first to make detailed plans for the expansion of secondary education, which required both the abolition of all fees for secondary school pupils and the provision of secondary education for all pupils over the age of eleven. 
The urgent requirements of expansion and building, the traditional respect in which the county grammar school had been held since the act of 1902, and the prevailing orthodoxies inherited from the 1930s made it inevitable that the majority of secondary school pupils would be directed into secondary modern schools while the more academic minority would enjoy the undoubtedly superior provision of the grammar schools. Surrey was rich in such schools. Beloe's own preference was for a form of common or comprehensive schooling for pupils between the ages of eleven and thirteen, at which point more definitive choices could more appropriately be made. Although this preference did not prevail, he did ensure -- as educational expectations and performance rose -- that good opportunities for some of the pupils excluded from the grammar schools were provided within the secondary modern schools. Socially and economically Surrey was a well-favoured area, and the development of the bilateral school (essentially a secondary modern school with a grammar school stream within it) was a distinctive mark of Beloe's years in that county. 
Such a development, in a county warily suspicious of innovation, furnished a natural bridge to the more dramatic growth of comprehensive schooling which was to be so pronounced a feature of the educational history of the 1960s. Beloe himself had little interest in some of the more ambitious claims made for comprehensive education, and little sympathy with their ideological roots. His concern was for the individual (pupil or teacher or colleague) and with the extension to him or her of the advantages enjoyed by those who came, like himself, from a privileged background. 
One measure of these advantages in post-war Britain was access to an appropriate public examination attesting educational success for those pupils choosing to stay on at school for at least one extra year beyond what was at that time the legally imposed school-leaving age. Beloe's introduction of the GCE (general certificate of education, as it had been constituted in 1951) into the secondary modern schools of Surrey was an index of the determination of parents, teachers, and pupils to enlarge the scope of that examination. It was nevertheless acknowledged that the GCE had weaknesses, which became more obvious as it was opened to less academic pupils. 
Beloe had been a member since 1947 of the Secondary Schools Examination Council, the national body then responsible for policy on such matters, and it was therefore particularly appropriate that in 1958 he should be appointed chairman of a committee of that council charged with reviewing the provision of school examinations. The Beloe report of 1960 enjoys a place in educational history and led to the introduction five years later of the certificate of secondary education (CSE) which was intended to meet the needs of pupils across a wide range of ability. That examination was designed to be determined by the curriculum provided in each school, to be controlled very largely by teachers, and to provide an acceptable alternative to the GCE. Its success and popularity created problems -- inherent in the provision of two separate examinations for sixteen-year-old pupils -- and in 1988 (fifteen years after the minimum school-leaving age had been raised to sixteen) the two examinations were merged in the general certificate of secondary education (GCSE). The CSE, the principal national monument to Beloe's career, represented an important transition and epitomized many of the liberal values of the decade in which it was born. 
In 1959 Beloe, to the surprise of many, was appointed as the (first) lay secretary to the archbishop of Canterbury. In that discreet capacity he served for ten years two archbishops, G. F. Fisher and A. M. Ramsey. He was appointed CBE in 1960 and was made in 1979 an honorary DCL of the University of Kent. He was a member of many committees and other bodies, including the royal commission on marriage and divorce (1951-5). His recreations included travel and gardening. Beloe died at his home, the Hill House, Queens Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 26 April 1984. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30806


Clark, Thomas Archibald Bennet- (1903-1975), botanist, was born in Edinburgh on 13 January 1903, the only son and youngest of four children of Thomas Bennet-Clark JP, accountant and senior partner in the firm of R. and G. Scott, chartered accountants of Edinburgh, and his wife, Anne Chalmers Hanna. His interest in botany was kindled at an early age by his father, whom he accompanied on excursions to Ben Lawers and Norway in search of alpine plants. Educated first at Wells House School, Malvern Wells, from 1912 to 1916, he went on to Marlborough College in 1916 and won an open entrance scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge in 1920. He gained first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos in 1922 and 1923 (specializing in botany in part two) and, in the latter year, won the Frank Smart prize for botany. 
As an undergraduate Bennet-Clark developed a passionate interest in plant physiology, to which he was to devote his whole career. Following graduation he began research at Cambridge with F. F. Blackman. Two years later he became assistant at Trinity College, Dublin, to Professor H. H. Dixon. He completed his Cambridge PhD at Dublin. While in Ireland, on 22 September 1926, he married Elizabeth Constance, daughter of the Revd James Haythornthwaite, rector of Rathmines parish, Dublin. They had two children, Margret Aithna ('b'. 1929) and Henry Chalmers ('b'. 1934). 
In 1930 Bennet-Clark was appointed lecturer in botany at the University of Manchester. In 1936 he became the first professor of botany at the University College of Nottingham and, in 1944, professor of botany at King's College, London; finally, in 1962, he became professor of biology and first dean of the school of biological sciences, at the University of East Anglia, Norwich. 
Bennet-Clark's contributions to plant physiology were in three distinct fields: the metabolism of organic acids in succulent plants, particularly members of the Crassulaceae; the water relations of plant cells, especially in connection with the possible existence of an active water uptake mechanism; and finally, the isolation, identification, and mode of action of plant growth hormones, in which he was the first (with N. P. Kefford) to use chromatography to separate naturally occurring plant growth regulating compounds. 
Bennet-Clark published only thirty papers, but the quality and originality of his work, and its incisive and critical nature, engendered immense interest and worldwide research activity. He was an excellent university teacher, who placed more emphasis on stimulating enthusiasm in his subject than on the ground covered. Possessed of an encyclopaedic mind and photographic memory, he could discuss almost any topic in botany from an informed and authoritative standpoint. He thought botany should be taught entirely by rigorous experiment and viewed taxonomy and ecology as more suitable for amateurs, though there were few more knowledgeable field botanists. His belief that plant and animal biology should be taught in an integrated manner bore fruit when he founded the school of biological sciences at the University of East Anglia. He did his utmost to support and encourage both colleagues and students, but he could not stand laziness or pomposity, and did not suffer fools at all. He could appear unreasonable -- but this was the result of the enormous demands made on him, together with a certain professorial forgetfulness. Being asked to take one of his lectures might have been considered an honour until it was explained that the lecture should have begun about five minutes beforehand. 
Bennet-Clark served on many national and international bodies. He founded and edited (1950-60) the 'Journal of Experimental Botany', and gave outstanding service to the Agricultural Research Council (from 1957 until 1967), the Royal Society, the Society for Experimental Biology, and many other organizations. His workload left him little time for hobbies, although he enjoyed gardening, especially scrounging and acquiring plants, and carpentry, at which he was probably rather too impatient to become really skilled. 
Bennet-Clark was a man of small stature, who often wore a patched suit and a wide-brimmed trilby hat while riding a bicycle through London traffic. He was known equally well to the keepers of the Palace of Westminster and the porters of the Royal Society and King's College as the professor who parked his bicycle in the most inappropriate places. He was an adventurous driver and many preferred public transport to a lift in his unusual cars, which bore unmistakable evidence of encounters with London Transport buses. Nevertheless, he was well liked and respected by colleagues and students. His outstanding contributions to plant physiology were recognized by his election to a fellowship of the Royal Society (1950) and an honorary fellowship of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1969), the award of honorary DSc degrees by the universities of Leicester (1968) and East Anglia (1968), and appointment as CBE (1966). 
Bennet-Clark retired in 1967 and withdrew completely from the academic and public scene, first to his home in Essex and subsequently to a beautifully restored medieval tenement flat in the Canongate, Edinburgh. After a distressing illness he died on 24 November 1975 at Glencairn Towers Nursing Home, 8 Chalmers Crescent, Edinburgh. 
M. B. Wilkins', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30807


Bennett, Jack Arthur Walter (1911-1981), literary scholar, was born on 28 February 1911 at Auckland, New Zealand, the eldest son of Ernest Bennett, foreman shoemaker, and his wife, Alexandra Corrall. Both parents were born in Leicester in the 1880s: Ernest worked in shoe manufacturing, and emigrated to New Zealand in 1907; Alexandra followed in 1908. Bennett's younger brother Norman was born in 1916. Bennett was educated at Mount Albert grammar school in Auckland, where he won a Lizzie Rathbone scholarship to Auckland University College. The most important influence on his work while he was at Auckland was that of Philip Sidney Ardern. While undergraduates, Bennett and his friend James Bertram founded and edited a controversial literary magazine, 'Open Windows', intended to introduce New Zealand readers to the larger world of literary modernism. 
In 1933 Bennett left for Merton College, Oxford, with a postgraduate scholarship, having taken a first class in the Auckland MA examination. He completed the Oxford BA English course (medieval and philological option) in 1935, with a first class, and at once, with Kenneth Sisam as his supervisor, embarked on a doctoral thesis 'Old English and Old Norse studies in England from the time of Francis Junius till the end of the eighteenth century'. He took his DPhil in 1938; in the same year he was elected to a junior research fellowship at Queen's College, Oxford. 
In 1937 Bennett married a pupil at Oxford, Edith Bannister; the marriage was annulled in 1949. At the outbreak of war in 1939 Bennett was in the United States. He stayed there until September 1945, working for the Ministry of Information, and becoming head of the research division of British information services. He returned to Queen's College late in 1945 and took up teaching for the English faculty. In 1947 he was elected to a tutorial fellowship at Magdalen College, where his colleague in teaching English was C. S. Lewis, whom Bennett knew as a member of the literary group the Inklings. In 1951 he married as his second wife Gwyneth Mary Nicholas (died 1980), the daughter of Archibald John Nicholas, a civil servant; they had two sons. Bennett soon began to help C. T. Onions, who was also at Magdalen, to edit his journal 'Medium Aevum'; he succeeded Onions as sole editor in 1956 and continued until 1980. In 1964 he succeeded C. S. Lewis as professor of medieval and Renaissance English at Cambridge; in the same year he became a fellow of Magdalene College, and in 1968 was made the keeper of the old library at Magdalene. 
Bennett's first substantial publications were editions of medieval texts: 'The Knight's Tale' (1954), and 'Devotional Pieces in Verse and Prose from MS Arundel 285 and MS Harleian 6919' (1955). Also published in 1955 was his edition (with H. R. Trevor-Roper) of 'The Poems of Richard Corbett'. His three books on Chaucer occupied him intermittently for the following twenty years. 'The Parlement of Foules: an Interpretation' appeared in 1957, 'Chaucer's Book of Fame' in 1968, and (based on the Alexander lectures given at Toronto in 1970-71) 'Chaucer at Oxford and at Cambridge' in 1974. 'Early Middle English Verse and Prose', a volume of annotated selections which Bennett edited with G. V. Smithers, appeared in 1966. 
From the 1950s until the early 1970s Bennett was also much involved, as general editor, with the 'Clarendon Medieval and Tudor' series of annotated texts, to which he himself contributed two of the later volumes: 'Gower' (1968) and 'Piers Plowman' (1972). From 1972 to 1976 he published four sets of 'Supplementary Notes on 'Sir Gawain and the Green Knight'' and in 1980 a short book, 'Essays on Gibbon' (this was not such a radical departure as it might seem, since his interest in Gibbon went back to his doctoral thesis of over forty years before). Bennett's last completed book, 'Poetry of the Passion' (1982), examined poetic treatments of Christ's passion from the Old English 'Dream of the Rood' to 'The Anathemata' of David Jones. Also in 1982 appeared a volume of Bennett's uncollected essays; edited by Piero Boitani and published in Rome, it was called 'The Humane Medievalist and other Essays'. 
Bennett left unfinished at his death a large work which had engaged him for many years -- the medieval volume intended for the 'Oxford History of English Literature'. Entitled 'Middle English Literature', this was completed and edited by Douglas Gray and published in 1986. 'Medieval Studies for J. A. W. Bennett', a volume of essays by pupils and friends, edited by Peter Heyworth and intended for Bennett's seventieth birthday, appeared too late for him to see it in 1981. 
Although Bennett was unquestionably one of Britain's leading literary medievalists, his interests were by no means confined to the middle ages. The seventeenth century was a favourite period, and he was surprisingly well read in American literature. Erudite, imaginative, sensitive, his work as a whole was nourished by his curious and highly independent reading in all periods and by a wide and discriminating experience of the arts, especially painting. 
Bennett was made a fellow of the British Academy in 1971. In 1976 he held a visiting fellowship at the Australian National University, and was elected a corresponding fellow of the Medieval Academy of America, and an honorary foreign member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1978 he was elected to an emeritus fellowship of the Leverhulme Trust, and in 1980 was awarded the Sir Israel Gollancz prize of the British Academy. 
Bennett had long suffered from cardiac asthma; some months after his wife's death in March 1980 he was on his way to New Zealand, and had stopped at Los Angeles, when he died suddenly on 29 January 1981. He was buried in Cambridge beside his wife. He had been a devout Roman Catholic. 
Emrys Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30808


Bennett, Sir Thomas Penberthy (1887-1980), architect and public servant, was born on 14 August 1887 at 39 Kensal Road, London, the elder child and only son of Thomas William Bennett (died 1901), clerk for the London and North Western Railway (LNWR), and his wife, Ann Frances Hodge, 'nee' Penberthy. He was educated at St Augustine's church school, Kilburn. When his father died in 1901 he entered the drawing office of the LNWR at Euston, where he began his architectural training. He studied architecture at evening classes of the Regent Street Polytechnic under A. E. Richardson and won several prizes there. He obtained a place at the Royal Academy Schools, where he won a year prize for sculpture. He learned to draw at Heatherley's atelier, was a good watercolourist, and played the piano and organ well. 
In 1911 Bennett left the LNWR for the architect's office of the Office (later Ministry) of Works: the chief architect said that he could not possibly be more of a nuisance inside the office than he had been knocking at the door. He qualified ARIBA in 1912 and FRIBA in 1922. When war broke out in 1914 he enlisted but was called back to supervise the construction of hutting in France and Wales. There he learned the value of good site management and labour relations. On 19 August 1916 he married Mary Langdon Edis (1883/4-1976), portrait painter, daughter of Charles Vessey Edis, a retired clerk. 
In 1919 Bennett joined the firm of Mewes and Davis as chief assistant. He could have had a partnership there but, after eighteen months, left to set up his own practice with J. D. Hossack. At the same time he became head of the school of architecture and building at the Northern Polytechnic. He entered this field with great energy, and had become a recognized authority on technical education when in 1929 he resigned to devote more time to his practice. During the next ten years Bennett built a mass of buildings; large scale flats, of which he built many, including those at Westminster Gardens, Marsham Street, Eyre Court, Finchley Road, Hillcrest, Hampstead, and the Avebury estate at Bethnall Green, and public authority housing, offices, stores and suburban shops, banks and cinemas, the Saville Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue, and establishments for the Royal Navy. Many of these were designed with the help of Morris W. Linslade, his son Philip, and W. Bonham Galloway. 
Bennett's reputation as an architect came from sound contract management and financial control rather than from innovation or refinement in design. He was not an 'architects' architect', and held the view that good architecture comes from good building backed by sound administration, and, in his case, from unbounded faith in his own judgement. His self-confidence brought many clients. His ability to assess the potential of a site, prepare alternative sketch plans, produce carefully worked out figures of costs and likely returns, and to complete his building on time made him popular, particularly with developers. As a clear-thinking, determined, and efficient architect he was without equal. 
In 1940 Lord Reith called Bennett to the Ministry of Works to be controller of bricks. In 1941 he became director of works and played an important part in the construction of hospitals, airfields, ordnance factories, and naval and prisoner-of-war camps. In 1944 Lord Portal invited him to oversee contracts for the production of the temporary housing programme. Bennett returned to private practice at the end of the war. In 1947 he was invited by Lewis Silkin to become chairman of Crawley New Town. He had already made a name as independent chairman of the Board of Trade boot and shoe working party (which reported in 1945), and Crawley was a new challenge which once more exercised his flair for organization. Such was his success that in 1951 Lord Dalton, who had succeeded Silkin, asked him to be chairman of Stevenage New Town, the appointments to run concurrently. At Stevenage, Bennett found irreversible planning difficulties which he was unable to resolve and he resigned in 1952. 
In 1960, with Crawley almost completed, Bennett retired from public life but continued with his practice. He became consultant to the partnership in 1967. He was appointed CBE in 1942, knighted in 1946, and appointed KBE in 1954. Of medium height and strongly built with a straight back, he walked with a measured tread. His voice was authoritative. He appeared to look neither to left nor right when speaking. A firm mouth contributed to a somewhat brusque manner. He was a keen golfer, and a proud life president of the Highgate Golf Club. When over ninety he was still playing, 'but only twice a week, apart from practice'. His only son, Philip Hugh Penberthy Bennett CBE, succeeded his father as senior partner in T. P. Bennett & Son in 1967, before retiring in 1980. Thomas Bennett died at his home, The Sycamores, 19 North Road, Highgate, London, on 29 January 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 30809


Bentley, Nicolas Clerihew (1907-1978), cartoonist and author, was born at 75 Dartmouth Park Hill, Highgate, Middlesex, on 14 June 1907, the youngest in the family of one daughter and two sons of Edmund Clerihew Bentley (1875-1956), writer, and his wife, Violet Alice Mary (1878/9-1949), daughter of General Neil Edmonstone Boileau, of the Bengal staff corps and something of an eccentric: of him, Bentley wrote: 'of all my immediate relatives whom I never had a chance to meet, the General, who died twelve years before I was born, is the one I would most like to have known, and knowing, I feel equally sure, would have loved' (Bentley, 'Version of the Truth', 29). 
Nicholas Bentley (he later dropped the 'h' from his first name) was sent to University College School in Hampstead, London, and left it, no scholar, at seventeen. He was already visiting the National Gallery to study painting, and knew he was going to be some kind of artist. The illustrated books in his father's library included works by Caran d'Ache and Gustave Dore, which he enjoyed before he could read. He enrolled in 1924 at the Heatherley School of Fine Art, London, known to be good for teaching illustration. The joint principal was Iain Macnab, who became important in Bentley's development. Bentley described him as a genius, both for the way he gave students confidence in themselves and, in particular, for how he insisted on practising observation, which became the sure foundation of Bentley's own success as an artist. Bentley seems to have been observant from childhood, but after learning from Macnab he wrote, 'One's eye is never off duty'. 
Bentley left Heatherleys after a comparatively short time, and became a clown (unpaid) in a circus. He had always been fond of dressing up, especially with his father's friends the Chestertons -- and getting inside the skin of somebody else is as much the business of the illustrator as of the actor. He worked as a clown for six weeks, and then for a short time took part as an extra in films. His experiences in the ring and on the stage are reflected in several of his early cartoons. 
In 1926 Bentley worked on the London underground during the general strike and sold his first drawing to his godfather, G. K. Chesterton, but it is not known what it was. In 1928 he was illustrating a diary in a trade paper, 'Man and his Clothes': clothes always interested him, and he always drew them with great skill. He was then offered a job by Jack Beddington, the director of Shell publicity, and joined a group which included Edward Ardizzone, Barnett Freedman, Rex Whistler, Arthur Elton, John Betjeman, Peter Quennell, and Robert Byron; the American poster artist Edward McKnight Kauffer also became a close friend. In his autobiography, 'A Version of the Truth' (1960), he wrote: 'the three years I spent with Jack Beddington were decisive, not so much for Shell as for me... I... would certainly not be the sort of man I am if I had never felt Jack's influence' (Bentley, 'Version of the Truth', 139). Bentley's friendship with Beddington was deep but he was not fond of advertising. Rescue came from Hilaire Belloc, an old friend of his father's, who asked him to illustrate his 'New Cautionary Tales' (1930). Bentley took Belloc's memorable advice, delivered on a visit to Shell-Mex House: 'If you don't get out of here pretty soon, my boy, you'll be tied to the chariot wheels of commerce for the rest of your life!... Where's it going to get you? Clear out of it while you can, my boy! (ibid., 142-3)' The collaboration led him to illustrate, with equal success, several comic books by J. B. Morton (Beachcomber of the 'Daily Express'), Damon Runyon, and others, as well as anthologies, sometimes compiled by himself. The twelfth book bearing Bentley's name as illustrator, also written by him, was 'Ready Refusals, or, The White Liar's Engagement Book'. The text consists of a quotation for every day of the year, collected by Bentley from an astonishing range of authors, and sets down in his own words 'an invitation resistance that is proof against every effort of the most insultingly charitable hostess'. The first published collection of Bentley's cartoons, culled from 'The Bystander', 'Punch', and 'Men Only', was 'Die? I Thought I'd Laugh!' (1936); but he was already as much of a writer as he was an artist. 
On 17 October 1934 Bentley married Barbara Mary Hastings (1908-1989), the daughter of Sir Patrick Gardiner Hastings, the most famous QC of his day; their only child, Arabella (Bella), was born in 1943. During the Second World War Bentley illustrated several books for children, including two written by his wife: 'Lobby Lobster' (1943), with eight full-page illustrations beautifully conceived in full colour, not just in line with colour added; and 'Mustapha Monkey' (1945), with many illustrations, among the best he ever did, but all in line. 
Before the war Bentley had been a prison visitor at Wormwood Scrubs prison and in 1938 became an auxiliary fireman. During the war he served with the London Fire Brigade, and had grim experiences in the London blitz, vividly described in 'A Version of the Truth'. He worked in the Ministry of Information throughout the war, first in the home intelligence and later in the publications and films divisions. After the war he continued to draw for books, newspapers, magazines, and advertisers, and also wrote three thrillers, all published by Michael Joseph and later as paperbacks by Penguin. In 1950 he joined the publishing firm of Andre Deutsch, for whom he had illustrated George Mikes's best-seller 'How to be an Alien' in 1946: he became not only Deutsch's partner but a lifelong friend. 
Working as a publisher enabled Nicolas Bentley to go on drawing without being forced to over-produce. Between 1952 and 1954 he drew regular cartoons for the weekly 'Time and Tide', and after that for the daily 'News Chronicle'. Between 1958 and 1962 he drew over 600 'pocket cartoons' for the 'Daily Mail', published about 2 inches wide from much larger drawings. He finally found the strain of this work too great, and gave it up as a regular commission. 
Bentley had an outstanding ability to catch likenesses. His faces are clearly real people he has observed, both rich and poor, old and young, women and children as well as men, and even dogs and cats. Some portraits may be called cruelly accurate, but they are never savage. He also drew many portraits, in black and white line, of famous people, for various papers, including over sixty for the 'Sunday Telegraph', which began publication in February 1961. When aged over sixty-four, he began drawing for 'Private Eye', at that time the most youthful of Britain's adult satirical weeklies. His cartoon of the royal family sitting in 1972 for a group photograph (reproduced in 'Nicolas Bentley Drew the Pictures', 1990) is accurate, funny, and devastating. 
The source of Bentley's inspiration is man himself: man, proud man, especially when dressed in a little brief authority. He became the first artist in England of recent times to get away with loud laughter at certain aspects of death and the church -- perhaps from natural irreverence and also because they gave him the opportunity to use pleasing areas of solid black. More usually he showed the gentler, more pleasant face of life. His pretty girls, whether vacuous or intelligent, are enchanting, and his housewives, chars, couturiers, schoolgirls, Wren officers, cellists, and hockey players are never mere caricatures: they are honest portraits of individuals we all know. The people of England in the mid-twentieth century live on in all his pages. 
Towards the end of his life Bentley moved out of London and settled down in a converted village school at Downhead, near Shepton Mallet, Somerset. Though becoming elderly, he retained a youthful appearance -- slim, shy, and friendly. He died at the Royal United Hospital, Bath, on 14 August 1978. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30810


Bentley, Phyllis Eleanor (1894-1977), novelist, was born on 19 November 1894 at Victoria House, Stanley Road, Halifax, Yorkshire, the fourth child and only daughter of Joseph Edwin Bentley (1855-1926), master dyer and finisher, and his wife, Eleanor Kettlewell (1859-1949), daughter of Thomas Kettlewell, representative of a cloth-manufacturing firm in Huddersfield, Yorkshire. She was educated at the Princess Mary High School for Girls, Halifax, and, from 1910, at Cheltenham Ladies' College, where she studied for an external London University degree. In 1914 she was awarded a first-class pass degree, an indication that she should have taken the honours degree that was at that time forbidden to women students. 
After her years at Cheltenham, Bentley returned to Halifax. Her autobiography ''O Dreams, O Destinations'' (1962) recalls the dilemma of the educated woman living in the parental home without income or independence in the early years of the twentieth century. She came under strong pressure to 'stay out of a man's job' and help her mother with domestic tasks, but in 1915 she took a teaching post in a boys' grammar school. She was an unsuccessful schoolteacher, in particular unable to keep order, and after six months of misery returned home. After an unsettled period of two years she became a volunteer at a new, progressive child welfare clinic in Halifax, and her work with working-class women and their children awakened her political conscience. She combined volunteer work with a rigorous programme of reading and self-education, and her political and religious convictions gradually shifted from Conservative and Church of England to socialist and humanist. 
In 1918 Bentley moved to London to work as a munitions clerk. After the war she returned to Halifax with a strong sense of herself as a 'surplus woman', both personally and professionally. Convinced from an early age that she was unattractive to men, she was inhibited by shyness and had never considered marriage an option. Instead, she determined to 'reform injustice, banish iniquities, dismiss hate... by presenting human character in story' (Bentley, 107). A librarian friend taught her the Dewey decimal system, and she spent the next six years cataloguing books in local libraries while working on a novel in the evenings. In 1922 'Environment' was published. Set in her native West Riding of Yorkshire, it was the first of many novels in which she saw her own district as a microcosm of the world and expressed her strong belief that only through understanding and conciliation could troubles be cured. Partly autobiographical, its story was that of a young woman struggling for education and fulfilment in the fictional Yorkshire town of Hudley. It was damned with faint praise by reviewers, but, undeterred by lukewarm notices, she slowly mastered the techniques of crafting fiction. Over the next three years she managed to save $700 from the modest sales of 'Environment', subsequent short stories, and contributions to the 'Yorkshire Post'. In 1926, during the general strike, the family textiles business foundered, but, by giving up her savings, she managed to keep it afloat. Her father died from a heart attack in 1926, which Bentley attributed to the stress of impending bankruptcy, and from then on she had the responsibility of supporting her widowed mother, who lived to be ninety. In 1929 'Carr' was published, the imaginary biography of Philip Joseph Carr, a west Yorkshire manufacturer, written by his granddaughter. This novel was more favourably received by the critics: the 'Times Literary Supplement' commended her for overcoming the difficulties of the fictional biography. It was Bentley's first experiment with historical regional fiction, and two years later she achieved her great success with 'Inheritance' (1932), a chronicle of the Oldroyd family and their mill from the time of the Luddites to the closing of the mill in 1930. The sequels 'The Rise of Henry Morcar' (1946), 'A Man of his Time' (1966), and 'Ring in the New' (1969) carried the chronicle of the Oldroyds up to 1968. The entire series became a television serial. These novels and all her subsequent ones were published by Victor Gollancz. 

'Inheritance' brought Bentley to prominence both in Britain and in the United States. During the early 1930s she was befriended by Winifred Holtby and Vera Brittain, both of whom invited her to London and introduced her into literary circles. In 1934, 1936, 1939, and 1941 she visited the United States on lecture tours, on which she was promoted as a regional novelist. Her only novel set outside Yorkshire, 'Freedom's Farewell' (1936), about the fall of the Roman empire and written as a protest against the rise of Hitler and Mussolini, was not a success. In 1941 she published 'The English Regional Novel', a survey of regional fiction from 1840 to 1940, with special emphasis on Charlotte Bronte, George Eliot, Thomas Hardy, and Arnold Bennett. In January 1941 Bentley braved London in the blitz to work there for the American division of the British Ministry of Information, taking a small flat in Bloomsbury. The position was an acknowledgement of her fame in the United States, and in 1944 she crossed the Atlantic on government business, risking the perils of submarines, to work with the British information service in New York. From 1945 until 1949 her time was occupied with nursing her invalid mother, and she was unable to write. After her mother's death in 1949, she worked prodigiously, producing volumes of short stories, her autobiography in 1962, several historical children's books, a short biography, 'The Brontes' (1947), 'The Brontes and their World' (1969), and detective stories for American magazines. She also contributed many reviews and articles to various journals, for years writing a fortnightly column of fiction reviews in the 'Yorkshire Post'. She was also a vigorous supporter of local arts activities, particularly amateur dramatics, and was active on many committees. 
During the fifties Bentley became aware that her popularity was on the wane, as, with the arrival of the Angry Young Men on the literary scene, the working class was replacing the middle class as the material for novels. Her later fiction, such as 'Crescendo' (1958), did not enjoy the success of her 'Oldroyd' series. However, in later life she achieved recognition as an accomplished writer. Leeds University awarded her an honorary DLitt in 1949, in 1958 she became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and she was appointed OBE in 1970. She died at her home, Ing Royde, Broomfield Avenue, Halifax, on 27 June 1977. 


@@@@@


doc= 30811


Bentwich, Norman de Mattos (1883-1971), colonial official and exponent of Jewish ideals, was born in London on 28 February 1883, the elder son and second of eleven children of Herbert Bentwich (1856-1932) and his wife, Susannah, daughter of Joseph Solomon, leather merchant, and sister of Solomon J. Solomon, painter. His father, a solicitor, was an active member of the Anglo-Jewish community who brought up his family in the fervent belief that Israel had a continuing religious mission to fulfil, while his mother stressed the universal values of music and art. The Hebrew scholar Solomon Schechter was a great friend of his father. He attended St Paul's School whence he went as major scholar to Trinity College, Cambridge. He read classics, winning the Yorke essay prize twice, and rabbinics under Solomon Schechter. He obtained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1903 and 1905). In 1905 he took up law with the Whewell scholarship and was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1908. 
In 1912 Bentwich entered the Egyptian ministry of justice as inspector of native courts. In 1915 he joined the British army in Egypt (Camel Transport Corps) and took part in the conquest of Jerusalem, which earned him the rank of lieutenant-colonel, an MC, and appointment as OBE (1918). In 1915 Bentwich married Helen Caroline Franklin (1892-1972) ['see 'Bentwich, Helen Caroline], daughter of Arthur Ellis Franklin, banker and company director. There were no children. 
In 1918 Bentwich became legal secretary to the British military administration in Palestine and after the establishment of the mandatory government in 1922 he became the country's first attorney-general. Bentwich's wife was the niece of Lady Samuel, wife of the then high commissioner, Sir Herbert Samuel. In Zionist politics Bentwich was moderate, working for Arab-Jewish understanding and a bi-national state. But with the conflict between the two nations steadily intensifying, the government was bound to find a Jewish attorney-general a political embarrassment, however reconciling his personal views might be. In 1929 Bentwich clashed with a subsequent high commissioner, Sir John Chancellor, over plans to prevent the sale of 'Arab land' to Jews. Unfortunately, the Colonial Office supported Chancellor. Bentwich was put on paid leave, and then detained in London under the pretext of 'giving temporary assistance to the Legal Department of the Colonial Office' (Shepherd, 113). Bentwich was offered promotion in the service outside Palestine, and, when he declined, was retired from the colonial service in 1931. 
In 1932 Bentwich was appointed professor of international relations at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. His inaugural lecture, 'Jerusalem, city of peace', was interrupted by students who opposed his pacifying approach and had to be continued under police protection. The terms of the chair provided that the holder would lecture during only one of the two terms of the year and otherwise be free to work in the field of international relations where he wished. He made full use of these opportunities. Thus, when the Nazi persecutions began, he became one of the foremost fighters for the rescue of the oppressed. He travelled to all countries, pleading with governments and investigating possible places of refuge. He became director both of the League of Nations high commission for refugees from Germany (1933-5) and of the Council for German Jewry. 
During the Second World War Bentwich served in the Ministry of Information in London, and for a time in the Air Ministry. He lectured for the government, especially in the United States. In 1943 he went to the Middle East and to Ethiopia where he advised the emperor on the treaties to be concluded with Great Britain. During the following years he was engaged, as chairman of the Anglo-Abyssinian Society, in furthering Ethiopia's claim for the recovery of Eritrea, and attended the Paris conference of 1946 as a member of the Ethiopian delegation. In addition he took up the cause of the Falashas, an Ethiopian tribe who consider themselves Jews, but are not recognized as such by Israel and most Jewish communities. 
Bentwich was chairman of the National Peace Council (1944-6) and in the post-war period had a major part in securing restitution and compensation for the victims of Nazi persecutions. In 1951, having reached the statutory age, Bentwich retired as professor at the Hebrew University, and was elected a member and vice-chairman of its board of governors. Work for the university now became his main concern. Since its foundation the Hebrew University had been to him the symbol of Jewish renaissance and of all the causes he served probably this was nearest to his heart. He was president of the London North-Western Reform Synagogue from 1958 until his death. 
Bentwich was the author of nearly thirty books on subjects ranging from Judaeo-Greek civilization to international law, refugees, and the rebirth of Israel. These included a major biography of Solomon Schechter. He was awarded honorary doctorates from the universities of Aberdeen (1942), Melbourne (1938), and Jerusalem (1956). He was always ready to help others, indefatigable in the causes he had taken up, and deeply committed to what he considered right. He sometimes wondered whether his life had perhaps lacked a certain 'one-pointedness' and had been too much divided between different worlds. But however this may be, all divisions were overcome and reconciled by his gentle personality and his spirit of service. 
Between 1919 and 1931 Helen Bentwich had documented the social life of the mandate in letters home. Norman Bentwich quoted these extensively in 'Mandate Memories, 1918-1948' (1965), and in 1999 the letters themselves were published. Helen Bentwich was active in local government in London in her later career, and served as a Labour councillor. She was chair of the London county council (1956-7) and was appointed CBE in 1965. 
Bentwich died in London on 8 April 1971 and according to his wish was buried in Jerusalem on Mount Scopus. Helen Bentwich died in 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 30812


Beresford, Jack (1899-1977), oarsman, was born at 36 St Mary's Grove, Chiswick, Middlesex, on 1 January 1899, the elder son and eldest of the three children of Julius Beresford Wiszniewski ('b'. 1868) and his wife, Ethel Mary Wood. His father, Julius, was taken to Britain from Poland by his governess at the age of twelve, and became a furniture manufacturer. Jack was educated at Bedford School, served with the Artists' Rifles in 1917, was commissioned in the Liverpool Scottish regiment, and was wounded in the leg in northern France in 1918. At school his sporting ambitions were directed at rugby, but prescribed physiotherapy of rowing a dinghy at Fowey, Cornwall, turned him to rowing. He then entered his father's business, and began working at the furniture factory Beresford and Hicks, of Curtain Road, London. 
Beresford had an outstanding record as an amateur sculler and as an oarsman with Thames Rowing Club. He won the Wingfield sculls from 1920 to 1926, which made him amateur champion of England, and he won the diamond sculls at Henley royal regatta four times during that period. He made his international mark by winning a silver medal at the Olympic games in Antwerp in 1920, when he lost the single sculling title by one second to an Irish bricklayer from Philadelphia, John Brendan (Jack) Kelly. The two men, who in later years became friends, encapsulated the controversy of the day concerning amateur status. Before competing in the Olympics, Kelly's entry for the diamond sculls was refused. Kelly claimed that he never received the rejection letter, and the story spread that he was snubbed because, as a manual worker, the Henley stewards considered him to be a professional. Beresford, however, epitomized their view of an amateur oarsman prevalent at the time. He was sporting, displayed loyalty to his club, dressed for dinner, was well heeled, and when not in a boat was an ambassador for a gentlemanly way of life. He was fit and hardy, and a colleague remembered him as never wearing a waistcoat or an overcoat, whatever the weather. The real reason for Kelly's ban, however, was that his club, Vesper of Philadelphia, had been barred by the stewards in 1905 for sending for the Grand Challenge Cup an eight who had received payment and been supported by public subscription. Kelly's family bricklaying company built many of Philadelphia's twentieth-century public buildings. His son Jack grew up to win the diamond sculls in 1947 and 1949, and his daughter Grace became the princess of Monaco. 
From the beginning of his rowing career, Beresford displayed the tactical brilliance of a winner, assessing his opponents' capabilities and pacing his training, and usually his racing, to do just enough to beat them, although he clearly possessed the killer instinct which motivates a winner and a breaker of records. 'He was very vicious in the boat,' said Eric Phelps, his coach for the Berlin Olympics. 'He would give a sickly smile to the man next to him. He never knew what it was to pack up' (private information, E. Phelps). 
Beresford's successes proved his worth in every type of boat -- eights, fours, pairs, and sculls -- the more remarkable because his rowing weight was normally just over 11 stone and he stood about 5 feet 10 inches, light and short as oarsmen go. He won the Philadelphia gold cup for the world amateur title in 1924 and 1925, and was given the Helms award for sculling in Los Angeles in 1926. He won four further medals in the next four Olympic games: gold in the single scull in Paris in 1924, silver in the British eight in Amsterdam in 1928, gold in the coxless four in Los Angeles in 1932, and his most celebrated gold in the double sculls with Leslie (Dick) Southwood in Berlin in 1936. 
The Berlin medal was Beresford's finest moment. The first five of the seven Olympic titles had gone to the Germans, under the watchful eye of their chancellor, Adolf Hitler, who was presenting the medals. Beresford and Southwood were coached by the English professional Eric Phelps, who had an intimate knowledge of the German team. He had a new, light boat built for his charges by Roly Sims in two and a half days (although it was lost in suspicious circumstances on the German rail system and turned up in Berlin only shortly before their first race) and surmised that the German crew, strong favourites, lacked the stamina to complete the 2000 metre course if put under severe pressure. 
The British crew lost in the first heat to the Germans, who crossed into their lane, but qualified for the final by winning a 'repechage', or 'second chance' round, in champion form. In the final, both crews jumped the start after observing that the starter, Victor de Bisschop, was using a megaphone so large that he could see nothing once he raised it to his lips. The British led for 500 metres, then Willy Kaidel and Joachim Pirsch went ahead. Opposite Phelps's vantage point at 1800 metres the crews were level. Southwood shouted when the Germans wandered from their lane, and then Pirsch stopped rowing. Phelps's men had rowed them down, just as he predicted. Beresford's German nickname, the Old Fox, was vindicated. It was 'the sweetest race I ever rowed in', he said. His record of rowing medals in five consecutive Olympics was unsurpassed until 2000, when Steven Redgrave of Britain won his fifth consecutive gold in Sydney. 
Beresford crowned his outstanding record at Henley of two wins in the Grand Challenge Cup (1923, 1928), two in the goblets (1928-9), one in the stewards' (1932), and four in the diamonds (1920, 1924-6) by coming out of retirement with Southwood for a new event in 1939, the invitation centennial double sculls. Their famous victory in Berlin inspired the stewards to introduce this class of boat, and the Thames Rowing Club men, aged forty and thirty-six respectively, won the final in a dead heat with the Trieste double G. Scherli and E. Broschi. The Italians were European champions and much heavier and younger than Beresford and Southwood, and the Thames men realized that they would have no chance should the stewards order a re-row. As soon as they had returned their boat to its rack in the boat tent, Beresford went over to where the Italians were lying exhausted and, in a superb act of gamesmanship, cheerily congratulated them on a great race. 'Do it again in half an hour?' he is reputed to have said (private information, L. Southwood). The Italians declined profusely, and honours remained even. 
In 1940 Beresford married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Craske Leaning, a medical doctor. They had one son and one daughter. This marriage was dissolved and in 1958 he married Stroma Jean Margaret, daughter of the Revd Andrew Morrison; they had two daughters. 
Beresford lived at Shiplake and was often seen sculling at Henley, but always competed for Thames Rowing Club, the Putney club for which his father, 'Old Berry', had a distinguished record as an oarsman and coach, including winning a silver medal in the 1912 Olympic games and several Henley medals. Jack was captain of Thames in 1928-9, a vice-president from 1936 to 1977, and president from 1970 to 1977. He devoted considerable efforts to coaching and sports administration, and he carried the flag as leader of the British team in the opening ceremony of the Berlin games. He managed rowing teams on tour in South America in 1947, for the empire games in 1950, and the Olympic games of 1952. He was a rowing selector from 1938 to 1954. 
Beresford was a member of the British Olympic Council from 1936 and a member of the organizing committee of the Olympic games in 1948, as well as helping to coach the double scullers Bert Bushnell and Richard Burnell, who won a gold medal. He was awarded the gold medal of the International Rowing Federation in 1947, and the Olympic diploma of merit in 1949, after helping to organize the games in London and Henley-on-Thames in 1948. He was elected a Henley steward in 1946 and was on the committee of management for many years. He was connected with the National Playing Fields Association, the Greater London and South-east Sports Council, and served on the council of the Amateur Rowing Association for thirty-five years. He was a keen swimmer and beagler with the Farley Hill beaglers, and played the umpire in the film 'Half a Sixpence'. He was rowing correspondent of 'The Field' from 1966 to 1971. He was a member of the court of the Furniture Makers' Guild and a liveryman of the Painters' and Stainers' Company. He was made a freeman of the City of London in 1952 and appointed CBE in 1960. 
Beresford was courteous both to colleagues and to younger oarsmen, although his competitive edge in a boat occasionally spilled into arrogance when dealing with lesser mortals on the bank. When over seventy he competed in the 41/2 mile scullers head of the river race. He was shaken in his last years by a tragic accident at the national schools regatta at Pangbourne in 1969. On that occasion, aged seventy, he dived into the Thames from his umpire's launch to rescue a boy who had caught a crab during a race and had been swept out of his boat. Beresford, an expert swimmer, reached the boy under the surface but had to struggle with the victim's desperate attempts to cling to him. The boy was eventually drowned. His failure to overcome the boy's plight and the tricky currents troubled him for the rest of his life. He died at his home, Highlands House, Shiplake, on 3 December 1977, the morning after presiding cheerfully over the Thames annual dinner. 


@@@@@


doc= 30813


Bernal, (John) Desmond (1901-1971), physicist, was born on 10 May 1901 at Brookswatson, Nenagh, co. Tipperary, eldest of the three sons and two daughters of Samuel George Bernal, a farmer of Limerick, and his wife, Elizabeth Miller, elder daughter of the Presbyterian minister in San Jose, California. The Bernal family can be traced back to Sephardic Jews in sixteenth-century Spain. Among their descendants in the nineteenth century several flourished in England, but Bernal's grandfather lived in Ireland. Bernal's father, Samuel, had run away to sea and farmed sheep in Australia before he settled to farming in Ireland. 
There seems to have been little in the way of a bond between father and son, but a rewarding companionship between Elizabeth Bernal and her first-born. His mother was described by C. P. Snow as literary and cultivated (she attended lectures at Stanford University and the Sorbonne, and contributed articles to the 'San Francisco Argonaut'), and it was her care for his education which meant that at the age of ten he was sent, with his brother Kevin, to Hodder, the preparatory school for Stonyhurst College. However, both boys were miserable at Stonyhurst, and their mother moved them to Bedford School, where some science was taught. Emmanuel College, Cambridge, awarded Bernal a scholarship in mathematics in 1919, so it was to Cambridge he went, and when he completed his undergraduate courses in 1923 he had been educated in England for twelve years. For the rest of his life he spoke with the voice of an educated member of the upper class. 
Bernal brought with him to Cambridge, alongside his passion for science, a deep concern for the state of Ireland and a strong attachment to Catholicism which he viewed positively as a powerful hindrance to the Anglicization of his home country. Long before -- he claimed at the age of ten -- he had come to the conclusion that the answer to Ireland's problems lay with science. Living in both countries as a boy he had been made painfully aware of the striking contrast between the poverty of agricultural Ireland and the growing wealth of industrial England. Ireland, he believed, needed to attain economic as well as political independence from Great Britain. His enthusiasm for science was not, therefore, solely that of curiosity but more importantly out of concern for its wealth-giving applications. In this he proved steadfast, despite the revelations of the atom's dread powers. Among fellow students he soon became something of a legend -- his encyclopaedic knowledge and his photographic memory, his articulate and persuasive speech, and his passion for what he held dear earned him the nickname Sage. C. P. Snow described his 'shock of fairish hair gone wild' and 'beautiful, humorous, hazel eyes' (Snow, 19). He married (Agnes) Eileen (1898-1990), a former student of Newnham College and the daughter of Dr William Carr Sprague, on 21 June 1922, having just reached his majority, but not his graduation. In any event, his marriage did not cramp his amorous nature. In addition to his two sons, Michael and Egan, with his wife, he had Martin with Margaret Gardiner (1904-2005) and (Susanna) Jane with Margot Heinemann (1913-1992). 
The intellectual qualities that Bernal displayed as an undergraduate, one would have thought, would have endeared him to his college and university, but there were problems. His young Cambridge friends had influenced him in the direction of Marxism. The Irish national foundation of his political concern, they considered, was too narrow. H. D. Dickinson introduced him to the socialist society. His communist friend Allen Hutt lent him Marx's works. Bernal was soon converted and his faith in the Roman Catholic church weakened. Already in his pioneer work 'The Social Function of Science' (1937) his admiration for Marx's writings and for the organization of science in the Soviet Union is evident. Twenty years later he was to sum up his view of Marx in the little work 'Marx and Science' (1957). By that time he could look back on the Second World War as 'another world catastrophe brought about by the insane greed and violence of a decaying capitalism' (J. D. Bernal, 'Marx and Science', 42). On the bright side, though, both in China and in the 'People's Democracies of Europe', he declared, 'the age-old role of the landlords is over and the natural talents of the people can find expression'. With pride and confidence he pointed to the 800 million of them now living under socialism. The Soviet intervention in Hungary was four years away, but Lysenko's destruction of Russian genetics had begun in the 1930s and proved to be a serious embarrassment to socialist scientists in Britain. In due course J. B. S. Haldane resigned from the Communist Party chiefly because of it, but in 1939 Bernal had attributed the controversy to the fact that Soviet science as it grew was only just finding out its philosophy, a process which he described as 'lively and at times almost violent' (J. D. Bernal, 'The Social Function of Science', 1939, 231, 237). Reports of the matter had been greatly exaggerated outside the Soviet Union, he thought, and it was misleading to describe the controversy as a revival of the old Weismann-Lamarck debate. Over the years Bernal became more critical, and in 1968 he was prepared to admit that Lysenko had ignored contemporary biology -- Bernal had by then visited Lysenko and seen his work. But it was modern molecular biology and the discovery of the double helical structure of DNA that changed Bernal's mind. These developments were to him 'more materialistic and hence more Marxist than Lysenko's views' (J. D. Bernal, 'The material theory of life', 'Labour Monthly', 50, 1968, 326). 
Judged by the natural sciences tripos examinations results Bernal did not excel, perhaps due to the extent of his interests outside the formal curriculum, and to his discovery of a passion for crystallography. Taught this subject by Arthur Hutchinson, Bernal decided to derive the 230 space groups using Hamiltonian quaternions. This enormous task took his attention away from the physics of Professor Rutherford, and a second class in the part two physics final examination was the result -- a disappointment after his first in the part one in chemistry, geology, and mineralogy, but the work on the space groups deeply impressed Hutchinson. Through his recommendation Bernal was offered a position at the Davy-Faraday Laboratory at the Royal Institution in London, directed by Sir William Bragg. 
By natural inclination Bernal was a theoretician rather than an experimentalist, but Sir William, who with his son Lawrence had worked out the structure of diamond in 1913, wanted the structure of graphite determined. These two forms of carbon could be considered as prototypes for the dimensions of the carbon-carbon bond in aliphatic and aromatic compounds respectively. Introduced to the exact method of measuring diffraction intensities using the X-ray spectrometer, Bernal recoiled at the patience required -- a whole day to measure only two reflections! The alternative was to use photographic film, not so accurate but much quicker. The snag was that he had to assemble his equipment himself from bits and pieces. Doggedly he persisted and the structure came out with a carbon-carbon distance of 1.42 A in contrast to the distance for diamond of 1.54 A. This work done, Bernal turned to methods of analysis. He popularized Paul Ewald's conception of the reciprocal lattice, gave a systematic account of rotation methods, and in 1926 published the very useful charts he had laboriously calculated for plotting the layer lines of diffraction patterns. The distances between these lines represent the reciprocal of distances separating scattering points in the crystal lattice. To make the photographic method easy to use he designed equipment that was marketed by a Cambridge company as the X-ray photogoniometer. Bernal also worked on the structure of metal alloys while at the Royal Institution -- a subject with obvious industrial applications. 
In 1927 Bernal returned to Cambridge on his appointment to the revived lectureship in structural crystallography. He was to remain there until 1938, becoming assistant director of research in 1935. Then he moved to the chair of physics, subsequently crystallography, at Birkbeck College, London, retiring in 1968. If his years at the Royal Institution were the most exciting and formative of his scientific life, the decade he spent in Cambridge was the most significant for our assessment of his contribution to science, for it was then that the foundations were laid for the tradition of research on the structure of biologically important compounds which we associate with Cambridge, where he made firm friends with several biochemists. There followed a productive collaboration with the outstanding experimentalist Dorothy Crowfoot (subsequently Hodgkin) and Isidore Fankuchen. Between 1931 and 1937 Bernal published his preliminary study of the crystallography of amino acids and oligopeptides, the structure of the carbon skeleton of sterols, the structure of water, and the first description of the diffraction patterns of protein crystals using the trick of bathing the crystals in their mother liquor; the latter two achievements gave the first glimpse of the world of molecular structure that underlies living things. The hope of creating a molecular account of the organic basis of life was born here. 
For a number of reasons Bernal's plans for crystallography at Birkbeck College did not enjoy quite the same success. His substantial contributions to civil defence, Bomber Command and combined operations, during the war won him the medal of Freedom (with palms) from the United States but inevitably took him away from the college. Then, as the cold war began, he became a globe-trotter -- working indefatigably for world peace and for the socialist cause. The fact that he found time to write his ambitious and extensive 1000-page 'Science in History' (1954), although greatly aided by Francis Aprahamian and Anita Rimmel, suggests that his enthusiasms now lay outside the laboratory, that the man who had been torn away from his research by the war could not again recover the urge and the patience he once showed for the structural analysis of the proteins. Having shipped off his equipment with Fankuchen to America when hostilities began, he lived to mourn the loss of his promising researches of the inter-war years. When the double helical structure of DNA was discovered his regret at not being in the story was evident, but he could take pride in the contribution of his department, for it was Sven Furberg who came from Norway in 1947 to work at Birkbeck, there establishing the three-dimensional structure of cytidine (pyrimidine plus sugar) -- essential information for the solving of the structure of DNA. 
Also in 1947 Francis Crick visited Bernal in his quest for a research position in biology, followed two years later by an enquiry from Rosalind Franklin for the same purpose. Bernal had by this time a grant from the Nuffield Foundation, and the Medical Research Council's secretary, Sir Edward Mellanby, assured Crick that an application supported by Bernal would be accepted automatically, but Bernal was out of the country. In the meantime the biophysicist A. V. Hill urged Crick to consider Cambridge. Likewise the physical chemist Charles Coulson advised Franklin to apply to King's College rather than Birkbeck. After the DNA research was completed she did move to Birkbeck and carry out her fine researches into viral RNA. It seems, therefore, that it was neither the lack of funds nor Bernal's politics that prevented him from re-establishing his pre-eminent place in the field of biomolecular structure after the war, but the opinion formed about his commitment to research on a day-to-day basis. Was he not a founder member of the World Federation of Scientific Workers and the World Peace Council? Snow described him at this stage as 'in continuous motion, scurrying from Birkbeck, the most recent scientific paper being corrected in the car to London airport, off to one of the socialist capitals, Moscow, Warsaw, Bucharest, or Peking' (C. P. Snow, 'John Desmond Bernal', 'DSB', 15, Suppl., 1978, 19). 
To view Bernal's achievement by comparing it with the success of 1950s molecular biology, however, fails to reveal Bernal's vision of biomolecular structure. First it is not clear that he was interested in genetics, or in the nucleic acids as the genetic material. Had he not, in support of Lysenko, claimed that genetics had inherent weaknesses due to its design to serve capitalist aims? Second, he was fascinated by the mystery of the origin of life, an interest continued over many years, and leading to his full-length study 'The Origin of Life' (1967). This subject raised the question of the level of organization at which life could be said to emerge. He envisioned a series of levels from the molecular to the organismic, and his focus was on organization at the 'inter'-molecular level of colloids, membranes, and Aleksandr I. Oparin's coascervates. Thus his pioneer study with Fankuchen of tobacco mosaic virus crystals was directed chiefly to the behaviour of the molecules at varying degrees of hydration, rather than to the internal structure of the molecules themselves. This was very understandable at the time: in the absence of the electron microscope the interpretation of the diffraction intensities corresponding to distances between molecules was the only way to bridge the gap between the molecular and the cytological structures. Hence, on his return from war work to Birkbeck College he wrote to Fankuchen describing his hopes and explaining that 'the main idea is to link up the long-range forces with the biological systems' (Olby, 262). 
Additionally, the data of the diffraction patterns of the tobacco mosaic virus were not those of a single crystal to which the standard methods of interpretation could be readily applied. They were, it later turned out, the transforms of the molecules rather than of the crystal lattice. This explains why Bernal and Fankuchen experienced such difficulty in establishing the features of the unit cell. Nor was the pattern blessed with numerous spots, at least not enough of them to justify the use of the standard methods of analysis which Bernal preferred. As he was later to remark (1968): 'The picture of a helical structure contains far fewer spots than does that of a regular three-dimensional crystalline structure, and thus far less detailed information on atomic positions, but it is easier to interpret roughly and therefore gives a good clue to the whole. (Bernal, 'Material theory', 324)' He added that it may appear 'paradoxical that the more information-carrying methods should be deemed the less useful to examine a really complex molecule'. Here he implied, it seems, that as far as methods of analysis for the nucleic acids were concerned, he had 'backed the wrong horse'. 
The theme running through Bernal's popular writing is one of developing science in the service of all mankind. Like Marx, Bernal saw science as part of the productive forces, not an abstract body of idealistic thought. Time was when science was the occupation of the curious supported by the wealthy. Now, he explained, it has become 'an industry supported by large monopolies and by the State' (Bernal, 'Material theory', xiii). The problem for Bernal was to set out the conditions under which science can be most successfully pursued and most advantageously deployed for the benefit of all. In 'The Social Function of Science' -- a truly prophetic work -- he stressed the need for organized and planned research, for co-operation in research, for adequate documentation, and for the scientific study of scientific activity -- what was to become the 'science of science'. Bernal wrote the book because he resented the inefficiency and frustration of scientific research on the one hand, and its diversion to base ends on the other. Later he was to turn to the history of science, for only with that knowledge, he claimed, could we hope to understand the significance of the institution of science and its relation to society. In 1937 he remarked that existing histories of science 'are little more than pious records of great men and their works' (Bernal, 'Social Function', 11). What is history, he asked, but the progressive unfolding of the productive relation between man and nature? It was therefore fitting that he should take his great work 'Science in History' (1954) up to the post-war period. Viewed from the present Bernal's unfailing optimism for nuclear power, world energy supplies, antibiotics, synthetic fibres, massive irrigation to make the deserts bloom, and changing the course of rivers to suit man's needs, seems outdated and naive. Yes, he admitted, agriculture has produced devastation, but only because of the 'predatory nature of capitalism' (Bernal, 'Science in History', vol. 3, 964). In truth, Bernal remained to the end a passionate visionary. He was elected to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1937, and was the Society's royal medallist in 1945. In 1953 he received the Lenin prize for peace, in 1965 an honorary fellowship of his Cambridge college, and in 1969 fellowship of Birkbeck College. He began to suffer from health problems in 1951. The severe stroke he suffered in 1963 increasingly limited his activities and after several further strokes he died on 15 September 1971 and was buried in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30814


Bernard, Percy Ronald Gardner, fifth earl of Bandon (1904-1979), air force officer, was born some twenty minutes before his twin brother at Gillingham, Kent, on 30 August 1904, the eldest of the three children (the last of whom was a daughter) of Ronald Percy Hamilton Bernard (1875-1921), the great-grandson of the second earl of Bandon and a captain in the rifle brigade, and his wife, Lettice Mina, the daughter of Captain Gerald Cecil Stewart Paget, the son of Lord Alfred Paget, fifth son of the first marquess of Anglesey. Percy Bernard, invariably known as Paddy, lived during his childhood on the Theobald's Park estate in Hertfordshire, where his parents had been loaned a house by the eccentric Lady Meux. In the summer of 1914 he and his twin brother were sent to St Aubyn's preparatory school at Rottingdean, and four years later both boys entered Orange dormitory at Wellington College, where the elder was incorrectly referred to as Bernard minor throughout his schooldays. Although he showed promise as an athlete and rugger player he never excelled academically, and it was only after spending the summer of 1922 at a Norfolk crammer that he passed the entrance examinations to the Royal Air Force College at Cranwell. 
In May 1924 Bernard became the fifth earl of Bandon on the death of his grandfather's cousin. The peerage, being Irish, did not carry with it a seat in the House of Lords. His inheritance was the estate of Castle Bernard in co. Cork, but the castle had been burnt down by Sinn Fein in 1920 and the fourth earl had deliberately made little financial provision for his successor. The saving grace was the $123,000 compensation paid by the governor for the destruction of the castle. From the viewpoint of the Royal Air Force the fact that Cadet Bernard was now the earl of Bandon had immediate significance and future value. The army and navy had counted men of title among their serving officers for generations, but it was unprecedented for a twenty-year-old peer of the realm to be making his career in the RAF, which was still struggling to retain its independence as the third service. 
During the next two decades Bandon served as an instructor at Sealand, near Birkenhead. He was posted for five halcyon years to Egypt, where he became adjutant of 216 squadron and gained renown as the pilot of the first Vickers Victoria to fly non-stop from Khartoum to Cairo. At the outbreak of the Second World War he commanded 82 squadron; he was appointed DSO in 1940 and in 1941 became station commander at West Raynham. The following year he was posted to air headquarters India before joining headquarters, south-east Asia command. At the end of the Burma campaign, having already been mentioned three times in dispatches, he was honoured by the Americans, who awarded him the United States Army Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross for 'leadership and command' and the bronze star medal. 
On his return to England Bandon became commandant of the Royal Observer Corps and revitalized their morale, which was low since wartime incentive had departed and their future was uncertain. He was air officer commanding no. 2 group of the British air forces of occupation, Germany, in 1950-51 and in 1953, as air officer commanding no. 11 group, had the responsibility for organizing the coronation fly-past over Buckingham Palace and the coronation review of the RAF at Odiham. After serving as assistant chief of air staff (training) he was appointed commander-in-chief of the 2nd allied Tactical Air Force in Germany, and in March 1957 he was officially reprimanded by the secretary of state for air, George Ward, for giving information to foreign pressmen that tactical atomic weapons would soon be stored in Europe. As commander-in-chief of the Far East air force from 1957 to 1960 he received a 'rocket' telegram from Earl Mountbatten of Burma in August 1959 after he had shrewdly realized the strategic importance to the RAF of the Indian Ocean island of Gan and virtually 'commandeered' it. His final posting was as commander allied air forces, central Europe (1961-3). He was promoted air chief marshal in July 1959 and placed on the retired list in February 1964. He was created CB (1945), CVO (1953), KBE (1957), and GBE (1961). 
Throughout his distinguished career Bandon retained the 'elan' of the pioneering days of the Royal Air Force, which was always his first love. He possessed moral courage to a high degree and had the gift of conveying to those around him, irrespective of rank, a sense of loyalty. Affectionately known as the Abandoned Earl, in his later years he epitomized the man that young airmen hoped a senior RAF officer would be. His qualities of leadership were acknowledged to be outstanding, but equally his schoolboy humour, his practical jokes, and his crude language, allied to his non-conformist attitude, were frequently resented, particularly by those who found it difficult to recognize his true ability. 
On 28 February 1933 Bandon married (Maybel) Elizabeth, the second daughter of Raymond William Playfair, a banker, of Nairobi, Kenya. Two daughters were born before the marriage was dissolved in 1946. On 2 October of that year Bandon married Mrs Lois White, the daughter of Francis Russell, also a banker, of Victoria, Australia. 
Bandon always found pleasure in fishing, particularly in the River Bandon, where salmon abounded, and in shooting, especially in the bogs where snipe and woodcock were to be found in the vicinity of Castle Bernard. He was also an enthusiastic gardener with considerable knowledge of rhododendrons. He died on 8 February 1979 at the Bon Secours Hospital in co. Cork, after a short illness. As there was no male heir the earldom became extinct. 
Michael Seth-Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30815


Betjeman, Sir John (1906-1984), poet, writer, and broadcaster, was born on 28 August 1906 at 52 Parliament Hill Mansions, north London, the only child of Ernest Edward Betjemann (1872-1934), a furniture manufacturer, and his wife, Mabel Bessie Dawson (1879-1952). The family name, of Dutch or German origin, can be traced back to an immigration in the late eighteenth century. The poet adopted his style of it about the age of twenty-one. 
Betjeman attended Byron House Montessori School, Highgate, and Highgate junior school, where he was taught by T. S. Eliot. In 1917 Betjeman boarded at the Dragon School, Oxford, and then unhappily at Marlborough College, and was active at both in school theatricals and in various forms of writing. He later recalled with affection, however, the influence of two Marlborough school masters: George Gidney and Clifford Canning, who 'made us aware that being good at games was not all' ('Betjeman: Letters', 2.333). Betjeman entered Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1925 but was rusticated three years later after failing in divinity. To his father's deep disappointment he declined to enter the family business, becoming successively a preparatory school master (at Thorpe House School, Gerrard's Cross, and at Heddon Court, Cockfosters, Hertfordshire), private secretary to Sir Horace Plunkett, assistant editor of the 'Architectural Review' in 1930, and film critic of the London 'Evening Standard' in 1933. On 29 July 1933 he married Penelope Valentine Hester Chetwode (1910-1986), daughter of Field-Marshal Sir Philip Walhouse Chetwode, first Baron Chetwode (1869-1950), commander-in-chief in India at the time. They then moved to Garrard's Farm in Uffington, in the Vale of the White Horse, Berkshire, where his wife, who later trekked in the Himalayas, was able to keep horses. Their son Paul was born there in 1937. 
Betjeman's first two collections of poems, 'Mount Zion' (1931) and 'Continual Dew' (1937), showed a poet already fully formed, with the impeccable ear, delight in skill, and assured mastery of a wide range of tones and themes that so distinguished all his subsequent work in verse. In these early volumes, as later, Betjeman moved with perfect assurance from light pieces, 'vers de societe', satirical sketches of muscular padres or philistine businessmen (as in the famously ferocious tirade 'Slough') to sombre reflections on the impermanence of all human things. In a remarkable variety of metres and manners the poems make an equally clear-cut impression on the reader, never drifting into obscurity and never influenced by the modernists. Here too he gave glimpses of the world of gas-lit Victorian churches and railway stations, of grim provincial cities and leafy suburbs that he was to make his own, not forgetting the grimmer contemporary developments, shopping arcades, and bogus Tudor bars that he saw effacing it and strove to resist. 
These concerns are reflected in Betjeman's 'Ghastly Good Taste' (1933), subtitled 'a depressing story of the rise and fall of English architecture', which attracted more immediate attention than either of his first books of poems. In it he attacked not only modern or modernistic trends but also the other extreme of unthinking antiquarianism; nor had he any time for the safely conventional. While still at school he had become interested in Victorian architecture, thoroughly unmodish as it was at the time. His writings on the subject, by reviving appreciation of the buildings of that era, prepared the ground for the Victorian Society's successful foundation in 1958. Further afield, he showed among other things his fondness for provincial architecture in his contributions to the Shell series of English county guides, of which the most notable is that on Cornwall, another enthusiasm acquired in boyhood. He had joined the publicity department of Shell in the mid-1930s. In 1937 Betjeman became a devoted member of the Church of England, speaking of it as 'the only salvation against progress and Fascists on the one side and Marxists of Bloomsbury on the other' ('Betjeman: Letters', 1.171). His devotion to the church lay not only in his open admiration for its buildings, its liturgy, and its worshippers, but for its faith. 
In the Second World War Betjeman volunteered for the RAF but was rejected and joined the films division of the Ministry of Information. He then became Britain's press attache to the high commission in Dublin (1941-3), where his daughter Candida (1942-2014) was born. Betjeman's official job in neutral Ireland was to sway public opinion in favour of the British, and as part of this strategy he arranged for the battle scenes of Laurence Olivier's 'Henry V' (1944) to be filmed in Ireland (this depicted a heroic England massively outnumbered by its European enemies). He wrote regular reports on Irish politics based on high-level contacts within the Irish government, and factions within the Irish Republican Army (IRA). One IRA battalion planned to assassinate Betjeman, but the operation was called off because the IRA's head of civilian intelligence liked his poetry. Betjeman subsequently worked in P branch (a secret department) in the Admiralty at Bath. 
In 1945 Betjeman moved to Farnborough, and in 1951 to Wantage, where his wife opened a tea-shop, King Alfred's Kitchen. Betjeman's poetical career began to flourish with the appearance in 1940 of 'Old Lights for New Chancels' and continued with 'New Bats in Old Belfries' (1945) and 'A Few Late Chrysanthemums' (1954). Many of the poems in these three volumes became classics of their time, including 'Pot Pourri from a Surrey Garden', 'A Subaltern's Love-Song', and 'How to get on in Society'. His 'Collected Poems' came out in 1958 and went through many impressions. 'Summoned by Bells' is dated 1960, a blank-verse poem of some 2000 lines that gives an account of his early life up to schoolmastering days with characteristic animation, humour, sadness, and abundance of detail. 
Both these volumes were widely successful, the first edition of the 'Collected Poems' selling over 100,000 copies. Betjeman's poetry enjoyed a popularity not seen since the days of Rudyard Kipling and A. E. Housman. No doubt it was poems like the three mentioned above and the more obviously quaint period pieces that made an immediate appeal. Nor should one underestimate the sheer relief and delight that was felt at the appearance of modern poetry that was easy to follow and yielded the seemingly almost forgotten pleasures of rhyme and metre expertly handled. Nevertheless it may not be instantly obvious how so strongly personal a poet, one given moreover to evoking unfamiliar characters and places, should have proved so welcome. 
The answer must lie in the closeness of the concerns of Betjeman's poetry to the ordinary day-to-day experience of his readers, also something rarely found in the work of his contemporaries. For all the delight in the past, it is the past as seen from and against the present; for all the cherished eccentricities -- hardly repugnant as such to British taste anyway -- the subject is ourselves and our own world. The point was well made by Philip Larkin, the friend and admirer who best understood his work: 'He offers us something we cannot find in any other writer -- a gaiety, a sense of the ridiculous, an affection for human beings and how and where they live, a vivid and vivacious portrait of mid-twentieth-century English social life. (P. Larkin, 'It could only happen in England', 1971, in 'Required Writing', 1983, 204-18)' From 1951 Betjeman's marriage was troubled: his wife's conversion to Roman Catholicism in June 1949 had upset him greatly, and although he eventually became reconciled to her decision, they reached a joint decision to separate amicably. As Betjeman put it quite simply later: 'I love her. 'But I cannot live with her for long without quarrelling'' ('Betjeman: Letters', 2.473). He met Lady Elizabeth Georgina Alice Cavendish ('b'. 1926), sister of the duke of Devonshire, and lady-in-waiting to Princess Margaret, at a dinner party in 1951, and they embarked on a friendship that soon became a love affair. The relationship lasted until his death. 
By the mid-1950s Betjeman's main income came from book reviewing, broadcasting, and his poems. He pursued a highly successful career as a broadcaster, and -- with the help of the image he projected through television, engaging, diffident, exuberant, often launched on some architectural or decorative enthusiasm -- he became a celebrated and much-loved figure in national life. He used this position zealously to defend many buildings threatened with demolition. He was able to save many of these, from St Pancras Station to Sweeting's fish restaurant in the City of London, although the Euston Arch was lost despite his vigorous campaign. Appropriately, it was at St Pancras, naming a British Rail locomotive after himself, that he made his last public appearance on 24 June 1983. A statue of the poet was unveiled at the station in November 2007. 
In later years Betjeman continued his work in poetry, publishing 'High and Low' in 1966 and 'A Nip in the Air' in 1974. The contents of these two volumes reveal no loss of energy; indeed, poems like 'On Leaving Wantage, 1972' embody a melancholy, even a tragic, power he had never surpassed. All the same, apart from the ebulliently satirical 'Executive', almost none of them have achieved much individual popularity. They were incorporated entire in the fourth edition of the 'Collected Poems' in 1979. Those in 'Uncollected Poems' (1982) were such as the poet was content should remain in that state and are unlikely to gain him many new readers, though lovers of his work would not be without any of them. Expressions of doubt and the fear of old age and death are strong and memorable in his poetry, but 'Church of England thoughts' are pervasive too, and one of its chief attractions, seldom given proper weight, has been the sense of an undemonstrative but deep Christian belief of a kind that could contain the harsh, ugly, absurd realities of present-day existence. 
John Betjeman was a sociable man, one who loved company and valued it the more for being also shy. Although renowned for his youthful gregariousness and endlessly affable with all manner of people, his was a life rich in intimacy. Latterly he was partial to small gatherings, old friends, and a sufficiency of wine. His expression in repose was timid, perhaps not altogether at ease, and even at the best of times it was possible to surprise on his face a look of great dejection. But all this was blown away in an instant by laughter of a totality that warmed all who knew him. His presence, like his work in verse and prose, was full of the enjoyment he felt and gave. 
Betjeman was chosen as poet laureate to universal acclaim in 1972. He received many distinctions besides, being awarded the Duff Cooper memorial prize, the Foyle poetry prize, and in 1960 the queen's medal for poetry. In that year too he was appointed CBE. In 1968 he was elected a companion of literature by the Royal Society of Literature, and in 1969 he was knighted. He was an honorary fellow of his old college, Magdalen (1975), and also of Keble College, Oxford (1972). He had honorary degrees from Oxford, Reading, Birmingham, Exeter, City University, Liverpool, Hull, and Trinity College, Dublin. He was also honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects. 
From the mid-1970s Betjeman had suffered increasingly from the onset of Parkinson's disease and after a series of strokes he died at Treen, his home in Daymer Lane, Trebetherick, Cornwall, on 19 May 1984. He was buried on 22 May in nearby St Enodoc churchyard, and a memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey on 29 June 1984. To his daughter Candida Lycett-Green he bequeathed his impressive library of 5000 volumes, the product of a lifetime's intelligent and discerning book collecting. 


@@@@@


doc= 30816


Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali (1928-1979), president and later prime minister of Pakistan, was born on 5 January 1928 at Larkana, a medium-sized town on the Indus River in Sind, then part of British India. His father, Sir Shahnawaz Bhutto (1888-1957), was one of Sind's largest landlords, holding extensive property in the Larkana district. Although not a close political associate of Mohamed Ali Jinnah, Pakistan's founder, Sir Shahnawaz was a politician of considerable standing and sympathized with the Muslim League's demand that a separate country should be established for the Muslims of British India if the subcontinent became independent. Kurshid Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali's mother, was a Hindu of low social status who had converted to Islam and changed her name from Lakhi Bai before becoming Sir Shahnawaz's second wife. Social acceptance came slowly and grudgingly to her, a fact that troubled her son during his childhood and adolescence, and may have helped to mould his personality as well as his political views. As the only surviving son, Zulfikar Ali inherited most of the Larkana estate on his father's death in 1957. He also married twice: first at the age of twelve, to his cousin Sheerin Bhutto, who took the name Amir Begam. She was considerably his senior, and the marriage was one of convenience for the transfer of property. His second wife, whom he married on 8 September 1951, was Begam Nusrat, 'nee' Nusrat Ispahani (1929-2011), a woman of Iranian origin whom he met in Karachi. He and Nusrat had four children; three of them, Benazir (1953-2007), Mir Murtaza (1954-1996), and Shahnawaz (1958-1985), were to play an active role in Pakistan's politics. Their other child was a daughter, Sanam ('b'. 1957). 
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto (Zulfi to friends and family) was sent to Bombay for schooling, and then to the University of Southern California, the University of California, Berkeley, and Christ Church, Oxford, to study law. He returned to Karachi in 1953 and started legal practice at the Sind high court. Still virtually unknown, he was included in President Mirza's twelve-man cabinet following the coup of 7 October 1958. General Ayub Khan retained Bhutto as commerce minister when Mirza was shunted into exile in London less than three weeks later. But Bhutto's sights were set considerably higher. Immediately on joining the Ayub cabinet he began to prepare himself for the ministry of foreign affairs. However, it was while managing the petroleum portfolio that he began to reach out to the socialist world. He was convinced that Pakistan had large but undiscovered sources of oil and gas which the Western oil companies, holders of large 'exploration concessions', were not interested in exploiting. Accordingly, in 1961 he negotiated an oil exploration agreement with the Soviet Union which included Soviet provision of technical and financial assistance to Pakistan's Oil and Gas Development Corporation (OGDC). This was the first of several occasions when Ayub Khan, against his better judgement, succumbed to his young protege's powers of persuasion. The OGDC did not produce any spectacular results, but that did not matter to Bhutto: the agreement with the Soviet Union had demonstrated that, even at a very young age, he had influence over President Ayub Khan that far exceeded that of the general's older colleagues. 
Bhutto's big opportunity came in 1963, with the sudden death of the foreign minister, Muhammad Ali Bogra. He persuaded Ayub Khan to reassign him to the foreign ministry, which was done with reluctance by the president. Once put in charge of Pakistan's external affairs, he began to reshape the country's foreign policy, moving away from the explicitly pro-Western orientation of Ayub Khan and M. A. Bogra towards a more neutral posture. Despite the openly expressed unhappiness of Lyndon B. Johnson's administration in the United States, Bhutto developed close ties with China. Pakistan and China negotiated a border agreement, established commercial airline operations between the two countries, and increased the flow of trade between them. The initial talks on a boundary agreement took place in October 1962, precisely when Chinese troops, attacking across India's disputed north-eastern border with China, routed their Indian opponents before voluntarily withdrawing two months later. China agreed to establish large military-industrial complexes near the city of Wah, which already supported a large arms and ammunition industry. 
Under Bhutto's restless direction of foreign policy, Pakistan entered what were, for the country, the uncharted waters of non-alignment. In 'The Myth of Independence', a book published in 1969 after he left the Ayub Khan government, Bhutto provided the reasons for the change in course he had engineered while still in office. The book was a rejoinder to Ayub Khan's political biography 'Friends not Masters' (1967). According to Bhutto, a relationship between Pakistan and a country of the size and influence of the United States could not be on the basis of equality: any attempt to make such friends would consign the small countries of the 'third-world' to subordination. The only way out for these nations was to work in unison and pursue their collective self-interest. It is ironic that it was against this theoretical backdrop that Bhutto persuaded Ayub Khan to launch operation Gibraltar, an ill-advised and poorly conceived armed penetration by the personnel of Pakistan's armed forces into the Indian state of Kashmir. 
Kashmir, a princely state nestling in the mountains of the Himalayas, was sandwiched between Pakistan's eastern and China's western borders. India bordered it to the south. In 1947 the Hindu maharaja of the state, which had a vast Muslim majority in the population, decided to opt for India under partition. Pakistan refused to accept the state's accession to India, and fought a war with India over the issue in 1948. United Nations intervention produced a ceasefire and a possible referendum (to be supervised by the UN) of the Kashmiris over their membership of India or Pakistan was promised. But the referendum was not held, and Bhutto took advantage of Pakistani restiveness to incite Ayub Khan to provoke a war of liberation against the Indian occupation of the state. Operation Gibraltar sought to infiltrate Pakistani-trained and armed guerrillas into the parts of Kashmir under Indian occupation. This operation began in August 1965, and quickly escalated into a full-scale war between India and Pakistan. On 6 September India launched a massive air, armour, and infantry attack on the city of Lahore, and Pakistan responded in kind at several points along the long border between the two countries. 
Bhutto's motives for this action remain unclear; if his wish was to weaken Ayub Khan, the operation against India achieved some success. But it took Bhutto half a dozen years to realize the full political benefits of Ayub Khan's failed Kashmir adventure. Ayub Khan quickly recognized the folly of his actions. On 23 September, barely seventeen days after the war had begun, he announced a ceasefire agreement with India, which he negotiated with the help of the United Nations. Four months later, along with Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri of India, Ayub went to the Soviet city of Tashkent and negotiated what he believed would be a more durable peace agreement between the two countries. Bhutto accompanied him to Tashkent, but appears not to have endorsed the substance of the agreement. A few months after their return to Pakistan, Ayub and Bhutto finally parted company, Ayub making much in public debate of Bhutto's opposition to the Tashkent declaration. The people of Pakistan listened with interest. Here was an issue that exposed the Ayub regime at its most vulnerable point: its inability to use what was widely believed to be the country's military superiority over India to settle once and for all the dispute over Kashmir. Ayub Khan, therefore, not only guaranteed Bhutto's national political career by appointing him to his martial-law cabinet in 1958; he also provided Bhutto with an exceptionally potent political issue to pursue after expelling him from the cabinet in 1966. 
In 1967, a year after leaving the government, and after weighing the offers from several opposition parties, Bhutto decided to form his own political organization, the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). In doing so, he was not being particularly innovative. He was following what had become an established tradition in the politics of opposition in Pakistan: to form a party of one's own rather than play second fiddle in someone else's political organization. The PPP's foundation papers reflected Bhutto's genius for timing. The party's programme represented an amalgam of intense nationalism (born out of Bhutto's campaign against the Tashkent declaration), socialism (reflecting the belief of several of his new political associates that the people were smarting under the unequal distribution of incomes caused by a sharp increase in national income during the Ayub period), and Islamic revival (representing Bhutto's view that the secularism of the Ayub period had not been popular with the majority of the population). The PPP initially drew its support from students, lawyers, and trade unionists, and its populist programme proved to be a heady electoral brew. The PPP won eighty-one of the 138 seats allocated to West Pakistan under Yahya Khan's legal framework order of 30 March 1970 (which had abandoned the principle of parity of seats between East and West Pakistan in the national assembly). The PPP was by far the largest political group representing West Pakistan in the national legislature. This set the stage for Bhutto's return to power, but before that happened Pakistan went through the wrenching experience of a civil war. 
Only time and access to more sources will explain Bhutto's intransigence following the electoral victory of 1970. He refused to participate in the discussions that should have begun in the national assembly immediately after the elections to frame another constitution. He may have intended to provoke East Pakistan and force it out of the Pakistani union; he may have feared that any compromise on Pakistan's unity would endanger his position in the western wing. The fact remains that the position taken by Bhutto led to a confrontation between the military and the political leadership of East Pakistan. The civil war lasted for nine months. It ended with the surrender in Dacca of the Pakistani troops to the Indian forces and the Bengali guerrilla force the Mukhti Bahini, which had been forged after the brutal military crackdown in West Pakistan of March 1971. Defeat led in December 1971 to the resignation of President Yahya Khan and the appointment of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. 
In so far as the conduct of domestic economic policies is concerned, the Bhutto era (December 1971 to July 1977) can be divided into two periods, before and after 1974. In the first, the Bhutto government pursued a socialist programme, capturing for the government all the commanding heights of the economy. Thirty-one large-scale industries, private banks, and insurance companies were nationalized in the early part of 1972, and a number of state enterprises were established to look after these sectors of the economy. External trade in rice and cotton, Pakistan's two principal export earners, was also brought under government control, as were all private colleges and schools. This programme was carried out by Dr Mubashir Hasan, Bhutto's finance minister, and J. A. Rahim, a close Bhutto associate from the time Bhutto had served as Ayub Khan's foreign minister. Both Mubashir Hasan and Rahim were avowed Marxists. However, they left the government in 1974, and Bhutto took command of the economy. The result was a total loss of orientation and a whimsical decision making that caused Pakistan to live quite beyond its internal and external means. 
In foreign affairs Bhutto proved to be a much more imaginative and flexible manager. He negotiated the Simla agreement with Indira Gandhi in 1972, hosted the second meeting of the Organization of Islamic States at Lahore in 1974, recognized Bangladesh as an independent state also in 1974, and made some tangible advances in healing Pakistan's relations with Afghanistan. In keeping with the approach he had advocated during Ayub Khan's government, he realigned Pakistan's foreign relations away from a close dependence on the United States. 
The record on domestic political management was mixed. Having been sworn in in December 1971 not only as president but also as chief martial-law administrator (despite being a civilian), Bhutto decided to keep operating under the protection of the military. In March 1972 he consolidated his control over the military by putting the army and air force under the charge of officers he trusted. At the same time he used his authority as the chief martial law administrator to introduce an interim constitution for Pakistan. The interim constitution gave him enormous authority. After allowing the formation of non-PPP governments in the smaller provinces of the North-Western Frontier and Baluchistan, he dismissed both a few months later on a charge of their alleged involvement with Afghanistan, which was accused of fomenting rebellion. The National Awami Party (NAP), the main party of the opposition and one of the two that had formed the government in Baluchistan and the North-Western Frontier Province, was banned. These were all surprising moves on the part of a politician who had campaigned so vigorously to restore democracy in the country. 
In 1973 Bhutto, with his political skills once again on display, persuaded and cajoled the opposition into accepting a new constitutional arrangement for Pakistan. The constitution was passed by the national assembly and became effective on 14 August 1973, which was Pakistan's twenty-sixth anniversary. Bhutto stepped down from the presidency and became prime minister. Pakistan seemed finally to be set on a democratic course. However, Bhutto kept up an unrelenting pressure on the opposition -- using all the state apparatus at his disposal, including the federal security force, to browbeat the opposition into submission even on its minor differences with the government. He seemed to be working towards the establishment of a one-party state in Pakistan. When in January 1977 he suddenly called national elections -- the first to be held under the new constitution -- he expected to catch the opposition unprepared. The opposition surprised him by preparing itself quickly: the Pakistan National Alliance (PNA) was born and a disparate set of parties agreed to compete with the PPP under a single political umbrella. In the days leading up to the elections the PNA began to draw large crowds to its rallies and these may have pushed Bhutto to summon help from the bureaucracy to ensure a respectable victory for the PPP. The elections were held on 7 March, and when the results were announced the opposition was very surprised by the massive and unexpected victory recorded by the PPP. The PNA responded with the only tactic the opposition in Pakistan had ever been able to use with some success against established governments: it called out its supporters in mass protests against what it saw as the 'great electoral fraud'. 
Skirmishes between the followers of the PNA and government security forces turned exceptionally bloody in May and June. Bhutto called in the army to restore law and order in the major cities, which it did, but it exacted a price by proclaiming Pakistan's third martial-law regime. Bhutto was deposed by the military. In the conflict that followed between him and his party on the one hand and General Zia ul Haq and the military on the other, Bhutto was the eventual loser. A series of court cases were brought against him, including one for the murder of a political opponent. He was sentenced to death by the Lahore high court in March 1978, and his appeal was rejected by the supreme court in February 1979 in a split decision. Two months later, on 4 April 1979, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was hanged in Rawalpindi's central gaol, and his body was flown in an army aeroplane for burial in the family graveyard at Larkana. Thus ended a remarkable political career; but his death did not end for a while what came to be known as 'Bhuttoism' or the 'Bhutto factor' in Pakistani politics. General Zia ul Haq died in a plane crash in 1988, which once again opened up the country's political system, and Ghulam Ishaq Khan, a long-serving bureaucrat-turned-politician, became acting president. He went on to hold general elections in November 1988. The electoral triumph on that occasion of the PPP -- under the combined leadership of Bhutto's widow, Begam Nusrat, and his eldest child, Benazir Bhutto -- showed that Bhuttoism survived its founder. Benazir Bhutto became prime minister for the first time on 2 December 1988. 
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto remained a highly contentious figure long after his death. Admirers pointed to his populist concern for the poor and his foreign policy successes. Detractors emphasized his authoritarianism, his economic failure, and his responsibility for the division of Pakistan. Within the PPP there was division between the left and those who accepted that the domestic and international constraints of the 1990s dictated the more pragmatic policies espoused during Benazir Bhutto's two governments. Even within the Bhutto family Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's mantle was contested between Benazir and her younger brother Mir Murtaza, who died in a police encounter in Karachi on 20 September 1996. Benazir was assassinated in Rawalpindi on 27 December 2007. She was succeeded as leader of the PPP by her son, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari ('b'. 1988), then a student at Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 30817


Bing, Geoffrey Henry Cecil (1909-1977), barrister and politician, was born on 24 July 1909 at Craigavad near Belfast, the only son and elder child of Geoffrey Bing, headmaster of Rockport School and Orange lodge supporter, of Rockport, Craigavad, co. Down, and his wife, Irene Hare Duke. He was educated at Tonbridge School and Lincoln College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in modern history in 1931. He was Jane Eliza Procter visiting fellow at Princeton University in 1932-3. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple (1934), at Gibraltar (1937), the Gold Coast (1950), and Nigeria (1954). 
Bing's early experience in Ulster gave him a hatred of discrimination and a willingness to defend human rights wherever they were threatened. He became a sort of joyful revolutionary, hurled himself into every scene where his interests were engaged, and always emerged with a good story, however sombre his report. In the mid-1930s he helped to give early strength to the Haldane Society and the National Council for Civil Liberties, founded by Ronald Kidd in 1934. He entered several prisons in fascist countries in search of the 'disappeared', and joined the International Brigades in Spain as a journalist, barely escaping at Bilbao. 
Bing was himself very much at home in these left-wing and radical surroundings, and some of his own foreign exploits were aimed at investigating or enlarging an embryo story. He became one of the first anti-Nazis of the 1930s. Nevertheless, when he was called up in the Royal Signals in 1941, Bing's left-wing reputation was still such that he had no prospect save the most menial in a large home establishment. A serious political battle had to be fought in his favour before he was given any chance of worthwhile employment. He then entered an officer cadet training unit, from which he passed out top. 
In 1943 Bing did experimental work with parachutes in the GSO2 airborne forces development centre. One of the experiments undertaken disfigured his face for many years. In 1943 he was a signals officer in north Africa and in 1944 accompanied the British liberation forces in western Europe with the rank of major. He was wounded and mentioned in dispatches. In 1940 Bing married Christian Frances, the former wife of Edward Archibald Fraser Harding, and daughter of Sir Ralph Barrett Macnaghten Blois, ninth baronet, of Cockfield Hall, Yoxford, Suffolk; they had two sons. His wife for a time helped Claud Cockburn with his left-wing newspaper 'The Week'. 
In 1945 Bing was elected Labour MP for Hornchurch, a seat he held until 1955. He was at once appointed as an unpaid junior whip. It was generally thought that this was a mistake for another man of a similar name, who was as much to the right of the party, and so acceptable to Ernest Bevin, as Bing was to the left. The appointment lasted for nine months and then was ended without comment. Bing's first marriage was dissolved in 1955 and in 1956 he married Eileen Mary, daughter of Frederick Cullen, alderman and parliamentary agent for Hornchurch; they had one adopted son. 
Bing returned to the back benches where he became 'the unrestrained leader of a small group of radicals, never fully trusted by their colleagues and known as 'Bing Boys'' ('The Times', 25 April 1977). A committed supporter of communist China, he was nicknamed the Mandarin. He also specialized in Northern Ireland, the brewers' monopoly, and parliamentary procedure. In the years after the war his was almost the sole voice calling for help for the Ulster minority. He became adept at the parliamentary devices whereby any issue can be raised, perhaps late at night, which no deputy speaker can reject. Indeed, when Labour was in opposition he was called on by colleagues to guide them through the intricacies of this procedure. 
At the bar (he took silk in 1950) Bing built up a small practice in west Africa where he met Dr Kwame Nkrumah, leader of the main party in the Gold Coast. In 1955 the programme for independence was already arranged and Nkrumah urgently needed a legal and constitutional adviser. Bing, having lost his parliamentary seat, got the job in 1956. In 1957 he was appointed attorney-general in Ghana (previously the Gold Coast) and was thus involved in many of the territory's problems. The British government seemed obsessed with the idea that all colonial civil servants would withdraw; Bing had to dissuade them. He also had to order Emil Savundra out of the country for fraud at a time when his true character was not known. 
As Nkrumah's right-hand and trusted adviser, Bing played a controversial role 'whether it was to increase press restrictions, a new presidential constitution, or removing the Chief Justice, the elaborate legalism of Bing's mind would find a way to do it.' ('The Times', 25 April 1977). When a 'Daily Telegraph' journalist was arrested Bing announced, on behalf of the Ghanaian government, that he could have any counsel he chose; when Christopher Shawcross QC arrived, Bing, on the orders of Krobo Edusie, the minister of the interior, announced that he was excluded -- an act which made it impossible for Bing ever again to work at the English bar. It is arguable that he should have resigned as attorney-general rather than act on Edusie's order. 
Bing ceased to be attorney-general in 1961, whereupon he became Nkrumah's adviser. Emancipation of the African colonies was new and the one-party African state was unforeseen. Bing and Nkrumah thought that a liberated colony must try to establish an independent economy, an effort which seemed to require one-party dictatorship whether benign or evil. When Nkrumah was ousted by a 'coup d'etat' in February 1966 Bing was arrested and ill-treated. He had done no wrong and after some months was sent home. He had been appointed CMG in 1960. His aptly named memoir of Nkrumah's Ghana, 'Reap the Whirlwind', appeared in 1968. Bing died in London on 24 April 1977. 
John Platts-Mills', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30818


Binney, Sir (Frederick) George (1900-1972), explorer and blockade runner, was born on 23 September 1900 at Great Bookham, Surrey, the second of two sons of Maximilian Frederick Breffit Binney (1859-1936), vicar of Richmond, Surrey, and his first wife, Emily Blinkhorn, who died when Binney was born. There were two more sons of a second marriage. He won a scholarship from Summer Fields, Oxford, to Eton College and later to Merton College, Oxford. He obtained a third class in English in 1923. At Oxford, at a chance meeting with Julian Huxley in Blackwells, he was asked as editor of 'Isis' to back an expedition to Spitsbergen and to become its organizer and secretary. This was the Oxford University Spitsbergen expedition of 1921. In 1923 he organized and led the Merton College Arctic expedition and in 1924 the Oxford University Arctic expedition. The first to use a seaplane for Arctic surveys, he recorded his experiences in his book 'With Seaplane and Sledge in the Arctic' (1925). His achievements were recognized by the Back award of the Royal Geographical Society, the gold medal 'de la roquette' of the Geographical Society of Paris, and in 1957 by the founder's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Binney joined the Hudson's Bay Company in 1926, and spent the winters in England recruiting young apprentices and the summers planting them on trading stations in the Canadian Arctic. A 'Times' leader on his 'The Eskimo Book of Knowledge' (1931), the first book other than the 'Bible' to be made available to the Inuit in their own language, led his chairman to offer him promotion to the company's headquarters in Winnipeg, but he refused and joined the United Steel Companies Ltd the next day. He was appointed to build up a central export department and became the company's export director, distinguishing himself by his remarkable success as an unconventional negotiator. He remained with United Steel until it was nationalized, travelling the world on its behalf, from Europe to North and South America, Russia, Iran, India, and the Far East. 
Having narrowly missed service in the First World War, Binney was determined to play a part in the second. In December 1939 he was sent by iron and steel control (Ministry of Supply) as their Scandinavian representative to Sweden to negotiate the purchase and shipment of special steels, machine tools, and ball-bearings which were vital for the British armament industries. The German invasion of Denmark and Norway on 9 April 1940 cut Sweden off from the West, whereupon Binney decided to run the gauntlet of the Skagerrak blockade. He defeated opposition to his plan at home and in Sweden and was given diplomatic status as assistant commercial attache at the British legation; he recruited British, Norwegian, and Swedish crews for five Norwegian merchantmen. Operation Rubble, as it was called, sailed from Bro Fjord north of Goteborg on 23 January 1941 with Binney as commodore. It got through to Kirkwall in the Orkneys with 25,000 tons of vital war supplies and five ships for the allied merchant fleets. Binney refused an important appointment in Washington, and returned to Sweden to run operation Performance in March 1942 with ten ships. Only two got through, with 5000 tons of cargo, two returned to Sweden, and the rest were sunk or scuttled. 
Binney was expelled from Sweden as 'persona non grata' for smuggling scuttling charges and arms on board his ships but reappeared as commander, Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, in 1943 in charge of operation Bridford. This consisted of a flotilla of five motor coasters (of which two were lost) which delivered 3471/2 tons of valuable cargo while another 88 tons were airlifted. Having been invalided out after a heart attack, Binney still involved himself in yet another operation -- Moonshine -- which delivered arms to the Danish resistance. He was knighted in 1941 and appointed to the DSO in 1944 for these remarkable exploits. His unique contribution to the war effort was to help meet the shortfall of ball-bearings when there were too few coming from British factories and insufficient imports from the USA and Canada. After demobilization in 1945 Binney returned to United Steel, and left it once only -- for a brief foray for the government as leader of the UK trade and industrial mission to Ghana in 1959. 
This jovial buccaneer with his puckish sense of humour, his stocky physique, ruddy complexion, and keen blue eyes was a man of discriminating taste in books, antiques, and the good things of life. Binney's homes were perfect settings for his treasures, and his restoration of his home, Horham Hall, Thaxted, Essex, was typical of his taste. He was an obstinate individualist with scant respect for authority, a man of impeccable integrity, and meticulous in his attention to detail. Cyril Alington, his headmaster at Eton, called him 'the ingenious and ingenuous Binney': this he always remained. 
Binney was married first, on 7 May 1946, to Evelyn Mary, widow of Flight Lieutenant A. P. F. Fane of the RAF Volunteer Reserve, and elder daughter of Thomas G. Marriott, of Putney Hill, London. This marriage was dissolved in 1954 and the following year Binney married Sonia, widow of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Crofton Simms MC, and daughter of Paymaster Rear-Admiral Sir William Marcus Charles Beresford Whyte. He adopted her son Marcus. He died on 27 September 1972 at his home, Domaine des Vaux, Haut de la Vallee, St Lawrence, Jersey, Channel Islands. 
Peter Tennant', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30819


Birch, (Evelyn) Nigel Chetwode, Baron Rhyl (1906-1981), economist and politician, was born in London on 18 November 1906, one of two sons (there were no daughters) of General Sir (James Frederick) Noel Birch (1865-1939) GBE KCB KCMG and his wife, Florence Hyacinthe (1876-1938), the daughter of Sir George Chetwode, sixth baronet, and sister of Field Marshal Lord Chetwode. Educated at Eton College, he became a partner in the stockbroking firm of Cohen Laming Hoare. A skilful operator, especially in the gilt-edged market, he acquired at an early age a sufficient fortune to assure him independence. He joined the Territorial Army (King's Royal Rifle Corps) before 1939 and served in the Second World War on the general staff in Britain and the Mediterranean theatre, attaining the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1944. 
Birch was elected to parliament for Flintshire in 1945 and quickly made a formidable reputation on the Conservative opposition benches for his mordantly witty interventions and speeches, and for his advocacy of strictly honest public finance and his critique of the prevalent Keynesian trend. He married on 1 August 1950 Esme Consuelo Helen ('b'. 1908) OBE, daughter of Frederic Glyn, fourth Baron Wolverton. There were no children. On forming his government, in November 1951 Winston Churchill appointed Birch -- some believed as a result of mistaken identity -- not, as was expected, to a financial post but as parliamentary under-secretary at the Air Ministry and subsequently at the Ministry of Defence (from the end of February 1952). 
Birch attained ministerial rank in October 1954 as minister of works where he enjoyed, as he said, 'gardening with a staff of three thousand' and deserved to be remembered for his insistence upon retaining the trees in Park Lane when it was widened. He served in the government of Sir Anthony Eden as secretary of state for air from December 1955; but the first appointment in his special field came only when Harold Macmillan made him economic secretary to the Treasury -- technically a demotion -- in January 1957. 
Birch supported and encouraged the chancellor of the exchequer, Peter Thorneycroft, in evolving a theory of inflation which was the recognizable forerunner of the monetarism of later decades, and when Thorneycroft failed to obtain from his cabinet colleagues the restraint in public expenditure he considered essential, Birch joined him and the financial secretary (J. Enoch Powell) in the triple resignation on 6 January 1958 which Macmillan, in a jaunty phrase which became famous, dismissed as 'a little local difficulty'. 
Though he never held office again, Birch exercised great influence on economic and financial questions and continued to castigate what he regarded as the lax and inflationary proclivities of Macmillan's government. When Macmillan was about to be toppled by the scandal of the 'Profumo affair', Birch demanded his resignation in a philippic long famous for its closing phrase from Robert Browning's 'The Lost Leader', 'Never glad confident morning again', which went down in parliamentary memory along with his exclamation to a full house on the announcement of Hugh Dalton's resignation: 'They've shot our fox!' The failing eyesight which increasingly inhibited Birch's other activities did not interfere with his stream of contributions to economic debate, which, though meticulously prepared, were invariably delivered without a note. 
Birch, who once accused the Treasury of 'the reckless courage of a mouse at bay', was representative of a distinctive element in the House of Commons after the Second World War. He combined with personal courage, independence, and integrity an understanding of public finance and economic affairs acquired and perfected in the practical life of the City. He was appointed OBE in 1945 and sworn of the privy council in 1955. 
Having continued from 1950 to represent West Flint, where he resided at Saithailwyd ('Seven Hearths'), near Holywell, Birch went to the House of Lords in 1970 as a life peer, Baron Rhyl. He died on 8 March 1981 at Holywell House, Swanmore, Hampshire. 
J. Enoch Powell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30820


Birley, Sir Robert (1903-1982), headmaster and educational administrator, was born on 14 July 1903 at Midnapore, India, the only son and elder child of Leonard Birley CSI CIE (1875-1951) of the Indian Civil Service (Bengal), and his first wife, Grace Dalgleish, younger daughter of Maxwell Smyth, indigo planter, formerly of Moffat, Dumfriesshire. His mother died when he was three and he was brought up by his paternal grandparents in Bournemouth. He was educated at Rugby School (1917-22) where he specialized in history and soon developed a taste for exploring its byways and oddities, which was stimulated by a tour of Europe between school and university, roaming about Italy, Germany, and Czechoslovakia. By a series of chances he had generally escaped external examinations, and this was to colour his approach to education later on. He went to Balliol College, Oxford (1922-5, Brackenbury scholar in history), where he won the Gladstone memorial prize (1924) and obtained first-class honours in modern history (1925). Balliol nurtured the strong idealism in Birley's character. 
On leaving Oxford, Birley joined the staff at Eton College, where he remained from 1926 to 1935, and married, in 1930, Elinor Margaret, daughter of Eustace Corrie Frere, architect; they had two daughters, Julia (1931-1978) and Rachael ('b'. 1935). At Eton he made an immediate impact as an inspiring history teacher. He also startled some of the staff by putting the case for the strikers in the general strike of 1926 and organizing relief for the unemployed of Slough in 1931. He developed a lifelong absorption in the magnificent college library, from which he obtained much of his large store of often esoteric knowledge. He taught mainly the cleverer boys, introducing them to adult modes of thought and awakening their aesthetic sense. In all he made such an impression that on the retirement of C. A. Alington as headmaster in 1933 Birley was seriously suggested by some as his successor. But the post went to an older man, Claude Elliott, and soon Birley was made the headmaster of Charterhouse School, a post he held from 1935 to 1947. 
As a young liberal-minded headmaster Birley had a stimulating effect in the school, and brought it into closer touch with the world of affairs. He believed that a headmaster should do as much teaching as possible. In addition to the contact with the pupils that this afforded, Birley and his wife encouraged individual boys, particularly those whom life was not treating well, with private hospitality, both in the school and at their holiday home in Somerset. Soon Charterhouse had to be guided through the war, and Birley stoutly resisted all pressures to remove it from Godalming. 
Birley's public spirit made him a prominent member of the Headmasters' Conference. In 1942 he was appointed as its member on the government committee set up under Lord Fleming to bridge the gap between private and state education. He contributed much to the final report, and at the end of the war his reputation was such that he was appointed educational adviser to the military governor, Allied Control Commission for Germany (1947-9). In Germany, Birley worked for reconciliation by bringing people together. He must be given a generous share of the credit for rebuilding the German educational system. He also played a leading part in setting up the Konigswinter conferences, the first of which was held in 1950, by which Anglo-German understanding was strengthened and sustained. 
In 1949 Birley became headmaster at Eton, where he remained until 1963. During his first term there he gave the Reith lectures, which were not a success. Historian that he was, he had a deep understanding of the historical role of Eton and a subtle appreciation of its special character. Birley was not a reforming headmaster, but under him respect grew for the intellect and the arts, and the teaching of science was improved and modernized. He realized the need for technologists in the second half of the twentieth century, and he felt that ideally they should be literate, go to church, and know Greek. 
Birley soon became the most influential public school headmaster of his generation and he occupied the chair of the Headmasters' Conference for four years. He saw the main purpose of education as the encouragement of independent thought. The leisurely Eton education of his day, with its late specialization and freedom from the tyranny of the A-level syllabus, admirably suited this approach. However, towards the end of Birley's time some parents grew restive and there was a growing demand for paper qualifications, which he was unable to resist. 
The next phase of Birley's life was as remarkable as it was unexpected. On a visit to South Africa, Birley's crusading zeal was aroused by the political and racial constraints in that country. He left Eton to become visiting professor of education at the University of the Witwatersrand (1964-7). Tirelessly and single-mindedly he and his wife worked in their favourite cause, freedom of the spirit against repression and injustice. Their presence heartened liberals throughout South Africa and they made innumerable friends among both white and black people. 
Birley filled one more important post on his return from South Africa, that of professor and head of the department of social science and the humanities at the City University, London (1967-71). 
6 feet 6 inches in height, clumsy and unathletic, with a shy smile and an increasing stoop, Birley was an imposing and compelling figure, particularly in his cassock and bands as headmaster of Eton. Incapable of small talk, he would launch into the serious topic of the moment with excited earnestness, livened by a keen sense of the absurd and a mischievousness which never lapsed into irresponsibility. Anyone so sure of his own rectitude could not fail to have his detractors, but his natural goodness and lofty ideals won the respect of most and the devotion of many. His effect on the moral and intellectual climate of his time was immense. 
Birley was given many honours in his life, including honorary doctorates (one of them an Oxford DCL, 1972) at eight universities. He was appointed CMG (1950) and KCMG (1967) but not to the honour to which his talents and sense of service were perhaps best suited, namely a life peerage. He became an honorary fellow of Balliol in 1969. He died on 22 July 1982 at Somerton in Somerset. 
M. A. Nicholson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30821


Black, Sir Misha (1910-1977), architect and industrial designer, was born on 16 October 1910 in Baku, Russia, the second of the three sons (there was also a daughter) of Lionel Tcherny (1885-1960), merchant, and his wife, Sophia Divinska ('d.' 'c'.1970), who took him at the age of eighteen months to London. His elder brother was the philosopher Max Black. Lionel Tcherny changed his name to Black in 1911-12 and his son Moisey became Misha. Black received his early education at the Dame Alice Owen School in Islington. He went on to take evening classes at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London and studied briefly in Paris in 1928. 
In spite of this modest education Black ended his life as a professor emeritus of the Royal College of Art (from 1975), a trustee of the British Museum (from 1968), an honorary doctor of technology of Bradford University, and an internationally recognized authority on the teaching and practice of industrial design. He arrived at these distinctions by a circuitous route, for industrial design was an unknown, untaught subject when he was born. 
Black began his career at the age of seventeen, designing posters and exhibition stands. It was about this time that he met Lucy Rossetti, the great-niece of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. The two studied together under Hans Kiesewelter and worked for Messrs Wickham and Arundell Display Ltd. They set up a partnership and set about designing what Black called 'stomach fillers' such as book-plates, book jackets, posters, and exhibition stands, under the name Studio Z. They conducted these youthful freelance activities from an attic overlooking Seven Dials. The partnership lasted about a year, after which Black carried on working alone until 1934, when he joined Milner and Thomas Gray and others in the Industrial Design Partnership. His early designs included television and radio sets for E. K. Cole Ltd and the redesign of the Kardomah cafes in London and Manchester. It was through his work on commercial display stands that he eventually became a leader in the field of exhibition design working as co-ordinating designer for the 1938 Modern Architectural Research (MARS) Group exhibition 'New architecture' and as interior designer for the British pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair. In 1935 he married Helen Lillian, daughter of Frank Foster Evans, engineer, with whom he had one son and one daughter (the marriage was dissolved in 1952). 
From 1940 to 1945 Black was principal exhibition architect to the Ministry of Information. In 1946 he designed the 'Birth of an Egg Cup' exhibit at the 'Britain Can Make It' exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, but his real chance came in 1951 at the Festival of Britain south bank exhibition, of which he was co-ordinating architect for the upstream section, co-ordinating designer for the Dome of Discovery, and co-architect of the Regatta restaurant and the Bailey Bridge. Thereafter he was endlessly busy as architect, designer, or consultant, having formed in 1946, at the instigation of Marcus Brumwell and Herbert Read, his lifelong partnership with Milner Gray, which they cleverly called Design Research Unit (DRU), thereby winning national and international standing as the leading design consultancy in Britain. Although the DRU practice ranged across the whole spectrum of design, Black's own leanings were towards blending art with technics and bridging the gap between industrial and engineering design, particularly in the field of public transport. This led him to consultancies with British Rail, London Transport for whom he designed the stations and trains of the Victoria Line, the Orient Line, British Overseas Airways Corporation, Beagle Aircraft, and the Hong Kong rapid transport system, among others. He went on to become a partner in the architectural practice Black, Bayes, and Gibson, architects, between 1963 and 1977, with whom he designed the Charles Clore pavilion for small mammals at London Zoo. 
Black was also active in many societies and public bodies. In 1933, again with Milner Gray, he had been a founder member of the British Society of Industrial Artists and in 1954-6 he was its president, an experience which together with his many foreign friendships led him to become a prime mover in the establishment of the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design, the first meeting of which was held in London in 1957 and of which Black was president from 1959 to 1961. 
Black married for a second time in 1955; his new wife was Edna Joan, daughter of George Septimus Fairbrother, engineer, with whom he had one son. That year he also acquired another string to his bow and one that brought him almost more acclaim worldwide than had his widespread professional practice, for it was in that year that he was appointed professor of industrial design at the Royal College of Art, a chair he held until his retirement in 1975. Although Black never himself went to a university, his arrival at the Royal College of Art soon gave academic authority to the profession he had adopted and he became in great demand as a writer and lecturer. His mastery of language was a joy to witness, developing as it did from early pretentiousness to such clarity of thought and expression as to leave audiences eating out of his hand. No one could sum up a debate or seminar or conference more precisely or punctiliously, thereby sending everyone home comforted that some wisdom had transpired. It was indeed for his wisdom that he was picked for membership of all manner of organizations such as the Council of Industrial Design (1955-64), the Design and Industries' Association, the National Advisory Council on Art Education (1959-72), the advisory council to the Science Museum (from 1966), the Faculty of Royal Designers for Industry, of which he was master in 1973-4, the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and even the National Union of Students, which offered him honorary membership in 1967. He was appointed OBE in 1946 (he was naturalized in 1950, whereupon the OBE was reissued) and knighted in 1972. He became RDI in 1957. 
Misha Black wrote on design throughout his career, giving lectures and writing in the popular and design press, and contributing to design manuals. His best-known works are 'Exhibition Design' (1950) and 'Public Interiors' (1960). He died in London on 11 August 1977. The British Architectural Library holds a number of his drawings. 


@@@@@


doc= 30822


Blackett, Patrick Maynard Stuart, Baron Blackett (1897-1974), physicist and government and military adviser, was born on 18 November 1897 at Kensington, London, the only son and the second of three children of Arthur Stuart Blackett (1865-1922), stockbroker, and his wife, Caroline Frances (1868-1954), daughter of Major Charles Maynard RA, a veteran of the Indian mutiny. 
Blackett received his early education at a preparatory school in High Street, Guildford, from 1907 and entered Royal Naval College at Osborne in 1910, moving on to Royal Naval College at Dartmouth in 1912, as was customary for naval cadets. When war broke out in August 1914 he and other cadets were immediately sent into action, and he participated in the battle of the Falkland Islands in 1914 and the battle of Jutland in 1916. Promoted to lieutenant in May 1918, he resigned from the navy shortly after January 1919 when the Admiralty sent him to Cambridge along with other officers whose study had been interrupted in 1914. He completed part one of the mathematical tripos in May 1919 and part two of the natural sciences tripos (physics) in 1921, graduating with first-class honours that year. He was elected to a Bye fellowship at his college, Magdalene, and in autumn 1921 he became a research student under Ernest Rutherford at the Cavendish Laboratory. 
In 1923 Blackett was elected a fellow of King's College, a position that he held until 1933, to which he added a university lectureship in 1930. He spent the academic year 1924-5 with the physicist James Franck in Gottingen during the second of a two-year tenureship of the Moseley research fellowship of the Royal Society. In March 1924 he married Costanza 
(or Constanza; 'b'. 1899)
, daughter of Eugenio Bayon, an Italian. Their daughter, Giovanna, was born in 1926 and their son, Nicolas (or Nicholas) Maynard, in 1928. 
During the Cambridge and Gottingen years Blackett established solid credentials as an experimental nuclear physicist in work that led to the award of the Nobel prize in physics in 1948. He was enthusiastic about the rapidly developing theory of quantum mechanics; his experimental researches addressed fundamental questions within a broad theoretical context. In the widely admired essay on 'The craft of experimental physics', he emphasized that 'the experimental physicist must be enough of a theorist to know what experiments are worth doing and enough of a craftsman to be able to do them. He is only preeminent in being able to do both' (in 'University Studies', ed. H. Wright, 1933, 67). 
At the Cavendish Blackett, like many of his fellow researchers, was put to work by Rutherford counting the microscopic scintillations that provided evidence of the expulsion of protons from atomic nuclei targeted with fast alpha particles. From the scintillation work Blackett estimated that a million alpha particles fired into nitrogen should result in about twenty disintegration protons. Rutherford was also interested in using the cloud chamber as a detector in which vapour condenses on ionized particles during the expansion of gas. By developing an automatic cloud chamber Blackett, in the summer of 1924, obtained 23,000 photographs showing 415,000 tracks of ionized particles, of which eight tracks were of a strikingly different type. These showed the path of a proton ejected from a recoiling nitrogen nucleus and the capture of the alpha particle by the nitrogen nucleus, creating an isotope of oxygen. Blackett's classic paper, published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' in 1925, included photographs that have been widely reprinted ever since. 
While in Berlin in 1930 Blackett met Bruno Rossi, who was studying ways to use the Geiger-Muller counter to detect charged particles in cosmic radiation. Rossi arranged for Giuseppe P. S. Occhialini to visit Blackett at the Cavendish in order to learn cloud chamber techniques. Blackett and Occhialini soon developed a counter controlled cloud chamber in which the expansion of the chamber was triggered by the passage of charged particles through the plane of the chamber. 
In late 1932 Carl D. Anderson, a physicist at the California Institute of Technology, published his discovery of a positively charged particle with a mass smaller than the proton. In March 1933 Anderson suggested that the particle was a positively charged electron (positron). By that time, in February 1933, Blackett and Occhialini had communicated to the Royal Society the results of 700 automatic expansions resulting in 500 tracks of cosmic ray particles, of which fourteen tracks were evidence for the existence of a positive electron. In contrast to Anderson's 1932 paper, they explicitly associated the new particle with Cambridge physicist P. A. M. Dirac's recent formulation of quantum mechanics that predicted pair production of an electron and an anti-electron. Later Blackett questioned new reports by Anderson and S. H. Neddermeyer that they had identified a particle heavier than the electron in the penetrating cosmic rays. However, by 1938 he had accepted the interpretation of what came to be called the mu-meson (muon). 
In 1933, the year that Blackett was elected FRS, he moved to Birkbeck College in London in order to head his own laboratory. In co-ordination with Metropolitan-Vickers in Manchester he designed a large electromagnet for use with the cloud chamber. Blackett set up his equipment 100 feet below ground at an unused platform in Holborn tube station, attracting the attention of science journalists who compared his investigations to those of Sherlock Holmes. In 1937 he succeeded William Lawrence Bragg as Langworthy professor of physics at the University of Manchester. From 1937 to 1953 he built an international physics school with expanding student enrolments; distinguished foreign visitors, some of them refugees from Europe; and intersecting research programmes that came to include the work of D. R. Hartree and Leon Rosenfeld in theoretical physics; J. G. Wilson, G. D. Rochester, L. Janossy, and C. C. Butler in cosmic ray physics; and Bernard Lovell in radio astronomy. 
From the 1930s onwards, Blackett's attention focused equally on military and political matters. While in London in 1935 he joined a committee chaired by Henry T. Tizard that advised the Air Ministry to give high priority to the development of radar for defence against enemy air attack. This argument prevailed over the objections of Frederick A. Lindemann, who was to become Winston Churchill's scientific adviser in 1939. At the outbreak of war Blackett joined the instrument section of the Royal Aircraft Establishment where he worked with H. J. J. Braddick on the design of the Mark 14 bombsight. This instrument eliminated the need for a level bombing run at the time of bomb release. 
In August 1940 Blackett became scientific adviser to General Frederick A. Pile, the commander-in-chief of anti-aircraft command. Blackett organized a group of scientists to study the operational use of radar sets, guns, and mechanical calculators, resulting in improved accuracy of anti-aircraft fire during the battle of Britain. Joining Coastal Command in March 1941, he headed a group that recalculated the depth settings for anti-submarine explosives, and applied mathematical techniques (Poisson's distribution) to settle tactical and strategic arguments within the command. At the Admiralty from January 1942 to the summer of 1945 Blackett, and 'Blackett's circus', as it became known, exerted a major influence on the British battle against U-boats, and brought about significant improvement in the use of airborne radar for finding German submarines that were sinking Allied merchant ships. 
Two reports that Blackett drafted in 1941 on the organization and methodology of operational research enjoyed broad circulation in Great Britain and elsewhere, appearing later in his 'Studies of War' (1962). By the late 1950s Blackett was expressing misgivings about the teaching of operational research as an academic speciality, especially the use of game theory, which he considered practically inadequate and morally suspect in its application to warfare. On the other hand he was optimistic, like some other veterans of operational research, about the use of operational research in industry. 
During 1942-3 Blackett incensed some members of the government and the Air Ministry by arguing against Lindemann's recommendation for saturation bombing and the targeting of civilian housing in German cities. He was also the sole dissenting member in June 1941 from the finding of the Maud committee that an atomic bomb could be produced by 1943 at a cost of $5 million; instead, he recommended that the project should be co-ordinated with work in the USA, as indeed subsequently occurred. Again during 1945-7, when appointed to the advisory committee on atomic energy, his views diverged from majority opinion as he opposed British development of atomic weapons and argued for a neutralist foreign policy. Having failed to influence government policy, Blackett circulated his opinions, first in the Fabian Society publication 'The Atom and the Charter' (1946) and then in the widely read book 'Military and Political Consequences of Atomic Energy' (1948), published in the United States under the title 'Fear, War and the Bomb'. This book excited considerable criticism for its sympathetic treatment of Soviet objections to American plans for international control of atomic energy, for its suspicion of American post-war global ambitions, for its criticism of British bombing strategy during the war, and for its debunking of claims that bombs alone could win a war. 
During the immediate post-war years, as Blackett returned to the problem of the origins and distribution of cosmic radiation, he revived the hypothesis that the magnetic fields of the sun, stars, and the earth are a fundamental property of their rotating mass. His presentation in May 1947 of a simple equation involving Newton's constant of universal gravitation and the speed of light led journalists to compare his work with Einstein's theory of relativity. 
While marshalling evidence for his theory from the fields of quantum electrodynamics, astronomy, and geophysics, Blackett developed a magnetometer of great sensitivity and precision in order to measure a predicted magnetic effect on the order of 10-8 Gauss for experimental cylinders. In 1952 he communicated his negative results to the Royal Society, as well as the failure of other lines of evidence to confirm his hypothesis. He offered a masterful account of his geomagnetic theory and of the operation of his magnetometer, noting its suitability for measuring remanent magnetism in sedimentary rocks that might corroborate the hypothesis of continental drift. He built up a research group for studying rock magnetism, first at Manchester and then at Imperial College, where he moved from Manchester in 1953. After a decade of fostering geophysical research, much of it led by Edward Bullard, Stanley Runcorn, and J. A. Clegg, Blackett initiated a Royal Society discussion meeting on continental drift in March 1964 that had a great impact on the acceptance of the hypothesis of continental drift and the development of the theory of plate tectonics. 
During the 1940s and 1950s Blackett was a forceful advocate of university expansion and government funding of research and development. He was a member of the Barlow committee (1945-6), the council and the research grants committee of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (1956-1960), and the National Research Development Corporation (1949-64), where he pushed for the development of the computer industry. He was dean of the faculty of science (1948-50) and pro-vice-chancellor (1950-52) at Manchester; dean of the Royal College of Science (1955-60) and pro-rector (1961-4) in London. After formally retiring from Imperial College and the University of London in September 1965 Blackett served as president of the Royal Society from 1965 to 1970. 
Blackett had longstanding Fabian and socialist political allegiances, dating from his undergraduate years at Magdalene College. His conception of laboratory organization emphasized co-operation and teamwork. As he told Brian Connell of Anglia Television in 1971, a good laboratory is a place where ordinary people do first-class work. He was an active member and president (1943-6) of the trade unionist British Association of Scientific Workers. The grandson of a vicar, he respected religious observances that were established social customs, but described himself as agnostic or atheist. 
Blackett felt more at home in London than in Cambridge, declining in 1953 to be considered as a candidate to succeed Bragg as director of the Cavendish Laboratory. During 1939-40 he was part of the London based Tots and Quots political dining club organized by Solly Zuckermann. From 1953 to 1963 he met a group of scientists hosted by J. R. M. Brumwell, and including J. D. Bernal and C. P. Snow among others, who advised Hugh Gaitskell, as leader of the Labour Party, and then Harold Wilson and his shadow minister for education, Richard Crossman. The expansion of science and technology became a main platform of the Labour Party in the 1964 general election. 
Blackett first travelled to India in 1947, and increasingly became concerned with improving living conditions in poorer countries of the world through applications of science and technology. His sympathetic attitude toward the Soviet Union was based largely in his optimism that socialism and science could improve human welfare. Blackett was appointed CH in 1965 and OM in 1967. He never took a PhD, but he held twenty honorary degrees and was an honorary member of academic or other institutions in eleven countries, including the Soviet Union and China. His honours also included the royal medal in 1940 and the Copley medal in 1956, both from the Royal Society. In 1969 he was created a life peer, an honour that he had declined five years earlier. Sir Edward Bullard recalled Blackett's quip that, at any rate, he had remained Mr Blackett until after he retired (Bullard, 370). 
Tall and handsome, Blackett was a powerful and versatile figure in British scientific and governmental circles. He was a problem solver who was willing to take responsibility and to assess responsibility. 'Never say 'They'', he cautioned a friend, 'it's a sign of frustration and woolly thinking and will get you nowhere' (Hodgkin and others, 137). He believed that science, clear thinking, and good will could win the day. He died in London on 13 July 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30823


Blackman, Geoffrey Emett (1903-1980), agricultural scientist, was born on 17 April 1903 at 58 Scarsdale Villas, Kensington, London. He was the eldest of the three children of the cytologist and plant physiologist Vernon Herbert Blackman (1872-1967), then an assistant in the British Museum (Natural History), and Edith Delta (1876/7-1940), daughter of Joseph and Rebecca Ann Emett of Mangotsfield, Gloucestershire. Blackman began his schooling in Leeds, where his father was professor of botany from 1907. Following his father's return to London as professor of plant physiology and pathology at Imperial College, he attended King's College School, Wimbledon, before entering St John's College, Cambridge. Blackman graduated second class in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1924 and 1926). He was also a good sportsman, a jazz fan, and president of the dance club. 
Blackman's interest in biology started very early. He grew up surrounded by renowned biologists including his uncle Frederick Frost Blackman (1866-1947), his aunt Dame Harriette Chick (1875-1977), and Sir Arthur Tansley (1871-1955), a close friend of the family. In Cambridge he became interested in the applications of mathematical statistics to biological problems through his teacher G. E. Briggs. This interest was furthered in 1926 during Blackman's five months as a student worker in the Rothamsted Experimental Station under Ronald Fisher and Bernard Keen, studying the effects of fertilizers on plant growth in the field laboratory. His father, considering his performance in Cambridge poor, then advised Blackman to go into industry rather than try to follow an academic career. Thus, in 1927, he joined Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). There he worked under Frederick Keeble, director of the agricultural research station at Jealott's Hill. Blackman eventually headed the station's botany section, working in particular on the effects of fertilizers and poisonous substances on the ecological interactions between different plant species, thereby laying the foundations of the study of selective herbicides. Some of this work was publicized in articles in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle'. Blackman later became an assistant scientific editor of the 'Chronicle'. 
On 8 October 1931 Blackman married Audrey Babette Seligman ('b'. 1906/7), sculptress, with whom he shared many interests, including the collection of British watercolour paintings. She was the daughter of Richard Joseph Simon Seligman, chemical engineer and director of APV Ltd, manufacturers of machinery for the food trade, on whose board Blackman sat from 1930. They had no children. 
During his time at ICI Blackman developed his hobby of gardening, in which he became a great expert -- well known for his gardens on acid soils. He also became passionately fond of mountains and winter sports, making regular visits to the Alps until he was over seventy. 
During the first half of the 1930s Blackman grew increasingly frustrated with routine testing at ICI, and with the secrecy surrounding the composition of the compounds involved, which, he argued, kept him from designing satisfactory experiments. He sought employment elsewhere, and in 1935 was appointed to a lectureship in the department of biology at Imperial College, then still headed by his father. While the department was very interested in the agricultural applications of its work, Blackman was very sensitive about having started his scientific career in industry, and, therefore, turned his attention increasingly to ecological experiments in natural habitats. However, the time spent in Rothamsted and at Jealott's Hill left its mark. The statistical methods he and A. J. Rutter deployed in their work on the autecology of the bluebell and on the dispersion of plants were pioneering, as was their application to native vegetation of techniques of plant growth analysis then being used by agricultural scientists in Cambridge and Rothamsted. Significantly, Blackman remained uninterested in experimental work on the mechanisms of photosynthesis, nutrient absorption, and intermediate metabolism, which his colleagues believed to be fundamentally important to understand plant growth. 
Blackman's agricultural work before moving to Imperial College also facilitated his efforts to establish a role for biologists in the war effort. He was centrally involved in moving the Association of Applied Biologists, the Society of Experimental Biology, and the British Ecological Society to support the establishment of the biology war committee, of which he was the secretary from 1942 to 1946. He also supervised research under the aegis of the Agricultural Research Council on many agricultural problems, including the possible use of selective herbicides, and the introduction of new crops such as oilseed rape, maize, and flax to compensate for lost imports. His involvement with the war effort also cemented his friendship with Sir Henry Tizard who, after being elected president of Magdalen College, Oxford, was instrumental in persuading Blackman to apply for an Oxford chair. 
Appointed to the Sibthorpian chair in rural economy in 1945, Blackman was quick to change the emphasis of the department. This was reflected in its name which he changed first to the department of agriculture and subsequently to the department of agricultural science. Teaching and research changed in line with this transformation to reflect the needs of students less interested in becoming farm managers than in embarking on a scientific career. By 1950 the team of collaborators Blackman had drawn together during the war was unified in the Agricultural Research Council unit of agronomy, and was engaged in important research on the physiology of plant hormones and plant growth, the kind of work he had disdained at Imperial College. Blackman's persistent reservations about scientific work in industry, together with criticism from colleagues in Oxford, also resulted in a determined avoidance of any close relationship with the agricultural industry. Some members of the unit who disagreed with these developments eventually succeeded in 1960 in establishing, under the aegis of the Agricultural Research Council, a separate Weed Research Organization at Letcombe. 
During the 1950s Blackman became less actively involved in research and more interested in the wider activities of both St John's College and the university, particularly the management of the university parks and the university botanic garden. He also expanded his advisory and administrative activities outside Oxford; these included supervision of the organization of the Malaysian Rubber Research Institute and chairing the section on production and processes of the International Biological Programme. He retired from his professorship in 1970 and was invited to join the committee set up by the United States National Academy of Sciences to report to Congress on the controversial use of herbicides in Vietnam for military purposes. In spite of his age and the dangers involved he took a very active part in the committee's surveys, and was only disappointed that there was no support for more detailed investigations of the herbicides' effects. 
Blackman was elected to the Royal Society in 1959, and served on its council and as vice-president (1967-8). He was elected to the Royal Swedish Academy of Agriculture (1963), to an honorary fellowship of Imperial College (1968), and as honorary councillor of the Superior Scientific Circle of Spain (1968). An annual Blackman lecture, at Oxford, was created in his honour. Blackman died at 29 Norman Avenue, Abingdon, on 8 February 1980 after a short illness. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30824


Blackwell, Sir Basil Henry (1889-1984), bookseller and publisher, was born on 29 May 1889, at Blackwell's bookshop, 51 Broad Street, Oxford, the only son and younger child of Benjamin Henry Blackwell (1849-1924), bookseller, and his wife, Lydia (Lilla) (1848-1928), daughter of John Taylor, a Norfolk farmer. Basil's grandfather, Benjamin Harris Blackwell (1813-1855), had first become a bookseller in Oxford in 1845, but he died prematurely when his elder son, Benjamin Henry, was only six. However, on new year's day 1879 Benjamin Henry opened his shop at Broad Street, and by the time Basil was born the business was well established. The family moved out of the shop to 1 Linton Road, Oxford. Blackwell was educated at a dame-school for boys kept by Wilhelmina and Sarah Mardon and then at Magdalen College School, Oxford. In 1907 he achieved a postmastership at Merton College, Oxford, where he received a third class in classical honour moderations (1909) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1911). Here he met Adrian Mott, who became his publishing partner. 
On graduation Blackwell went to work for two years in the London office of Oxford University Press in order to learn about publishing; he was joint editor of a volume of essays for the 'World's Classics'. On new year's day 1913 he joined his father and in September established the publications department separately from the bookshop. In his first year he launched the annual series 'Oxford Poetry', which included, over thirty years, Robert Graves, W. H. Auden, and Stephen Spender. He also published Edith Sitwell's first three volumes of poetry. His first editorial assistant was the crime writer Dorothy L. Sayers. On 9 September 1914 he married Marion Christine (1888-1977), daughter of John Soans, schoolmaster, of Ramsgate. They had two sons and three daughters. 
In the next few years (he was rejected for military service because of defective eyesight) Blackwell laid the foundation for the publishing firm of Basil Blackwell and Mott (founded in 1922), which encouraged many young Oxford poets. Blackwell and Adrian Mott were also co-directors of the Shakespeare Head Press, which they saved from bankruptcy, and which allowed them to indulge in fine book production. 
However, in 1924 Blackwell's father died and he became chairman of B. H. Blackwell Ltd. This meant that he had to concentrate on the main business of selling new books. This he did reluctantly, as he preferred publishing to bookselling and selling antiquarian books to new books. In spite of this, and through the promotion of export in the USA, by 1929 he was one of the most flourishing and influential booksellers in the country. Almost immediately on assuming complete responsibility for the business he successfully opposed a ring of collusive bidders in antiquarian book auctions. In 1925-6 he was elected president of the Antiquarian Booksellers' Association. In 1955, after a further outbreak of collusive bidding, Blackwell had the matter raised vigorously in parliament, and, as a result of the publicity, the Antiquarian Booksellers' Association made a new and even more stringent rule against the practice. 
Throughout his life Blackwell served his profession well and exercised considerable influence in the book trade of the United Kingdom. From 1934 to 1936 he was president of the Booksellers' Association. He forged an alliance with Stanley Unwin (1884-1968), president of the Publishers' Association, on the grounds that booksellers and publishers, so often mutually suspicious, should be brought together in co-operation. At the 1932 Booksellers' Association conference Blackwell, at Unwin's request, had finally succeeded in persuading booksellers to support the book token scheme, which had originally been proposed by a publisher in 1928. In 1934 Blackwell invited Unwin to be joint host to an informal weekend conference of fifty booksellers and publishers in Ripon Hall, Oxford, the beneficial influence of which lasted for many years. At the end of his period of office Blackwell's reputation for approachability, concern for the welfare of the trade, and enthusiasm was such that he was affectionately nicknamed the Gaffer. 
By 1938 the bookselling business was flourishing, with expansion into further premises and the establishment of a second publishing business, Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd. Contrary to the experience of the First World War, and to expectations, the sales of books greatly increased in the Second World War, and in 1945 B. H. Blackwell Ltd and its two associated publishing companies were well set. Blackwell's eldest son, Richard Blackwell (1918-1980), returned from the war and in the course of the next twenty years gradually assumed responsibility and undertook modernization. Blackwell finally resigned the chairmanship after forty-five years in 1969 to become president, and handed on a business vastly increased, both in reputation and in size, although much of the credit for the post-war expansion overseas belonged to his son, Richard. 
For the rest of his life, to within a week of his death, Blackwell continued to attend all board meetings as president, to peruse all accounting statements, and to visit the three main offices. He instinctively supported the attitudes and conventions of a previous age, working long hours in his office and supervising every detail. He believed in paternalism and it was his settled intention that Blackwells should remain independent and controlled only by those members of the family actively concerned with its management. He had the reputation of being one of the best-read people in the country. He wrote no books, but his letters and speeches were entertaining. He contributed the notice of J. G. Wilson to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
In 1941 Blackwell became a JP for Oxford, and in 1956 he was the first bookseller to be knighted. In 1959 he was elected an honorary fellow of Merton College. He was president of the Classical Association (1964-5), and of the English Association (1969-70). In 1979, on the hundredth anniversary of the founding of B. H. Blackwell Ltd, the University of Oxford made him an honorary DCL. He was also an honorary LLD of Manchester University (1965). But the distinction he cherished most was that of honorary freeman of the city of Oxford, conferred upon him in his eightieth year. Blackwell died of bronchopneumonia at his home, Tubney House, Tubney, near Abingdon, Oxfordshire, on 9 April 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 30825


Blackwell, Richard (1918-1980), bookseller and publisher, was born on 5 January 1918 at 1 Frenchay Road, Oxford, the eldest in the family of two sons and three daughters of Sir Basil Henry Blackwell (1889-1984), bookseller, and his wife, Marion Christine (1888/9-1977), daughter of John Soans, schoolmaster, of Ramsgate. He was educated at the Dragon School in Oxford. He won a scholarship to Winchester College, and from there a scholarship to New College, Oxford, where he rowed in the first eight; in 1938 he achieved a first class in classical honour moderations. However, the war cut short his academic career, and he did not return later, but was content with a wartime MA (1944). His six and a half years of war service were spent in the Royal Navy, as lieutenant (S), Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He saw action and hardship on the Russian convoy route and also in the Mediterranean, where in 1944 he was awarded the DSC. On 23 May 1942 he married Marguerite Brook Holliday ('b'. 1922/3), the daughter of Major Lionel Brook Holliday, industrialist and landowner, of Copgrave Hall, Yorkshire. They had two sons. He was destined for the family firm and in 1946 he joined his father in the bookselling business. 
After the war Blackwells enjoyed a high and enviable reputation as one of the best retail booksellers in the English-speaking world, but the actual size of the business in financial terms was modest. It was Richard Blackwell's life work to build a large, complex, and successful international business on this base. He achieved this by foreseeing the spread of English as the main international language, the post-war growth of higher education throughout the world, and the establishment of many new universities and libraries, and thus the opportunities for export. He also promoted specialization in the management of the business. 
Blackwell travelled widely and took every opportunity for development. He nurtured many small and not so small subsidiary and associated companies in the book trade. The most significant of these was perhaps Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd. In 1964 he formed, with Oxford University Press as a joint partner, University Bookshops (Oxford) Ltd.. When the Richard Abel library supply business in the United States failed, he developed Blackwell North America Inc. to take over the business. His aim was to develop a worldwide service supplying English periodicals and books to academic and specialist libraries and customers. While Blackwells was always a priority, he also helped to establish the Smaller Business Association (later the Association of Independent Businesses), which upheld the rights of small firms. In 1962 he worked hard for the defence of the net book agreement and played an arduous part in the case itself before the restrictive trade practices court (see R. E. Barker and G. R. Davies, eds., 'Books are Different', 1966). For two years (1966-8) he was president of the Booksellers' Association. 
In all business enterprises Blackwell always ensured the ultimate control by the Blackwell family. It was not only a question of seeing his inheritance multiply, it was also his intention that the family business should remain wholly independent and private. During the years of growth Richard Blackwell had been supported by his family, above all his father, his younger brother, Julian, and latterly his two sons, Miles and Nigel, all actively involved in the management of the business. In the early days the guidance of his father was an essential feature in his success, but he steadily took over the main burden of responsibility, becoming managing director in 1966 and chairman in 1969. In 1976 he became chairman of Basil Blackwell Publisher Ltd, the publishing business originally established by his father as Blackwell and Mott. He always down-played his achievement with characteristic modesty and self-effacement. 
In 1971 Blackwell was made an honorary DLitt at York University, Ontario, and in 1978 he was elected a fellow of St Cross College, Oxford. He died of cancer at his home, Tubney House, Tubney, near Abingdon, Oxfordshire, on 26 February 1980; his funeral took place on the 29th. 


@@@@@


doc= 30826


Blair, David (1932-1976), ballet dancer, was born David Butterfield on 27 July 1932 at the Royal Halifax Infirmary, Halifax, Yorkshire, the elder child and only son of John Butterfield, moquette weaver, and his wife, Zette Carolyne Elizabeth Whiteley, both of Halifax, where he received his primary education at Trinity School. As a child he attended local dancing classes and was selected by the Royal Academy of Dancing for extra coaching under its scholarship scheme in the Yorkshire region, which led, when he was fourteen, to the Royal Ballet School, London. Only a year later, in 1947, he joined the Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet and progressed so quickly that at sixteen he was dancing the exacting 'pas de deux' in 'Casse noisette' and in 1950 he was made a principal dancer. 
From the start Blair's exceptional virtuosity, enhanced by good looks and a most engaging stage presence, endeared him to the public and critics alike in a variety of roles. His first lead in a new choreography came when Michael Somes cast him for his 'Summer Interlude'; and a few months later Balanchine chose him for 'Trumpet Concerto' at Sadler's Wells Theatre. But it was John Cranko who worked most closely with Blair for several years, developing his talents over a wide range and creating for him, in 1951, the unforgettable Captain Belaye in 'Pineapple Poll' to the music of Arthur Sullivan. Blair's portrayal of the dashingly handsome but ludicrously vain captain was a masterpiece of comedy which, combined with his brilliant dancing, helped to establish the ballet as one of the favourite British classics. 
In 1953 Blair transferred to the 'parent' company, Sadler's Wells Ballet (later the Royal Ballet) at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden. The change to a larger company and larger theatre was timely for his artistic development in the classical repertoire, for which his slightly mischievous, boyish charm and exuberance were almost a disadvantage -- although of course making him the ideal Franz in 'Coppelia'. 
Blair soon mastered the noble style and partnered with great distinction all the Royal Ballet ballerinas including Svetlana Beriosova, Violetta Elvin, Annette Page, Rowena Jackson, Anya Linden, Margot Fonteyn, and especially Nadia Nerina, with whom he had an exceptionally successful partnership. 
Blair's repertoire with the Royal Ballet included 'The Three-Cornered Hat' (1953), 'Swan Lake' and 'Sleeping Beauty' (1955), 'Cinderella' (1956), 'Giselle' and 'Prince of the Pagodas' (1957), 'Petrushka' (1959), and much more. In 1960 Frederick Ashton choreographed one of his greatest works, 'La fille mal gardee', for Nadia Nerina and David Blair, who shared a triumphant success. Blair danced superbly the role of Colas, the country youth, giving him an irresistible air of amiable cheekiness. Another triumph was his Mercutio in Kenneth MacMillan's 'Romeo and Juliet'. In 1961, on Michael Somes's retirement, David Blair succeeded him as principal dancer of the Royal Ballet. 
Blair had a delightfully fresh enthusiasm for dance even when encountering the ups and downs from which no one is immune -- the road is always bumpier at the top than on the way up. But it would be hard to find a man more straightforward, staunch, without malice or guile, warm-hearted, and lovable. He spoke his mind in the forthright manner of a true Yorkshireman and he was also very human -- he had a soft shell for criticism. 
Blair married in 1957 the ballerina Maryon Lane, who was born Patricia Mills, the daughter of an Irish doctor in Melmouth, Zululand, South Africa. Twin daughters, Diana and Catherine Blair, were born in 1960, and Diana, following her parents' profession, became a member of the Hamburg Ballet. 
While still on the top as a dancer, Blair branched out into production with the complete versions of 'Swan Lake' (1965) and 'Sleeping Beauty' (1966) for the Atlanta Civic Ballet. For American Ballet Theater he produced 'Swan Lake' (1967) and 'Giselle' (1968). He was also the producer of the Hong Kong Ballet's 'Giselle' and a filmed version of 'Giselle' starring Carla Fracci and Erik Bruhn (1969). 
In the history of British ballet David Blair stands in the forefront of accomplished male dancers. He set a standard of virtuoso dancing in the 1950s that inspired and influenced the following generation. In addition he gave much time and effort, mainly through his involvement with the Royal Academy of Dancing (he was a member of its executive committee from 1971), to the teaching of students and the resettlement of retiring professionals. His was a life devoted to dance and fellow dancers. For services to ballet he was appointed CBE in 1964. In 1973 his farewell to the stage at the Royal Opera House was an overwhelming personal triumph. He was about to take up directorship of the Norwegian Ballet in Oslo when on 1 April 1976 he died suddenly of a heart attack at his home in London, 19 Holland Park Road, Kensington, his wife surviving him. 
Margot Fonteyn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30827


Bliss, Sir Arthur Edward Drummond (1891-1975), composer, was born on 2 August 1891 at Hawthornden, Queen's Ride, Barnes Common, Barnes, Surrey, the eldest of three sons of Francis Edward Bliss (died 1930), an American businessman from Massachusetts, and his second wife, Agnes Kennard Davis (1858-1895). There was one son from a previous marriage. 
On his wife's death in 1895, Francis Bliss took over the upbringing of Bliss and his brothers Francis Kennard (1892-1916) and James Howard (1894-1977). Untypically for the period, he was not a remote figurehead, but an active and devoted parent. His response to the situation was characteristic of his New England sensibility, with its sense of duty and high thinking, qualities he passed on to his sons. From his father Bliss gained too a love of visual arts, theatre, classical history, and mythology, all of which would be manifest in his works. Bliss frequently drew inspiration from the technical processes of painting and sculpture; among his friends were Jacob Epstein and Paul Nash. Classical mythology is the inspiration behind Bliss's 'Hymn to Apollo' (1926) as well as the 'Pastoral' (1928); and the theatrical sense displayed in his film scores, ballets, and operas may be traced to his early enthusiasms. 
In 1900 Bliss was sent to Bilton Grange, the preparatory school for Rugby School, which he attended from 1905 to 1910. He then went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, with a classical exhibition, but also studied composition with Charles Wood and found a stimulating mentor in Edward Dent. He graduated BA and MusB in 1913, then spent a year at the Royal College of Music, London. Although he found his teacher, Charles Stanford, uninspiring, he was part of an outstanding generation of talented musicians including Herbert Howells, Ivor Gurney, Arthur Benjamin, and Eugene Goossens. At this time he also met Edward Elgar, who offered encouragement. 
During the First World War Bliss served with distinction and gallantry in the 13th Royal Fusiliers (1914-17) and the Grenadier Guards (1917-19). He was wounded in 1916 during the battle of the Somme, gassed at Cambrai in 1918, and mentioned in dispatches in 1916. However, the death of his brother Kennard in action had a long-lasting effect on him, and the futility of war was engraved on his personality. Its deepest musical expression is the choral symphony 'Morning Heroes' (1930); but it also surfaces in sudden shifts in his music to threatening, malevolent moods, for example in the interlude 'Through the Valley of the Shadow of Death' in 'Meditations on a Theme by John Blow' (1955). His abhorrence of time-wasting was a further result of his war years. He knew how fortunate he was to have survived, and was determined not to lose a moment's opportunity -- as witnessed by contemporary descriptions of him immediately after the war which portray a forthright young man bursting with energy and purpose. These qualities are vividly evoked too in Wyndham Lewis's lithe pencil sketch of 1922. Bliss was received into the Roman Catholic church in 1918. 
During the war a string quartet ('c'.1914) and piano quartet (1914-15) were performed and published, although Bliss subsequently withdrew them. It was with a series of original ensemble works, many of them with voice, that he established his name immediately after the war: 'Madam Noy' (1918), 'Rhapsody' (1919), 'Conversations' (1920), 'Rout' (1920), and incidental music for Viola Tree's production of 'The Tempest' (1921). Influenced by Maurice Ravel and Igor Stravinsky and showing an allegiance to the French composers known as 'Les six', they startled the conservative critics of the day by their modernity, and gained Bliss considerable notoriety. 
Bliss's first major orchestral work, 'A Colour Symphony' (1921-2), commissioned by the 1922 Gloucester Three Choirs Festival at Elgar's instigation, consolidated his reputation as a major figure in British contemporary music. The work adumbrates the mature composer. In the ceremonial grandeur of its outer movements it hints at an embryonic master of the queen's music; the balletic scherzo looks forward to his dance scores; while the introspective slow movement points to the deeper, personal utterance of 'Morning Heroes'. Stravinsky's influence has been absorbed in the frequent dissonance, as has the pomp and circumstance of Elgar. 
In 1923 Bliss travelled to the USA with his father, who had remarried and wished to spend his last years in his homeland. They settled in Santa Barbara, California, where Bliss met Gertrude (Trudy) Hoffmann ('b'. 1904), later a writer and broadcaster, daughter of Ralph Hoffmann, director of the Natural History Museum at Santa Barbara. They married on 1 June 1925, and in his wife Bliss found the ideal partner who created for him a secure domestic happiness upon which his art could flourish. The couple had two daughters. Compositions from his USA sojourn include the song cycle 'The Women of Yueh' (1923) and the suite for piano (1925). 
Bliss returned to England with his wife shortly after their marriage. The two works he composed next had American links, since the 'Introduction and Allegro' (1926) and 'Hymn to Apollo' (1926) were conceived specifically for the Philadelphia and Boston orchestras and for their respective conductors Leopold Stokowski and Pierre Monteux. Performances by such orchestras and conductors bear witness to the reputation Bliss now commanded. In the next three major works that followed, the oboe quintet, commissioned by Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge (1927), the 'Pastoral' (1928), and the 'Serenade' (1929), Bliss reached maturity establishing a distinctive voice in which a more overt Romantic vein comes to the fore. 
From 1929 to 1939 Bliss lived at East Heath Lodge, Hampstead. He and his wife were in the midst of an artistic community, and friendships developed with Barbara Hepworth, Ben Nicholson, Mark Gertler (whose portrait of Bliss is in the National Portrait Gallery, London), and J. B. Priestley. In 1934 they built a country house in Somerset, Pen Pits, which was designed by Peter Harland in the modern style influenced by the Bauhaus. 
The 1930s were highly successful for Bliss. In 'Morning Heroes' (1930) his war experiences and the pain of Kennard's death were translated into a profound choral symphony, in which he exorcised a horrific recurring dream of the trenches. The clarinet quintet (1932), viola sonata (1933), and 'Music for Strings' (1935) showed his mastery of absolute forms. The quintet was conceived for the clarinettist Frederick Thurston, and the sonata for the viola player Lionel Tertis. Writing works for great artists such as these and collaborating with major figures in other art forms were to become hallmarks of Bliss's career. This is apparent in his next important commission: a score for Alexander Korda's film of H. G. Wells's 'Things to Come' (1934-5), based on his novel 'The Shape of Things to Come'. It remains one of the finest scores for the medium. The music showed a natural dramatic talent that was further evident in the ballet 'Checkmate' (1937), with a scenario by Bliss based on one of his lifelong enthusiasms: chess. Ninette de Valois choreographed the ballet, which had designs by E. McKnight Kauffer; it was still a classic of the Royal Ballet's repertory at the end of the twentieth century. Bliss capped the decade with the piano concerto (1939), especially written for Solomon to perform at the New York World Fair in June 1939. 
After the premiere Bliss and his family remained in the USA on holiday and were there when war was declared. On the advice of friends in England, Bliss initially remained in America, becoming a visiting professor at the University of California at Berkeley. There he composed two of his most personal works, the 'Seven American Poems' (1940) and the first string quartet (1941). However, even though his family remained in the USA, he increasingly felt that he must return to England to help in the war effort. This he did in 1941 when he joined the BBC overseas music service, subsequently serving as the BBC's director of music from 1942 to 1944. The far-sighted vision of his 'Music policy statement' was influential and led to the founding of the Third Programme. Bliss and his family were reunited in November 1943. For the rest of the 1940s Bliss was occupied with theatrical projects: the ballets 'Miracle in the Gorbals' (1944) and 'Adam Zero' (1946), which were choreographed by Robert Helpmann (who also danced the leading roles), and the opera 'The Olympians' (1948-9), with a libretto by J. B. Priestley. The latter was staged at Covent Garden in 1949, but did not prove a great success. 
Bliss was knighted in 1950 and appointed master of the queen's music in 1953, a post he served diligently with distinction and which included composing the music for the investiture of the prince of Wales (1969). During his tenure Bliss was unstinting in his work for the music profession. Among many appointments he was president of the Performing Right Society (1954-75), and in 1956 under the auspices of the British Council he led the first delegation by British musicians to the Soviet Union since the end of the Second World War. His outstanding public service was recognized by two further honours: KCVO (1969) and CH (1971). He received honorary degrees at Cambridge, London, and Edinburgh universities among others, and was gold medallist of the Royal Philharmonic Society (1963). 
Several major works of the 1950s reflect again Bliss's association with great artists of the time: the second string quartet (1950), for the Griller quartet; a 'scena', 'The Enchantress' (1951), for Kathleen Ferrier; the piano sonata (1952), for Noel Mewton-Wood; and the violin concerto (1955), for Alfredo Campoli. In that decade he composed too the work that he felt was perhaps his finest and most personal achievement: the orchestral 'Meditations on a Theme by John Blow' (1955). This was followed by a television opera, 'Tobias and the Angel' (1959-60), with a libretto by Christopher Hassall. The early sixties produced three significant choral works: 'The Beatitudes' (1961), commissioned for the reopening of Coventry Cathedral, and 'Mary of Magdala' (1962), both of which were further collaborations with Hassall, and 'The Golden Cantata' (1963), in which he set words by Kathleen Raine. 
Bliss continued to compose vigorously into his seventies and eighties, producing the orchestral 'Metamorphic Variations' (1972), the cello concerto (1970), premiered by Mstislav Rostropovich, and a cantata, 'Shield of Faith' (1974). In his early career Bliss was a prolific writer about music, and he was also a fine conductor; he conducted the premieres of 'A Colour Symphony' and 'Morning Heroes', and formed a close association with the London Symphony Orchestra, serving as its president from 1958 to 1973. His autobiography, 'As I Remember' (1970; reprinted, 1990), is a fascinating description of the composer's life and music. Bliss was an outstanding speaker and conversationalist, although he was reticent about discussing his music in depth, preferring that it spoke for itself. In 1955 Sir Arthur Bliss and his wife moved to 8 The Lane, Marlborough Place, St John's Wood, London, where he died from cancer on 27 March 1975; after cremation at Golders Green on Easter Saturday 1975, his ashes were interred in Mortlake Catholic cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 30828


Blunden, Edmund Charles (1896-1974), poet and university teacher, was born on 1 November 1896 at 54A Tottenham Court Road, London, the eldest of the nine children (five sons and four daughters) of Charles Edmund Blunden (1871-1951) and his wife, Georgina Margaret (1868-1967), daughter of Henry Tyler and his wife, Georgina. Both parents were schoolteachers. When Edmund was four the family moved to Yalding in Kent, where he discovered the love of rural life and natural history that pervaded his whole career as a writer. He was a clever child with precocious literary tastes and ambitions. He attended Cleave's Grammar School in Yalding for two years and then in 1909 won a scholarship to Christ's Hospital, Horsham, Sussex, a public school which had been founded in the sixteenth century to provide an education for poor boys. Throughout his life Blunden was devoted to the school, and to the writers who had attended it, such as Charles Lamb, Leigh Hunt, and S. T. Coleridge. His final year there was overshadowed by the First World War. 
In August 1915 Blunden was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Sussex regiment. Early in 1916 he was sent to Flanders, where he saw violent action in the trenches and on the battlefield and was awarded the Military Cross. Very much against the odds for a young infantry officer, Blunden survived nearly two years in the front line without a scratch. In mind and spirit, though, he was indelibly affected by the death and destruction he witnessed so early in his life. Blunden is remembered as one of the finest poets of the First World War, though many of his war poems were written afterwards, contemplating events in retrospect. He was affected not only by the loss of human life, including several of his friends, but by the brutal destruction of a countryside that, in its natural state, was very like the rural England that he loved. These memories haunted him and reappeared in his dreams and his poetry until the end of his life. 'When the events were not yet ended' (Blunden, 'Undertones of War', 1928, vii) Blunden wrote a prose account of his experiences, 'De bello germanico', but he was not satisfied with it. It was not published until 1930, and then only in a limited edition. 
After returning to England in 1918 Blunden was serving at a camp in Suffolk when he met and married, on 1 June 1918, a young local woman, Mary Daines (1900-1957). He left the army in 1919 and launched himself on a literary career, meeting Siegfried Sassoon, who became a lifelong friend (and, on occasion, a source of financial support). The Blundens' first child, Joy, was born in July 1919, but died when only a few weeks old; Blunden grieved for her all his life. There were two more children of the marriage. While still at school Blunden had been awarded a scholarship to Oxford, and in October 1919 went up to Queen's College. He made friends among the aspiring writers in the university, many of them ex-servicemen like himself, but he found it hard to settle to academic work and in 1920 he left Oxford to take up a part-time editorial post at 'The Athenaeum', later incorporated in 'The Nation'. In that year he published a collection of poems, 'The Waggoner', and co-edited the poems of John Clare, a countryman poet to whom he felt a great devotion. Blunden's next book of poems, 'The Shepherd', was awarded the Hawthornden prize, and he was recognized as a young writer of great promise. He was a fluent but thoughtful reviewer; his copious literary journalism reflected wide reading in the poets and prose writers of the Romantic era and their eighteenth-century antecedents. Despite his productive career as an editor, journalist, critic, and biographer, Blunden always regarded himself as essentially a poet, and a poet in the Romantic tradition. He was not influenced by the modernist literary revolution, but his poetry was admired by its adherents, such as T. S. Eliot. Blunden was a true nature poet, but in his work nature is menacing as well as consoling, as in such well-known poems as 'The Pike' and 'Midnight Skaters'. And his evocations of nature are often clouded by memories of war. 
Sassoon, though ten years his senior, greatly admired Blunden; in 1922 he wrote in his diary that 'he brings with him his aura of enthusiasm for literature. He creates a special atmosphere which inspires me with certainty that I am a privileged person sharing the mysteries of the noble craft of letters' ('Siegfried Sassoon Diaries', 161). Less reverentially, Sassoon wrote of Blunden 'perching' on a bed: 'he always reminds me of a bird' (ibid., 170). It was a widespread response to his small stature, sharp features, and rapid, darting movements (though when he was in the army his commanding officer referred to him as Rabbit). 
Despite Blunden's growing fame, his poetry and literary journalism were not sufficiently lucrative to support a family. In 1924 he struck out on a new path by accepting the post of professor of English at the Imperial University of Tokyo. He came to love Japan, which brought him new friends and fresh subjects for poetry. While there he made another attempt at a prose account of his war experiences. The result was 'Undertones of War'. Written without any documentation other than maps, it represents an extraordinary feat of memory and is Blunden's greatest contribution to the literature of war. 
Blunden returned to England in 1927, and in 1928 'Undertones' was published. His wife had refused to accompany him to Japan, and the marriage ended in divorce in August 1931. Blunden resumed his connection with 'The Nation' and was literary editor for a year; in 1931 he went back to Oxford as fellow and tutor in English literature at Merton College. On 5 July 1933 he married Sylva Norman (1901/2-1971), 'nee' Nahabedian, a young novelist and critic. 
At Merton, Blunden was highly regarded as a tutor; his students included the famous Canadian critic Northrop Frye and the poet Keith Douglas, who was killed in action in 1944. During his years in Oxford, Blunden published several collections of poetry, and studies of Charles Lamb, the Keats circle, and Thomas Hardy. His 'Cricket Country' (1944) reflects his abiding passion for the game. Eventually he came to feel restricted by academic life; he returned to full-time writing in 1944, and in the following year became assistant editor of the 'Times Literary Supplement'. In May 1945 his second marriage, which was childless, was dissolved, and he married on 29 May 1945 Claire Margaret Poynting (1918-2000), a teacher, who had been one of his students; they had four daughters. Blunden's highly praised life of Shelley appeared in 1946, and in the following year he returned to Japan as a member of the United Kingdom liaison mission in Tokyo; he lectured widely on English literature and renewed some of his old acquaintance from the 1920s. Blunden was back in England from 1950 to 1953 and then accepted the post of professor of English literature at the University of Hong Kong. Here, as previously in Japan, he made many friends and admirers among his students. 
Blunden retired in 1964 and settled in Suffolk, where he had lived in the 1920s; for almost the first time in his adult life he had a permanent home. His achievements were publicly recognized: he became a CBE in 1951, received the queen's gold medal for poetry in 1956, and in 1962 was made a companion of the Royal Society of Literature. In 1966 he was nominated for the Oxford professorship of poetry and reluctantly agreed to stand. Blunden was elected by a large majority over the other candidate, the American poet Robert Lowell (who warmly admired his work), but he found electioneering dispiriting. In the words of his biographer: 'For his Oxford lectures Edmund clung to the familiar themes of Romantic poetry, war poets, and Thomas Hardy, but found it increasingly difficult to order his thoughts or even to engage in any sustained reading. His nervousness and fear of public failure brought him almost to a state of collapse. (Webb, 318)' After two years he resigned from the post because of ill health. He died of a heart attack at his home, Hall Mill, Long Melford, Suffolk, on 20 January 1974; he was buried at Holy Trinity Church, Long Melford, on 25 January 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30829


Blunt, Anthony Frederick (1907-1983), art historian and spy, was born at Holy Trinity vicarage, Bournemouth, Hampshire, on 26 September 1907, the third and youngest son (there were no daughters) of the Revd (Arthur) Stanley Vaughan Blunt (1870-1929) and his wife, Hilda Violet (1880-1969), daughter of Henry Master of the Madras civil service. His brothers, Wilfrid Jasper Walter Blunt (1901-1987) and Christopher Evelyn Blunt (1904-1987), were a teacher of art and a numismatist respectively. Blunt's father was a kinsman of the poet, anti-imperialist, and libertine Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, while his mother's family were acquaintances of the future Queen Mary: both these connections were to have a curious significance for Blunt's future career. As a child in Paris, where his father was the British embassy chaplain, Blunt acquired a lasting enthusiasm for French art and architecture, a passion encouraged by his eldest brother, Wilfrid, a future art master at Eton College. By the age of sixteen, at Marlborough College (where with his best friend Louis MacNeice he was part of a group of rebellious young aesthetes), he was producing precociously fluent defences of modern art, much to the infuriation of the deeply conservative art teacher -- an early indication of his academic talent and his instinctive contrariness. 
In 1926 Blunt won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating there with a second in part one of the mathematical tripos (1927) and a first in both parts (1928 and 1930) of the modern languages tripos (French and German). In 1932 he was elected a fellow of the college on the strength of a dissertation on artistic theory in Italy and France during the Renaissance and seventeenth century; he remained there until 1937. By 1932 he was already writing for the 'Cambridge Review' and within a year had become 'The Spectator's' regular art critic, a position he held until 1938. 
While still an undergraduate, Blunt was invited to join the Apostles. The significance of Blunt's membership of this secret, all-male Cambridge debating society has generally been overstressed. In 1928 its main attraction for him lay in its strong links with Bloomsbury, then at its height as the self-styled cutting edge of avant-garde art and liberal social mores. At school Blunt had adopted Roger Fry's and Clive Bell's ideas on modern art; now through the Apostles he took on Bloomsbury values, which have been summed up as the cult of the intellect for its own sake, belief in freedom of thought and expression irrespective of the conclusions to which this freedom might lead, and the denial of all moral restraints other than loyalty to friends. An influential minority of the society's members were, moreover, like Blunt himself, homosexual at a time when homosexual acts were still illegal in Britain. 
In 1933-4 Blunt -- hitherto the image of an elegant, apolitical, social young academic -- began to take an interest in Marxism under the influence of his friend the charming, scandalous Guy Burgess, a fellow Apostle, who had recently converted to communism. Blunt's move to the left can be plotted in his art reviews, in which he turned from a Bloomsbury acolyte into an increasingly dogmatic defender of social realism. He eventually came to attack even his favourite contemporary artist, Picasso, for the painting 'Guernica''s insufficient incorporation of communism. 
According to documents in the Russian intelligence archives, it was just at this time, spring 1937, that Burgess introduced Blunt to the Hungarian former priest Theo Maly, an agent of the NKVD, the precursor of the KGB. Blunt was asked to become a 'talent spotter' -- that is, to find students who might be willing to work clandestinely for communism. He recruited two young men, Michael Straight and Leo Long, and sized up a third, John Cairncross, before the entire NKVD London residence was recalled to Moscow and caught up in Stalin's purges in summer 1937. 
Blunt's work for the NKVD has sometimes been put down to a sexual passion for Burgess. Certainly he was fascinated by Burgess's outrageousness, which was the antithesis of his own reserved self-discipline, and they may have had a brief sexual affair at the beginning of their long friendship. However, Blunt's attraction to spying was more complex. He possessed a streak of unexorcised rebelliousness. His initial commitment to the left in the 1930s was sincere, though this was combined with an undeniable pleasure in the potential for secrecy and intrigue of his position. In 1939, when the Soviet-Nazi pact destroyed the USSR's claims to champion anti-fascism, he seems to have suffered no obvious pangs of conscience. 
In summer 1937 Blunt left Cambridge to work at the Warburg Institute in London, where he met a generation of Jewish emigre academics who greatly influenced his art history. He performed no further services for Moscow until the NKVD's London resident re-established contact in December 1940 and was amazed to discover that Blunt had joined MI5. With the new demands wartime placed on it, MI5 was drafting in clever academics; Blunt was hired on the recommendation of his old Cambridge friend Victor Rothschild. His main task was to gather information about foreign embassies by planting agents -- usually in the guise of domestic servants -- and clandestinely opening diplomatic bags. He also worked directly for MI5's most influential officer, Guy Liddell, overhauled its surveillance system, and ran liaison with other secret departments. This brought him into contact with British intelligence's most sensitive secret, Ultra, the information produced at Bletchley Park from the breaking of German military codes. 
The question of whether Blunt's actions led to deaths is hard to answer. As MI5's remit was internal security, most of the information to which he had access related to espionage on British soil. On the other hand, for six months before the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the USSR was allied to Germany and thus not only an enemy of Britain, but also potentially handing Blunt's information to the Germans, though there is no evidence that they did. Moreover, Blunt was a diligent spy -- he brought to it the same conscientiousness that made him a good art historian -- and went out of his way to know every area of MI5's work and to pass on everything he came across. The KGB archives have over 1000 documents which he passed, though this hardly compares with the other Cambridge spies: between mid-1944 and the end of the war Burgess passed over 4000 documents. Whether the Soviets took advantage of the material is another complicated question. The KGB (as the NKVD was renamed in 1954) was so inefficient that much material was never translated, and so sure that the Soviet embassy was being watched by MI5 that it took Blunt's accurate assertions to the contrary as lies. It also disapproved of the fact that Blunt and Burgess shared a flat in Bentinck Street famous for its lively parties. Indeed between 1942 and 1944 Russian intelligence became so suspicious of Blunt, Burgess, and Philby that it seriously considered having them assassinated. At the end of the war Blunt left MI5. Thereafter he had few secrets to impart, though he passed gossip from his former MI5 colleagues and documents from Burgess, until the defection of Burgess and Maclean in 1951. Yuri Modin, his controller, tried to persuade Blunt to flee too, but he refused. 
All through the war Blunt had continued with his art history; even his Soviet controllers noted that it was the only subject by which he seemed to be really excited. Already before the war he saw that the refugee scholars at the Warburg Institute had brought with them from Hamburg both an intellectual rigour and a soundly based historical method that were new to the study of the art of the past in Britain. In 1937-9 he published scholarly articles in the Warburg 'Journal' on diverse topics, including 'The Hypnerotomachia Poliphili in 17th-century France' and Blake's 'Ancient of Days', and began his great work on the seventeenth-century French painter Nicolas Poussin, characteristically with an article showing that Poussin's 'Notes on painting' were not original but were largely copied from obscure ancient and Renaissance literary sources. Blunt also helped to establish friendly relations between the Warburg and Courtauld institutes, becoming deputy director of the latter in 1939. In 1940 most of his fellowship dissertation was published as 'Artistic Theory in Italy, 1450-1600'; written with his customary lucidity and stylistic grace, it remains a useful introduction to its subject. During the Second World War he wrote further articles in periodicals and a book on the French architect Francois Mansart (1941); in 1945 he published a catalogue of the French drawings in the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle. 
In the same year, 1945, to the puzzlement of his friends, who knew of his political sympathies though not of his activities as a spy, Blunt accepted appointment as surveyor of the king's (after 1952 the queen's) pictures (a role that later inspired Alan Bennett's play 'A Question of Attribution', 1988). One motive for taking the job may have been to deflect suspicion if one of his fellow spies had been caught: who would suspect a senior royal servant? He also enjoyed being in charge of such an extraordinary collection, and was responsible for professionalizing its care, bringing in restorers and academics to contribute their services, often on a tiny budget. In 1962 he oversaw the opening of the Queen's Gallery. He remained surveyor until 1972, when his deputy, Oliver Millar, who had been doing most of the day-to-day work for many years, took over. 
Blunt's appointment has caused much lurid speculation, some of it stemming from a series of trips he made between 1945 and 1947 to Westphalia and Hesse in Germany and Huis Doorn in the Netherlands, to recover a number of objects which the king did not want to fall into occupying hands, American or Soviet. These included the crown jewels of Hanover. The rumour that Blunt rescued from Hesse a series of letters proving the duke of Windsor had made a deal with the Nazis seems quite unfounded. 
In 1947 Blunt became director of the Courtauld Institute of Art and professor of the history of art in the University of London. Thenceforth the institute was his home (he had a flat at the top of the building, designed by Robert Adam, in Portman Square) and the centre of his life. In almost every sense he was a superb director. He had a natural authority, an infectious enthusiasm for his subject, and a winning way with students and younger colleagues. Teaching more by example than by precept, he inspired those around him to give of their best. Under him the Courtauld became the principal centre for training art historians in Britain, with a worldwide reputation for excellence. The first phase of Blunt's scholarly career was crowned by a masterly survey in the 'Pelican History of Art' series: 'Art and Architecture in France, 1500-1700' (1953). Lucid, penetrating, and comprehensive, this is still the best study of its subject and is perhaps Blunt's single most successful book. 
The next dozen years, spent mainly working on Poussin, culminated in the exhibition Blunt curated at the Louvre in 1960 and by his monograph (1967) on the artist, but were marred by his bitter dispute with the art historian Sir Denis Mahon. Mahon claimed, not without some justice, that Blunt had mistaken the chronology of Poussin's paintings and had overstressed the artist's intellectual, at the expense of his visual, qualities. Blunt took this hard, not least because in some sense he identified with Poussin, seeing in the artist qualities which he valued in himself: clarity, scepticism in religious matters, subordination of emotion to reason. At the height of the dispute he appears to have deliberately blocked the reattribution of a lost Poussin that Mahon owned which turned out to be authentic. Nevertheless, Blunt's book, which concentrates on the intellectual content and context of Poussin's work, is still a landmark in modern writing on the artist. His numerous other publications ranged in subject from William Blake to Picasso to baroque architecture, the passion of his later years. 
His commitment to his work impelled Blunt to take on more roles: in 1948 he became the National Trust's first picture adviser, put on exhibitions at the Royal Academy, went on foreign lecture tours, edited numerous books, and sat on every influential art committee. He was knighted in 1956, appointed to the Legion d'honneur in 1958, and received a series of honorary fellowships, before retiring in 1974. 
Yet all this time Blunt was at risk of exposure as a former spy. He was interrogated frequently by the security services during the 1950s but gave away nothing. Outwardly he seemed utterly in control, ever the composed academic, but his secret took its toll: in 1945 he was hospitalized with exhaustion; from the 1950s he took large doses of seconal and drank a bottle of spirits a day; in 1953 the strain brought on an attack of Bell's palsy which left one side of his face paralysed for several years. Before the war he had been known as an expansive and charming party giver. Now he turned inward, concentrating on his work and the Courtauld. Although those in his field were often surprised by his generosity and kindness, he kept intruders at bay with a practised coldness and those outside his circle could find him unpredictable and arrogant. Despite his acknowledged skills as a lecturer he rejected all invitations to introduce himself to a wider audience through radio and television as Kenneth Clark was to do. 
In 1964 Michael Straight confessed to the American Federal Bureau of Investigation that he had been recruited to Soviet intelligence and said he was prepared to testify against Blunt. MI5 offered Blunt immunity from prosecution in return for a full confession. In the later 1970s the pressure mounted again, as a result of investigations by independent writers on espionage relying on information leaked by former security officers. On 15 November 1979 the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, confirmed in the House of Commons that Blunt had been an agent of, and talent spotter for, Russian intelligence before and during the Second World War, although she added that there was insufficient evidence on which criminal charges could be brought. His knighthood was annulled, as was the honorary fellowship he had held at Trinity College since 1967. He resigned from the Society of Antiquaries at their behest, but a row erupted within the British Academy over his continued membership, many members threatening their own resignation if he was not expelled and many if he was. Its council voted narrowly in favour of his expulsion but the members avoided a vote at the academy's annual general meeting, after which Blunt resigned. The press, radio, and television began a campaign of vilification. Wild rumours accused him of spying for the Germans, of authenticating fakes, of salting away a fortune abroad; he was caricatured as snobbish, imperious, sexually predatory. Blunt outwardly remained cool, completing one book on baroque Rome and starting another on Pietro da Cortona. But the London flat to which he had retired near the Courtauld was besieged by journalists for months. His long-term partner, (William) John Gaskin (1919-1988), attempted suicide. When asked after his exposure how he had managed to survive the strains, Blunt answered, pointing to a glass of whisky, 'With this, and more work and more work' (Margot Wittkower, Interview Transcript, p. 125, Interviews with Art Historians, Getty Research Institute, Research Library 94109). 
Undoubtedly some of the agitation was motivated by Blunt's intellectuality and homosexuality as well as by class hatred. It is a striking fact that both Blunt's own actions and the treatment of him not only by the public but also by officials were pervaded at every turn by the class divisions in British society. His career can perhaps best be explained by the fatal conjunction in him of outstanding gifts and a desire to be at once part of the establishment and against it; or, as Sir Isaiah Berlin put it, 'The trouble with Anthony was that he wanted both to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds.' He died of a heart attack at his home, 45 Portsea Hall, Portsea Place, Westminster, London, on 26 March 1983 and was cremated on 30 March at Roehampton, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30830


Boase, Thomas Sherrer Ross (1898-1974), art historian and university teacher, was born in Dundee on 31 August 1898, the only son and elder child of Charles Millet Boase, the manager and part owner of a bleaching mill at Claverhouse outside Dundee, and his wife, Anne Malcolm, daughter of Thomas Sherrer Ross, a merchant of the same city. Books abounded in his home and he read widely from an early age. Moving from a local preparatory school to Rugby School in 1912, he long believed himself at a disadvantage because he was so bad at ball games. However, he became head of his house, and won a prize essay contest on the subject of Lorenzo de' Medici and then an exhibition to enter Magdalen College, Oxford. From 1917 to 1919 he was with the Oxford and Buckinghamshire light infantry and for the last year of the war fought on the front between St Quentin and Cambrai. He was awarded the MC. His Oxford education had already begun, the cadet battalion which he joined on leaving Rugby being housed in Wadham College. At this time he first met F. F. (Sligger) Urquhart of Balliol, whose style and standards were to influence him profoundly. He returned in 1919 to read modern history at Magdalen, took a second class degree in 1921, and was elected to a fellowship at Hertford College in 1922. 
Boase rapidly became an effective teacher. He lectured on both medieval and modern themes, a breadth of view reflected thirty years later in his equal concern for medieval and Victorian art. An interest in Italy developed into his first book, 'Boniface VIII' (1933), and his study 'St. Francis of Assisi' (1936). He was at the same time immersed in Oxford activities academic and social. As treasurer of the Oxford University Dramatic Society he made the acquaintance of the finest theatrical talent of the day; for the rest of his life he delighted to take pupils to the theatre, and patronized drama. He also turned his attention to the visual arts. The 1930 exhibition of Italian art at the Royal Academy deeply impressed him, and he learnt much from his friendship with Kenneth Clark and Lord Balniel (later earl of Crawford and Balcarres), who helped to mount the exhibition. Beside his frequent visits to Urquhart's chalet in the French Alps, constant travel in western Europe and the Near East was meanwhile making him an experienced viewer of pictures, monuments, and buildings. 
In 1936 these interests brought Boase to the attention of those who were involved with the problems of the Courtauld Institute, founded in 1932 for the study of art history. Following the resignation of W. G. Constable as director, the committee of management selected Boase for the post in 1937 (he also held the London University chair in the history of art from 1937 to 1947), although he seemed to some art historians, critics, and students an amateur not properly qualified to succeed Constable. In taking up this challenge Boase enjoyed one advantage. Maintaining old friendships in Berlin and Frankfurt, participating in the World Council of Churches with its concern for events in Germany under Hitler, he was the better prepared to collaborate with scholars who had moved with the Warburg Library and Institute to London, and to learn from them. The Courtauld discovered that, although he did not satisfy everybody, the new director was able to give it an improved syllabus and greater stability. The two foundations were brought closer together; the first of his own numerous contributions to the 'Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes', 'The arts in the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem', appeared in 1939. Later Boase contributed the notice of Samuel Courtauld to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Immediately on the outbreak of the Second World War, Boase went to the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley, and from there to Cairo, where he worked for the Royal Air Force for nearly two years. From the end of 1943 he was once again based in Cairo, in charge of British Council activities in the Middle East. He travelled widely, made many friends both Arab and Jewish, enriched his old passion for the history of the crusades, and in 1945 returned to the Courtauld 'with resilience a little dulled for the taking up of a former life' (Boase). Aided principally by Anthony Blunt, he contributed to the revival and expansion of art-historical studies in post-war London, but in 1947 accepted the presidency of his old college, Magdalen. It was quickly evident there that the new president's deft style of management, combined with a splendid talent for getting to know large numbers of undergraduates, would leave its mark. He remained vigorously in control for a dozen years, until tenure of the vice-chancellorship of the university (1958-60) and less robust health led to a phase of diminished activity. He retired in 1968. 
All this time Boase gave equal attention to his work for the arts. His main undertaking was the 'Oxford History of English Art', as general editor and author of two out of eleven volumes. 'English Art, 1100-1216' (1953) and 'English Art, 1800-1870' (1959) offer sturdy summaries of modern knowledge; in the first illuminated manuscripts, and in the second minor rather than major artists, were the topics on which he wrote most effectively. Meanwhile he contributed many articles to books of reference, and generous introductions to work by other scholars. He served as trustee or adviser for the National Gallery (1947-53), the British Museum (1950-69), the Victoria and Albert Museum (1947-70), the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, the Gulbenkian Foundation, and other institutions. He received several honorary degrees (including that of DCL of Oxford in 1960) and was a fellow of the British Academy (1961). 
Boase died at his home at 6 Atherton Drive, Wimbledon, London, on 14 April 1974, having completed his contribution for a history of the Cilician kingdom of Armenia (published in 1978) and a study of Vasari (published in 1979). He was always energetic, a bachelor who organized his time with great precision and worked rapidly. He was an excellent speaker; collected good pictures; and disliked extravagance. Brought up in the Scottish Episcopal church, he remained a firm Christian, a great supporter of his college choir and chapel. His portrait by Anthony Devas, emphasizing a characteristic gesture of his hands, hangs in the hall of Magdalen. 
John Stoye', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30831


Scott, Sir Ronald Bodley (1906-1982), physician, was born in Bournemouth on 10 September 1906, the eldest of six sons (there were no daughters) of Maitland Bodley Scott, general practitioner in Bournemouth, and his wife, Alice Hilda Durance George. He was educated at Marlborough College and Brasenose College, Oxford, where he obtained a degree in natural science in 1928. Bodley Scott completed his clinical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, graduating BM, BCh in 1931. The same year he married (Edith) Daphne (died 1977), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward McCarthy, of the Royal Marine Artillery. 
Once qualified, Bodley Scott served a short period as house physician at St Bartholomew's and then left to join the family practice in Bournemouth. However, he had evidently made such an impression as a student and house physician that he was invited to return, first as chief assistant to A. E. Gow, and then as first assistant on the medical unit. This was a recognized route for those who were going on to consulting practice. During this time he obtained his MRCP (1933), and developed an interest in clinical haematology. He obtained his DM at Oxford in 1937, on the newly developed technique of bone marrow aspiration. His studies on the subject led to his describing with A. H. T. Robb-Smith the clinical entity of histiocytic medullary reticulosis in 'The Lancet' in 1939. 
In 1936 Bodley Scott became a consultant at the Woolwich Memorial Hospital, a post he filled until 1971. During the Second World War he entered the Royal Army Medical Corps, and in 1941 was sent to the Middle East, where he was responsible for the medical division in no. 63 and no. 43 general hospitals. He was elected FRCP in 1943. At the end of the war he returned to London. He was one of the first new assistant physicians to be appointed at St Bartholomew's (1946) and he rapidly became an internationally recognized figure in the management of leukaemia and lymphoma. He introduced drug treatment for these invariably fatal illnesses, and was one of the first in Britain to use nitrogen mustard and other chemotherapeutic agents. He remained a shrewd general physician, with a penetrating intelligence and great clinical skill. 
In 1949 Bodley Scott was appointed physician to the household of King George VI and from 1952 to 1973 he was physician to Queen Elizabeth II. He was appointed KCVO in 1964 and GCVO in 1973. He was made consultant physician to British Railways (Eastern Region) in 1957; honorary consultant in haematology to the army from 1957; consultant physician to the Florence Nightingale Hospital in 1958; consultant physician to the King Edward VII Hospital for Officers in 1963; and in the same year honorary consultant to the Royal Navy. Two years later he became honorary consultant to the Ministry of Defence. 
At the Royal College of Physicians, Bodley Scott was successively councillor (1963-6), censor (1970), and vice-president (1972). He was president of the Medical Society of London (1965-6), president of the British Society of Haematology (1966-7), president of the section of medicine of the Royal Society of Medicine (1967-8). He was made a member of the court of assistants of the Society of Apothecaries of London in 1964, and became master in 1974. He served as a member of council of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund from 1968, and the British Heart Foundation from 1975, eventually becoming chairman of the latter. 
As a teacher Bodley Scott excelled in a postgraduate setting. His achievements in his speciality were acknowledged by invitations to give the Lettsomian lecture of the Medical Society of London in 1957, the Langdon-Brown lecture in 1957, the Croonian lecture in 1970, and the most prestigious lecture offered by the Royal College of Physicians, the Harveian oration, in 1976. To appreciate Bodley Scott's breadth of vision it is necessary to turn to his Lettsomian lecture on leukaemia. It must be remembered that at that time no adult patient survived acute leukaemia; but Bodley Scott insisted that 'although the outlook was bleak, the use of active drugs must be attempted in order to achieve a remission of the disease, for a nihilistic approach would create an impenetrable barrier against therapeutic advance'. As well as lecturing, Bodley Scott also achieved academic success with his edition of 'Price's Textbook of Medicine' (12th edn, 1978), and with the 'Medical Annual', which he edited from 1979; both of these owed much to his encyclopaedic knowledge of medicine and his clear, concise style. He published his last book, 'Cancer -- the Facts', in 1979. 
Bodley Scott combined a remarkable ability in clinical medicine with a deep awareness of the need for innovation and experiment. He was a wise observer of humanity and behind his reserved, almost shy manner he appreciated people's foibles and commented on them with an astringent wit. Despite his reserve, however, he could speak forcibly and with effect. 
Following the death in 1977 of his first wife, in 1980 Bodley Scott married Jessie, the widow of Alexander Page Gaston, of Sevenoaks, and daughter of Thomas Mutch, farmer in Aberdeenshire. She survived the car accident near Parma, Italy, on 12 May 1982, in which Bodley Scott died. 
J. S. Malpas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30832


Boosey, Leslie Arthur (1887-1979), music publisher, was born in Bromley, Kent, on 26 July 1887, the eldest of five children (three sons and two daughters) of Arthur Boosey, music publisher, and his wife, Lucy Ashton. After some years at Malvern College he chose, instead of going to a university, to work for a time in the music publishing house of Durand in Paris, before joining the family business, a conservative and rather old-fashioned one largely associated at that time with the Boosey Ballad Concerts in the Albert Hall. 
In 1908 Boosey joined the 22nd London regiment (the Queen's) as a territorial officer, and during the First World War served with it in France (1915-18). Captured, as a major, in the March offensive of 1918, he was put up against a wall to be shot for refusing to give information to the enemy: at the last moment, however, the German officer changed his mind: 'All right', he said, 'you can go back; you're a gentleman'. Boosey was recommended for appointment to the DSO, but the recommendation miscarried -- the first but not the last occasion on which deserved recognition, sponsored by responsible people, was not forthcoming. He was, however, appointed a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. On 28 April 1921 Boosey married Ethel Torfrida ('b'. 1898/9), daughter of Frank Marchant, paper maker; they had three sons and a daughter. 
When he got back to the publishing business in 1920, Boosey had to adapt himself to conditions very different from those of 1914. Recording and radio transmission had created new problems and possibilities, and Boosey met the challenge by establishing firm friendships with many leading composers. A merger with the firm of Hawkes, completed in 1930, led to important developments in the manufacture of musical instruments and increased publishing activity, especially in the American market. The culmination of this vigorous expansion came with the acquisition in 1947 of the Koussevitsky catalogue, which added the names of Prokofiev, Rakhmaninov, and Stravinsky to a list that already included those of Strauss, Bartok, Copland, and Britten. By this time the firm of Boosey and Hawkes, in its own field, was one of the most influential in the world. 
Leslie Boosey was an adventurous and shrewd publisher, but he was also a very scrupulous one. His weakness, if weakness it was, lay in his readiness to trust everybody and to believe that people would not do to him the things he would never do to them: he lived to learn that this was over-optimistic. In the later years of his publishing career he began to find himself involved in circumstances that were distasteful; and in 1963, after some years of increasing discomfort, he severed his connection with the firm whose prosperity he had done so much to create and sustain. 
Boosey retained until the end of his life a great influence in the Performing Right Society, which he had joined in 1926, and whose chairman he became in 1929. This office he held with distinction until 1954, when he gave up the post to Sir Arthur Bliss. During his period of office he attended all the great international conferences, where he was respected by publishers, authors, and composers alike. In 1976 he was awarded the International Society's gold medal. He was also honoured by the Royal Philharmonic Society of London, with which he was closely associated during most of his life. 
Boosey should be remembered, if for nothing else, for the fact that in 1944, by his personal initiative, he saved the Royal Opera House from becoming a Mecca dance-hall. He had learnt that a lease was about to be signed which would produce that very result, and he acted quickly. With his partner Ralph Hawkes, having been to Washington to gain the support of Lord Keynes, he secured the lease for the firm of Boosey and Hawkes and the Covent Garden Opera Company. It was an achievement of great importance at the time and for the future. 
A casual observer, meeting Leslie Boosey, might have taken him for a typically urbane and conventional businessman; it would have been a mistake, for beneath the polished surface there lay a different reality. Experience in the trenches, which included the death of a loved brother and many friends, had led him to examine and reject most of the comfortable beliefs learned at home and at school, and to search for more dependable convictions. His mind was naturally sceptical and critical; he read widely in philosophy, theology, history, and science, and wrote a great deal, though not for publication. He was always ready to submit his views to criticism and discussion. And these studies, continued until the onset of his last illness, were undertaken not as an intellectual pastime, but in order to discover a way of life. That he was successful in this endeavour is suggested by the fact that he was able to accept without bitterness the realization that a long and helpful career had passed without public recognition -- a source of surprise and regret to those who knew his work. His gaiety, his lively mind, and his amused observation of the world and its ways, made him a sought-after companion in the Savile Club and elsewhere. To those fortunate enough to know him better he was a great deal more than that. 
Leslie Boosey died at his home, Meadowlands, Hambledon Road, Denmead, Hampshire, on 5 September 1979. 
Thomas Armstrong', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30833


Boot, Henry Albert Howard (1917-1983), physicist, was born on 29 July 1917 in Hall Green, Birmingham, the elder child and only son of Henry James Boot, electrical engineer at the firm of Bellings, and his wife, Ruby May Beeson. Always known as Harry he was educated at King Edward's High School, Birmingham, and at Birmingham University, where he studied physics and graduated BSc in 1938. He had begun work for his PhD (which he obtained in 1941) when war broke out. 
Mark Oliphant, professor of physics at Birmingham University, had recently been to Stanford University where he had encountered the klystron, an electron tube which could generate microwave radiation for use in radar. He put Boot, J. T. Randall, and James Sayers to work on the problem of developing microwave generators (centimetric wave transmitters). Boot and Randall used the magnetron, a thermionic valve capable of producing high power oscillations in the microwave region. By late February 1940 they had constructed a new type of cavity magnetron, with a radiation wavelength of 9.8 cm. By May 1940 an experimental radar set using a pulsed 10 cm cavity magnetron had been built at the Telecommunications Research Laboratory, Swanage, and by September 1940 a submarine periscope could be detected at a range of 7 miles. 
The cavity magnetron -- later improved by James Sayers -- crucially influenced the outcome of the war, for centimetric radar enabled a precise radar beam and small lightweight radar transmitters to be used. At first Bomber Command aircraft used the transmitters in night raids, and soon anti-aircraft units, convoy escorts, and night fighters all carried the equipment. Thousands of cavity magnetrons had been manufactured by the end of the Second World War. Boot and Randall were given a prize of $50 from the Royal Society of Arts 'for improving the safety of life at sea' in 1945; when they applied to the royal commission for awards to inventors in 1949 they and James Sayers received $36,000. 
In 1943 the Birmingham physics department returned to the study of atomic physics (for atomic bombs) and Boot moved for a time to British Thomson-Houston at Rugby to continue the development of very high power magnetrons. He rejoined the Birmingham department (to help build the cyclotron) in 1945 as a Nuffield research fellow. In 1948 he entered government service as a principal scientific officer with the Royal Naval Scientific Service in the Services Electronics Research Laboratories (SERL) at Baldock in Hertfordshire, and in the same year married Penelope May, daughter of Luke Herrington, an engineer; they had two sons. Boot was appointed senior principal scientific officer in 1954 and remained at Baldock until his retirement in 1977. 
During his latter years in Birmingham and at Baldock, Boot continued his work on microwaves and magnetrons and further researched on plasma physics, controlled thermonuclear fusion, lasers, masers, and infra-red viewing devices. He had exceptional success in designing, constructing, and operating powerful electrical devices, beginning as a schoolboy with generators of X-rays and of high voltages. He was awarded the John Price Wetherill medal of the Franklin Institute (1958) and the John Scott award (with J. T. Randall, 1959). 
Boot and his wife lived for thirty years in a thatched cottage at Rushden, Hertfordshire, with 5 acres of land (although Boot disliked gardening) and a garage full of fifty assorted magnetrons. His great love was sailing; he kept two boats at Salcombe in Devon. He was a quiet, modest, and tactful man, neat in his dress and habits of work. He had a friendly and discerning manner, together with a mildly sardonic sense of humour. Boot died on 8 February 1983 in the Hope Nursing Home, Cambridge. He was survived by his wife. One of the prototype cavity magnetrons built by GEC went to the Institution of Electrical Engineers and several from Boot's own collection were given to Hatfield Polytechnic. 
C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30834


Bose, Satyendranath (1894-1974), physicist, was born on 1 January 1894 in Calcutta, the only son and eldest of the seven children of Surendranath Bose (1867/8-1964), an accountant with the East Indian Railways, and later one of the founders of a small chemical and pharmaceutical company, and his wife, Amodini Devi (died 1939), who had little education but much domestic ability in bringing up a large family. Bose attended the local elementary school in Calcutta until he moved to the Hindu School in 1907. He was much interested in science, in which he was encouraged by the headmaster and mathematics teacher. In 1909 he entered Presidency College, Calcutta, and was awarded science degrees in 1913 (BSc) and 1915 (MSc) with top place in various branches of mathematics. In that year Bose married Ushabala, daughter of Dr Jogendra Nath Ghosh. They later had two sons and five daughters. 
Since Indians were then denied entry to the administrative government service, Bose continued to study physics, in spite of the lack of appropriate textbooks and literature. With much of Europe at war, little was known in India at that time about recent developments of quantum theory in Germany and elsewhere. Moreover, there were no adequate laboratories or equipment for research. In 1914 the University College of Science, for postgraduate studies and research, was established at Calcutta. Some recent European books were obtained, and research was published on new aspects of physics. In 1917 Bose and his lifelong friend Meghnad Saha (1893-1956) became lecturers there, and Bose learned French and German to gain access to recent literature. 
Bose developed a special interest in statistical mechanics, and was much stimulated by J. Willard Gibbs's book on 'Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics' (1902), from which he learned more about phase space and Boltzmann statistics. Arthur Eddington's analysis of the data from the solar eclipse of 1919 verified the deflection of starlight by the sun's gravitational field, confirming one of Einstein's predictions in respect of general relativity, turning Bose's attention to relativity and Einstein's recent papers about it. He translated for circulation in India Einstein's paper of 1905 on the special theory of relativity, and in 1916 that on the general theory of relativity. Although these translations were somewhat defective, they presented the first English texts of Einstein's work. 
In 1921 Bose went to the new Dacca University as a reader in physics. He had now studied Planck's theory of heat radiation, and became interested in Planck's radiation formula, the expression which gives the distribution of energy in the radiation from a black body. This had been one of the starting points of the quantum theory. Neither Planck nor Einstein had been satisfied with their attempts to derive this formula by classical methods. The basic assumptions of the quantum theory were not reconcilable with the laws of classical electrodynamics. In this context Bose made his single great contribution. He derived the Planck formula in a logical manner using the principles of Boltzmann statistics. Aware that his derivation was the logical outcome of Einstein's own line of thought, in June 1924 Bose sent his paper to Einstein, who, recognizing its merit, immediately translated it himself. As 'Plancks Gesetz und Lichtquantenhypothese' it was published in August of that year in 'Zeitschrift fur Physik', vol. 26. This epoch making paper contained the first correct treatment of the thermodynamics of the photon gas and laid the foundation of quantum statistics. Bose considered his next paper, 'Warmegleichgewicht in Strahlungsfeld bei Anwesenheit von Materie', published later that year in vol. 27 of the 'Zeitschrift', to be his best scientific contribution. It was likewise translated by Einstein, who on this occasion contested Bose's hypothesis about the probability of elementary radiative processes. 
Bose longed to meet European scientists, and in 1924 applied to Dacca University for a leave of absence of two years to study abroad. After seeing Einstein's letter to Bose expressing high appreciation of the latter's achievement, the university granted him leave and made adequate financial provision for his family during this period. He first went to Paris, in 1924, where he met Langevin, Madame Curie, and the de Broglies, and among many other things learned something about spectroscopy and crystallography. In October 1925 he went to Berlin and met Einstein, who had made many advances during the previous twelve months, partly arising from Bose's ideas, but who was now mainly interested in a unified field theory. Through Einstein, Bose was delighted to meet many of the distinguished scientists in Berlin at that time. He heard talks by Max Born and others about the new quantum mechanics. 
Bose returned to Dacca in 1926 and was appointed a professor of physics in 1927. In the years following 1924 Bose's research interests widened. His forte lay in his profound understanding of basic science, which found expression outside physics, and research workers on other disciplines benefited from discussions with him. In the years 1952-4 he renewed his interest in the theory of relativity. In 1946 he became the Khaira professor of physics at Calcutta University. He retired in 1956, became the vice-chancellor of Viswa-Bharati University, Santiniketan, and in 1958 accepted the honorific appointment of national professor ('Padma Vibhushan'). 
Throughout his life Bose tried to improve education, science, and culture in India, and to encourage the use of better technology for the people's welfare. He was proud of his Bengali origins and hoped for Indian independence; he grieved when Bengal was divided in 1947. He was president of the physics section of the Indian Science Congress (1939), general president of the thirty-first session of the Indian Science Congress, Delhi (1944), and president of the National Institute of Science of India (later the National Academy of Sciences) in 1949. In 1958 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. To those who asked why he had never visited the United States of America, Bose would explain that as he had already visited Russia the American authorities considered him a communist sympathizer (this was in the McCarthy era) and refused him a visa. 
It is rare, indeed, for any scientist living in an environment or milieu which could not really teach, or help him, to make an important contribution like that of Bose, and send it to a leading world scientist whom he had never met asking for an assessment of its value. Bose's name is now established by the terms Bose-Einstein statistics, which are used in the interpretation of numerous physical phenomena, and bosons (particles obeying Bose-Einstein statistics). 
Plans were in hand at various places in India to celebrate Bose's eightieth anniversary when he died in Calcutta on 4 February 1974. 
H. W. Thompson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30835


Boult, Sir Adrian Cedric (1889-1983), conductor, was born on 8 April 1889 at 4 Abbots Hayes, Liverpool Road, Chester, the only son and second child of Cedric Randal Boult (1853-1950), an oil merchant, and his wife, Katherine Florence Barman (died 1927). He showed exceptional early musical promise. He entered Westminster School in 1901 and attended London concerts and operas whenever he could. Few schoolboys can have attended as many performances by great artists as Boult heard between 1901 and October 1908, when he went up to Christ Church, Oxford. There music again occupied most of his time (he was also a keen rower, stroking his college boat at Henley), and he was president of the University Musical Club in 1910. 
On leaving Oxford, in September 1912 Boult joined the conducting class at Leipzig conservatory. However, the chief attraction was the opportunity to study Arthur Nikisch at work with the Gewandhaus Orchestra. After returning to England in 1913 he became an extra member of Covent Garden music staff and helped in preparations for the first London performance of Wagner's 'Parsifal' on 2 February 1914. Three weeks later, on 27 February, he made his debut as a conductor in the public hall, West Kirby, in a programme that included the first performance of Butterworth's 'The Banks of Green Willow'. He was unfit for military service when war was declared in August 1914, so he returned to Oxford in October to sit and pass his first doctor of music examination. He then went to London to work for the War Office, but continued his musical activity. In February and March 1918 he organized four concerts in Queen's Hall, at which he conducted the London Symphony Orchestra in contemporary English works. This led to an invitation from Gustav Holst to conduct the first (private) performance of the orchestral suite 'The Planets' in September 1918. He conducted the Diaghilev Russian Ballet's 1919 London season, joined the staff of the Royal College of Music, and, in March 1920, conducted Elgar's second symphony, drawing from Elgar the comment: 'I feel that my reputation in the future is safe in your hands' (Kennedy, 73). At the age of thirty-one Boult was now firmly established. In 1924 he was appointed conductor of the City of Birmingham Orchestra, and for the next six years his adventurous programmes attracted widespread attention. He conducted Wagner and Verdi for the British National Opera Company in 1925 and was conductor of the Bach Choir, London, from 1928 to 1931. 
In 1930 Boult became the BBC's director of music when Percy Pitt retired. The BBC, with John Reith as director-general, was forming its own symphony orchestra, and Boult conducted the inaugural concert on 22 October 1930, a historic evening in British music-making. This led to his appointment as the orchestra's permanent conductor. He was the ideal choice for a post that in effect made him music educator-in-chief to the nation through broadcasting. He encouraged the engagement of celebrated guest conductors and was willing to conduct works, in programmes chosen by others, which were regarded as important even though they had little appeal for him personally. He was a sound, if not brilliant, trainer in fundamental principles, as was acknowledged by Arturo Toscanini when the latter first conducted the orchestra in 1935 and declared it one of the best he had encountered. As a guest conductor in the 1930s Boult worked with the Vienna Philharmonic, Boston Symphony, and New York Philharmonic orchestras. He conducted the first (concert) performances in England of Berg's 'Wozzeck' in 1934 and Busoni's 'Doktor Faust' in 1937 and the first London performance of Mahler's ninth symphony, also in 1934. He conducted the first performance of Vaughan Williams's fourth symphony in 1935 (and of his sixth in 1948). 
On 1 July 1933 Boult married Ann Mary Grace, the daughter of Captain Francis Alan Richard Bowles RN, of Sittingbourne, Kent. She was previously married to the singer and opera administrator Sir (James) Steuart Wilson, with whom she had four children. 
During the Second World War, despite the loss of players to the services (forty out of ninety between 1939 and 1946), Boult kept the standards of the BBC orchestra as high as he could and maintained the enterprising quality of the programmes. In 1942 he handed over the post of director of music to Arthur Bliss. At the end of the war he found a changed attitude to the orchestra in the upper echelons of the BBC and had to fight hard to restore it to its pre-war glory. 
Although Reith had told Boult, 'When you get to 60 [the BBC's age for retirement] tell us what extra help you want and we'll draw up a new contract' (private information), Reith had left the BBC in 1938, and Boult's enforced retirement in 1949 was engineered by the head of music, Sir (James) Steuart Wilson, whose divorced first wife Boult had married in 1933. Boult was principal conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra from 1950 to 1956. With it he embarked on a busy recording schedule, including the complete cycle of Vaughan Williams's symphonies. In 1953 he conducted the music at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II (he had served in the same capacity in 1937 for King George VI). In 1959-60, having heard that the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra had been unable to find a successor at short notice after its conductor had resigned, he returned to his old haunt with a vintage Boult series of programmes. After 1960 he spent more and more time in the recording studio, making important recordings of Elgar, Vaughan Williams, Holst, Parry, Brahms, and some Wagner. By now he had attained more popularity with the public than he had ever enjoyed. He was especially moved by a return to Covent Garden to conduct the Royal Ballet in Vaughan Williams's 'Job', Mahler's 'Das Lied von der Erde', and Elgar's 'Enigma Variations'. His last public appearance was at the London Coliseum on 24 June 1978, when, unannounced, he conducted Elgar's ballet 'The Sanguine Fan'. He ended his recording career on 20 December of that year with works by Parry. He died in a West Hampstead nursing home in Christchurch Avenue on 22 February 1983, leaving his body to medical science. He was survived by his wife. 
Boult was knighted in 1937 and was made a Companion of Honour in 1969. He was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1944 and the Harvard Glee Club medal in 1956. He had honorary degrees from five universities: Birmingham (1930), Liverpool (1947), Cambridge (1953), Reading (1976), and Oxford (1979), and was an honorary student of Christ Church. The Royal College of Music conferred the honorary degree of doctor of music of the college on him in 1981. 
In the music he admired most, Boult was often a great conductor; in the rest, an extremely conscientious one. His manner was undemonstrative and he liked to use a long baton. If from behind he seemed unexciting and unemotional, the players could see the animation in his face -- and he was capable of frightening outbursts of temper at rehearsals. Tall and erect, with something of the military in his appearance (particularly the moustache), he seemed the personification of the English gentleman. But recipients of his cutting wit and occasional sarcasm knew that this was not the whole picture. He was generous to orchestral players and loyal to colleagues, but on certain occasions, when difficulties arose of a quasi-political nature, he took the line of least resistance. How to assess a conductor's lasting influence is difficult if not impossible, but Boult undoubtedly established a tradition of catholic taste at the BBC. His championship of British music was carried on by one of his pupils, Vernon Handley, and he was the inspiration of the career of another pupil, Timothy Reynish, whose work was mainly at the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester. He wrote two books on conducting, 'The Point of the Stick' (1920) and 'Thoughts on Conducting' (1963), and his autobiography, 'My Own Trumpet', was published in 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 30836


Boulting, John Edward (1913-1985), film producer and director, and 
In 1933 John Boulting was the first brother to enter the film profession, initially with Ace Films, a small film distribution company owned by a schoolfriend's father and based in Wardour Street, London; he later described this period of his life in his 'Who's Who' entry as one of 'selling bad films to reluctant exhibitors' ('Who's Who', 1985). In 1935 he joined a modest independent producer and gained much experience in small studios. Roy, meanwhile, was trying his luck in Canada where, among other jobs, he spent some time with a film production company in Trenton, Ontario. He returned to England in the mid-1930s as a crew-member on a cattle ship and also found work in Wardour Street in film sales, but later transferred to production at the Marylebone studios as an assistant editor. 
Early in 1937 John Boulting volunteered as a front-line ambulance driver for the International Brigade in Spain, and was involved in the later stages of the battle of Guadalajara and the offensives of Brunete and Balchite. On his return in November 1937 he and Roy formed Charter Films, and began a long career of independent film production in Britain with the documentary 'Ripe Earth' (1937). With Roy directing and John producing, the company also put out a handful of modest thrillers such as 'Consider your Verdict' (1938) and 'Trunk Crime' (1939), 'quota quickies' that were picked up by renters to meet the legal obligation to distribute a quota of British films. 
The Boulting brothers came to prominence in the early war years with their adaptation of the anti-Nazi play 'Pastor Hall' (1940), based on the humanist resistance of Pastor Martin Niemoller. They entered the services in that year: John went into the RAF as a flight mechanic and Roy into the Royal Armoured Corps as a trooper. Eventually the authorities saw sense and put the brothers to better use, transferring them to their respective service film units, where they contributed significantly to wartime documentary. Roy eventually reached the rank of captain in the army film unit and supervised the Academy award-winning 'Desert Victory' (1943) and its companion 'Burma Victory' (1945); John ended the war a flight lieutenant and directed his first film for the RAF film unit, the feature-length drama documentary 'Journey Together' (1945). In 1941-2, while the arrangements to establish the service film units at Pinewood studios were under way, the brothers were granted special leave to return to Charter Films and produced the propaganda film 'The Dawn Guard' (1941) for the Ministry of Information and the feature film 'Thunder Rock' (1942). The Boultings' wartime cinema was progressive, moralistic, and strongly anti-fascist, with their films promoting the democratic ideals of the people's war and rejecting the discredited appeasement policy of the 1930s. Their achievements were widely recognized and they became identified with the renaissance in British cinema, which was felt to have attained a new maturity and honesty in confronting the national crisis. 
Following the war the Boulting brothers continued to operate as an independent producer-director team, but found it necessary to produce in association with a variety of film companies, with the brothers alternating roles as director and producer. A series of adaptations ensued: Roy directed 'Fame is the Spur' (1947), about the moral compromises of a Labour politician, and 'The Guinea Pig' (1948), about a working-class boy (played by Richard Attenborough) adapting to life in a public school. The themes reflected the Boultings' preoccupation with political and social issues. John directed 'Brighton Rock' (1947), a moody and effective thriller also starring Attenborough, who was under contract to the brothers. The twins collaborated in directing 'Seven Days to Noon' (1950), the first film to deal with the moral implications of the atom bomb, which won an Academy award for the original story provided by Paul Dehn and James Bernard. 
In the early 1950s the Boulting brothers worked separately again. John was invited to direct 'The Magic Box' (1951), the British film industry's principal contribution to the Festival of Britain, telling the life of cinema pioneer William Friese-Greene, leaving Roy to make the cold war thriller 'High Treason' (1951), which was already in an advanced stage of preparation. Beginning in 1953, the Boultings worked both separately and collaboratively on productions for American producers. Roy directed 'Singlehanded' (1953) for Twentieth Century Fox; he and John co-directed 'Seagulls over Sorrento' (1954) for MGM; and Roy directed 'Run for the Sun' (1956) for Russ-Field Productions, the only Boulting brothers project to be made in the United States. 
The mid-1950s saw the Boulting brothers make a decisive turn to comedy. While 'Josephine and the Men' was the first to appear, in 1955, much more significant was 'Private's Progress', directed and co-scripted by John in 1956. This was a hugely popular satire of army life that assembled a cast consisting of Ian Carmichael, Richard Attenborough, Terry-Thomas, and sundry others who generally appeared as the same or similar characters in successive comedies satirizing the legal profession ('Brothers in Law', 1957), universities ('Lucky Jim', 1957), the Foreign Office ('Carlton-Browne of the FO', 1958), industrial relations ('I'm All Right Jack', 1959) and the church ('Heavens Above!', 1963). 'I'm All Right Jack' won BAFTA awards for best screenplay (written by John Boulting, Frank Harvey, and Alan Hackney) and best actor for Peter Sellers, who was reinvented by his performance as the belligerent shop steward Fred Kite from comedian to comic actor of the first rank. The film was among the most popular British productions of the year, but attracted severe criticism from the Association of Cinematograph, Television and Allied Technicians (ACTT) for what it interpreted as a negative portrayal of trade unionists. The Boultings had been in dispute with the ACTT for many years regarding what they saw as the restrictive practices operated against them, resulting from their combined status of executives and technicians. (The union argued that as executives the brothers should not act also as editors or cameramen.) Legal action was finally settled in 1964. 
If the social awareness of the Boultings' comedies of the 1950s anticipated the satire boom of the early 1960s, the brothers were not part of the critically celebrated new wave British cinema of the same period. Only later in the decade, with 'The Family Way' (1966), a pointed comedy of generational conflict with permissive leanings, did the Boultings connect with the kitchen sink school of realism. The film came after John's final solo directorial effort, the modest comedy 'Rotten to the Core' (1965). Roy continued as the team's director and embarked on a series of more adult-oriented pictures, in keeping with a firm trend in commercial film-making: he directed the controversial psychological thriller 'Twisted Nerve' (1968), which the National Society for Mentally Handicapped Children disliked for its portrayal of a child with Down's syndrome, and two sex comedies that largely failed to capitalize on the (admittedly fading) star appeal of Peter Sellers: 'There's a Girl in my Soup' (1970) and 'Soft Beds, Hard Battles' (1973). The Boulting brothers' high-profile career in the British film industry effectively came to an end with the latter. Roy intermittently undertook directorial assignments, such as 'The Last Word' (1979) for the Suncrest Cinema Corporation in Hollywood, and an episode of the 'Miss Marple' television series, 'The Moving Finger', for the BBC in 1985. Roy also co-authored with Leo Marks (who had scripted 'Twisted Nerve') the play 'Favourites', which was produced in 1977. 
John and Roy Boulting exemplified independent film production in British cinema. They had a long association with the 'third force' in British film distribution, British Lion; both brothers were directors of the company, although John took a more executive role, serving as managing director from 1966 to 1972. The brothers were persistent in criticizing the Rank Organisation and Associated British Corporation duopoly which exercised a stranglehold over cinema distribution and exhibition, and offered what support and encouragement they could to struggling independent film-makers. John was part of the successful effort to get broadcasters to pay higher fees to film producers for screening films on television. 
John Boulting married four times. His first wife was Veronica Davide Davidson ('b'. 1916/17), a student, daughter of John Craig Nelson Davidson, barrister, whom he married on 20 July 1938. That marriage ended in divorce and on 27 February 1952 he married Jacqueline Helen Duncan ('b'. 1922/3), daughter of Richard Chilver Robert Rice Allerton, a broker at Lloyds, and divorced wife of William Raymond Duncan. Once again divorced, Boulting married Ann Marion, daughter of Alan Ware, of the Royal Marines, in 1972. Finally, he married Anne Josephine, daughter of Frank Flynn, sales manager, in 1977. He and his first wife had two sons, and with his second he had three daughters. He also had another son. 
Roy Boulting married five times. His first wife was (Marian) Angela Warnock, whom he married in 1936. That marriage ended in divorce in 1941 and on 30 December 1943 he married Jean Nora, 'nee' Gamage, divorced wife of Charles Kenneth Capon and daughter of Eric Muir Gamage, company director. By the time of the marriage she had changed her surname to Boulting. Divorced again in 1951, on 24 March that year he married Enid Munnick, 'nee' Groenewald, divorced wife of Cornelius Francis Munnick and daughter of Jacobus Linde Groenewald, farmer. The marriage was dissolved in 1964, and she later became countess of Hardwicke. For a period in the mid-1960s he lived with Victoria Vaughan. His marriage in 1971 to Hayley Catherine Rose Vivian Mills ('b'. 1946), the young star of 'The Family Way' and 'Twisted Nerve', created headlines, but ended in divorce in 1978. Finally, on 30 October 1978 he married the actress Sandra Spencer (formerly Lerner), daughter of Gilbert Spencer Payne, civil servant. They divorced in 1984. Roy Boulting had seven sons: two from his second marriage, three from his third, one son with Victoria Vaughan, and one son from his fourth marriage. The latter, Crispian Mills, became lead singer in the pop group Kula Shaker and experienced a very public rapprochement with his father in the late 1990s. 
John and Roy Boulting gained critical recognition early in their career with the release of 'Pastor Hall'. Their subsequent wartime films set certain standards and expectations, and shaped the critical response towards the brothers' later films. This period marked them out as socially committed or, in the words of one critic, 'earnest evangelicals' (Durgnat, 'A Mirror', 234): men who propagated the values of the people's war and the people's peace. Critical reception cooled in the immediate post-war years when, at best, their films were seen as worthy failures (such as 'Fame is the Spur') or dismissed in some quarters as sordid affairs (such as 'Brighton Rock'). A progressive 'moral disenchantment' (ibid., 42) was seen to descend over the Boultings, leading to a 'dissolution of idealism and a critical tone about the state of postwar society' (Landy, 35). Their cold war thrillers 'Seven Days to Noon' and 'High Treason' marked a new intensity in this dissatisfaction: both films were judged by many critics as excessively paranoid, with narratives drifting towards an increasing reliance on authority. The satirical comedies of the 1950s were in this view a straightforward index of the brothers' increasing cynicism and bitterness and could be dismissed (by Penelope Houston) as the work of 'sour Liberals' (Burton and others, 4) (John had joined the Liberal Party in the 1950s). Moreover, critics became increasingly hostile to a perceived vulgarity in the Boultings' films and a certain low approach to humour, which reached its nadir in 'Soft Beds, Hard Battles'. Raymond Durgnat, though, has warned against this view of 'moral abdication' by the Boultings and has defended the brothers' comedic approach as 'a deliberate moral position', entirely consistent with the idealism of their wartime productions. While this idealism might well have been dented by the social and moral laxity and the compromises brought on by the onset of affluence in the mid-1950s, it was also capable of 'an affectionate enjoyment of humanity despite its moral mediocrity and without the guilt of stereotypical puritanism' (Durgnat, 'Boulting, Roy and John', 101). By the end of the twentieth century the brothers' output was enjoying something of a critical rehabilitation. 
The Boulting brothers' careers in British cinema marked them out as mavericks. They displayed a single-minded dedication to their craft and developed a reputation, in the words of Roy, of being a couple of 'toffee-nosed bastards, arrogant, opinionated, inflexible, difficult' ('The Independent'). It was no coincidence that their films focused on the misfit figure of the dissident idealist, coming to the fore in the early war features 'Pastor Hall' and 'Thunder Rock', with their men of conscience actively opposed to the horrors of fascism; this figure was presented again in 'The Guinea Pig', the tale of a working-class lad's transformation into an exemplary public schoolboy, and, in a different register, in the gullible innocent played by Ian Carmichael in several comedies, most notably the Stanley Windrush character in 'Private's Progress' and 'I'm All Right Jack', whose noble ideal of service is exploited by the opportunistic rogues of a self-serving society. The Boultings strove for a degree of control over their film-making rare in the British film industry. In most cases they chose their projects, had a hand in the scripts, alternated shooting responsibilities on the studio floor, and on occasion edited the films themselves. It was a commonly held view that they were interchangeable, even indivisible, as film-makers; indeed, they were known to exchange roles on set without the crew even noticing. 
Both brothers had a passion for cricket and a full set of cricket gear was always kept in the prop van ready for an impromptu game should the sun go in and halt filming. John died of cancer on 17 June 1985 at his home, 5 The Ridge, Ridgemount Road, Sunningdale, Berkshire. This was a devastating blow for his twin brother, who was left to spend many frustrated years unsuccessfully trying to adapt Terence Rattigan's last play 'Cause Celebre' for the screen. Roy, living in his later years in a council flat in Eynsham, Oxfordshire, died of cancer at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 5 November 2001. 


@@@@@


doc= 30837


Bovenschen, Sir Frederick Carl (1884-1977), civil servant, was born on 26 March 1884 in Forest Hill, London, he and his older sister being the only children of Carl Bovenschen, silk merchant, of Forest Hill, and his wife, Catherine Hoare. As a scholar of the King's School, Canterbury, his record in work and games was outstanding. He won an open classical scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and obtained first classes in both classical honour moderations (1905) and 'literae humaniores' (1907). 
Bovenschen's initial appointment to the civil service, in March 1908, was as a clerk of the higher division in the War Office, and he remained in that department until his retirement in 1945. In November 1908 he became assistant private secretary to R. B. Haldane, secretary of state for war, whose timely reforms gave the army the strong and elastic structure that stood up to such stern tests in 1914. Four years in Haldane's office gave Bovenschen incomparable opportunities to grasp facts and principles fundamental to military organization. His next three years (1912-15) as private secretary to Sir Charles Harris, whose expertise in the scrutiny of army votes was famous, gave him parallel experience of finance in peace and war. He married on 1 February 1919 Mabel Alice (1891-1975), only daughter of Sir Arthur Herbert Dyke Acland, thirteenth baronet; they had one daughter. In 1921 he became assistant secretary at the War Office, and in 1931 he was seconded to the government of India to serve on the army retrenchment committee. 
Bovenschen had two conspicuous traits: persistent integrity of purpose and painstaking mastery of detail. These dominated his working life for half a century. They were subtly suggested by the strokes of his round, deliberate handwriting and by an occasional quizzical glance above half-moons of gold-rimmed spectacles. These traits together helped to get value for money -- sometimes, in the eyes of his military colleagues, with unjustifiable severity -- in many aspects of army expenditure for a decade after 1932. He was successively director of army contracts, from 1932; director of finance, from 1936; and finally deputy under-secretary of state for war, from 1936 to 1942. His integrity and conscientiousness combined more conspicuously, and with more unconditional appreciation, during the Second World War when he was charged with building, from inevitably ill-assorted pieces, a strong framework for the administration of occupied enemy territory. This was done through military government and civil affairs staffs set up under Anglo-American co-operation. The completion of this huge, unprecedented task in Europe owed more to Bovenschen than to anyone. From 1942 to 1945, as joint permanent under-secretary of state for war, he chaired the main committees concerned, reconciling conflicting interests of Whitehall departments and within the armed services. It fell to him to force awkward decisions affecting supplies, to enlist American co-operation (he twice visited Washington), and to apply, with the continuity essential in exasperatingly confused conditions, intellectual objectivity and powers of persuasion. It is widely accepted that shortcomings in military government, especially in the control commission for Germany, resulted not from the organization agreed on Bovenschen's committees but primarily from mistakes in staffing. 
Retirement from the civil service in 1945 restricted the scope more than the quality of Bovenschen's work. Its benefits to Westminster Hospital and Kent county and Hythe borough councils covered the years until 1960, during which his broadly based if at times over-rigid financial judgement was applied on their governing bodies or main committees. It was also applied in less formal discussions in which, as throughout his public life, he never became heated, endearing himself to a new assortment of colleagues by a characteristic combination of charm and shrewdness. 
Bovenschen was a dedicated and good-humoured golfer. On four or five of his favourite Kent courses his small, compact figure would, according to an admirer, 'lead the field like a light infantryman at a good 140 paces to the minute'. He had also enjoyed a slower pace -- walking in the queen's coronation procession in his robes as a baron of the Cinque Ports (1953). 
Among the pleasures of his eighties were a return to reading classical Greek, and practical interests in education which saw him involved in the managing committees of two schools for young children in Hythe, as well as a long-established role as a governor of the King's School, Canterbury. And there were richer rewards in the happiness of his home life. His wife had studied painting under Walter Sickert and her gentle, artistic temperament complemented her husband's punctilious devotion to duty. He seemed lost when she died in 1975. A solace in the last year of his life was the return of their only child and her husband from South Africa to settle in Hythe, where Bovenschen died on 9 November 1977. 
Bovenschen was appointed chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1920), CB (1927), KBE (1938), and KCB (1943). 


@@@@@


doc= 30838


Bowen, Edmund John (1898-1980), chemist, was born in Worcester on 29 April 1898, the eldest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Edmund Riley Bowen ('b'. 1866), headmaster of St John's Elementary School for Boys, Worcester, and his wife, Lilias, daughter of Thomas Kamester, carpenter, of Clewer, Windsor. He was educated at his father's school and at the Royal Grammar School, Worcester. Bowen won a science scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, and went into residence in October 1915. In 1916 he volunteered and in April 1917 was posted to France with the Royal Garrison Artillery. 
Following demobilization Ted Bowen returned to Oxford in January 1919 and took first-class honours in chemistry in 1920 after only five terms of study. He was one of several highly gifted scientists whose abilities were recognized by their tutor, H. B. Hartley, for whom he and his contemporary C. N. Hinshelwood carried out undergraduate research. Immediately after graduation he was appointed a demonstrator in the Balliol and Trinity laboratories. This was followed by a lectureship (1921) and a fellowship (1922) at University College which he held until his retirement in 1965. In 1924 Bowen married Edith, eldest daughter of Joseph and Margaret Moule, farmers of Hartlebury, Worcestershire. They had a happy marriage, and two children were born, Margaret Lilias ('b'. 1927) and Humphry John ('b'. 1929). From 1938 onwards he was also university lecturer and later Aldrichian praelector. Bowen sat on numerous university committees, but his main contributions to university administration were in connection with the University Museum, the Museum of the History of Science, and the university observatory. 
Bowen's scientific work lay almost entirely in the field of photochemistry and the related phenomenon of fluorescence. His pioneer work in the period 1923-35 provided some of the earliest experimental confirmation of the fundamental laws of photochemistry in the theoretical work of Einstein. In 1935 Bowen was elected FRS, and later served on the council (1943-5). During the Second World War he was a member of the Oxford research team working on respirator problems for the Ministry of Supply. 
Bowen's early research had been carried out using largely home-made apparatus, often put together using domestic odds and ends. However, from 1945, electrical and optical devices became commercially available, and Bowen used these extensively in his later work on fluorescence. One of the notable results of this work was the demonstration that energy could be transferred from one molecule to another over distances much greater than a molecular diameter. Although no mathematician, he took a keen interest in the developments in quantum theory, which were of basic importance for his experimental work. 
Bowen had a remarkable gift for explaining abstruse theories by means of simple diagrams and models. This was put to good use in his book 'The Chemical Aspects of Light' (1941) and in discussion with pupils and colleagues. He was widely read in many branches of science outside chemistry, and an avid collector of fossils and antiquities. One ammonite from Dorset, where he had a holiday house, was named 'Perisphinctes boweni' after him. He was keenly interested in the history of science, and published several articles on the early history of the Royal Society and of science in Oxford. In 1963 Bowen was awarded the Davy medal of the Royal Society. He also became vice-president of the Chemical Society and of the Faraday Society and was Liversidge lecturer of the Chemical Society in 1966. 
Bowen was an inventive scientist, more interested in understanding underlying principles than in accumulation of detail. His enthusiasm and kindness to others were widely acknowledged. He retained his boyish character and youthful appearance until his death at his home, 10 Park Town, Oxford, on 19 November 1980 following a heart attack. 
R. P. Bell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30839


Bowen, Elizabeth Dorothea Cole (1899-1973), writer, was born on 7 June 1899 at 15 Herbert Place, Dublin, the only child of Henry Charles Cole Bowen (1862-1930), barrister, of Bowen's Court, Kildorrery, co. Cork, and his wife, Florence Isabella Pomeroy ('c'.1866-1912), daughter of Henry Fitz-George Colley, of Mount Temple, Dublin. The Bowens were Cromwellian settlers of Welsh origin. Elizabeth Bowen's early childhood was happy, with summers spent at Bowen's Court, the house built by Henry Bowen in 1775 (the history of which she told in her family memoir 'Bowen's Court', 1964), and winters in Dublin (recalled in 'Seven Winters', 1942). This idyll ended when her father suffered a mental breakdown in 1905. 'Bitha', as she was nicknamed by the family, and her mother moved to England in 1906, settling in Hythe. Her marked stammer developed at this time. In 1912 her beloved mother died of cancer. Elizabeth Bowen never fully recovered from this trauma, telling a friend that the worst event of her life had occurred when she was thirteen -- her fiction abounds in orphaned children. Elizabeth Bowen was largely brought up by her aunts; she attended schools in Hertfordshire and Kent and spent her summers at Bowen's Court. In 1918 her father married Mary Gwynn, sister of Stephen Gwynn. 
In 1921 Elizabeth Bowen was briefly engaged to John Anderson, a British officer, and on 4 August 1923 she married Alan Charles Cameron (1893-1952), assistant secretary for education for Northamptonshire. Cameron had fought in the First World War, been badly gassed, and had been awarded the MC. Although the marriage was important to both partners, it was unconsummated. Elizabeth Bowen later told Iris Murdoch that they had decided not to have children because of her desire to write and her husband's horror of the modern world: she came to regret this decision. Alan Cameron is recalled as a Blimpish figure, given to cliches and banal comments. However, he had a passion for education and was an enthusiast for cinema; his report 'The Film in National Life' (1932) led to the founding of the British Film Institute. He gave Elizabeth Bowen practical support and was an unqualified admirer of her work -- he could recite long passages from her novels, which he knew almost by heart. 
Cameron transformed Elizabeth Bowen from a 'farouche', badly dressed young woman into a more worldly, stylish figure. After their move to Waldencote, Old Headington, in 1925, on Cameron's appointment as secretary for education for Oxford, she embraced Oxford life, becoming a close friend of David Cecil, Maurice Bowra, and of Susan and John Buchan. Her first collection of short stories, 'Encounters', was published in 1923; her first novel, 'The Hotel', was published in 1927. Her first 'Irish' novel, 'The Last September', was published in 1929; 'Friends and Relations' and 'To the North' followed in 1931 and 1932. 
In early 1933 Elizabeth Bowen met Humphry House (1908-1955), later an eminent Dickens scholar. He had been fellow and chaplain at Wadham, but had resigned after losing his faith. Elizabeth Bowen fell in love with the brilliant, saturnine, much younger House. He was genuinely attached to her, but also admitted to being 'avid for experience' (House to Bowen, undated). Their affair paralleled his established relationship with Madeline Church and continued after his marriage in December 1933 -- the wedding was arranged while Elizabeth Bowen was in New York, from early November to mid-December 1933. Elizabeth Bowen's animosity towards Madeline House expressed itself in a determination to see Humphry House as 'embracing mediocrity with his eyes open' (Bowen to Berlin, 18 Dec 1933) and as destroyed by claustrophobic domesticity. She expressed outrage to Humphry House on hearing of his wife's pregnancy -- he countered by enquiring, 'why, Elizabeth, did you not tell me when we first slept together that you were a virgin?' (House to Bowen, 23 July 1934). Despite these tensions Madeline House and her baby daughter stayed with Elizabeth Bowen at Waldencote in spring 1935. Early in 1936 House went to Calcutta, and this decision caused a serious quarrel with Elizabeth Bowen, although they were to remain friends. A version of this relationship -- radically adjusted -- is to be found in 'The House in Paris' (1935), a novel in which Elizabeth Bowen enshrines her lover's name, and in which her quasi-obsessive theme of orphaned children is intricately tied to a secret affair. In 1935 Alan Cameron was appointed secretary to the Central Council for Schools Broadcasting. Elizabeth Bowen established herself as a notable London literary hostess at 2 Clarence Terrace, the grand house near Regent's Park which they acquired on an eight-year lease. Despite Cameron's director-level salary, they let a bed-sitting-room to help with the rent. 
In summer 1936 Elizabeth Bowen arranged a large house party at Bowen's Court, which she had inherited on her father's death in 1930; guests included Isaiah Berlin, Rosamond Lehmann, and Goronwy Rees, journalist, Soviet agent, and fellow of All Souls. It is probable that Elizabeth Bowen saw Rees, a vital young man, as a replacement for Humphry House; however he and Rosamond Lehmann fell in love and began an affair. Elizabeth Bowen's anger at Rees's preference for the exotically beautiful Lehmann erupted in letters to Berlin, in which she accused the couple of defiling Bowen's Court by the 'ruthless incontinence' of their actions (Bowen to Berlin, 23 Sept 1936). Berlin thought her mad with jealousy. The enduring pain caused by this episode provided the central situation for her novel 'The Death of the Heart' (1938), in which Rees was, to his consternation, transformed into the egocentric, self-destructive Eddie. Elizabeth Bowen had an intolerance of rejection and this crisis revived her resentment of Humphry House -- as she put it 'experience means nothing till it repeats itself' ('The Death of the Heart', 342). Her uncontrolled behaviour is in contrast to the formal control of the novel -- a moving depiction of the crisis of adolescence. She had already confessed to her inability to surrender the 'unchecked power' of the novelist and to realize 'that a close relationship with a person isn't a book' (Bowen to House, 6 June 1934?). As she admitted, 'I am fully intelligent only when I write' ('Why do I Write?', 20). 
Hostility to a married couple with children resurfaced in her affair with Sean O'Faolain (1900-1991), which began in May 1937. Elizabeth Bowen told the American writer May Sarton that the O'Faolain marriage had been a mistake. O'Faolain, a former member of the IRA, brought Elizabeth Bowen to a closer understanding of Irish nationalist politics -- she had already dealt with the war of independence in 'The Last September' -- and put her in touch with contemporary Irish writing. Their affair was effectively ended by the outbreak of war. Elizabeth Bowen also had a brief affair with May Sarton in late May 1937, which she took lightly. She told Sarton that she had had one previous affair with a woman. She distinguished between such relationships between an older woman and younger woman, and lesbianism -- of which she disapproved. An important literary friendship with Virginia Woolf was forged in the 1930s; Elizabeth Bowen greatly admired Woolf and valued her rigorous criticism. She stayed regularly with Woolf at Monks House, Sussex, the last time in February 1941. 
The Second World War produced Elizabeth Bowen's greatest writing -- a great number of short stories emerged, many directly or indirectly concerned with the irruption of the supernatural in wartime London ('The Demon Lover', 'The Happy Autumn Fields', 'Mysterious Kor'). She recalled: 'It seems to me that... the overcharged subconsciousnesses of everyone overflowed and merged... Sometimes I hardly knew where I stopped and somebody else began. The violent destruction of solid things... left all of us, equally heady and disembodied. Walls went down. ('The Demon Lover and other Stories', 217-18)' During the war, Elizabeth Bowen travelled regularly to Ireland and wrote confidential reports for the Ministry of Information; these are brilliant exercises in reportage and analysis, which capture the constriction of neutral Ireland. Despite her own conservative political stance and patriotism -- she and her husband acted as ARP wardens during the war -- she vigorously defended Irish neutrality: 'It may be felt in England that Eire is making a fetish of her neutrality. But this assertion of her neutrality is Eire's first 'free' self-assertion... Eire (and I think rightly) sees her neutrality as positive, not merely negative. She has invested her self-respect in it. (FO 800/310/253)' Elizabeth Bowen's wartime affair with the Canadian diplomat Charles Stewart Almon Ritchie (1906-1995) was the happiest and most equal sexual relationship of her life -- it is clear from Ritchie's diaries that he admired and loved her. The affair led to an enduring friendship and he is remembered in her will. Ritchie, who shared Elizabeth Bowen's fascination with the psychology of defeatism, is the unexpected model for Robert, the crypto-Nazi, in 'The Heat of the Day' (1949), her supreme achievement as a novelist, and one of the finest novels of civilian life of the Second World War. The love affair between Robert and Stella takes place in a London rendered phantasmagoric by war, a city in which the 'wall between the living and the living became less solid as the wall between the living and the dead thinned' (p. 87). The novel's dreamlike Irish episodes shadow Elizabeth Bowen's war reports and depict a world of fuel shortages, isolation, and obsession with the war. 
From 1949 to 1951 Elizabeth Bowen served on the royal commission on capital punishment and successfully pressed the case for verbal provocation. In 1945 Alan Cameron had retired from the BBC -- his eyesight was failing and in 1952 they moved permanently to Bowen's Court. Alan Cameron died there that August. He had functioned as a family system for Elizabeth Bowen and she was devastated by his death, using images of amputation to describe her feelings; she later told Iris Murdoch that the most terrible moment of her life had been when she found him dead and told Isaiah Berlin that she had never known what it was like to mourn before and that he had been 'my father and mother... I now have... 'no next of kin'... my next of kin is this house' (Bowen to Berlin, 8 Oct 1952). 
Elizabeth Bowen continued to entertain at Bowen's Court; guests included Iris Murdoch, a lifelong friend, and, less happily, an infatuated Carson McCullers. Despite heroic efforts, much journalism, lecture tours in the United States, and periods as writer-in-residence at American universities, Elizabeth Bowen was unable to keep up the house, which she sold in 1959 to a farmer, who promptly demolished it. She described this catastrophe as 'a clean end' ('Bowen's Court', 459), for she had already depicted the more typical fate of a big house -- degeneration -- in 'A World of Love' (1955), her last 'Irish' novel. Elizabeth Bowen returned to England in 1960, living first in Old Headington, and then in 1965 moving to Hythe, where she wrote her last novel, 'Eva Trout, or, Changing Scenes' (1968), which reanimates the tensions of her affair with Humphry House. Its genesis was linked to the publication in 1965, of Madeline House's first volume of Dickens's 'Letters', dedicated to Humphry House, who had died in 1955: an episode of 'Eva Trout' takes place in Bleak House, Broadstairs, and his letters are quoted at length. In this novel Elizabeth Bowen returns to obsessive themes -- displaced, orphaned, and abducted children, the disruption of a marriage by an outsider -- in a bizarre, kaleidoscopic work, which gives the reader a 'sense of burning one's finger with the present' (John Bayley to Elizabeth Bowen, undated). 
Elizabeth Bowen's output was considerable: ten novels, over eighty short stories, as well as memoirs, travel literature, criticism, and much literary journalism. Her major novels enjoyed critical and commercial success: 'The Heat of the Day' sold 45,000 copies on first publication. She was appointed CBE in 1948 and CLitt in 1965. She was a member of the Irish Academy of Letters and received an honorary DLitt from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1949 and Oxford in 1956. Elizabeth Bowen's reputation declined before her death but recently her distinction has been recognized and her standing as a writer is assured. Elizabeth Bowen was tall, large-boned, with red-gold hair and light blue eyes. Attitudes to her varied; some found her kind, generous, and unsnobbish, others thought her arrogant and condescending in a very Anglo-Irish way. In 1972 she developed lung cancer -- she was a sixty-a-day smoker -- and died on 22 February 1973 in University College Hospital, London. She is buried, as her will directed, in her husband's grave in St Colman's churchyard, Farahy, co. Cork. Virginia Woolf's final pronouncement on Elizabeth Bowen might serve as epitaph for both woman and writer; 'A very honourable horsefaced, upper class hard constricted mind' ('Diary', 299). 


@@@@@


doc= 30840


Bowman, Sir James, first baronet (1898-1978), trade unionist and industrial administrator, was born at Great Corby, near Carlisle, Cumberland, on 8 March 1898, the fifth of the seven children of Robert James Bowman (1861-1948), blacksmith, and his wife, Mary Murray (1865-1941). On leaving school, Bowman was presented with a watch inscribed 'for being never late and never absent'. At the age of fifteen he started work at Ashington colliery. In the war of 1914-18 he served in the Royal Marines. On returning to Ashington 'big pit', where he was a coal filler, he showed an active interest in trade unionism and became the first full-time official at the pit. On 10 March 1923 he married Jean, daughter of Henry Brooks, a miner, of Ashington, Northumberland. 
Bowman's years of active lodge membership gave him a keen understanding of the working miner and fostered his gift for exposition and advocacy. He gained respect for his moderate views combined with a certain toughness. In 1935 he was elected general secretary of the Northumberland Miners' Association. He reached national level within the union in 1936, when he was elected to the executive committee of the Mineworkers' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB). In 1939 he was elected vice-president of the MFGB and he was re-elected, unopposed, until his resignation in 1949. Throughout the 1940s Bowman shared power within the MFGB with William Lawther, president, and Arthur Horner, general secretary. He played a major part in merging the federation, with its deep historical and traditional roots in the district unions, into the National Union of Mineworkers. He successfully urged a more cautious, step-by-step approach to reorganization than was demanded by the Yorkshire miners (Arnot, 422). 
In the period immediately after the Second World War Bowman was invited by Sir Stafford Cripps to advise on the reorganization of the German trade unions. In 1946 he was elected to the general council of the TUC and was appointed to serve on its international, economic, education, disputes, and organization committees. In 1947-9 he was a member of the royal commission on the press and in May 1949 became a member of the committee on broadcasting chaired by Lord Beveridge. In January 1950, having resigned his former posts, he was appointed chairman of the Northern Division (Northumberland and Cumberland) of the National Coal Board (NCB) at the instigation of Hugh Gaitskell, then minister of fuel and power. Bowman had no doubts about the move; he believed passionately in nationalization, which he saw as the means to a more efficiently managed industry which would bring increased prosperity and security to those employed within it. 
In 1955 Bowman was appointed deputy chairman of the NCB and in 1956, on the death of his predecessor, Sir Hubert Houldsworth, he was appointed chairman. He inherited a revised organization, following the acceptance by the board of the report of a committee chaired by Alexander Fleck, which had recommended a strengthening of functional departments and of the central authority of the board. As chairman he dealt mostly with general matters of policy and left supervision of the board's day-to-day business to the deputy chairman, Joseph Latham. An exception was Bowman's use of his trade union connections to maintain good industrial relations. He supported the introduction of new techniques, such as method study, and did much to secure increased mechanization of production methods. This was undoubtedly his most valuable and enduring legacy to the industry. 
In 1957 the board faced a crisis as, with increased use of oil, the market for coal declined rapidly. Over the next three years 124 pits were closed and the number of industrial employees was reduced from 710,000 to 583,000. Although open-cast production was almost halved, undistributed coal stocks rose to 36 million tons. There was much criticism of the NCB during this difficult period. Bowman robustly answered it in a long article in 'The Times' (11 December 1958). He pointed out that 'the Board did not aim during the years of scarcity to make the high level of profits which would certainly have been reasonable'. There should be more understanding of the industry's position when the market changed. It was a tribute to Bowman's skill and his understanding of the mining community that, despite the criticism, these policies were effected without opposing industrial action. Meanwhile the pace of mechanization was maintained, with output per man-shift reaching a new record level. 
On the expiry of his term of office in 1961 Bowman decided to retire because of ill health. He and his wife returned to Newcastle, which they had always regarded as home. He was succeeded, as chairman of the NCB, by Alfred Robens. In the final annual report of his five years as chairman tribute was paid to him: 'his tenure of office included some of the most difficult years since the industry was nationalised and his resolution and clear vision were an inspiration to everyone in the industry' (NCB annual report, 1960, iv). 
Bowman was a powerfully built man of medium height, whose confident physical presence, recalling his early career as a miner, was allied to an ease of manner which enabled him to deal with equal success with trade unionists, mining engineers, civil servants, and politicians. He possessed an outgoing personality which was demonstrated in his strength as a public speaker, whether delivering a prepared set-piece or an impromptu tribute, and in his skill as a raconteur, where he was helped by an accent which retained attractive traces of his Cumbrian origin and Northumbrian upbringing. 
Bowman was made a JP in 1935. He was appointed CBE in 1952 and knighted in 1957. In January 1961 he was created a baronet. In October 1958 he was made an honorary DCL of Durham University. Bowman died on 25 September 1978 at his home, Woodlands, Killingworth Drive, West Moor, Newcastle upon Tyne. He had one son, George (1923-1990), who succeeded to the baronetcy, and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 30841


Bowra, Sir (Cecil) Maurice (1898-1971), classical scholar and university administrator, was born in Kiukiang, China, on 8 April 1898, the son of Cecil Arthur Verner Bowra (1869-1947), a senior official in the Chinese customs service, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Lovibond. His childhood was exotic. Chinese servants, carousing Russian soldiers, and the endless prospect of a Japanese invasion made for a colourful upbringing. In later life he admitted that he had been 'spoiled' as a child, but thought 'it was well worth it, and I have nothing but gratitude to those who did it' (Bowra, 5). He had one elder brother, Edward, and two younger sisters, Norah and Francesca, but he was never close to any of his siblings and rather kept them at arm's length. Such a beginning made Bowra a stranger to mainstream English life. He later described himself as a 'nationalist with regard to the past, and to English tradition' only (E. Kantorowicz to C. M. Bowra, 27 April 1949, Bowra MSS). He was not moved by the patriotism of his contemporaries. In 1910 he returned home to take up a scholarship at Cheltenham College, but an English public school was not to his liking. Some masters were kind, but he had few friends, and survived by exploiting his talents to amuse and mimic. 
Bowra could not share the euphoria which greeted the outbreak of war in 1914, but dutifully joined the Royal Field Artillery, in which he was commissioned, and served on the western front from August 1917 until the armistice. The grim experiences of these months haunted his imagination ever after, and left him with a detestation of all things military. He long remembered: '
Boys bayonetted in the night 

To keep official buttons bright. 
(poem, Bowra MSS)' The war also left Bowra with an abiding hatred of all things German, except that country's classical scholarship. In the 1930s he made frequent visits to Austria and Germany, one of which included an interview with Hitler. He never had any doubts about the nature of Nazism, and actively opposed all appeasement policies. As the situation deteriorated, he busily assisted the escape of German friends like Ernst Kantorowicz and Baroness Wangermann. Being as he put it 'very Germanophobe', he could not even enjoy entertaining Konrad Adenauer, deciding not to 'give him a good lunch' and to invite only 'a few old shits' (Bowra to I. Berlin, n.d., Bowra MSS). For the whole of his life, he was sympathetic to the moderate left, a preference confirmed by his friendship with and respect for Hugh Gaitskell. 
In 1919 Bowra went up to New College, Oxford. His undergraduate years were in every way successful, except in the tuition offered by the distinguished philosopher H. W. B. Joseph, whose teaching methods 'paralysed' Bowra, and convinced him that he had no future in philosophy (Bowra to Berlin, 20 Nov 1945, Bowra MSS). Joseph insisted that the nuances of every word should be measured, and that precision was more important than imagination. He deeply impressed Bowra, who was left with a feeling that his own writings represented a lesser scholarship, even though they had infinitely more colour and range. Gilbert Murray, not Joseph, became Bowra's patron, and it was largely due to his efforts that Bowra was elected a fellow of Wadham College in 1922, having taken firsts in both classical honour moderations (1920) and 'literae humaniores' (1922). Candidly, Bowra expressed pleasure at being able to attend Joseph's funeral. 
Bowra was a fellow of Wadham from 1922 to 1938, and warden from 1938 to 1970. The college became the only permanent home he ever knew. It was also a community he transformed, a court he ruled, and a forum in which he established a national reputation. His ideas about the purpose of a university could not have been clearer. He saw an ongoing struggle between those who loved life and those who were interested only in undermining its wonderful possibilities. Jokingly, he declared himself 'anti-prig, anti-elitist, anti-solemn, anti-Balliol'. In a university young people should be invited to break through barriers of class, convention, and national feeling, and to revel in the uninhibited exercise of the mind. He described himself as a member of 'the Immoral Front' (Bowra to Berlin, n.d., Bowra MSS). 
In this war between the civilized and the philistine Bowra was at his most combative. Everyone who came within range would be labelled friend or foe. He found it easy to make lists of allies and enemies. Among the first were Isaiah Berlin, John Sparrow, A. J. Ayer, and George (Dadie) Rylands; among the latter C. P. Snow and A. J. P. Taylor. Once a friend had been identified, his career was to be aggressively advanced. Few things pleased Bowra more than the manipulation of elections. The appointment of the right man was reason for celebration. His circle was consciously a band of brothers embattled against the anti-intellectualism so evident on 'Baldwinite faces' (Bowra to Berlin, 20 Jan 1963, Bowra MSS). Loyalty to each other was at a premium. There was no more terrible word in the Bowra vocabulary than 'disloyal'. Those judged guilty of this offence could face crushing anathemas and silences. 
In this campaign, Oxford in general and Wadham in particular should become bastions of right thinking. The transformation of Wadham in his time was almost an act of creation. As he put it, 'All Colleges taken in the lump are dim... It does not matter. It is up to oneself to make it enjoyable and reasonably distinguished' (Bowra to Berlin, 11 Nov 1953, Bowra MSS). Talent was to be searched out and encouraged. Grammar-school boys and the beneficiaries of the 1944 'Education Act' were particularly welcome. Equally, there was to be no provincialism. Bowra's contacts and friendships with members of Ottoline Morrell's circle at Garsington, the Bloomsbury set, and the Sitwell network broadened Oxford's range and enriched it. In England scholarly life lived in Oxford has often been quite separate from the intellectual life lived in London and certain country houses. In Bowra's Wadham the two came together in pleasant and profitable companionship. 
Bowra the impresario never overwhelmed Bowra the scholar, however. Parties ended promptly at 10.30, to allow for the possibility of a full day's work on the morrow. His scholarly output was prodigious. Yet it was in one sense personally unsatisfying. He had a clear notion of a hierarchy of classical scholars. At the summit stood Wilamowitz and Fraenkel. Next came Gilbert Murray and J. D. Denniston. Bowra never felt himself the equal of these men. He could never match their meticulous attention to detail in deciphering an inscription or in editing a text, though his own edition (1935) of Pindar's works stands up well. Nor could he, in the last decades of his life, sympathize with new forms of literary criticism coming from France and Germany. In 1936, when he was passed over for the regius professorship of Greek in favour of E. R. Dodds, he was bitterly disappointed but hardly surprised. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1938. 
Bowra's classical scholarship was defined by two objectives. First it was 'the task of a Greek scholar... to revive as best he could for the modern world the inner life of the Greeks by a close examination of their literature' (Bowra, 257). He hoped to be an interpreter, making the spirit of Greece intelligible, and he had no doubt about what that spirit was. He told a Cambridge audience just before his death that the essence of Greek thought was 'that man is an individual, who lives among other men in his own right and for his own worth' (speech on Greek Freedom, 21 March 1971, Bowra MSS). The military coup in Greece in 1967 deeply distressed him, and he was happy to allow Wadham to become a base for those trying to restore democracy. His major works included 'Ancient Greek Literature' (1933), 'Greek Lyric Poetry' (1936), 'Periclean Athens' (1971), and 'The Greek Experience' (1957). 
Bowra's second aim in writing was to shed light on classical literature by comparing it to that of other cultures. His cultural and linguistic range allowed him to do this with effect. He wrote on Valery and Blok as well as Homer, and he brought new poets like Cavafy and Seferis to the attention of intelligent Englishmen. Works such as 'The Heritage of Symbolism' (1943) and 'The Romantic Imagination' (1950) broke new ground. Not unreasonably, Edith Sitwell hailed his role as a critic, because he was 'doing a great work in making poetry universal, and abolishing frontiers' (E. Sitwell to Bowra, 17 March 1945, Bowra MSS). Greek literature was never to be assessed as though it stood alone. It was rather to be evaluated as part of an ongoing human experience that transcended particular cultural borders. In making comparisons, what was distinctive about the Greeks would be highlighted, and what they shared with later generations would be underlined. From 1946 to 1951, he held the chair of poetry in Oxford, a position which gave him particular pleasure. 
The talents of the scholar were more than matched by those of a formidable administrator. In addition to presiding over the affairs of Wadham, Bowra was vice-chancellor of Oxford University from 1951 to 1954 and president of the British Academy from 1958 to 1962. He claimed that such roles were uncongenial, most of the work being 'dull and difficult, statutes, science, finance, etc.' (Bowra to Berlin, 11 Nov 1953, Bowra MSS). But this was false modesty for the most part. Science and scientists, it is true, presented problems. He never understood the language of scientists and never sympathized with their aims. Relations with Lord Cherwell and Cyril Hinshelwood could be frosty. But, on the other hand, the conducting of campaigns, the marshalling of votes by flattery and bullying, and the securing of favourite projects were all intensely enjoyable. 
In coming to a meeting, Bowra was always well prepared and very clear in his own mind about what decisions should be taken. The tempo at which business was taken increased dramatically in university councils. Matters were 'dispatched at high speed and in a loud voice' (Lloyd-Jones, 'Bowra', 123). It was not unusual for other members of committees which he chaired to complain that this breathless approach left them insufficient time to reflect or suggest amendments. But Bowra would assume that such protestations were only further evidence of his methods working. He was not given to doubting. In talking to colleagues he was sure that his instincts were right. In representing Oxford to the University Grants Committee, or to the outside world generally, he was equally sure that Oxford and its values should not be challenged. Such confidence made him formidable in college or university politics. He never feared making enemies or 'making bad blood'. Such things were inevitable in a war against philistinism in all its forms. 
Force of argument was matched by force of personality. Short of stature, Bowra yet had bulk. Thickset, bull-necked, and rounding with the years, he was compact and seemingly muscled. His nickname, the Rhino, bore witness to form and character. Yet in one respect it was misleading. No skin was thinner. He was deeply sensitive to criticism and to rejection. He once remarked, 'I create rebuffs before I am rebuffed' (Bowra to Berlin, n.d., Bowra MSS). In particular his homosexuality was always a matter of anxiety. Close friendships with Philip Ritchie, Adrian Bishop, and Ernst Kantorowicz were marred by fears about exposure and blackmail. Although he enjoyed the companionship of many women, among them Iris Murdoch, Elizabeth Bowen, and Penelope Betjeman, he was essentially a member of what he called 'the Homintern' (ibid., 11 Aug [1937]). When his engagement to Audrey Beecham was called off, he reflected that 'it seems that God has decided that I [am] seldom to get what I want and am to be punished for my good actions' (ibid.). Hard work, the loyalty of friends, and wit enunciated in a bittern-booming voice with strange cadences were compensations for emotional disappointment. 
In later life Bowra was much honoured. The German government made him a member of the order of merit, and the Sorbonne gave him an honorary doctorate for his writing on French poetry. He once remarked that he collected honorary degrees as a schoolboy collected stamps. He was knighted in 1951 and appointed CH in 1971. 
Bowra was not a religious man in any conventional sense, and he detested puritanism in any of its disguises. In the First World War a reluctance to shell Noyon Cathedral was overcome by the recollection that Calvin had been closely associated with the town. Yet he assiduously attended college chapel, and took pleasure in the stateliness of an ordered Anglicanism. It was, in his phrase, 'all marvellous rot'. He died, unmarried, in Wadham College on 4 July 1971, and was buried in St Cross churchyard, Oxford. 
In January 1937 Harvard offered Bowra a chair, and he affected to take the matter seriously. His hesitation produced letters from every classicist of note in Oxford begging him not to leave. These appeals not only recognized the value of his scholarship, but also his astonishing capacity to transform the lives of young people. Isaiah Berlin acknowledged, among many others, that his own thinking and behaviour had been moulded by the warden. Young men who arrived in Oxford 'suppressed, un self-expressed, unventilated' (R. Harrod to Bowra, 17 Jan 1937, Bowra MSS) were recast into individuals with something to say. And that, as far as Bowra was concerned, was what a university was for. As a friend remarked, Oxford without Bowra was 'a mutton chop without any chutney' (Mary [?] to Bowra, 16 Dec 1936, Bowra MSS). 


@@@@@


doc= 30842


Boyd, Sir John Smith Knox (1891-1981), bacteriologist, was born on 18 September 1891 at Largs, Ayrshire, the second of three sons (there were no daughters) of John Knox Boyd, an agent in the Royal Bank of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret Wilson Smith. He was educated at the local school in Largs and then entered Glasgow University in 1908 to study medicine; he graduated MB, ChB in 1913. After house appointments at Glasgow Royal Infirmary he sailed to Rangoon as a ship's surgeon. On his return in 1914 Boyd applied for a commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps. By December he was at Ypres. From France he moved to Salonika, and became medical officer to the divisional engineers in 1916. In this post he travelled widely through Mesopotamia, making his first acquaintance with tropical diseases. After some training in bacteriology, by 1917 he was in charge of a mobile laboratory where he worked on the treatment of malaria and studied the prevalent dysentery. He became a pathologist at Salonika in September 1918 but was invalided home in December with 'Spanish influenza'. In the same year he married Elizabeth (died 1956), daughter of John Edgar, a Dumfriesshire station-master. 
Having obtained a regular commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps, in 1920 Boyd was appointed to head the brigade laboratory at Nasirabad in Rajputana and later the district laboratory in Mhow, Central Provinces. He returned to London in 1923 and joined the staff of the Royal Army Medical College, where he became demonstrator and then assistant professor of pathology. He obtained the DPH at Cambridge in 1924. Back in India in 1929 with the rank of major he was given charge of laboratories in Bangalore and then Poona. In 1932 he was appointed assistant director of hygiene and pathology at the army headquarters, Simla. In 1936 he returned to Millbank to run the vaccine laboratory. He was awarded the Leishman medal in 1937 and promoted to lieutenant-colonel in 1938. 
Boyd put the vaccine department of the army medical college on a war footing in 1939 and after its transfer to Tidworth it produced sufficient material for all the needs of the services during the Second World War. He organized a blood transfusion service for the Middle East forces and pioneered the preferential use of whole blood for transfusion in casualties with severe blood loss. During this time he built up some forty laboratories in that zone. He was mentioned in dispatches (1941). In August 1940 he was also given responsibility for pathology in the Middle East and in November 1943 he became deputy director of pathology to the twenty-first army group. Promoted colonel in 1944 Boyd became a brigadier in the following year. In 1945 he became director of pathology for the War Office. 
Boyd left the army medical staff in 1946 and became director of the Wellcome Laboratories of Tropical Medicine where he remained until 1955. In that year he became a Wellcome trustee and served until 1966; he also became deputy chairman in 1965 and a consultant to the trust until 1968. Boyd's first wife died in 1956 and in 1957 he married his secretary, (Ellen) Mary Harvey Bennett (1910-1968), daughter of Denis Harvey Murphy, company director, of Northwood, Middlesex, and Mary Ellen Dempsey. There were no children of either marriage. 
Boyd was especially interested in the dysenteric diseases. He studied the difference between 'smooth' and 'rough' colonies of dysenteric bacterial strains, showing that the rough strain contained the group antigen common to all flexner types while the smooth strain lacked this group antigen but possessed its own specific surface antigen. This property made it possible to separate dysenteric bacilli into two groups subsequently called flexneri and boydii. Later, in the Middle East, Boyd was responsible for the first trials of sulphaguanidine in the treatment of dysentery. His work on malaria included the first studies on synthetic anti-malarial preparations, and his studies of typhus in India in 1916 showed that most cases of this disease were transmitted by the mite and the flea, and not by the tick as had been suspected. Boyd also had a special interest in bacteriophage. His experience with these 'bacterial viruses' led him to formulate a theory for the long-lasting immunity that occurs after recovery from yellow fever, based on the bacteriophage model. 
Boyd was a member or chairman of many committees and was president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (1957-9). He was awarded the Manson medal in 1968 and was elected MRCP in 1950, and FRCP and FRS in 1951. He graduated MD from Glasgow in 1948. He was an honorary FRCPE (1960) and FRSM (1965). He was made FRCPath (1968), honorary LLD, Glasgow (1957), and honorary DSc, Salford (1969). He was appointed OBE in 1942 and knighted in 1958. 
Boyd was a deeply honest man of military bearing with a determination to see that his objectives were achieved. During his latter years he was a very formidable figure, but once he made a friend his loyalty was unshakeable. He was a keen golfer and bird-watcher. Boyd died on 10 June 1981 at Northwood, Middlesex. 
P. O. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30843


Rochfort, Sir Cecil Charles Boyd- (1887-1983), racehorse trainer, was born on 16 April 1887 at the family home, Middleton Park, co. Meath, the third son and seventh of eight children of Major Rochfort Hamilton Boyd (1844-1891) of the 15th hussars (who assumed the additional name of Rochfort in 1888), and his wife, Florence Louisa (1855-1944), daughter of Richard Hemming, of Bentley Manor, Worcestershire. 
After schooling at Eton College, in 1906 Boyd-Rochfort became a pupil trainer with H. S. Persse at Grateley in Hampshire. In 1908 he became assistant trainer to Captain R. H. Dewhurst at Newmarket, and four years later left to become racing manager to Sir Ernest Cassel. He joined the Scots Guards in the First World War, was wounded on the Somme, and received the Croix de Guerre. A captain on demobilization, he returned to Newmarket and to managing Cassel's racing interests at Moulton Paddocks. A chance meeting led to Boyd-Rochfort's being invited to manage Marshall Field's horses as well. 
On Cassel's death Boyd-Rochfort bought Freemason Lodge at Newmarket and commenced training for the season of 1923. His principal owners were Field and the Dowager Lady Nunburnholme. His first season yielded nineteen successes including the winner of the Newmarket July cup. Subsequent seasons brought a steady flow of winners but his first winner of a 'listed' race was Royal Minstrel who won the Eclipse stakes in 1929. 
The arrival of the Americans William Woodward and Joseph Widener as owners in 1930 marked a turning point in Boyd-Rochfort's career. The first classic success came in 1933 when Woodward's Brown Betty won the One Thousand Guineas. Boyd-Rochfort was now on the crest of the wave and in 1937 he became the leading trainer for the first of five times. In 1927 he had bought the filly Double Life for Lady Zia Wernher and in 1937 he had the satisfaction of training Double Life's son, Precipitation, to win the Ascot gold cup. He trained many winners from this family, culminating in the victory of Meld in the Oaks of 1955. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 forced Boyd-Rochfort to reduce his string to twenty-five horses but in 1943 he started training the horses from the private stable of King George VI. In 1946 he trained Hypericum, the king's only home-bred classic winner. The victories of well-bred fillies such as Avila, Angelola, and Above Board laid the foundation of Queen Elizabeth's many successes in the 1950s and 1960s. On 24 July 1944 he married Elizabeth Rohays Mary ('b'. 1916), daughter of Major-General Sir James Lauderdale Gilbert Burnett of Leys, thirteenth baronet, and widow of Captain the Hon. Henry Kerr Auchmuty Cecil. They had one son. 
On her accession Queen Elizabeth decided to continue keeping her home-bred horses at Freemason Lodge. Aureole was expected to win the coronation year Derby for her in 1953, but finished in second place to Pinza. The 1950s were golden years for the stable, which culminated in Boyd-Rochfort's winning both the Derby, with Parthia, and the King George VI stakes, with Alcide, in 1959. Thereafter the success rate of the then septuagenarian trainer declined but he continued to turn out top-class winners until his retirement in 1968. 
Boyd-Rochfort was an excellent judge of a yearling and he liked to have a free hand in the selection of the horses he was to train. He had a deep and detailed knowledge of the stud book and consequently the studs of his owners usually flourished following his shrewd original purchases of their foundation mares. While he was always ready to spend money, he could be equally successful when operating within rigid financial controls. He was a punctilious correspondent and kept his owners regularly informed of the progress of their horses. Owners rarely quit the stable. 
Boyd-Rochfort was a large man of infinite courtesy and impeccable manners, inspiring respect rather than affection. He ran a stable where good judgement, regularity, good feeding, attention to detail, and patience were the principal ingredients of success; a strict employer, he recruited and kept the best stable staff. He was a master of the art of training stayers. His skill with fillies was particularly noteworthy and P. T. Beasley, his second stable jockey, rated him the best trainer of fillies of his generation. He won thirteen classic races and 1156 others which earned prize money to the total of $1,651,514. 
Boyd-Rochfort initiated worldwide bloodstock and racing. His system of making out each horse's programme months in advance meant that foreign owners could partake personally in their horse's success. He was appointed CVO in 1952 and KCVO in 1968, the year in which he retired, at the end of the season. Boyd-Rochfort died at Kilnahard Castle, co. Cavan, on 17 March 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 30844


Boyle, Edward Charles Gurney, Baron Boyle of Handsworth (1923-1981), politician, was born at 63 Queen's Gate, Kensington, London, on 31 August 1923, elder son in the family of two sons and one daughter of Sir Edward Boyle (1878-1945), second baronet, barrister, writer, and company director, and his wife, Beatrice (died 1961), daughter of Henry Greig, of Belvedere House, Kent. His grandfather Sir Edward Boyle (1848-1909), created the first baronet in 1904, also a barrister, had been Conservative MP for Taunton from 1906 to 1909. The name Gurney derived from the surname of the first baronet's mother. 
Boyle was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, and showed early talent in the directions of his future life, writing and politics. At Eton he was president of the Political Society and editor of the 'Eton Chronicle'. At Oxford he was president of the union, active in Conservative politics, and in 1947 one-third of a university debating team (with Tony Benn and Kenneth Harris) which toured the United States. He succeeded his father as baronet in 1945, having already had three years as a temporary civil servant at the Foreign Office, and so went up to Oxford with the first post-war generation, aged twenty-two. Though he left Oxford in 1949 with only a third-class degree in history, which seemed to belie his recognized intellectual abilities, he was already seen as a coming man who would achieve much -- more indeed than he ever did achieve. Sir Edward Heath, a close friend as well as a political associate, felt that Boyle's 'intellectual characteristics... comprised a wide breadth of interest, a remarkable store of information, and a phenomenal memory for everything that he encountered, but his was not a mind full of innovative ideas or of penetrating analysis' ('DNB'). Though they shared what Heath called 'deep-seated and moderate convictions which guided him all through his life' (ibid.) there was an intellectual difference between the leader Heath, who cogitated mainly to promote action, and the follower Boyle, who enjoyed philosophical reflection for its own sake, and was not always quick to make up his mind. This divergence of approach was a barrier both to Boyle's eventual advancement at the top and to Heath getting the best out of the Conservative colleague who most nearly shared his own outlook. 
After Oxford, Boyle was assistant editor of the 'National Review', but while still an undergraduate had been selected as Unionist candidate for Birmingham, Perry Barr. He fought and lost the seat in the general election of 1950, aged only twenty-six, but established connections with Birmingham which lasted for the rest of his political career. He comfortably won the Handsworth constituency, then safely Conservative, at a by-election in November 1950, and retained the seat until he went to the Lords in 1970. Birmingham was, though, an uncomfortable base for a moderate like Boyle, for its Conservatism tended to the right, especially when coloured immigration affected the city's politics soon after Boyle became one of its MPs. He was not a comfortable member of the Birmingham Conservative members' group in the Commons, refused to campaign for immigration restrictions, and in the 1960s had difficulties with his local party, notably in the aftermath of Enoch Powell's race speech in 1968, delivered in the city, when the rising Monday Club began to stir up his local activists against him. 
When Churchill's Conservatives regained office in 1951, Boyle was appointed parliamentary private secretary to the under-secretary for air, moving on to be parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Supply in July 1954 (younger even than Churchill himself when first given office in 1906), and became economic secretary to the Treasury in 1955. Apart from a single interruption, he spent the rest of his Commons life on the front bench, and even that interval was short: friends who organized a celebration of his resignation in November 1956 in protest at the Suez invasion found that he was back in office as a junior education minister under Macmillan in January 1957 before they could actually hold the party. Difficulties with his constituency following his stand over Suez led him to consider leaving politics to take up the permanent post of head Treasury representative in Delhi, as he confided to his friend Tony Benn, but he decided to stick with his departmental position. 
In 1959 Boyle returned to the Treasury as financial secretary, and then went back to the cabinet post of minister of education in 1962. He stayed at education until his party lost office in 1964, and then returned after an unhappy period as shadow home secretary (1964-5) to be education spokesman in opposition. Economics and education, the two fields in which he took the greatest personal interest, were also therefore the only departments where he ever acted as minister or shadowed for any lengthy period in opposition. Consequently Boyle never had opportunities to develop as a political all-rounder. A modest and easy-going man, he even allowed himself in 1964 to be demoted from minister of education to minister of state at the larger Department of Education and Science (though retaining his cabinet seat), when Alec Douglas-Home needed the secretaryship of state for Quintin Hogg. 
During his two periods at the Treasury, Boyle proved a capable minister, with an unusually good grasp for a minister in that generation of the economics involved. The chancellor, R. A. Butler, had wanted him as a junior treasury minister after seeing his impressive performance at supply, and Boyle thereafter remained close to Butler, strongly backing him for the premiership in 1963. During 1955 he had to carry a heavy responsibility, since Butler had to cope simultaneously with an economic crisis, personal ill health, and a dying wife. He worked well enough with Macmillan when he replaced Butler at the end of the year, though he was unable to persuade him even of the economic risks of the Suez adventure, and it was this that ensured his rapid return to office when Macmillan became prime minister. He had delayed his Suez resignation until after the cease-fire, not wanting to divide the country while British troops were under fire, but stuck to his own guns to the extent of abstaining in the no-confidence debate that followed, one of only eight Conservative MPs to do so. During the Profumo crisis of 1963 he seriously considered resignation once again, and the many letters from friends which urged him to do so indicated the reputation for personal integrity that he enjoyed. 
Boyle was unlucky that he twice arrived at the Treasury after a pre-election boom had over-heated the economy, so that the naturally expansionist Boyle was forced to help implement the credit squeezes of 1955-6 and 1961-2. He did, though, willingly help Heathcoat Amory as chancellor in resisting Macmillan's demand for tax cuts even during a boom in 1960. He was thought to have done well at the Treasury on both occasions, and the whips and party managers were happy to see him progress upwards, offering as he did a youthful, unstuffy, and modern face to a party increasingly jaded during thirteen years in office. When Macmillan reshuffled his team and gave Boyle his first cabinet posting at education in 1962, he identified the Etonian and Harrovian baronets Boyle and Sir Keith Joseph as his modernizing 'beavers', who would help to project a forward-looking image, while he himself contributed continuity and experience. Given his lifestyle, private means, and the intense knowledge of classical music which made him a knowledgeable conversationalist, a regular visitor to Glyndebourne, and the would-be author of a book on the composer Gabriel Faure, Boyle was never exactly convincing in this role of classless, modern man. 
At education Boyle assisted Geoffrey Lloyd in a modest expansion programme in 1957-9, and then pursued a far more active one of his own from 1962. His introduction to the published Newsom report on secondary schooling has been hailed as 'a momentous breakthrough in official thinking', since he took the opportunity to reject the idea of fixed intelligence levels which had underpinned the tripartite system set up in 1944, and demanded instead that all children should have 'an equal opportunity of 'acquiring' intelligence and of developing their talents and abilities to the full'. He naturally therefore welcomed comprehensive schools, but at the same time, as a staunch believer in academic standards, could not also accept the demise of the grammar school (Cook and McKie, 172). It fell to Boyle to announce the government's acceptance of the Robbins report into higher education when published in 1963, and so dramatically to accelerate the rate of expansion in the university sector during the decade, during which student numbers doubled and expenditure on universities approximately tripled. His seven honorary degrees (four of them before he himself abandoned the Commons for the common room) and his pro-chancellorship of the new University of Sussex (1965-70) testified to the belief that he had as a minister made a material impact on tertiary education. 
In opposition after 1964 the Home and Education portfolios were both responsibilities where Boyle's innate moderation conflicted with the party's right wing, and he was sometimes indeed attacked at party conferences as a surrogate for his friend and leader Heath. These were not therefore happy times for him politically, since he was reluctant to adopt even the rhetoric of a party moving to the right. Heath has recalled that Boyle 'repeatedly refused' the offer of other front-bench positions at this time ('DNB'), but Boyle was not offered such positions as shadow chancellor which would have both engaged his interest and reflected his seniority. He was, for example, one of the few Conservative frontbenchers interested enough to find out in the later 1960s about the emerging monetarist school of economics, which swept his party in the next generation, but he was also a supporter of incomes policies. Frustrated by lack of progress, he decided in 1969 to retire from the Commons and become directly involved in education as vice-chancellor of the University of Leeds. He could thus from 1970, in Heath's words, 'express his views and implement his policies without constant interference from those taking part in the political battle' (ibid.). Boyle became a life peer in July 1970 and, in deference to his new non-political role, sat on the cross-benches in the House of Lords. In June 1981, shortly before his death, he was made a Companion of Honour. 
After he moved to Leeds, Boyle's admired fair-mindedness secured his appointment as chairman of the top salaries review board, and in a time of rapid inflation he was instrumental in ensuring that politicians were steeled to the always difficult task of ensuring fair remuneration for the highest-paid public servants. At Leeds he was a diplomatic vice-chancellor during the later period of the student unrest which had begun in 1968, a difficult manager for student radicals to hate. He was fully committed to the university and its members, actively involved in its affairs, and recognized to have done his job so well that he was in 1977-9 chairman of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals. It was characteristic of Boyle that he preferred meeting and dealing with students in Leeds to the national leadership of the university sector. 
Boyle was, thought Anthony Sampson in 1962, one of the few 'radically minded men' within modern Conservatism, though he had: 'a nineteenth century look to him: he is a huge rubicund baronet who wears formal clothes, and talks with unconcealed learning... He walks like a bear, with a formidable shuffle, and he has the broad interests and the leisureliness of a cultivated squire. (Sampson, 89)' He was a persuasive rather than an oratorical speaker, and a man who rarely enjoyed scoring party political points in debate. Indeed, for a politician he had like Keith Joseph the near-fatal weakness of always being able to see the case against whatever position he was advancing, and in many cases sharing some sympathy with it too. This made him a sometimes dithering frontbencher, for example, over secondary education, where he would not adopt an all-out defence of grammar schools, yet could not commit himself wholeheartedly to comprehensives and then seek to persuade Conservatives to join him there. He was, though, a courageous man, unshakeably committed to the defence of reason and of moderate causes, for example, on race relations; when contesting the Powellite drift within the Conservative Party in 1965-70 he constantly proclaimed the need for understanding on both sides as a multiracial society developed. He symbolized a civilized, centrist, conciliatory style of Conservatism; in 1980 there were reports that he was involved in discussions about the formation of a centre party. His withdrawal to the House of Lords in 1970 provoked expressions of regret about the lack of intellectuals in the House of Commons, and the reflection in a 'Times' leader that British politics failed to attract sufficient 'men of powerful mind' of the type which he represented ('The Times', 3 June 1970, 11). 
In his earlier years Boyle had been a high Anglican, and though he moved steadily towards agnosticism as he aged, he never lost that passion for service to the community which his early beliefs and family background had engendered. In later life he suffered from ill health, and died at his home, the vice-chancellor's lodge, 10 Grosvenor Road, Leeds, on 28 September 1981. He had never married, and the baronetcy passed to his brother, Richard Gurney Boyle (1930-1983). 


@@@@@


doc= 30845


Bragg, Sir (William) Lawrence (1890-1971), physicist and crystallographer, was born on 31 March 1890 at 58/60 Lefevre Terrace, Adelaide, Australia, the elder son (the younger, Robert, was killed at Gallipoli in 1915) and eldest of the three children of Sir William Henry Bragg (1862-1942), physicist, and his wife, Gwendoline (1869-1929), daughter of Sir Charles Todd, government astronomer of South Australia. 
Bragg was educated in Adelaide at Convent School (1895-7), at Queen's preparatory school (1898-1901), and at St Peter's College, Adelaide, the leading Church of England school in South Australia (1901-5). Always ahead of his age group he left school at fifteen to enter the University of Adelaide, in 1905, where he read mathematics, with subsidiary courses in physics and chemistry, in his father's department. He graduated with first-class honours in mathematics in 1908. Most of his tuition was from his father: he had a desk in his office and was drawn into detailed discussion of his father's developing research work on the nature of X-rays. 
In 1909 Bragg's family moved to England, where his father had been appointed professor of physics at Leeds University, and Bragg entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He read part one of the mathematical tripos (first class, 1910) and part two of the natural sciences tripos (physics), graduating in 1912 with first-class honours. 
In the summer of 1912 Friedrich, Knipping, and Laue in Munich discovered the diffraction of X-rays by crystals and in the autumn of that year Bragg showed, first, that the phenomenon can be simply understood in terms of the reflection of X-ray waves by planes of atoms in the crystals (according to Bragg's law) and, second, that the observed effects are capable of revealing the detailed arrangements of the atoms in the crystals. In this single piece of work, which was described to a meeting of the Cambridge Philosophical Society on 11 November 1912, he opened the way to the detailed study of the wave nature of X-rays and, at the same time, began the X-ray analysis of crystal structures that has since revealed the arrangement of the atoms in all kinds of substances from the chemical elements to viruses. Both of these new opportunities for research were quickly exploited. His demonstration of X-ray reflection from mica in December 1912 led immediately to his father's development of the X-ray spectrometer, and the discovery that each element emits a characteristic X-ray spectrum of definite wavelengths; this led in turn to the discovery of the atomic numbers of the elements by H. G. J. Moseley. At the same time Bragg himself quickly determined the atomic arrangements in sodium and potassium chloride in a study described as 'the great breakthrough to actual crystal-structure determination and to the absolute measurement of X-ray wavelengths' (Ewald, 69). 
The X-ray spectrometer provided a more powerful method of analysing crystal structures than Laue photographs and Bragg worked in Leeds during the summer of 1913, using the instrument to analyse a number of mineral structures while his father concentrated mainly on spectroscopic studies of the X-rays. Together they determined the structure of diamond. For this body of work, described in 'X-Rays and Crystal Structure' (1915), written by Bragg in collaboration with his father, they were jointly awarded the Nobel prize for physics in 1915. Aged twenty-five at the time, Bragg was still known as the youngest ever Nobel prizewinner two decades after his death. 
Bragg served throughout the First World War, first in the Leicestershire Royal Horse Artillery and then, from August 1915, as officer in charge of sound ranging, a method of locating enemy guns from the sound of their firing. He was awarded the MC (1918), appointed OBE (1918), mentioned in dispatches three times, and rose to the rank of major. 
In 1919 Bragg returned briefly to the lectureship and fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, to which he had been appointed in 1914, but left for Manchester in the autumn, where he had been appointed Langworthy professor of physics in succession to Sir E. Rutherford. There he created the leading school of crystallography, to some degree in competition with his father who established another school at the Royal Institution. They seem to have agreed that Bragg should study metals and minerals, and crystal physics more generally, while his father concentrated on organic structures. 
In 1921 Bragg was elected FRS and in December that year he married Alice Grace Jenny, the daughter of Albert Hopkinson, a Manchester physician who became, in retirement, a demonstrator in anatomy in Cambridge, and his wife, Olga Cunliffe-Owen. Bragg had met his future wife in 1919 in Cambridge, where she was reading history at Newnham College. Over the period 1924-35 they had two boys and two girls. The elder son, Stephen (1923-2014), an aeronautical engineer with Rolls-Royce, subsequently became vice-chancellor of Brunel University, while the younger, David, inherited the artistic talents of his father and grandmother. The elder daughter, Margaret, married Mark Heath, ambassador to the Holy See 1982-5, and Patience, the younger, an authority on dyslexia, married David Thomson, younger son of Bragg's old friend Sir G. P. Thomson. In later years Bragg's wife was a JP, mayor of Cambridge, chairman of the Marriage Guidance Council, and wrote amusing articles in the 'Manchester Guardian'. 
Bragg's achievements in Manchester included the introduction of the idea of atomic radii; experimental verification of the theory of X-ray diffraction from perfect and imperfect crystals; the derivation of experimental atomic scattering factors for sodium and potassium that stimulated theoretical work by D. R. Hartree; the development of methods for analysing increasingly complex structures, including especially the Fourier method of calculating the electron density distribution in a crystal -- following a suggestion by his father; the demonstration that X-ray analysis is properly regarded as a branch of optics; and the development, with E. J. Williams, of the theory of order-disorder changes. In structural studies his main achievement was the analysis of a wide range of silicate mineral structures that led to a detailed understanding of silicate chemistry, but he also promoted the study of metals and alloys by A. J. Bradley and others that underlies modern solid-state physics. 
This work is described in about a hundred original papers and reviews published in leading scientific journals, especially 'Proceedings of the Royal Society', 'Philosophical Magazine', 'Nature', and 'Zeitschrift fur Kristallographie'. In addition Bragg wrote: 'The Crystalline State: a General Survey', which appeared in 1933 as the first volume of a projected series to be edited jointly by father and son; 'Electricity' (1936), an account of his Christmas lectures at the Royal Institution in 1934; and 'Atomic Structure of Minerals' (1937), based on his Baker lectures at Cornell University in 1934. The volume 'Electricity' was translated into many languages, including Czech, Finnish, and Japanese. 
Despite his great productivity at Manchester, and the availability to him of a steady stream of postgraduate researchers -- for which he felt great gratitude -- Bragg was not always happy there. A possible post at Cambridge in 1929 did not materialize, and he refused the offer of a chair at Imperial College, London, in the same year. His mother's death in that year, coupled with his professional disappointments, a difficult relationship with his father, and the effects of the economic crash on his Manchester environment led him to an emotional crisis in 1930, during which his health broke down. However, he recovered quickly in the following year, and his move from industrial Didsbury to rural Alderley Edge, in 1933, helped him face the world with renewed vigour. 
Bragg became director of the National Physical Laboratory in November 1937 but he occupied the post for less than a year, being appointed Cavendish professor of physics at Cambridge in March 1938 in succession to Rutherford, who had died the previous October. Thus he followed Rutherford in a major chair for the second time, much to the disappointment of nuclear physicists, who had hoped to see one of their number continue Rutherford's work in Cambridge. Their opposition was the occasion for C. G. Darwin's memorable remark: 'nuclear physics is a passing phase' (Phillips, 110). In the event nuclear physics remained the largest single activity in the Cavendish Laboratory but Bragg concentrated mainly on promoting the development of other new lines of research. Even in his first year, which was taken up increasingly with preparations for war, he made further advances in X-ray optics, strengthened the study of metals in the crystallographic laboratory, and enthusiastically supported the crystallographic studies of proteins by M. F. Perutz, which had been started under the influence of J. D. Bernal and were to be Bragg's chief research interest for the rest of his career. 
Bragg played no part in the war research that was conducted in the Cavendish but he acted as consultant to the sound ranging section in the army (the method was still useful and was employed, furthermore, in plotting the trajectories of the V 2 rockets) and to the Admiralty on underwater detection by the use of sound waves (asdic or sonar). He also served on committees set up by the Ministry of Supply to keep its scientific activities under review and as a member of the advisory council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. In 1941 he spent six months in Ottawa, Canada, as scientific liaison officer, and in 1943 he visited Sweden to re-establish contacts with Swedish scientists. 
Bragg was knighted in 1941 and his father, still at the Royal Institution, wrote to Lorna Todd, his sister-in-law in Adelaide: 'Isn't that fine?... He will have to be Sir Lawrence: we can't have confusion worse than ever... In spite of all care, people mix us up and are apt to give me a first credit on occasions when he should have it' (Caroe, 177). This was an issue that had bothered Bragg -- William or Willy to family and close friends -- since the earliest days, when his father, as an established senior scientist, was invited to describe Bragg's original work at the Solvay Conference on Physics in 1913, and it was still a sore point with him long after his father's death in 1942. 
From 1939 to 1943 Bragg was president of the Institute of Physics. While working hard to maintain the activities of the institute and foster discussion about the needs of the post-war world, he was mainly responsible for the creation of the X-ray analysis group to promote X-ray research in both universities and industry. At the end of the war he also contributed to the formation of the International Union of Crystallography, of which he was the first president, and the publication of its journal 'Acta crystallographica'. 
After the war Bragg reorganized the Cavendish Laboratory, giving each research section as much autonomy as possible. The principal activities included nuclear physics; low temperature physics; radio physics, which embraced radio astronomy under Martin Ryle (of particular interest to Bragg as a further example of physical optics); and the crystallography and metal physics which were his chief concern. In 1946 he was awarded a royal medal of the Royal Society. Work on protein crystallography had been maintained during the war and in 1947 he persuaded the Medical Research Council to set up a research unit on the molecular structure of biological systems at the Cavendish Laboratory. This was the origin of the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology -- and the site of the preliminary work which later led to the determination of the structure of DNA and, with Bragg's active participation, to the subsequent breakthrough to protein structure analysis. 
During this Cambridge period Bragg published a further ninety papers and reviews in scientific journals despite his firm adherence to the principle that he would be listed only as an author if he had made a significant contribution to the work; he was general editor of two further volumes of 'The Crystalline State' (1948 and 1953). 
In 1954 Bragg left Cambridge to become resident Fullerian professor and director of the Davy-Faraday Laboratory at the Royal Institution in London. There he maintained the traditional activities but sought to involve industry more closely through corporate membership. His association with industry and his interest in the industrial development of research had begun during his Manchester days, when he was in contact with local firms and with the Shirley Institute. Among other initiatives at the Royal Institution, he began an intensive programme of lectures for schoolchildren, gave popular science lectures on television, and built up a research team that collaborated with Kendrew and Perutz in the first successful studies of protein structures (myoglobin and haemoglobin) and was the first, in 1965, to determine the structure of an enzyme (lysozyme). 
In this period Bragg collaborated with G. F. Claringbull in writing 'The Crystalline State', volume 4, entitled 'Crystal Structures of Minerals' (1965), and he wrote another sixty papers, mainly reviews and published versions of lectures though they included, in his last original scientific paper, 'The determination of the co-ordinates of heavy atoms in protein crystals' ('Acta crystallographica', 11, 1958, 70-75), a contribution that was important in the structure analysis of tobacco mosaic virus. Characteristically this method depended on the careful analysis of a few measurements, carried out by hand, and owed nothing to the growing dominance of digital computers in the development of the subject. On the international scene he was chairman of the Solvay Conferences on Physics (1948-61), and president of the International Science Hall at the Brussels Exhibition in 1958. 
By the time of his retirement in 1966 Bragg had made the Royal Institution again a leading centre of scientific research and, thanks in large part to the impact of television, a focus for the popular exposition of science to a wider audience than ever before. In recognition of his overall achievements he was rather belatedly awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society in 1966 and appointed CH in 1967. During his career he had been awarded honorary degrees by eleven universities. 
Bragg had a stocky build, a somewhat military appearance resembling his father, and a diffident manner. He was not self-confident in public affairs and he found committees and personal relations generally difficult to handle. He was essentially a private man who delighted in reading, painting, gardening, bird-watching, sailing, and domestic activities with his wife and family. But he wrote quickly and vividly, his public lectures were models of popular exposition, he had a profound grasp of classical physics, and he brought about an important scientific revolution. Through his development and promotion of X-ray crystallography in three major scientific appointments, Bragg transformed our understanding of the natural world: modern mineralogy, metallurgy, chemistry, and molecular biology were completely restructured as a result of his discoveries. Only two weeks before his death he completed the text of his last book, 'The Development of X-Ray Analysis' (1975), which summarized these advances in his characteristically lively style. Ironically this work, which challenged the dominance of nuclear and quantum physics as 'the' modern scientific disciplines, was carried out almost entirely in physics departments; the struggles for recognition of himself and his associates are a study in the emergence of new disciplinary boundaries. 
Bragg died of cancer in Ipswich General Hospital, Suffolk, on 1 July 1971 and was cremated at Ipswich crematorium on 6 July after a funeral service in Waldringfield church near his country home. 


@@@@@


doc= 30846


Abrahams, Doris Caroline (1901-1982), writer and songwriter, was born at 28 Morland Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 8 December 1901, the only child of Henry Clarence Abrahams, a wholesale jeweller, and his wife, Pearl, one of the twenty-one children of Moses and Sultana Levi, who had arrived in England from Constantinople about 1873. She was educated privately, at Minerva College in Stonygate, near Leicester, and at the Royal Academy of Music, where she failed her LRAM. At the academy, already an embryo critic, she did not care to listen to the noise she made when playing the piano. She began to write light verse for a student magazine and then for the 'Evening Standard'. At this time she adopted her pseudonym so that her parents, who envisaged a more domestic future for her, would be unaware of her literary activities; she became generally known as Caryl Brahms. 
Ballet class as a child and her later exposure to the Diaghilev Ballet in the south of France encouraged Brahms to apply to Viscountess Rhondda to write ballet criticism for 'Time and Tide'. She also wrote on opera and the theatre for the same newspaper, the 'Daily Telegraph', and many others. In 1930 Gollancz published her volume of children's verse, 'The Moon on my Left'. 
At this time Brahms met S. J. Simon (Secha Jascha Skidelsky), a White Russian student of agriculture, an international bridge player, and an inspired humorist. In the early thirties they contributed captions for 'Musso, the home page dog' cartoons by David Low in the 'Evening Standard'. In 1936, during which Brahms also edited a popular primer, 'Footnotes to the Ballet', they collaborated on a novel, 'A Bullet in the Ballet' (1937), their classic comedy thriller which introduced the Stroganoff Ballet Company. Another Stroganoff novel, 'Casino for Sale', followed in 1938. 'The Elephant is White' (1939) again deployed a cast of eccentric Russian 'emigres'. In 1940 they hit on a new and original vein of wild, anachronistic, historical humour with 'Don't, Mr Disraeli!' (1940), a novel set, 'not in the Victorian Age but in its literature'. They brought a similar approach to the Elizabethan age in 'No Bed for Bacon' (1941). Their other novels were 'No Nightingales' (1944), 'Six Curtains for Stroganova' (1945), 'Titania has a Mother' (1944), and 'Trottie True' (1946). A stage version of 'A Bullet in the Ballet', starring Leonide Massine and Irina Baronova, foundered in Blackpool. 
In 1948 Brahms and Simon had just begun their last collaboration, 'You Were There' (1950), when Simon died suddenly. Brahms finished the book alone, continued to write fiction, and increased her criticism of theatre and opera as well as ballet. Her collected book of theatre notices, 'The Rest of the Evening's my Own', was published in 1964. She followed it with 'Gilbert and Sullivan' (1975) and with 'Reflections in a Lake' (1976), a study of Chekhov's four great plays. 
In 1954 Brahms had met Ned Sherrin, who asked permission to adapt 'No Bed for Bacon' as a stage musical. Seeing that he challenged no comparisons with Simon, she suggested a collaboration. The production of the musical at the Bristol Old Vic was not a success but it laid the foundation of a partnership which over the next twenty-eight years produced seven books, many radio and television scripts, and several plays and musicals for the theatre including 'I Gotta Shoe' (1962-3), 'Sing a Rude Song' (1970), 'Liberty Ranch' (1972), 'Nickleby and me' (1975), 'The Spoils of Poynton' (1968, from Henry James), and latterly 'Beecham' (1980) and 'The Mitford Girls' (1981), both of which had respectable West End runs. 
In her sixties, Brahms's enthusiasm for ballet waned. She became a devotee of show-jumping and the All-England course at Hickstead took the place of Covent Garden in her life as she argued that the horses moved more gracefully than contemporary ballerinas. She also began to write songs for the BBC television programme 'That Was The Week That Was' (1962) and, as a lyric writer, she won an Ivor Novello award (1966) for the title song of 'Not So Much a Programme More a Way of Life'. Her song compilations were a feature of 'Side by Side by Sondheim' (1976) and the television series 'Song by Song' (1979-80). The latter also became a book (1984). In 1978 she was appointed a governor of the National Theatre. 
Physically Brahms's aspect seemed not to change for the last three decades of her life, until a noticeable enfeeblement in the last two years. She was dark, tiny, with a very prominent nose on which she permanently perched large dark, forbidding spectacles. Her pouter-pigeon figure and thrust-forward chin matched her combative approach to life. She sparred energetically with colleagues and bank managers and conscientiously encouraged young artistes. Her work with Simon will surely survive as an example of the most sensitive and innovative comic fiction during the middle years of the twentieth century. She died of heart failure on 5 December 1982 at her home, 3 Cambridge Gate, Regent's Park, London. She was unmarried. 
Ned Sherrin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30847


Brandt, Hermann Wilhelm (1904-1983), photographer, was born on 2 May 1904 in Hamburg (though he later encouraged the belief that he was born in south London), the second of four sons (there were no daughters) of Ludwig Walter Brandt, merchant (who had been born in London), and his wife, Louise (Lili) Merck. Perhaps because of the English connections of his family and the high feelings caused by the First World War, Brandt's schooldays were intensely unhappy. He contracted tuberculosis in his youth and at the age of twenty was sent to a sanatorium in Davos, Switzerland. Two and a half years later he travelled to Vienna, seeking a cure by means of psychoanalysis, but doctors there pronounced him free of the disease. Through his younger brother Rolf, he became part of the brilliant artistic circle of Dr Eugenie Schwarzwald. She placed Brandt in the studio of Grete Kolliner, a leading portrait photographer, to learn photography. There he met Eva Boros, who was to become his first wife. Perhaps through the agency of Dr Schwarzwald, Ezra Pound sat for Brandt in 1928. The poet is said to have provided an introduction to Man Ray, in whose Paris studio the young photographer served as an assistant for three months in 1930. Brandt always spoke of this period with enchantment. He was thrilled by the films of Dali and Bunuel and inspired by the enormous new possibilities offered by the surrealist movement in its heyday. 
Brandt continued his apprenticeship in Paris, making observant street photographs which became part of his classic 'oeuvre'. In typically cosmopolitan style, he married his Hungarian wife, Eva (daughter of Joseph Boros), in Barcelona in 1932. They settled in London in 1934 and Brandt began to publish his photographs in the 'News Chronicle'. His first impressions of England were collected in his first book, 'The English at Home' (1936). The book is notable for its pointed contrasts of upper- and working-class life, but also for Brandt's sheer relish for the mysteries and rituals of Englishness. He had privileged access to these through various Brandt uncles and their households. Friends and family acted out various roles in Brandt's photographs. His master in the art of documentary photography, or photojournalism, was the Paris-based Transylvanian Brassai, whose beneficial influence was even more in evidence in Brandt's 'A Night in London' (1938). Influenced by J. B. Priestley's 'English Journey' (1934) and the widespread concerns aroused by the Jarrow crusade (1936), Brandt and his wife travelled to Yorkshire and the north-east in 1937. He made the definitive images of coal-searchers, although these were not published until the next decade, and of the bleak beauty of the (then) coal-black cities such as Halifax. Soon he was photographing the eerie tranquillity of blacked-out London during the phony war. He had a stimulating editor and friend in Tom Hopkinson, for whom he worked with great creativity and productiveness at 'Lilliput' (founded 1936) and 'Picture Post' (founded 1938). In the 1940s he also began to take commissions from Carmel Snow, the dashing editor of 'Harper's Bazaar', through which Brandt's work became well known to an American audience. Aside from the magazines, Brandt received other commissions. For the Ministry of Information he produced his famous photographs of London's makeshift bomb shelters in underground stations and their rows of sleeping occupants. For the National Buildings Record he photographed major monuments. During the 1940s Brandt produced two more great series: his portraits of young writers and his landscapes. The former included such stars as Elizabeth Bowen (to whose writings he was particularly drawn), Robert Graves, and Dylan Thomas. The landscapes -- a reflection of national identity in a time of war -- feature places associated with the Brontes, Thomas Hardy, Dr Johnson, and others. The series originally appeared in 'Lilliput' and was republished, with further images, in Brandt's third classic book, 'Literary Britain', introduced by John Hayward, in 1951. 
In 1944 Brandt embarked on yet another exploration. He acquired a mahogany and brass-view camera with a wide-angle lens. It was actually a Kodak camera made for police work, but Brandt used it to photograph the nude. The ground glass yielded only an indistinct image of the subject, and Brandt had to work almost 'blind'. He later said that he chose this camera because he wanted to see differently, 'like a mouse, a fish or a fly'. The wide-angle lens dramatically expanded and diminished the figure like an episode from 'Alice in Wonderland', a book in which Brandt -- like other surrealists -- delighted. Brandt's vision of the nude was more directly informed by his admiration for Arp, Matisse, Moore, and Picasso. The series began in domestic interiors but was later extended to beaches in southern England and France. Brandt found that a Hasselblad with a Superwide lens could give him the same results as the old Kodak, and he also used the newer camera for his later portraits. 'Perspective of Nudes' appeared in 1961, followed by a career survey, 'Shadow of Light', in 1966. These books, and a retrospective exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York (1969), and the Hayward Gallery, London (1970, followed by a UK tour), brought Brandt to the attention of a new generation. Lucky pilgrims were welcomed by Brandt to his second-floor flat in Airlie Gardens, Kensington, to find an enchanting interior that was at once Victorian, surrealist, and contemporary, with stuffed seabirds recalling his landscapes, Brandt's own collages formed of beach-combed seaweeds and shells, and lively modern painted reliefs by his brother Rolf. They found that Brandt himself was unexpectedly boyish, fond of laughter -- and lovable. He was also genuinely modest. He must have charmed a large audience when he claimed, in a BBC television documentary about him in 1983, that 'anyone could have taken' his famous picture of maids ready to serve dinner (1936). 
It was mainly because of Brandt that the climate of opinion about photography changed in Britain. Photography was habitually thought of as the preserve of celebrity portraitists, commercial dullards, and fashionable chancers, but Brandt showed that photography could be informed by the imagination and create works of subtle, profound, visual art. This was recognized by many accolades in his later years: an honorary degree from the Royal College of Art in 1977, an award as royal designer for industry in 1978, and an honorary fellowship from the Royal Photographic Society in 1980. He was represented by Marlborough Fine Art in London and New York and exhibited and published widely until his death. 
Bill Brandt -- Billy to his closest friends -- was tall, fair-haired, slim, and handsome, with a beautiful smile and a surprisingly hearty laugh. He always kept a slight accent, but in later life he refused to admit to being German or even to speaking the language. Tom Hopkinson said that Brandt had a voice 'as loud as a moth'. He was ultra-sensitive, private, and shy, and suffered from diabetes. Despite his apparent frailty, Brandt was -- for many -- the most vigorous, compelling, and poetic photographer working in Britain in modern times. His archive is kept at his former home in London; major retrospectives were held at the Edwynn Monte Gallery, New York, in 2001, and at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, in 2004. 
Brandt's second wife, whom he met in the late 1930s, was Marjorie (died 1971), daughter of Henry James Becket. On 21 December 1972 he married Dorothy Anne (Noya) Kernot, widowed daughter of Ivan Leslover. Brandt died at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea, London, on 20 December 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 30848


Brayley, (John) Desmond, Baron Brayley (1917-1977), glass manufacturer and politician, was born at 10 Mervyn Street, Rhydyfelin, near Pontypridd, Glamorgan, on 29 January 1917, the only son of Frederick Brayley, a cafe owner, and his wife, Jennie Bassett. He was educated at Pontypridd grammar school, which he left at the age of seventeen to join the regular army in the Royal Artillery, becoming a physical-training instructor. During the Second World War he served in the Army Air Corps with distinction in the African desert campaigns, and was awarded the MC for gallantry in 1942. He went on to Crete and Sicily, where he received a mention in dispatches. From an earlier marriage to Irene Wisden he was presumably divorced, for on 18 August 1945 he married Flight Officer Queenie Elizabeth Selma Bee ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Horace Bee, estate agent; they had two daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1960. 
In 1946 Brayley joined the Phoenix Glass Company of Bristol, rising to managing director in the 1950s. In the process he became a wealthy man and was noted in Bristol for his free-spending habits and interest in horse-racing. In 1961 he became chairman of, and a major shareholder in, the Canning Town Glass Works, a bottle-manufacturing firm in London, which he was instrumental in developing. He had been a lifelong member of the Labour Party and did not allow success and wealth to affect his loyalty to it or to blur his early memories of poverty in Wales. He was a generous benefactor to the party and donated 60,000 shares in the Canning Town Glass Works to its funds. Harold Wilson first met Brayley through Lord Wigg, a close political ally and paymaster-general in his 1964 government. Wigg, a former regular soldier, shared Brayley's devotion to the army and his interest in horse-racing, while self-made, flamboyant, and wealthy entrepreneurs always seemed to appeal strongly to Wilson. When the Labour government was defeated in 1970, Wilson recommended Brayley for a knighthood in his resignation honours list, citing his services to the Bristol Labour Party. 
Brayley was, however, little known in the party and there was much adverse comment when Wilson made him a life peer in 1973. This was intensified when he was appointed parliamentary under-secretary for defence in March 1974. A few months later rumours began to circulate about his business affairs before becoming a minister. On taking office he had sold his shares in the Canning Town Glass Works for $1 million but on 7 September he was named at a shareholders' meeting as owing the company $16,515 for expenses which had been queried by the auditors; at one stage the company was claiming $200,000 from Brayley and similar sums from other directors. 
Although Brayley claimed ignorance of this, concern over allegations affecting a minister's business interests led the president of the Board of Trade to order on 15 September an inquiry under the 'Companies Act', and Brayley, after consulting Wilson, resigned from the government. Coming in the midst of the general election campaign these events were embarrassing enough for the Labour Party, but the more so when Brayley's close association with Wilson, and his gift of shares to the party, became known. After Brayley's resignation there were further allegations about misuse of the company's funds. Brayley sued the owners of the 'Daily Mail' for its disclosure of internal company documents, but in July 1976 he was arrested on five charges of fraud, which he strongly denied. Litigation began but the main issues had not come to trial when Brayley died of abdominal cancer, on 16 March 1977, at Cardiff Royal Infirmary, and the case was closed without the truth ever being known. The administration of his estate showed assets of $87,091 but these were far exceeded by his liabilities. It was a tragic end to the career of a man of great talents and, his friends always insisted, of high honour, whose death, they believed, had been accelerated by the shame of a scandal not of his wilful doing. Nor had he been prepared for the glare of publicity surrounding his ministerial appointment, even before the storm broke over his business life. 
Brayley was always noted for his work for charities, particularly those helping mentally handicapped people and those in his native Pontypridd, but not until after his death did the full extent of his personal generosity become known through tributes published in 'The Times'. The controller of the Royal Artillery Benevolent Fund wrote of his 'boundless generosity' to the regiment, and the chairman of the Middlesex sessions, Ewen Montagu, paid tribute to his unfailing readiness to meet anonymously appeals for financial help for prisoners and their families in distress or to assist their rehabilitation on release. In 1961 Brayley became a freeman of the City of London. In 1970 he was appointed an honorary colonel-commandant of the Royal Artillery and in the same year became a deputy lieutenant for Greater London. He was, from 1968, a JP for Middlesex. He had been a noted sportsman and athlete, and an army championship boxer. He held his own private pilot's licence. 


@@@@@


doc= 30849


Brian, (William) Havergal (1876-1972), composer, was born in Dresden, Staffordshire, on 29 January 1876, the eldest survivor of the seven sons (four of whom died in infancy) and one daughter of Benjamin Brian, a potter's turner, and his wife, Martha, daughter of James Watson. He was educated at the local infants' school and at St James's School, Longton, which had a strong musical tradition. His formal education ceased at the age of twelve: he had already shown musical talent, as a chorister and on violin, cello, and piano -- and while trying a variety of trades (carpenter's apprentice, railway office boy, clerk, and buyer for a timber firm) he attempted to become a professional musician. He trained with a reactionary but thorough local music teacher, Theophilus Hemmings, and began to gain some reputation as a fine church organist (it was at this time that he assumed the name Havergal, probably after the hymn composer W. H. Havergal). At the 1896 Staffordshire triennial festival he heard Beethoven's ninth symphony and the premiere of a contemporary English work, 'King Olaf', by Edward Elgar -- and, fortified by encouragement from Elgar, he resolved to become a composer. 
The years 1906-12 saw Brian resident in Stoke-on-Trent and recognized as a promising figure among British composers of the younger generation, with his choral compositions becoming staple fare as test-pieces in competitions and his early cantatas and orchestral works produced to critical acclaim at various festivals. He was also active as a critic; consorted with leading musicians -- Elgar, Frederick Delius, Thomas Beecham, Ernest Newman, Henry Wood, and especially Granville Bantock, who became a close and lifelong friend; and was supported by the patronage of the pottery magnate Herbert Minton Robinson. This palmy period was shattered by the breakup of his first marriage in 1913, and for the next fourteen years Brian struggled to make ends meet in London, Birmingham, and Sussex, producing hack-work and occasional journalism. On the outbreak of war he joined the Honourable Artillery Company as a private, but was invalided out in 1915 (having not served abroad) and worked first in the audit office of the Canadian forces contingent, listing the effects of men killed in action, and later as a clerk in munitions for Vickers Ltd in Birmingham. After the war he was a music copyist for various publishers. The price of this hectic and unsettled life was professional obscurity: his early music dropped out of the repertory, even though in the meantime he had developed considerably, composing two works of extraordinary brilliance -- the satirical anti-war opera 'The Tigers' (1917-19) and the huge first symphony, the 'Gothic' (1919-27), for gigantic choral and orchestral forces. 
Brian moved back to London in 1927, and his position stabilized when he became assistant editor of the journal 'Musical Opinion', a post he held until 1939. In these years, as well as producing copious and acute journalism, he continued to write a series of large-scale symphonies (nos. 2-5), but hardly any of his post-1912 music was performed: he was virtually a forgotten composer. During the Second World War he was awarded a civil-list pension and worked as a clerk for the Ministry of Supply, remaining in the civil service until retirement in 1948. From that latter date -- possibly partly as a result of the publication of a short biography by Reginald Nettel, 'Ordeal by Music: the Strange Experience of Havergal Brian' (1945) -- began an extraordinary Indian summer of creativity which produced a vast body of music including four operas and twenty-seven more symphonies (twenty-one of these after the age of eighty). Largely owing to the efforts of the composer and producer Robert Simpson, Brian's works began to be broadcast by the BBC, beginning with his eighth symphony in 1954, and there was a revival of interest in his music -- gradual at first but much accelerated by a performance of the 'Gothic' at the Royal Albert Hall in 1966 to mark the composer's ninetieth birthday. The army of performers included 500 singers, 50 brass, 16 percussionists, and 30 woodwind players. 
Brian was twice married. In 1899 he married Isabel Alice, daughter of George Dalton Priestley, painter and decorator; they had four sons (one died in infancy) and a daughter. After his first wife died he married in 1933 Hilda Mary (died 1980), daughter of Creswell Hayward, decorator of china and other pottery; previously they had had three daughters and two sons. 
In 1958 Brian moved from Harrow (where he had spent the previous twenty years) to Shoreham by Sea, Sussex. Manchester University conferred on him the honorary degree of doctor of music in 1967; the following year he moved into a council flat on Shoreham beach, and he composed his last works there. In July 1972 he received the accolade of composer of the year from the Composers' Guild of Great Britain. 
Physically a small man, of impassive and unassuming mien, his conversation richly flavoured by the Potteries accent he never lost, Brian dedicated his life to music with the utmost tenacity of a sardonic, idiosyncratic, and deeply original mind. His knowledge of past and contemporary music was more encyclopaedic than that of practically any of his contemporaries, and he was deeply stirred by nature, by Gothic architecture, and Romantic literature -- he taught himself German, French, and Italian. Despite his humble origins and lack of worldly success he did not regard himself as socially or artistically disadvantaged, and the early termination of his formal education left him free to follow his own interests to the furthest degree. 
Though in his early years Brian wrote many songs and partsongs, as well as some instrumental music, after the age of fifty he concentrated almost exclusively on music-drama and works for large orchestra. Several of these pieces remain unperformed, and his largest -- a cantata setting of Shelley's 'Prometheus Unbound' (1937-44) -- is lost, a fate which has overtaken several earlier scores. His music developed from the stylistic basis of the late Romantics (Berlioz, Wagner, Elgar, and Strauss), but a pronounced streak of scepticism led him to question the heroic assumptions of these masters and to counterbalance their harmonic opulence with a muscular, 'objective' polyphony inspired by the example of Bach and Handel, searching development of motivic cells, and ironic juxtapositions of highly contrasted and mutually subversive kinds of music. While his works are generally tonal, therefore, their argument is elliptical, rejecting carefully formalized solutions in favour of open-ended procedures that continually undercut the listener's expectations. It is not comfortable (though it can be inspiring) music to listen to; it is also extremely difficult to play without extensive rehearsal, and few of his symphonies have yet been performed to a standard sufficiently high to project their substance with the force it deserves. Nevertheless, the 'Brian revival' proved no temporary phenomenon; a gradual realization grew that he was one of the most important British composers of the twentieth century. He died on 28 November 1972 at Southlands Hospital, Shoreham, as a result of complications following a fall outside his home. His youngest child, a daughter, predeceased him by seven months. 
Malcolm MacDonald', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30850


Bridge, (Stephen Henry) Peter (1925-1982), theatre producer, was born at Wimbledon, Surrey, on 5 May 1925, the only son and eldest child of Stephen Henry Howard Bridge (died 1943), stockbroker, of Wimbledon, and his wife, Ella Mary Twine (died 1940). He was educated at Tyttenhanger Lodge, Seaford, Sussex, and at Bryanston School, Dorset, which he left at sixteen, his mother and sister having been killed by enemy action in 1940. His father died in 1943. He was an actor before joining the RAF. Apart from landing at Normandy six days after D-day, he served in Burma in photographic intelligence and as personal assistant to the air officer commanding Hong Kong, where he ended as air aide-de-camp to the governor. Demobilized, Bridge worked for Lord Tedder as assistant manager of the RAF Malcolm clubs, but a love of theatre turned him to show business and in his early twenties he managed a tour of Diana Morgan's family comedy 'Set to Partners', which reached the Embassy, Swiss Cottage, as 'Rain before Seven' in 1949. He co-produced Val Gielgud's 'Party Manners' (Embassy, 1950). Neither play transferred. 
In 1948 Bridge married Roslyn Mary, daughter of Douglas Seymour Foster, of independent means. They had three sons, of whom Andrew became a distinguished lighting designer. With a young wife and children to support, Bridge became assistant manager to Alec Clunes at the Arts Theatre Club, then rated as a small national theatre. He was also appointed manager of the Winter Garden Theatre when Clunes hoped it would become a second auditorium to the Arts, and he co-presented Christopher Fry's 'The Firstborn'. When the Winter Garden venture failed, Bridge joined the ticket agency Keith Prowse to scour the provinces for plays to transfer to London (1953-5). With the advent of independent television he then became director of sport for Associated Television (ATV), and as one of the country's six professional lawn-tennis referees (not to be confused with umpires) he produced ITV coverage of Wimbledon for two years. But the call of the theatre persisted, and in 1957 -- when great changes were imminent in the British theatre after 'Look Back in Anger' -- Bridge returned to the fold as an independent manager. Stars, he used to say, filled theatres, not upstart writers, hence his reputation for polished, bland revivals of Wilde, Shaw, Galsworthy, Coward, and Priestley, acted by the famous. 
In fact Bridge was interested in new writers as long as they were not assertively intellectual. One such writer was Alan Ayckbourn. It was a notice in 'The Stage', the profession's weekly paper, of 'Standing Room Only' (1961), about a bus load of passengers in a futuristic London traffic jam, that caught Bridge's eye. 'Will no management drive this bus into Shaftesbury Avenue?' asked the reviewer, a member of the Scarborough company (Watson, 61). Bridge was intrigued. He left London immediately for Yorkshire -- not that the play reached London -- but having bought it Bridge also bought a London bus, assuring Ayckbourn that success lay in the casting. Impressed by Bridge's tall, dark presence, genial self-assurance, and tendency to chain smoke, Ayckbourn kept on revising the play to suit various stars until it became unrecognizable. Eventually Bridge took another Ayckbourn piece to London, 'Mr Whatnot' (1964), a frail whimsical comedy conducted mainly in mime, that failed but caught the fancy of Mrs Michael Hordern, whose husband starred in Ayckbourn's first West End hit, 'Relatively Speaking' (1967). When his second was bound for London, 'How the Other Half Loves' (1970), Bridge brought in Robert Morley to head the company. In summing up Bridge, a fashionable play agent called him 'a sweet, kind but talentless man, and as a manager rather pre-war: honourable and endearing but lacking in discrimination and in the belief that authors were as important, or more so, than stars' (Watson, 147). 
Bridge had already brought to London a dozen other non-classical dramatists after Rosemary Anne Sisson's 'The Queen and the Welshman', with which he returned to management (Lyric, Hammersmith, 1957). Among them were a smash hit board-room drama, 'Any Other Business' (1958); a well-received American trial-play, 'Inherit the Wind' (1960); a lively West End revue, 'On the Bright Side'; a whodunit, 'Guilty Party' (1961); an unknown play by Tennessee Williams, 'Period of Adjustment' (1962); and an Irish adaptation from James Joyce, 'Stephen D' (1963). He also produced 'Say Who You Are' by Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall (1965); Danny La Rue in 'Come Spy with Me'; a new British musical, 'Strike a Light'; a thriller, 'Wait until Dark'; and, from Oxford, Aleksey Arbuzov's 'The Promise', with Judi Dench and Ian McKellen, long before they became stars. He also produced remarkable new plays such as Giles Cooper's 'Happy Family'; Peter Terson's 'Zigger-Zagger'; Robert Shaw's 'The Man in the Glass Booth' (1967); and the relatively daring homosexual comedy, Mart Crowley's 'The Boys in the Band' (1969). 
A tireless traveller in search of theatrical talent, Bridge rarely missed an Edinburgh or Dublin festival, a Sunday night try-out, or a rumoured masterpiece on the fringe. His shows were not definable, but they suited middle-class, middle-aged, middlebrow audiences. The 1960s were his decade. In 1967 he had three West End openings within a fortnight. He slowed down a little in the 1970s. His last production was of Priestley's 'Dangerous Corner' (1981), another all-star affair. What distinguished Bridge from other managers was his heart-felt, star-struck delight in theatre, especially its glamour. He was popular with actors and authors because, unlike other managers, he liked and respected them. Whether or not they shared his enthusiasm, he would telephone at all hours from all places with tidings of new projects, gossip, and box-office figures. Among his idols whom he was proud to engage were Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge, Eric Portman, Roger Livesey, Margaret Lockwood, Celia Johnson, Margaret Rawlings, Michael Denison, and Dulcie Gray. Few other managers could so serenely allow the so-called new wave of British drama to pass them by. Bridge died at his home, 15 Claremont Road, Highgate, London, on 24 November 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 30851


Bridson, (Douglas) Geoffrey (1910-1980), writer and radio broadcaster, was born on 21 August 1910 at Heaton Norris, near Stockport, the only child of John Douglas Bridson, a Manx shipping manager, of Stockport, and his wife, Marion (1883/4-1967), daughter of Josiah Barlow, of Rawtenstall, and his wife, Marion Bowker, 'nee' Ruthven. His parents soon moved to Lytham St Anne's, where he attended King Edward VII School (1920-27), matriculating brilliantly at an early age. 
In 1927 Bridson and his mother went back to Manchester, already, as he later described it, 'the waning capital of a grimly autonomous Northern republic'. He soon relieved a routine office job with the Sun Insurance Company by contributing both verse and criticism to local and national publications. Bridson's poems of social protest, written during the depression while he was still under twenty-one, caught the eye of Ezra Pound, the American poet. They also brought him to the notice of E. A. F. (Archie) Harding, the talented BBC programme director in Manchester whose Marxist views had caused Sir John Reith to remove him from being a features producer in London. 
Bridson began to contribute programmes for Harding and found they shared a crusading passion for the radio feature as an organ of social change. In 1935 he abandoned freelancing and joined the BBC staff. An early Bridson programme, and the BBC's first verse feature, was 'The March of the '45' (1936), an account of the Jacobite rising. It was broadcast eight times in the UK, overseas on BBC transcription service, and again on Radio 4 on 27 August 1989; it has been heard by an estimated audience of 100 million around the world. His radio output was prolific: in twenty-five years over 800 documentaries, plays, and feature programmes carried the imprint of D. G. Bridson. 400 had recorded repeats. Some, such as 'Aaron's Field' (1939) and 'Steel' (1937), became microphone classics. On 10 November 1934 he had married Vera (1909-1963), the fabric designer daughter of Harry Richardson, an antiquarian bookseller. Twins, Hermione Cicely (died 1987) and Gavin Douglas Ruthven, were born to them on 12 February 1936, but the marriage did not survive the war. 
From 1939 to 1945 broadcasts to America about the British war effort occupied most of Bridson's time. He moved from Manchester to London in 1941 to become overseas features editor until 1943, when he crossed the Atlantic for the first time to act as guest producer with the New York office. Here he rapidly made friends with folk-singers such as Burl Ives and Alan Lomax, as well as Josh White and other black musicians leading the struggle against segregation. Much later he was to produce (with Langston Hughes) 'The Negro in America' (1964), a series of nineteen separate shows broadcast on the Third Programme, which vividly recalled the developments of a dramatic decade. 
After VE-day Bridson travelled the world widely for the BBC, including work as a guest writer and producer for the South African Broadcasting Corporation in 1947 and for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the New Zealand Broadcasting Service in 1948. Growing up before the cautious days of pre-recorded radio, he approached the developing technology of his profession with zest. He was the first British producer to exploit the use of magnetic tape recording, with equipment captured from the Germans in Norway. 
Bridson's limited experience in television was less successful but he was the natural choice for BBC television to send as its adviser -- and indeed watch-dog -- for the American documentary series 'The Valiant Years' based on Sir Winston Churchill's memoirs. The BBC had taken an option on the American series, but was profoundly depressed by the quality of the first scripts and considered cutting its losses. Bridson helped reshape the programmes into an acceptable and moreover popular series. This assignment, due to last six months, in fact kept Bridson in New York for a year. It followed immediately upon his second marriage, on 9 April 1960, to Joyce Thirlaway Rowe (1915/16-1989), the BBC's first radio publicity officer. She was the daughter of Claude Harold Rowe, an antiques dealer in London who was a direct descendant of Nicholas Rowe, poet laureate. Her good nature tolerated the year-long separation with equanimity. Geoffrey and Joyce Bridson's Highgate home became a convivial London meeting place for poets, actors, and writers. Bridson was a short, neat man with red hair and an imperial beard; a courteous host and a witty raconteur. He loved books and collected them with discrimination. He had a well-stocked cellar and a well-stocked mind. 
From 1964 to 1967 Bridson was programme editor for arts, sciences, and documentaries (sound). Much of the most distinguished writing of his career was produced for the Third Programme. Its transformation into Radio 3 made him unhappy, as did the eventual winding up of the once outstanding features department, of which he had become the assistant head. His autobiography, 'Prospero and Ariel: the Rise and Fall of Radio. A Personal Recollection' (1971), reflected this malaise. Other publications by Bridson include 'Aaron's Field' (1943); 'The Christmas Child', a collection of poems for reading aloud (1950); 'The Quest of Gilgamesh' (1972); and 'The Filibuster: a Study of the Political Ideas of Wyndham Lewis' (1972). 
After Bridson retired from the BBC in May 1969 he adapted and dramatized French and English novels, which continued to be broadcast in the domestic and external services of the BBC long after he died of leukaemia at the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, London, on 19 October 1980. His wife outlived him by nine years. In the memories of his contemporaries, many of Bridson's distinguished contributions to a largely ephemeral art similarly survived him. 
Leonard Miall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30852


Brittain, Sir Henry Ernest (1873-1974), journalist and politician, was born on 24 December 1873 at Storth Oaks, Ranmoor, near Sheffield, Yorkshire, the oldest surviving child in the family of two sons and three daughters (one daughter died in infancy) of William Henry Brittain (1835-1922), twice mayor of Sheffield, and twice master cutler, and his wife, Frances, daughter of J. J. Mellor of Prestbury, Cheshire. He was educated at Repton School and Worcester College, Oxford, where he was awarded a third-class degree in jurisprudence in 1896. After a year's training in the family steel business in Sheffield, he moved to London, where he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1897, but he never practised. 
Brittain's first job was as private secretary to Sir William Ingram, managing director of the 'Illustrated London News', leaving to work for C. Arthur Pearson, founder of the 'Daily Express', when Pearson acquired 'The Standard' and the 'Evening Standard' in 1902. In 1905 he married Alida Luisa (1883-1943), only daughter of Sir Robert Harvey of Dundridge, Devon, and his French wife. Alida, a Roman Catholic, had been born in Chile, where her father had made his fortune in the nitrate trade. A composer and a fine harpist, she was created DBE in 1928 for her political activities. They had one son and one daughter. 
Inspired by his first visit to the United States in 1902, Brittain joined a group of American journalists and lawyers in London who were discussing the idea of founding a society that would bring Americans and Englishmen together to promote Anglo-American good fellowship. When the Pilgrims Society was formed in July 1902, Brittain was appointed honorary secretary. The Pilgrims Society of the United States was founded in New York in January 1903, with membership of one automatically entailing membership of the other. Harry Brittain was in his element as he built up the membership list, and invited distinguished guests to dinners, and soon he was the effective head of the organization. With a dinner in 1905 to welcome the new American ambassador, Whitelaw Reid, to Britain, the Pilgrims established the tradition that the first public speech made by an incoming American ambassador would be to the Pilgrims. Harry Brittain became chairman in 1913, and after he resigned in 1919 he was elected a vice-president. 
When Arthur Pearson was appointed chairman of the new Tariff Reform League by Joseph Chamberlain in July 1903, Brittain helped him to organize it. The Liberal landslide in the 1906 general election put an end to the league. In 1907, however, while visiting Canada as a member of a Board of Trade delegation, Brittain had the idea of organizing a meeting of the editors and owners of newspapers from all parts of the empire. He devoted the next two years to winning support for the first Imperial Press Conference, which took place in London in 1909, with fifty-five overseas representatives and over twenty British newspapermen. One permanent result of the conference was the formation of the Empire Press Union (from 1950, the Commonwealth Press Union). 
With the outbreak of the First World War, Brittain was sent by Lord Grey on a mission to the United States in May 1915 representing the Royal Colonial Institute; he sailed on the last voyage of the 'Lusitania' before it was torpedoed by the Germans. In 1917 he spent five months as director of the intelligence branch of the national service department. After the entry of the United States into the war, Brittain mobilized the Pilgrims Society to establish the American Officers' Club. 
Harry Brittain was knighted in 1918 and successfully fought the 1918 'coupon' election as Unionist candidate for the new constituency of Acton, serving as MP until his defeat in the 1929 general election. He steered a private member's bill for the protection of wild singing birds through parliament in 1925, and he was on the committee of the Empire Parliamentary Association. During the 1930s he busied himself with his numerous committees: he was, for example, on the committee of the Oxford Society, founded in 1932 along the lines of an American alumni association, and he took on the responsibility of tracing Oxford University graduates in the United States and the empire. 
At the beginning of the Second World War, Brittain hoped for a job in the United States on an Anglo-American committee, but when this failed to materialize he became vice-chairman of a government hospitality committee for American servicemen, set up in 1942. Together with the chairman, Sir Edward Grigg, he started the Churchill Club, and organized the Oxford leave courses at Balliol College. He also joined the panel of the Anglo-American Brains Trust, touring British army camps. 
Sir Harry Brittain was a superb organizer, attending to every detail, and he loved committees: he was a member of the British Peace Centenary Committee from 1912 to 1914, president of the British International Association of Journalists in 1920-1922, representative of the British Olympic Association at the winter games in Chamonix in 1924, a founder member of the British Travel Association in 1929, and a vice-president of the English-Speaking Union. Although he was not universally popular, he was very gregarious, a member of the Bath and Carlton clubs, and a well-known public figure, always with a carnation in his buttonhole (the 'Sir Harry Brittain' carnation won an award at the 1938 Chelsea flower show). He also loved travel, and claimed to have visited every country in Europe except Albania, and every state in the United States. He was a fine sportsman, excelling especially at tennis, skiing, and shooting, and enjoying golf. He was also a prolific writer: his books include 'To Verdun from the Somme' (1917); 'The ABC of the BBC: the Romance of British Wireless' (1932); a history of the first forty years of the Pilgrims Society, 'Pilgrim Partners' (1942); and two volumes of autobiography, 'Pilgrims and Pioneers' (1945) and 'Happy Pilgrimage' (1949). 
In 1961 Brittain remarried. His second wife was Muriel Lesley (1905-1994), daughter of H. Leslie Dixon; she had been his private secretary since the mid-1950s. He remained active to the very end of his long life, and, as Lord Astor said at his memorial service, he never lost his 'boyish enthusiasm'. Elected Pilgrim emeritus in 1971, he resigned the chairmanship of the Pilgrims' membership committee in 1972 at the age of ninety-eight, and was guest of honour at the seventieth anniversary dinner on 25 January 1972. The last Pilgrims function he attended was only a few weeks before his death, on 9 July 1974 at his London home, 88 St James's Street, SW1. He was buried on 12 July at Randalls Park, Leatherhead, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30853


Britten, (Edward) Benjamin, Baron Britten (1913-1976), composer, was born on 22 November 1913 in Lowestoft, Suffolk, the youngest of the four children (two sons and two daughters) of Robert Victor Britten (1878-1934), a dental surgeon, and his wife, Edith Rhoda (1874-1937), the daughter of Henry William Hockey, king's messenger at the Home Office in London. After her marriage Britten's mother proved herself to be an active amateur singer and pianist, and she became the secretary of the Lowestoft Choral Society. There was much music-making in the home, where her younger son participated as accompanist, and sometimes as a composer, in events that on occasion took the shape of musical soirees, attended by family and friends. 
There can be no doubt that his mother was the dominant influence on Britten's early years. The child's first musical experiences would have been hearing his mother sing, and it cannot be altogether accidental that song, in its broadest sense, and more specifically the relationship of words to music -- their colour, their rhythm -- was to form so large a part of the 'oeuvre' he created in his maturity. This was a reason, too, no doubt, for his eventual choice of an aspiring and gifted young tenor, Peter Neville Luard Pears (1910-1986), as his lifelong companion, about whose voice a close friend from the Lowestoft years remarked that it recalled in character the voice of his mother. While recognizing the importance of the maternal influence it would be a mistake to exaggerate it. Some of Britten's most remarkable compositions are to be found among his chamber music and his orchestral works, and while it is certainly true that songs are prominent among his earliest compositions, so too are numerous string quartets, many sonatas for piano, and a by no means inconsiderable array of attempts at large-scale orchestral works. One must be ever wary in Britten's case of drawing too strict parallels between life and art. His prodigious musical gifts, which declared themselves at an astonishingly early age -- a legitimate and meaningful parallel here with Mozart and Mendelssohn -- undoubtedly in themselves would have constituted a prime influence, in particular his exploration of the absolutely basic materials of music -- scales, triads, and so forth -- at the keyboard. It was his mother who gave him his first music lessons, but in 1921 she was succeeded by a local piano teacher, Ethel Astle. It is prudent to remember that Britten's childhood prowess at the keyboard meant that in his very early youth his musical career (if there were to be one) was probably envisaged as that of a successful pianist. The commitment to composing came later, though it is highly likely that the boy himself had already made the decision significantly in advance of the rest of his family. From the age of thirteen or fourteen his unusual compositional gift and creative ambition were recognized, and his mother in particular was active in drawing attention to them. A key work here among Britten's juvenilia is the sequence of 'Quatre chansons francaises' (1928) for high voice and orchestra, dedicated 'To Mr & Mrs R. V. Britten on the twenty-seventh anniversary of their wedding'. 
There can be no doubt that Britten's mother cherished and nourished the extraordinary talents of her youngest child as the years progressed. It is perhaps less easy to reach so clear-cut a conclusion about his relationship with his father, who could be inflexible and a shade daunting and was perhaps more anxious than his wife about his son's future. This may have created a certain tension between them, but what should be recalled is Britten's note in his diary after his father's death in 1934 -- 'A great man with one of the finest minds I have ever come across & what a father!' ('Letters', 1.334) -- and Mr Britten's salute to his son in a letter in 1933, on hearing news of a rehearsal of his op. 3, 'A Boy was Born' (1933), the work that was one of Britten's early choral masterpieces: 'Hearty congratulations! over and over again and also envy & jealousy... Go on my son. Your very loving & admiring Pop' (ibid., 1.310). 'Envy and jealousy': a strange choice of words! The work in fact was dedicated 'To my Father'. Of the Brittens' other children, two girls, Barbara and Elizabeth (Beth), and a boy (Britten's elder brother, Robert), it was only Robert who showed a specific musical talent: he played the violin. In temperament and character Robert was perhaps closer to his father. There was never an easy relationship between the two brothers, but it was for Robert and the school of which he was headmaster that Britten wrote his 'Friday Afternoons', op. 7 (1935), one of the first of his works for children's voices. Neither of the two sisters had pronounced musical abilities. Barbara, the elder, became a health visitor and settled down in life with a woman companion, while Beth married and wrote a vivid and valuable memoir of family life in Lowestoft after her brother's death. Britten maintained affectionate relationships with both sisters and especially with Beth's children, though her problematic temperament was to cause him much anxiety and stress in later years. His closest relatives, however, were of fundamental importance to the evolution and character of his first steps in composition. After all, they were his first patrons and performers, and many of his juvenilia were written for their use. 
In 1923 Britten entered South Lodge preparatory school, Lowestoft, and began viola lessons with Audrey Alston. The viola was not only to be Britten's own instrument for the rest of his life but also the string instrument to which he assigned some of his most expressive and intimate inspirations, for example 'Lachrymae', op. 48, for viola and piano (later arranged for viola and string orchestra), and the prominent solo role as the 'voice' of the suffering Apprentice in the great orchestral passacaglia from 'Peter Grimes', op. 33. His prodigious talent for music -- he passed grade eight of the Associated Board piano examination at the age of twelve -- did not affect his conventional school success: he was academically bright, was an excellent and enthusiastic sportsman -- he was vice-captain of the cricket team and in 1955, when describing his schooldays, made special mention of his love for the game -- and became head boy in 1927. It has long been assumed that these preparatory school years were largely happy and unclouded. But Eric Crozier, the librettist of 'Albert Herring', one of the original founders of the Aldeburgh Festival in 1948, and a close collaborator of Britten and Pears in many similar and related activities, left a personal memoir in which he claimed that Britten had told him that he had been 'raped' by 'a teacher' at school. The fact of Crozier's claim has to be recorded. But one has to add that if true, it seems remarkable that there has been no shred of supporting evidence from quarters closer to Britten than Crozier -- Peter Pears, for example, who after Britten's death often referred to his companion's 'idyllic' childhood; and Pears was never uncomfortable in discussing with friends his and his partner's homosexuality. It seems scarcely conceivable that Britten would not have mentioned this incident to Pears, or, if he did, that Pears would not have said a word about it to anyone before he himself died. A classic instance this, one might think, of what Brian Vickers has named 'surmise 'ex silentio''. 
What is established is the fuss that attended Britten's leaving his prep school, caused by an essay in which he argued against hunting, thus revealing his budding pacifist and humanist convictions. The choice of Gresham's School, Holt (in Norfolk) -- at the height of its reputation as a 'progressive' public school -- reflected his parents' desire to find an environment that would accommodate his views and neither stifle nor disparage his musical gifts. Whatever its merits, Gresham's was not altogether a happy experience: the music teaching and activities -- his diaries make frequent caustic references to performances by his teachers -- fell far below his expectations and standards. 'So you are the boy who likes Stravinsky!' (Beth Britten, 'My Brother', 27) was the unpromising welcome he had from Walter Greatorex, the music master, about whom Britten confided to his mother that 'no two notes were together' in what Greatorex himself played on the piano, with 'a gripping touch, and terrible tone' ('Letters', 1.30). None the less, it was during these years that Britten's own creative gift underwent expansion and exploration: the juvenilia of the period clearly show him attempting in work after work to establish a language, a style, that could form a basis for the future. The process at the time would have been largely unconscious. In retrospect, however, the most overtly 'experimental' period in Britten's compositional life can be seen to have belonged, paradoxically, to his schooldays. In the two 'Portraits' for strings he composed at this time the span of his linguistic explorations may be heard, the first pressing hard at and beyond the limits of strict tonality, the second a self-portrait (a solo viola takes the lead) conceived in a reflective, almost pastoral mode. In short, the music from his school years reveals far more about the evolution of the composer Britten was to become than his school reports. 
That his gift was technically so advanced by the time he left Gresham's was not exclusively Britten's own doing. A very large debt was owed to the teaching of the composer Frank Bridge, whom he had first met in 1927. From Bridge he acquired the integrity of his technique, his professionalism, and his awareness of the 'new' music in Europe, Berg's in particular. Bridge was himself a viola player and a pacifist -- reasons for an immediate sympathy between master and pupil -- and Britten was to regard him as his 'musical conscience' throughout his creative life. In 1930 Britten won an open scholarship to the Royal College of Music, London. At Bridge's insistence he studied with another composer, John Ireland, while continuing at the college his piano lessons with Arthur Benjamin (1893-1960), having previously studied the piano, for about a year, with Harold Samuel (1879-1937). Britten was an industrious, conscientious, and ambitious student, twice winning the Ernest Farrar composition prize (1931 and 1933) and funds (though not the award) from the Mendelssohn scholarship; but in general the college years seemed to duplicate the musical discouragement, frustrations, and disappointments that he had encountered at Gresham's. There is no doubt that his precocity proved a heavy burden for the youth to carry; in the eyes and ears of many, his prolific creativity gave rise to deep-seated suspicions of shallow 'cleverness' -- 'too clever by half' was an attitude that pervaded much opinion and commentary from this period. Worst of all, there was little recognition at the college of his compositional achievements in terms of performance. What was heard -- two works in all -- was badly played. 'I have never heard such an appalling row!' he remarked of the rehearsals of his 'Sinfonietta', op. 1 ('Letters', 1.276). Britten had a very long memory, and the impact of this debacle stayed with him to the end of his life. It was in fact his life outside the college -- London's music, including the famous Macnaghten-Lemare concerts, as well as cinemas and theatres -- that gave him the enlarged horizons that influenced his development. 
John Grierson, the innovative head of the General Post Office film unit, employed Britten -- on the recommendation of the college -- to write some film music, and he soon became in effect the unit's resident composer and music editor. He found himself in sympathy with the pronouncedly leftish social and political preoccupations of the unit and significantly assisted in the development of the documentary film. In 1935 began his collaboration with W. H. Auden (1907-1973), then working for the unit as script writer and occasional director, on two of the most memorable of British documentary films, 'Coal Face' (1935) and 'Night Mail' (1936). The scores that Britten wrote for these films make a highly original contribution to the history of music for the cinema. Each employed only tiny resources, but his exploitation of them introduced all manner of innovations, some of which foreshadow the techniques and modification of materials associated with the much later development of 'musique concrete', but to precisely reverse effect; Britten, that is, achieves miracles of 'realistic' sound out of his electronic manipulation and treatment of his assembly of eccentric 'instruments'. The percussion ensemble assembled for 'Coal Face' included 'blocks of wood, chains, rewinders, cups of water, etc., etc.' -- 'entirely experimental stuff', as Britten himself described it. He was to compose a more conventionally conceived score for the only full-length feature film in which he was involved: this was 'Love from a Stranger' (1937), starring Ann Harding and Basil Rathbone. Film, thereafter, claimed relatively little of his attention, though out of his last contribution to this field -- 'Instruments of the Orchestra' (1945) -- was born a work, 'The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra', which has influenced generations of the young persons for whom it was written -- both to edify and to entertain, as Britten's dedication characteristically puts it -- as well as winning a permanent place in the orchestral repertory worldwide. 
Of enduring importance, clearly, for the composer of opera that Britten was to become was the experience he gained in the film studio of the pacing and characterization of dramatic events, reinforced by participation in Rupert Doone's famous thirties theatrical venture, the Group Theatre, for which he wrote much incidental music. Among the most celebrated Group Theatre productions were two collaborative dramas by Auden and Christopher Isherwood (1904-1986), 'The Ascent of F6' (1937) and 'On the Frontier' (1938), for both of which Britten wrote substantial musical numbers. It was during these years that Auden's profound influence on Britten was at its height. He was not only hugely to widen the composer's literary and above all poetic interests but he also, in his role as apostle incarnate of bohemianism, blew away any vestiges of provinciality still clinging to Britten, who about this time was probably beginning to acknowledge and accept his homosexual nature. It seems likely that Britten found it difficult, or was reluctant, to commit himself physically in sexual relationships. Auden in this context was an ever-present and minatory counsellor; as he wrote himself in 1938, 'It's better to sleep two than single; it's better to be happy' -- advice that Britten was ready to accept, but not before he had found the right partner. 
To all this activity in the film studio and theatre, and for radio -- collectively amounting to an 'oeuvre' in its own right, one not only of specific period interest but, more importantly, a direct product of what were then new communication technologies (film, radio) -- Britten was strangely indifferent in later years. What gave him satisfaction, undoubtedly, was the fulfilment it permitted him of entering full-time employment as a composer without any transitional intermission. But in tandem, of course, with this rich mass of incidental music -- among British composers of Britten's generation, without precedent -- and in some cases preceding it, there was a steady flow of key works destined for the concert hall. Among these were the 'Sinfonietta', his op. 1 (1932), an early manifestation of his preference for chamber-like instrumental textures and proportions; 'A Boy was Born' (1933), the virtuosic choral demands of which continue to present a challenge to performers even though the century in which it was written has come to an end; and 'Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge' (1937), for string orchestra, in which his innovative exploitation of the strings and mastery of variation form -- each variation was in fact a portrait of his revered teacher, a programme that Britten kept hidden -- won him international recognition at the Salzburg Festival of 1937. Even earlier successes outside England had been at International Society for Contemporary Music festivals at Florence (1934) and Barcelona (1936). 
To 1936 belongs the first of Britten's orchestral song cycles, 'Our Hunting Fathers', one of the major fruits of his friendship and collaboration with Auden, who devised its text. The virtuoso instrumental textures of this brilliant work guarantee it a special place in the history and evolution of British orchestral music, and the same can be said of Britten's phenomenally challenging vocal writing. This was indeed a young man's music, taking no account of the performing skills available to him or the prevailing -- and conservative -- musical culture of the time. (It is scarcely to be believed that this was the first orchestral music of his own making that Britten had actually heard to date.) Furthermore -- and one thinks back to the rebellious prep school essay on hunting -- the work was fired by his and his poet companion's impassioned reaction both to the Spanish Civil War, then at its height, and to the threat of European fascism, and by his own extravagantly burgeoning genius. It was no accident that the image of the hunt is central to the concluding song, a setting of words by Thomas Ravenscroft entitled 'Dance of Death'. This erupts finally in a frenzied interlude for orchestra alone of Bergian intensity, and the last words to be heard after the tumult has subsided are just two: 'German, Jew'. The work met with total incomprehension at its premiere at Norwich, on 25 September 1936, after a chaotic rehearsal with the London Philharmonic Orchestra of the day; its members simply could not believe that the young composer's intentions should be taken seriously. It was nearly fourteen years or so before the work was heard again. It is now recognized as one of the very few major statements about the history and politics of the thirties made before the war by a British composer, not just a document of the times but a fierce condemnation of them. 
Despite some indications at least of an eventual career of high achievement, Britten, with the singer Peter Pears, left England for North America in May 1939, going first to Canada and then to New York. Various factors influenced this decision: the worsening political situation; the success Britten's former teacher, Frank Bridge, had enjoyed in the United States; the persuasive examples of Auden and Isherwood, who had already emigrated; loosening family ties (his father had died in 1934, his mother in 1937); discouraging reviews of his music in the English press; often inadequate performance standards; and, from 1937, the growth of his friendship with Pears. Undoubtedly too, Pears as an aspiring singer, and Britten as an ambitious young composer, on the threshold of his career and in search of new stimulus and new channels for his creativity, had it in mind to assess for themselves what the New World might have to offer. 
It was in fact in Grand Rapids in June 1939 that Britten made the unreserved physical commitment to Pears, the liberation to which Auden for so long had been prompting Britten in poems addressed to him. It proved to be an exemplary relationship, both personal -- their mutual passion survived until the very end of Britten's life -- and musical: 'Peter Pears accompanied by Benjamin Britten' developed into one of the most distinguished and celebrated voice and piano duos of the century. Their 'Winterreise' (Schubert) and 'Dichterliebe' (Schumann), for example, were but two classical masterpieces their performances of which were unique examples of re-creation and renewal. It was during these American years that Britten wrote his first cycle for Pears, the famous 'Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo', the first of the long sustained stream of works conceived for Pears's voice and, not less, his astonishing ability not just to articulate words but to use them to colour the pitches of which they formed an integral and, above all, musical part. It was the beginning too of Britten's significant interest in and revival of Purcell: his realizations of Purcell's vocal music were motivated by his developing a recital repertory, in which Pears was his partner (as were his folk-song arrangements). On the other hand, the American period marked the end of Britten's career as a solo pianist. The United States premiere of his piano concerto, which he gave in 1940 in Chicago, was effectively his last public appearance in a solo role in the concert hall; thereafter he was heard only in chamber music and vocal music, almost always with very close musical colleagues. 
For two and three-quarter years Britten and Pears lived mainly on Long Island, at Amityville, where they shared the family home and life of Dr William Mayer and his wife, Elizabeth (1884-1970), the latter a friend too of Auden, with whom she later made a translation of Goethe's 'Italienische Reise'. They moved briefly in 1940 to a house in Brooklyn, 7 Middagh Street, which was to enjoy fame for its literary and musical associations and a bohemian lifestyle, over which Auden presided as proxy landlord. This was not much to their taste, and they spent the summer of 1941 at Escondido, California. As it happened, Britten suffered a serious composing block -- as he remembered it, a 'complete incapacity' to work -- towards the end of his sojourn in North America, but despite this the list of works completed or composed is impressive: it includes 'Les illuminations' (it was Auden who had earlier introduced Britten to Rimbaud); the first string quartet; 'Sinfonia da requiem', given its first performance by the New York Philharmonic under John Barbirolli; and 'Diversions', for piano (left hand) and orchestra, commissioned by Paul Wittgenstein, the brother of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. The 'Sinfonia' had been preceded by the first performance at Carnegie Hall of the violin concerto. 
Serious attention, without doubt, was beginning to be paid to Britten's music in the USA, and a further bid, of a particularly significant kind, was made in a unique collaboration from this period, the composition of 'Paul Bunyan', an operetta, so-called, based on the famous American folk-hero. Auden wrote an inimitably brilliant and witty libretto, in turn funny and profoundly moving, while Britten, with the exercise of comparable skills, ingeniously and inventively explored the language and styles of popular American music, including country music (such as the narrator's ballads accompanied by guitar). Britten and Auden even had an eye on the ear of Broadway, though ultimately the work received its first production by a semi-professional company on the campus of Columbia University, New York, on 5 May 1941. It was a flop, generally derided by local critics. Britten and Auden contemplated revisions, but the process was halted by the composer's return to England; moreover, his experience of working with Auden on the operetta had begun to indicate that all was not altogether plain sailing as far as future collaborations were concerned -- and such at length proved to be the case. But nothing can take away from the importance of the operetta as Britten's very first full-length work for the stage. At the end of his life he revised it himself and would doubtless have been gratified, if surprised, by the success it has since enjoyed, above all its triumphant revival in New York -- and on Broadway! -- at the New York City Opera in 1998. 
While in California in 1941, Britten and Pears's attention had been drawn to George Crabbe's 'The Borough' by an article by E. M. Forster in 'The Listener', and in particular to that part of Crabbe's poem entitled 'Peter Grimes'. This led to the composition of Britten's first opera proper of the same title, with a libretto based on Crabbe by Montagu Slater, an old friend and collaborator from Britten's pre-war activities in the left-wing theatre. In the meantime, and an indication of the heightening of Britten's profile in America, Serge Koussevitsky had conducted the 'Sinfonia da requiem' in Boston and was clearly impressed by the composer's potential, perhaps especially his sense of the dramatic. As a result, the Koussevitsky Foundation commissioned Britten to write his new opera, and substantial thought was given to the project before Britten and Pears's return to England in March 1942. It was a return motivated by anxiety at wartime separation from friends and relatives and a profound sense of deracination on Britten's part, further deepened by his chance encounter with Crabbe's narratives, rooted as they were in Britten's own Suffolk. When the Second World War had broken out in September 1939, Britten and Pears were advised officially not to attempt a return, and it was not until March 1942 that they succeeded in making the perilous crossing of the Atlantic from Halifax, Nova Scotia, to Liverpool. During the journey Britten worked away at completing his setting of Auden's 'Hymn to St. Cecilia'. Despite the claustrophobic below-deck circumstances of a wartime crossing, what emerged was an unaccompanied choral work celebrating music and creativity, remarkable for its technical perfection and the innocent radiance of its inspirations, a reminder of what C major still had to offer. Yet another choral work was also done: 'A Ceremony of Carols', for treble voices and harp, destined to become one of the best loved and most widely performed of Britten's choral works and one in which for the first time on so elaborate a scale he employed boys' voices (the precedents here were 'Friday Afternoons' and the suite of Rossini arrangements originally written as the soundtrack for an animated silhouette film of Lotte Reiniger's and later, in revised form, to win fame in the concert hall as the 'Soirees musicales' of 1936). Thereafter, works for children or works which included children as performers occupied increasing space in Britten's output, among them the miniature opera 'The Little Sweep', from 'Let's make an Opera' (1949), 'Noye's Fludde' (1958), a setting of the Chester miracle play that was also a major step along the road to the church parables of the 1960s, 'The Golden Vanity' (1966), and 'Children's Crusade' (1969). In this category, special mention has to be made of 'The Turn of the Screw', the chamber opera of 1954, in which the crucial role of Miles is allotted to a treble. 
In the premiere of that opera the role of Miles was undertaken by David Hemmings, with whom, it has been reliably suggested, Britten became 'infatuated', although it seems that Hemmings at the time was unaware of this. Hemmings himself, who later became a celebrated stage and screen actor, has described the infatuation in terms that might well be realistically applied to all of Britten's relationships with boys: 'In all of the time that I spent with him he 'never' abused that trust' (BBC2, 13 Aug 1994). Interestingly enough, Michael Crawford, a well-known actor and stage personality whose career, like that of Hemmings, owes much to his early encouragement by Britten (having had roles in both 'The Little Sweep' and 'Noye's Fludde'), wrote in his autobiography (1999): 'I cannot say enough about the kindness of that great man... [He] was the pre-eminent British composer of his time and he had a wonderful patience and affinity with young people. He loved music, and loved youngsters caring about music. (Crawford, 43)' There can be no doubt that young boys -- 'thin-as-a-board juveniles... sexless and innocent', as Auden put it in a famous letter to Britten in 1942 -- made a powerful sexual appeal to Britten, and much discussion of this predilection followed in the wake of his death. It is probably unrealistic to suggest that Hemmings's and Crawford's should be accepted as the last words on a topic that since Britten's death has consumed far too much space and time and generated an excess of speculation. But at least a plea can be entered for a sense of proportion; the meaning and significance of Britten's works, prodigious in quantity and diversity, should be sought in themselves alone, not in some supposed explanatory parallel between life and art. 
When back in England, Britten and Pears registered as conscientious objectors. Both men held strong pacifist convictions of long standing. Pears was successful on making his first appearance before the tribunal. Britten, however, was not granted the unconditional exemption he sought, and appealed. The first statement of his position he made to the tribunal is of fundamental importance to the understanding of his pacifist philosophy; in addition it throws light on the much-debated topic of his specifically 'religious' beliefs. In fact, Britten informed the tribunal first time round that he did not believe in the divinity of Christ and had not attended church during the preceding five years. He spelt out, in his written submission, that 'The whole of my life has been devoted to a life of creation (being by profession a composer) and I cannot take part in acts of destruction' ('Letters', 2.1046). This clearly defined principle not only had immediate consequences for his day-to-day musical activities but was to surface prominently in his creative thinking in the years ahead. On appeal, he was granted exemption on the condition that he gave concerts with Pears for the wartime Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA). Already on the Atlantic crossing Britten had shown the preoccupation with English word-setting that characterized much of his music for the rest of his life, a pronounced thrust that was to mark the works that were composed between 1942 and 1945. Two of them, his second song cycle for voice and orchestra, the 'Serenade' (1943) for tenor, horn, and strings, and the opera 'Peter Grimes' (1945), brought Britten to the forefront of public and critical attention. In particular, the opera established an unprecedented international reputation for a British composer and constituted the memorable and indeed monumental first step in the creation of a national tradition of opera. The momentum generated by 'Grimes' continues even as the twenty-first century begins. The 'Serenade', with its 'two' virtuoso soloists, one vocal, one instrumental, was a magical exercise in nocturnal imagery and matching sonorities, supremely lyrical but executed with a challenging technical sophistication. The work was almost immediately recognized as the masterpiece it is. Typically, in a letter written even before the premiere, Britten described it as 'not important stuff, but quite pleasant, I think' ('Letters', 2.1144). 'Grimes', too, of course, has its lyrical moments, but the 'Serenade' would hardly have prepared anyone for the savagery of 'Grimes', its dramatic power and the skill with which Britten managed the very large vocal and orchestral forces involved. While it is perfectly true, as is often said, that in the opera Britten reaffirms his Suffolk roots, perhaps more importantly it remains a work in which he unequivocally asserts his 'European' roots. He had by no means put behind him the European stylizations embodied by such crucial works as 'Les illuminations', the Michelangelo sonnets, and 'Sinfonia da requiem'. It is indeed the symphonies of Mahler, Alban Berg's 'Wozzeck', and Shostakovich's 'Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District' that stand behind, but do not overshadow, 'Grimes'. Indeed, the last act of Britten's opera contains a 'mad' scene, a phenomenal recapitulatory cadenza virtually for the solo voice alone, which must count as one of the most audacious concepts in twentieth-century opera. 

'Grimes' is exceptional too in that its narrative is tightly focused on the outsider, the nonconformist, the social reject. Philip Brett, in his pioneering study of the work, has drawn attention to the parallel that can be drawn here with Britten's own experience as a homosexual in an often virulently homophobic society. It is undoubtedly a painfully relevant point, but of course it is the power of Britten as an artist that he can universalize his theme and make it directly meaningful to humanity at large. The Europeanism of the opera's style was surely an additional factor that helped establish the work on an international scale. One notes, however, the peculiar irony of so bleak and pessimistic a work being given its premiere at Sadler's Wells Theatre on 7 June 1945, at the very time that the allies were celebrating their military triumph in Europe. (The paradox only emphasizes that one of Britten's distinguishing features was his pessimism.) Furthermore, this was a work composed by a pacifist, whose beliefs, sexuality, and absence in the USA had not only been the subject of hostile comment but at one stage were the preoccupation of a dissenting group at the theatre, who threatened the opera's launch and succeeded in preventing its immediate revival at the Wells -- sorry proof of the discouraging parochialism still prevalent in post-war English musical culture. 
All this makes of quite special significance the tour of the German concentration camps in which Britten, very much on his insistence, accompanied, both musically (at the piano) and personally, the remarkable violinist Yehudi Menuhin. This harrowing experience left its mark on the music written immediately in its aftermath, in particular the sometimes distraught settings of the 'Holy Sonnets' of John Donne (op. 35). As Menuhin himself later observed, Britten clearly felt the need to experience at first hand the suffering that war had brought to his fellow humans and from which his unshakeable pacifist convictions had excluded him. There can be no doubt that the 'War Requiem', composed in 1961 for the reconsecration of Coventry Cathedral, a work that perhaps exceeded even 'Grimes' in the impact it made virtually worldwide, also reflected the horror and compassion generated by the tour of the camps; but it should also be remembered that while this was, as it had to be, a unique experience, compositionally speaking there had preceded it, from the 1930s onwards, a significant quantity of music in which Britten had unequivocally demonstrated his resistance to and condemnation of acts of war and personal violence. Thus it is that the 'War Requiem', which so captured the public imagination and mood of the 1960s that it became virtually an icon of the period, perhaps particularly for the younger generations, was in fact not something new but the consummation of a long-established creative ideology. Nor was it an end: the requiem was succeeded until the time of Britten's death by works of diverse character, in all of which in some way or another was expressed his preoccupation with violence, among them 'Voices for Today', commissioned by the United Nations for its twenty-fifth anniversary in 1965, and which led to the memorable meeting in New York the following year between the composer and the then secretary-general of the UN, U Thant. In 1970, in this same context, Britten undertook what proved to be his penultimate opera, 'Owen Wingrave', after a story by Henry James. He had many times been asked to consider an opera for television. It was altogether characteristic of him that, when the BBC finally secured a positive response, he seized the opportunity to exploit the mass medium for the first time to challenge the conventions and traditions of militarism, especially that form of it rooted in dynasties. On its first transmission in 1971, the opera was seen and heard in at least thirteen countries, a global mass audience to match the mass medium for which the work was conceived. After its launch, the work was occasionally performed in the theatre, but it was not until 2001 that a new film was made for television by Channel 4. The advances in film technology since the premiere were imaginatively explored to make the opera's anti-militarist message clear and meaningful to television audiences in the new century. 
Both 'Wingrave' and its successor, 'Death in Venice' (1973), amply illumine Britten's late style and the many innovations he had introduced into the musical theatre spanning three decades of prodigious fertility. Post- 'Grimes' his operas continually explored new paths. Already, in 1946, as a result of an invitation from John Christie, he had composed 'The Rape of Lucretia', commissioned to reopen post-war Glyndebourne. What was startlingly new here was the concept of chamber opera -- opera wanting nothing in the virtuosity demanded of the singers and players but involving relatively slender forces (a maximum instrumental ensemble of thirteen players). 'Lucretia' took as its theme ravaged innocence, to which Britten returned again and again in his 'oeuvre', in many guises and contrasting genres. His second chamber opera, 'Albert Herring', looked at innocence from quite another angle. The opera's protagonist, Albert, has to free himself from his domineering mother -- not only free himself, indeed, but 'find' himself. That voyage of self-discovery had certainly been part of Britten's own experience and profoundly enriches the humane comedy of 'Herring'. The serious underside of the opera, already anticipated in the second half of act II, breaks surface at the end of act III, the great threnody in which the supposed death of the absent Albert is mourned -- an audacious denouement that was widely misunderstood and misinterpreted when the work was first heard. The last of the trinity of chamber operas was an arrangement -- 'realization', to use Britten's own term -- of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera', a coruscatingly brilliant exercise in digging out the totally unexpected from what were often 'traditional' tunes, often by contrapuntal means, canon especially. Here, as also in his many folk-song arrangements for voice and piano or orchestra, Britten, by treating the melodies as if he had composed them himself, succeeds in creating a work wholly in his own musical image. This is an opera which remains much underestimated. Its dazzling counterpoint alone secures it a special place in the evolution of Britten's compositional techniques. 
The new concept of chamber opera was an idea -- better, an ideal -- that Britten had thought out even before 'Grimes', and one should not think that its materialization was, 'au fond', other than the development of a powerful creative preference. None the less, there were other factors involved that had long-term consequences with regard to the character and dissemination of Britten's own works and, above all, their authentic performance; in addition there was a serious ambition to detach himself from the ethos of 'grand opera' and create a format that would make opera more accessible to the public at large, especially by means of touring. Thus the foundation of the English Opera Group with a group of close colleagues in 1947 represented an intricate combination of aesthetic, economic, and socio-political motivations. 'Herring', the second of the three chamber operas to be played at Glyndebourne, was in fact the first of the works to be launched under the banner of the new company. Thereafter, with only very occasional exceptions, Britten's musico-theatrical works were written for and first performed by the group. However, it was not Britten's works alone that were the group's preoccupation. Fundamental to the ambition and aesthetic of the organization was the systematic commissioning -- and subsequent touring, at home and abroad -- of new chamber operas from both established and aspiring composers, among them Lennox Berkeley, Harrison Birtwistle, Gordon Crosse, Thea Musgrave, Arthur Oldham, William Walton, and Malcolm Williamson. This was a brave and serious attempt to discover new talent and give body to the new tradition of English opera initiated by 'Grimes' in an economically viable format that might win new audiences in locations which in the past had had no opportunity to experience opera. There was a further intention that must not be overlooked, with once again very long-term consequences for Britten's own development and for musical culture in Britain during the latter half of the twentieth century. He had always found it congenial to create and himself perform in the context of close collaborations with friends. The formation of the English Opera Group meant that the design, stage direction, and vocal and instrumental resources were all undertaken by colleagues from whom Britten might expect sympathy for, and comprehension of, his artistic aims; it also provided the capacity to meet his undeniably stringent demands. Having secured, in the shape of the English Opera Group, the ideal means of achieving his own vision of opera, Britten took a further momentous step in 1948 with the creation of the Aldeburgh Festival. This in turn secured the platform on which performances, at their best of an incomparably creative character, would be given and addressed to an audience rooted in East Anglia. There is no reason to doubt the sincerity of Britten's feeling for the region in which he was born or his commitment to the community -- Aldeburgh -- in which he lived and worked for most of his life. The founding of the festival speaks for itself. On the other hand, what had begun as a sometimes emphatically local venture rapidly developed into a unique national artistic annual event, and by the time of Britten's death it had for years commanded international attention. 
The nexus represented by the group and festival was in fact the result of the interaction between Britten's activities as a creator and a performer. In both areas he was the generating force, which is not to underestimate or undervalue the massive contribution of Peter Pears and, at a later stage, of Imogen Holst, the daughter of Gustav Holst. The attention paid internationally to the festival of course derived in large measure from the constant flow of new works by Britten that were first heard there; while it was the festival which enabled Britten to introduce to Aldeburgh audiences a quite astonishing collective of international performers of the highest calibre. Janet Baker, Heather Harper, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Sviatoslav Richter, Mstislav Rostropovich, Murray Perahia, Julian Bream, the Amadeus Quartet, and Galina Vishnevskaya were only a few, the majority of whom remained firm friends until the end of Britten's life. It was some of these artists whose gifts and personalities in turn stimulated Britten to write new works for them. Thus was the flow of creativity sustained by a kind of amalgam of all the areas in which Britten, with his chosen team of collaborators, was active. The next inevitable step -- again something that he had had in mind for a long period -- was to build the concert hall which, together with the Suffolk churches already conscripted, would accommodate festival performances. These were not only of his own music and that of his contemporaries, but of the great legacy of the past -- Bach, Dowland, Purcell, Haydn, Mozart, Schubert, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Mahler, for example -- performances which, since the composer's death, have rightly come to be assessed as one of the musical phenomena for which the twentieth-century musical scene will be remembered, such was the intense identification with whichever composer Britten was re-creating, whether he sat at the keyboard or stood on the podium. Supremely endowed as he was as a pianist, he could without any doubt have been among the world's top-class public virtuosos; but, like Melville's Bartleby, he 'preferred not to'. 
It was a feature of Britten's compositional method that he would sometimes comprehensively explore a musico-theatrical format that he had himself established in a sequence of works, as in the case of the ground-breaking trinity of chamber operas, composed between 1946 and 1948, and, later, in the composition of the three church parables in the 1960s. But even where the format imposed a certain unity of method, this did not result in any lack of diversity in the character of the individual works, each of which occupies strikingly different worlds of feeling and 'mise en scene'. (In a different example of the genre altogether, the five 'Canticles', composed between 1947 and 1974, demonstrate what diversity Britten could achieve even while respecting the basic concept.) 
When 'The Beggar's Opera' (1948) was succeeded by 'Billy Budd' (1951; revised, 1960) and 'Gloriana' (1953), both of which operas involved very large resources, large choruses in particular, and both of which were composed for first performance at Covent Garden, it might have been concluded that the genre of chamber opera had been abandoned. In 1954, however, there followed at the festival of contemporary music in Venice the first performance of 'The Turn of the Screw', a work which can properly be regarded not only as the summit of Britten's chamber opera concept but as one of his greatest masterpieces for the musical theatre. It is, above all, distinguished for its unique form -- a theme and variations for orchestra which enclose the sixteen scenes of the opera and culminate in a passacaglia (another form which Britten made peculiarly his own; among his principal sources were Purcell, Berg, and Shostakovich). The tightness of the form is matched by the economy of means and an unfaltering pacing of the drama. It was in the 'Screw' too, for the first time, that there emerged explicitly and audibly Britten's growing preoccupation with the ordering and organization of all twelve pitches of the chromatic scale, though there had been intimations of this in 'Billy Budd', some three years earlier. While Schoenberg was indubitably an influence, in the 'Screw' this shows up principally at the horizontal (that is, the thematic) level, not the vertical (accompanimental) level. (As a youth, it should be remembered, Britten had much admired certain of Schoenberg's works and had even himself played Schoenberg's 'Sechs kleine Klavierstucke', op. 19, at one of his mother's soirees -- a 'modern music' evening -- when still a schoolboy. This Lowestoft premiere on 30 April 1930 would surely have come as something of a surprise to Mrs Britten's guests.) Thereafter, what can be described as 'twelve-note propositions' recurred with increasing frequency, complexity, and weight in Britten's music to the end of his life. However, there was never any adherence to the strict serial system as conceived by Schoenberg or any systematic abandonment of tonality, which, for Britten, as he himself vowed, was absolutely fundamental and indispensable to his own creativity; he could not envisage composing without it. 
Thus it is that the 'Screw' must occupy a special place in any account of the evolution of Britten's musical language, one which throughout his life (and his commitment to tonality apart) was notably eclectic in character and non-ideological in spirit. What he chose as materials or means of organization, he made his own. This flexibility proved a notable resource for the operas, and in particular those which succeeded the chamber operas of the 1940s: 'Billy Budd', 'Gloriana', 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1960), 'Owen Wingrave' (1970), and, finally, 'Death in Venice' (1973). The very diversity of the dramas and the changing landscapes, seascapes, and cityscapes in which they are located called for music of an exceptional versatility. Britten's inventiveness and imagination rose to the challenge; his, indeed, was a language which, to the very end of his life, was in a continuous process of accumulating fresh vocabulary. On occasion these made a covert appearance in advance of their later patent materialization. 'Billy Budd' is a case in point. Despite the fact that the work might be said to be dedicated to re-energizing the power and image of the triad -- one of the basic building-blocks of music across four centuries -- it also employed at a critical moment in the evolution of the drama a type of polyphony -- heterophony, often the simultaneous combination of different rhythmic versions of the same melody -- that played a conspicuous role in his later music, not only for the theatre but also for the concert hall; indeed, it was to constitute the distinguishing feature of Britten's final period of composition. The accrual of this specific technique marks one of the most important developments in the evolution of Britten's composing and is intimately tied in with the events of his life. It was in fact during his wartime sojourn in the United States that Britten met the Canadian-born composer, pianist, and scholar Colin McPhee (1901-1964). McPhee it was who had studied the indigenous music of Bali and its orchestra -- the gamelan -- and soon after they had first met in 1939 he introduced Britten to examples of Balinese ceremonial music arranged (by McPhee) for two pianos. (A historic recording of this exists, made by McPhee and Britten in New York, probably in 1941.) Although Britten seems not to have betrayed to McPhee much immediate enthusiasm for Balinese music, clearly the experience made a profound impression on him: the first audible stirrings of it are to be found in the prologue to 'Paul Bunyan', when the chorus observes that the moon is 'turning blue', and Britten had to come up with comparably distinctive and arresting music. In short, there began the incorporation of a new vocabulary, and the techniques to make it explicit, into works composed by Britten after 'Peter Grimes' (for example, the 'Sunday Morning' interlude, or the explosion of heterophony in 'Billy Budd' (Vere's C minor aria in act II)). But, fascinatingly, it was not until 1957, and the first performance by the Royal Ballet at Covent Garden of the full-length ballet 'The Prince of the Pagodas' (Pagodaland, as the ballet has it, was, of course, Bali), with choreography by John Cranko, that public and critical attention was drawn to the oriental dimension that forms so prominent a part of the score, the longest orchestral score in fact Britten was ever to compose. Part of it was a large independent percussion orchestra -- Britten's version of the gamelan -- in which audiences were regaled with brilliant transcriptions for Western instruments of music that Britten himself had heard on his momentous visit to Bali (he was on a world tour with Peter Pears) in 1956: 'about as complicated as Schonberg' (Cooke, 'Britten and the Far East', 70), he wrote when assessing its technique in a letter to Imogen Holst from the island. 
When this extraordinary work was first heard, its overt links with and references to the Orient were regarded as a probable one-off day trip to a highly decorative, exotic world of sound. But this assumption was confounded when, eight years later, Britten composed and brought to first performance (in 1964, again with the English Opera Group, again at the Aldeburgh Festival) the first of his three parables for church performance, 'Curlew River', even though, in retrospect, significant foreshadowings and parallels may be found in 'Noye's Fludde' and even earlier in 'St Nicolas', the quasi-dramatic church cantata of 1948. But what was peculiar to 'Curlew River' was its Japanese roots. A visit to Japan had immediately followed the visit to Bali (on this same round-the-world excursion Britten and Pears had also been in Yugoslavia, Turkey, and Pakistan, and had then continued their tour in Singapore, Indonesia, Japan, Macau, Thailand, India, and Ceylon), and it was in Tokyo, in February 1956, that Britten attended a performance of the ancient and famous Noh play 'Sumidagawa' ('The Sumida River'). Britten was overwhelmed by the drama, the ritualistic, idealized action, and the music, a form of recitation accompanied by a very small instrumental on-stage ensemble. Although Britten himself declared, typically, that it was never his intention to attempt an authentic replica in any sense of Noh, a well-known Japanese composer declared that he was astonished at Britten's absorption in so short a time of so much identifiable detail taken from Japanese sources; and it was not only Noh drama that was at the heart of 'Curlew River' but also Britten's encounter with 'Gagaku', the ancient traditional court music of Japan. It is true, of course, that Britten relocated his version of Noh in the medieval English mystery play (compare 'Noye's Fludde'), but what should be borne in mind is that Noh itself might be meaningfully compared with the liturgical drama of the middle ages; both genres run in chronological parallel. What, however, is of central importance to comprehend with regard to 'Curlew River' and its successors, 'The Burning Fiery Furnace' (1966) and 'The Prodigal Son' (1968), is the acquisition and deployment of new techniques -- heterophony, above all -- culled from Britten's encounters with musics from non-Western cultures, an example of the process of absorption and accumulation by which he constantly renewed his musical language. 
This radical new path makes it possible to present Britten as the most important twentieth-century Western composer substantially to incorporate non-Western techniques into his own compositional practice, and it can be traced back to the early 1940s and the accident of his meeting with McPhee in Amityville, New York. It could be argued indeed that there is sufficient evidence in works preceding the encounter with McPhee to make it logical -- predictable even -- that the techniques he absorbed on Bali and in Japan should have made so powerful a creative appeal. In other words, there was an established predisposition to succumb to what he heard. Thus it was that the new techniques and new sonorities he brought home with him as part of his creative baggage continued to play an often dominant role in much of Britten's final music, in works as contrasted as 'Death in Venice', where Bali and the gamelan surface prominently to characterize the Tadzio of Thomas Mann's imagination and the athletics of the children on the beach, and the late song cycle 'The Poet's Echo' (1965), settings of Pushkin (in the original Russian) composed for Galina Vishnevskaya and Mstislav Rostropovich. The song cycle belongs unequivocally to the wholly European tradition of song cycles for voice and piano established by Britten's great predecessors and memorably sustained by him from his first cycle, the Michelangelo sonnets of 1940, until his last, 'Who are these Children?', of 1969. Analysis, however, reveals that the Pushkin settings, though they may wear a European face, are serviced technically by heterophony, the principal form of polyphony in south-east Asia and the Orient. 
This unique interaction between East and West, which secures for Britten a quite singular place in the history of twentieth-century music, is perhaps best exemplified in his penultimate opera, 'Owen Wingrave' (1970), where Owen's climactic apostrophe to peace is delivered over the rotation of twelve triads spanning the twelve pitches of the chromatic scale in simultaneous combination with an independent percussion ensemble, the heterophonic texture of which provides a horizontal, gamelan-like complement to the vertical conflation of the triads. Thus, to articulate the universal need for and importance of peace, Britten unites sonorous images and techniques drawn from cultures of East and West without detriment to their distinctiveness. There is no other moment quite like this in European music of the past century. 
It is easy, because of the scope, stature, and sheer volume of the operas, and the wealth of vocal music of all kinds, to pay insufficient attention to the many works Britten wrote in other, specifically non-vocal genres. Even in his schooldays and early youth Britten had composed no fewer than six string quartets, one of which (in D) he was to revive and revise in 1974. These were the predecessors of the three masterly string quartets, the first composed in 1941 in the United States; the second in 1945, in celebration of the 250th anniversary of Purcell's death; the third in 1975, at the very end of his life. Fascinatingly, this late-style work ends with a passacaglia which incorporates materials from 'Death in Venice'. The quartet's finale was itself written in Venice. Britten heard a run-through of the piece by the Amadeus Quartet in the library of the Red House in Aldeburgh on 28 September 1976, but he died before the premiere at the Snape Maltings on 19 December. 
Many of the orchestral works have established themselves in the concert repertory both at home and overseas, among them the early 'Simple Symphony' (1934, and less simple than its title would suggest); the 'Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge' for string orchestra (1937); and the 'Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra' (1946), subtitled 'Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Henry Purcell'. Britten had composed his piano concerto -- his only work in this genre -- in 1938; in August that year he appeared as soloist in its premiere at a Promenade Concert under Henry Wood. In 1939 there followed the violin concerto, again to remain a solitary example of its kind, which received its first performance in New York in 1940; and it was there, in 1941, that the 'Sinfonia da requiem' was first performed, having been completed in the preceding year. These three major orchestral works form a virtual trinity united in their response, albeit diverse in degree and musical character, to the political anxieties of the time which had already erupted with such extraordinary vehemence in the orchestral song cycle 'Our Hunting Fathers' (1936). What is encountered here is a teasing but highly significant creative paradox: that while public recognition of Britten's works involving orchestra was established only well after the premiere of 'Peter Grimes', it was in those very works that the orchestral mastery which was to win the enthusiasm of the opera's first audiences had been prepared and demonstrated. Ironically enough, the consequence of Britten's developing relationship with the orchestra was the creation of a four-movement suite from the opera -- the 'Four Sea Interludes' -- that soon became the best known of Britten's orchestral music, which says something about the symphonic scale of his thinking in the opera. (In later years his orchestral works were to enjoy an independence that is entirely their own right.) 
Although Britten never made use of 'symphony' as a title without qualifying or descriptive additions, two large-scale works, the 'Spring Symphony', for solo voices, chorus, boy's choir, and orchestra (1949), and the 'Symphony for Cello and Orchestra' (1964), belong to a symphonic tradition created largely by Mahler, by whom Britten was much influenced; he was among that composer's earliest admirers in England, in the mid-1930s. The 'Spring Symphony', for instance, incorporates vocal forms and the matching resources to realize them -- including cantata, orchestral song, and a choral finale -- that, until the advent of Mahler (with the profoundly influential exception of Beethoven), had been excluded from the concept of symphony proper. The 'Symphony for Cello and Orchestra' on the other hand, composed in 1963 and inspired by the peculiar genius of Mstislav Rostropovich, must rank among the most important of Britten's purely instrumental works. It shows a mastery of the narrative form Mahler had bequeathed to composers of symphonies in the twentieth century, proceeding as it does from darkness to light in a sequence of movements which, while never failing to exploit the virtuosity of the soloist, demonstrably make up a symphony, not a concerto. The soloist is the vehicle by means of which the symphonic drama is enacted. The proof the 'Cello Symphony' offers of Britten's ability to think and create in purely instrumental terms on so exceptional a scale gives cause for much regret that he did not more often turn to the genre of the symphony. This same work was also undoubtedly indebted to that other inheritor of Mahler's potent legacy, Dmitry Shostakovich (1906-1975). An extraordinarily close friendship grew up between Shostakovich and Britten, particularly towards the end of their lives. The immense admiration each felt for the other is amply documented, not least in Britten's dedication to Shostakovich of the third of his church parables, 'The Prodigal Son' (1968), and Shostakovich's dedication to Britten of his symphony no. 14, the first performance of which outside of Russia was entrusted by the composer to his British friend and colleague at the Aldeburgh Festival of 1970. It is in this symphony that Shostakovich memorably avows his bond with Britten in his setting of Kuchelbecker's 'O Delvig, Delvig!', a text which celebrates the freedom an artist should enjoy as of right and reminds us that 'inspired deeds and sweet song are alike immortal!'. 
An earlier and very important friendship was with Michael Tippett (1905-1998), with whom Britten was particularly close after his return from the United States to England at war, where Tippett too was a notably steadfast pacifist. There was much mutual admiration and shared musical ideals, activities, and ambitions at this time, when the pairing of Britten and Tippett was often used to identify the cutting edge of a perceived renaissance in English music. Other prominent composer friends included Lennox Berkeley (1903-1989) and William Walton (1902-1982), though the latter seemed to find it difficult to accept (or enjoy) the success of his younger colleague. 
From 1947 Britten lived in the small coastal town of Aldeburgh in Suffolk, first in a house facing the sea on Crag Path, then in the Red House, on Golf Lane, where he died in 1976. In February 1970, however, as a consequence of the ever-increasing pressures on the Red House -- which had become the headquarters of Britten's public and private lives -- he and Pears, after a long search, purchased a 'retreat', an old farmhouse in a markedly remote location in rural Suffolk, to which they made two important additions, a big music room conceived by the same architect, Peter Collymore, who had designed the library adjoining the Red House, completed in 1980, and perhaps even more importantly a studio, located in the farthest corner of the land, modelled, it must have been, on the 'composing house' that was a vital adjunct to Mahler's creativity. This Horham studio secured the calm and isolation essential to Britten's composing, which the constant busyness of the Red House put at risk; and it was here that much of Britten's late music was composed, including his last opera, 'Death in Venice', the premiere of which he heard, at least in part, on the radio at Horham, where he was convalescing after his heart surgery in 1972. There had been no intention of altogether parting company with the Red House but undoubtedly in the longer term he and Pears had thought of Horham, with its spectacular land- and cloudscapes, and a tiny open air swimming pool, as a possible ultimate home. In the event, while both men enjoyed some happy and fruitful times there, the collapse in Britten's health put paid to their occasional residence. It was from Horham, indeed, that Britten made his last journey to the Red House before his death. Britten was held in public, indeed national, esteem throughout the final decades of his life, and his music never lost its grip on both public attention and affection. In the sixties and seventies, however, there was a discernible cooling off in responses to his music, especially among the younger generations of composers, many of whom had previously adopted him as a role model. Britten was undoubtedly aware of and pained by this adverse swing in opinion; but the fashion to dismiss him, not only at home but also abroad, was not of long duration. Since his death there has been global recognition of his status as one of the most important composers of the century. A quite different kind of negative response -- the only one of its kind during the years of Britten's creative maturity -- was generated by the premiere of 'Gloriana', the opera he wrote to celebrate the coronation of Elizabeth II and first performed at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, on 8 June 1953. The royal gala that launched the opera proved to be a difficult, sceptical occasion, with an audience made up largely of diplomats, courtiers, and politicians whose first interest was not music. This might have been foreseen. What was not was the seizing of the opportunity to give the composer a robust dressing-down: many voices were raised to suggest that Britten had overreached himself, had pushed his luck too far, and somehow not composed a work worthy of the event it purported to honour; by some indeed it was considered an affront to the monarch. The fracas that ensued deserves (brief) attention for the reason that it was perhaps the only occasion in Britten's later life when there bubbled to the surface clear intimations of resentment and envy of his success that had long been around but had hitherto lacked a point of ignition. Undoubtedly too the row was fuelled, albeit more covertly, by other long-standing sources of hostility: his pacifist convictions and, above all, his homosexuality. The strong vein of homophobia in British culture, particularly in the post-war years, can never be disregarded when tracing the trajectory of Britten's life. It would be absurd to pretend that the life and the art were otherwise than complex. But psychobiography and the most extreme of gender studies apart, there is one conjunction of Britten's life and art that can be simply stated: his life 'was' his music; he had no other, and it is a serious error of judgement to read the art as if it were somehow an autobiographical account of the life. 
Almost the only interruptions that Britten permitted to his compositional activity were those generated by his partnering of Peter Pears, both at home and overseas, and the demands made by the Aldeburgh Festival and the English Opera Group, especially when, as was often the case, one of his own operas -- a new one, or an important revival -- was involved. There were occasional bouts of ill health, but in general he had the energy and physical stamina to fulfil his creative programme; as is well known, he was a keen and formidably accomplished tennis player; he swam, he ate and drank moderately, and he did not smoke. Long walks, which accompanied the exercise of his creative imagination, were part of his daily routine. There were, to be sure, what might be described as psychosomatic illnesses; it cannot have been entirely accidental that these set-backs seemed specifically to affect his ability physically to use pencil and manuscript paper. But these blocks, though real enough -- and painful -- were rare (the works in question, some of them among the most important he was to write, eventually got done), and it was not until the very last years of his life that he succumbed to a serious illness of the heart that had its origins in early childhood. But even this crisis in his health, for so it proved to be, did not stop -- dam -- his determination to compose. Against the advice of his doctors he refused to undergo the necessary surgery until he had put the finishing touches to 'Death in Venice'. After open-heart surgery, which was only partially successful, and during which he suffered a minor stroke -- one of the major consequences of which was that he was no longer able to play the piano (his right arm and hand were affected) -- he continued to compose. Among the works created against the odds in this final phase were the 'Suite on English Folk Tunes', 'A Time there was...' (his last orchestral work), the dramatic cantata 'Phaedra' (for Janet Baker), and, for the Amadeus String Quartet, the third quartet -- works which showed no diminution in the power of his creativity, though all were touched, inevitably, by his consciousness of impending mortality. 
For all his fame and worldwide recognition, Britten remained a truly modest man. Though it may seem strange to those who were not close to him, and were yet fully aware of the prodigious gifts with which he was endowed, he felt inwardly insecure and uncertain that he was as good a composer as so many told him he was. As Peter Pears once observed, Britten would never have ranked himself alongside his great classical predecessors: it was just that he knew he was better at what he did than most of his contemporaries, perhaps especially those at home. Since his death the world seems to have taken a more positive view than the composer's own. There followed a significant increase in the number of performances of his works instead of the customary decline. But his self-assessment was typical of the unsparing standards by which he judged himself, and which often he seems not to have noticed that he had achieved or exceeded. In this sense, his insecurity may be said to have contributed to his eventual mastery. He was always wanting to do better still. As he remarked in an interview in 1964, 'I haven't yet reached the simplicity I should like in my music, and I am enormously aware that I haven't yet come up to the technical standards Bridge set me.' 
Generous in spirit (though frugal in his habits), kind, courteous, compassionate, genial in his everyday dealings with the everyday world -- all these qualities might with truth serve any attempt at describing his personality. He was, it is true, conspicuously reserved in public manner, but when travelling at home or abroad with close friends or taking part in quasi-family outings -- picnicking was a much favoured and much enjoyed pursuit -- he could be very good company: warm, observant, amused, and amusing, his habitually attendant anxieties in temporary suspense. Watching cricket with Pears, sometimes with binoculars, was another relaxation, especially when the two men were on tour and a convenient window overlooking the ground afforded them the opportunity. Perhaps it was only in later years, when he seemed to become ever more conscious of the world's pain and ills, that liberating laughter was less often heard from him. On the other hand, manifestations of ironic comedy made a powerful appeal, hence no doubt his own (serious!) comedy in music, 'Albert Herring', and his long-standing enthusiasm for the classic Marx Brothers films. But, as was inevitable, given the complexities of his creative character and his multiple activities and responsibilities, relationships were sometimes less tranquil with those associates who found themselves working alongside him, especially in the field of management and administration. Here, in particular, there was often a legacy of unhappiness and ruptured friendship. Needless hurt was sometimes inflicted, and there was much talk during Britten's lifetime and after his death of betrayal, disloyalty, deceit, and the ditching of old colleagues. This may, in retrospect, seem somewhat exaggerated and unrealistic. The world of the arts has ever been high-voltage territory, and it is scarcely surprising that the history of Aldeburgh, its festival, and the English Opera Group should vouchsafe its fair share of rows and ructions. At the height of crises of this kind, mention was often made of 'sacrifices'. Britten was undeniably ruthless when it came to professional standards or the achieving of a creative vision or ambition, when he would absolutely not be thwarted. But what has to be remembered in this context is Britten's sacrifice of himself to the often killing demands his own creativity made of him. 
Britten was awarded many prizes, awards, and distinctions. He kept his decorations, so he claimed, in a drawer nearby his socks and handkerchiefs. He was created Companion of Honour in 1953; was admitted to the Order of Merit in 1965; and was created Baron Britten of Aldeburgh in the county of Suffolk in 1976, the first time a life peerage had been bestowed on a British composer. His acceptance of this honour puzzled some of his closest friends, to one of whom he remarked, 'Will you ever speak to me again?' Influential here, without doubt, was his growing sense of physical isolation at Aldeburgh, a consequence of his increasing ill health, and a sense too of no longer being at the centre of British musical life which he had dominated for more than thirty years. He received honorary doctorates from Cambridge (1959), Oxford (1963), and nine other British universities, and was an honorary fellow or member of many colleges and institutions. Among his many prizes and awards were the Coolidge medal (1941), the Hanseatic Goethe prize (1961), the first Aspen award (1964), the Wihuri-Sibelius prize (1965), the Ravel prize (1974), and the Mozart medal (1976). His executors were approached with a request for his burial in Westminster Abbey, but he had declared a preference for Aldeburgh parish church; the abbey, however, was home to a thanksgiving service which took place on 10 March 1977, attended by an overflowing congregation. (A memorial stone was laid in the north choir aisle of the abbey in 1978.) Britten was unsentimental about death, a convinced humanist rather than a believer. On 4 December 1976 he died without fear in his bedroom at the Red House, his home, with his nurse, Rita Thomson, by him, and in the arms of his lifelong companion, Peter Pears. The burial took place on 7 December. Both men now lie side by side in the graveyard of the parish church, within sight and sound of the sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 30854


Broad, Sir Charles Noel Frank (1882-1976), army officer, was born at Lahore on 29 December 1882, the only child of Major Charles Herbert Broad, 5th fusiliers, and his wife, Ann Paul. He was educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, and Pembroke College, Cambridge, but did not take a degree. After serving in the South African War as a private in the militia he was commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1905. He went to the Staff College, Camberley, in 1914 and eventually went to France as a brigade major in the late summer of 1915. In the Somme campaign of 1916 he was chief staff officer (as a major) to General H. C. C. Uniacke, an outstanding gunner, who was major-general Royal Artillery in the Fifth Army. He was appointed to the DSO in 1917, and received the Croix de Guerre and Legion d'honneur. In 1915 he married Lillian Mary, daughter of Edwin Mackintosh, who worked in shipping; they had one daughter. 
Broad's proven ability was recognized by his appointment as artillery instructor at the Staff College in 1919 where his students included four future chiefs of the Imperial General Staff. Four years later he transferred to the newly established Royal Tank Corps (RTC), and during the next decade he made his chief contribution to the profession as an exponent of mechanization and armoured warfare. Broad's talents were at once recognized by his appointment as commandant of the tank gunnery school at Lulworth, and in 1925 he succeeded another brilliant newcomer to the corps, George Mackintosh Lindsay, as chief instructor at the tank corps central school. Here he contributed to the first tactical manual for armoured forces and developed the medium tank, equipped with anti-tank gun and machine-guns and designed to fire on the move. 
During the years 1927-31, which witnessed the climax of British experiments with mechanized forces, Broad served in the staff duties section of the general staff at the War Office responsible for organizing for war. In 1929 he drafted what was to become a famous manual -- 'Mechanised and Armoured Formations' -- popularly known in the army as the 'purple primer' from the colour of its covers. Although progressive in tone, Broad's manual skilfully avoided the extremism and polemics which characterized much of the literature on mechanization. He stressed the superiority of armoured forces over infantry in power, mobility, and endurance; moreover he made the revolutionary suggestion that armoured forces might keep up advances of 30 to 50 miles a day for nearly a week -- a feat which was achieved by Germany's Panzer divisions in the early campaigns of the Second World War. General Heinz Guderian later acknowledged Broad's influence on his thinking, though it should be noted that the infantry component of the Panzer divisions was much stronger than Broad had recommended. 
In 1931 Broad, now a brigadier, was given a wonderful opportunity to try out his ideas as commander of the experimental 1st brigade RTC. According to the expert on tank warfare Basil Liddell Hart those trials on Salisbury Plain were 'the most influential tactical experiments in the British Army since Sir John Moore's training of the Light Brigade at Shorncliffe Camp' (Liddell Hart, 1.179) during the Napoleonic wars. Broad demonstrated that his units, composed of medium and light tanks, could play a more adventurous role than close co-operation with slow-moving infantry. He proved that tank formations could be controlled while manoeuvring over difficult terrain by a combination of flags and radio telephony. These trials lent support to the proposition that only mechanized armoured forces could be manoeuvred under the intense fire to be expected on the modern battlefield. Unfortunately Broad's 'five year plan' for the creation of four permanent armoured brigades was shelved owing to the financial crisis and the resignation of the Labour government in 1931. The momentum generated by Broad and his colleagues such as Lindsay, Sir F. A. Pile, and P. C. S. Hobart was lost, and six years elapsed before mechanization began in earnest in 1937. 
This proved to be Broad's last direct connection with mechanization, though he remained deeply interested in the subject for the rest of his life. He became major-general in 1936. In 1937 he made an excellent impression on the new secretary of state for war, Leslie Hore-Belisha, but was given only the dead-end job of major-general in charge of administration at Aldershot. Since the main duty there was to organize the annual tattoo this was a scandalous waste of expertise. Whether there was an actual conspiracy at the War Office against Broad and the other tank pioneers is uncertain; but there was evidently a feeling in the military hierarchy that they should not be conspicuously rewarded in competition with sound but conservative officers of equivalent rank. Broad had not helped his prospects by a contretemps with the chief of the Imperial General Staff, Viscount Gort (Liddell Hart, 2.35). 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Broad was promoted to the Aldershot command, and in the following year he was made lieutenant-general and general officer commanding-in-chief, Eastern army, India, where he worked hard to modernize the Indian army under the threat of a Japanese invasion. He was appointed CB in 1938 and KCB in 1941 and retired in the following year on reaching retirement age, though he continued to be colonel commandant of the RTC until 1948. Broad's first wife died in 1942, and in 1944 he married Diana Myrtle, younger daughter of Colonel Philip Robert Bald, of Barton Lodge, Cerne Abbas; they had three sons (one deceased) and one daughter. 
Slight of stature and generally mild of manner, Broad occasionally showed impatience with slower-minded senior officers. Several of his peers rated him an outstanding officer but one also mentioned his occasional want of tact. Perhaps it was this flaw which caused his estrangement from Gort over a trivial misunderstanding. Broad was sometimes depressed by the lack of funds for new equipment and realistic training, and also felt that the army was bedevilled by cliques. In later years he was apt to reproach himself for lacking the crusading zeal of a Joan of Arc, but it is hard to see that he could have made more of his brief opportunities in comparatively junior positions. Indeed his reputation is assured as a shrewd and balanced theoretician of armoured warfare in the years when Britain led the world in its tank manuals and field exercises. Broad died at Beaminster, Dorset, on 23 March 1976. 
Brian Bond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30855


Broad, Charlie Dunbar (1887-1971), philosopher, was born at Harlesden, Middlesex, on 30 December 1887, the only child of Charles Stephen Broad, wine merchant, of an old family of Bristol builders, and his wife, Emily Gomme. Broad was brought up in quietly comfortable circumstances and in an environment of elderly relatives of varying degrees of eccentricity; he was relieved from the need to work by a modest family trust. He was at Dulwich College from 1900 to 1906 when A. H. Gilkes was headmaster. Having moved from the 'engineering side' to the 'science side' of the school, he won a science scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, and went up there in 1906. At that time, he says of himself, he adhered to a 'smug and thin rationalism' under the influence of the writings of H. G. Wells and other advanced thinkers of the age. An interest in philosophy had been awoken at school by reading Schopenhauer. In 1908 he got a first in part one of the natural sciences tripos, but, doubting his chances of doing first-class work in science, turned to philosophy. 
That decision was justified in 1910 by Broad's achievement of first-class honours, with special distinction in 'moral science'. His main teachers were J. M. E. McTaggart and the logician W. E. Johnson. He also had some contact with Bertrand Russell, the philosopher to whom technically he was closest, sharing Russell's conviction that science is very substantially inconsistent with common sense and more worthy of belief than common sense, and with G. E. Moore. It was the early and largely shared doctrines of these two major philosophers that he was to elaborate and to defend, despite Laodicean protestations, throughout his career. 
In 1911 Broad was elected a fellow of Trinity on the basis of a dissertation that was published in an improved form in 1914 as 'Perception, Physics, and Reality'. From 1911 to 1920 he was at the University of St Andrews, first as assistant to G. F. Stout, then as lecturer at the Dundee part of the university. During the war he gave some time to work at a neighbouring munitions factory. In 1920 he succeeded C. Lloyd Morgan as professor at Bristol, and he returned to Trinity in 1923 to succeed McTaggart in his teaching post there. For the rest of his life he continued to live in Trinity, for most of the time in rooms once inhabited by Newton. From 1933 until his retirement in 1953 he was Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy, in succession to W. R. Sorley. 
As a philosopher Broad, as he was the first to admit, had little in the way of new ideas to contribute to philosophy. If anything, indeed, he was inclined to exaggerate both his uncreativeness and the rapidity with which he lost any real interest in the subject. In fact, he was a creditable specimen of what Locke claimed to be, namely an 'under-labourer' for whom it is 'ambition enough to be employed... in clearing the ground a little and removing some of the rubbish'. In a long series of books on a wide range of philosophical topics he explored the interests and doctrines of Russell with much greater care and thoroughness than Russell, and those of Moore without Moore's repetition and exasperating slowness. 
The Lockean account of perceptual knowledge, as a rather precarious inference from private 'sensa' to public objects endowed with only a few of the qualities commonly ascribed to them, was developed at length in Broad's dissertation. It reappears as part of a general account of the philosophy of science, taking account of recent developments in science, in 'Scientific Thought' (1923) and as part of a comprehensive philosophy of mind in his Tarner lectures, 'The Mind and its Place in Nature' (1925). Here for the first time appears a discussion of the psychical research to which he was to devote much of his energy. In 1927 he brought out the second and less abstract volume of his teacher McTaggart's 'The Nature of Existence', still in draft at its author's death. In 1934 'Five Types of Ethical Theory' gave careful, sometimes idiosyncratic accounts of some major moral philosophers. Broad's main work in the 1930s was his 'Examination of McTaggart's Philosophy' (vol. 1, 1933; vol. 2, 1938), the largest and most impressive of his works, in which he gave enormously fair, even if ultimately negative, consideration to what was for him an ideal example of the kind of speculative philosophy that he believed to be possible in principle over and above the analytic or critical philosophy orthodox in his time. 
Broad's later works were essay collections -- 'Ethics and the History of Philosophy' (1952) and 'Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research' (1953) -- 'Lectures on Psychical Research' (1962), and posthumously published lecture series on Leibniz and Kant. He had several honorary degrees, including both a LittD and ScD from Cambridge, and was elected FBA in 1926. 
Broad was a conspicuous example of the traditional bachelor don of his epoch. Boyhood interests in railways and the Nordic world, particularly the latter, persisted into later life. In 1946 he made his first trip out of Britain to Scandinavia, and found the young men of Sweden a source of profound delight from that time forward. In the Second World War he served as junior bursar of his college and acquitted himself well. He did not visit America until the academic year following his retirement, 1953-4, when he lectured at Michigan and the University of California at Los Angeles. He was a conscientious supervisor of his pupils but a dull lecturer, dictating matter already written out. He claimed to have lost all interest in philosophy by the time he became professor in 1933, but that is belied by the amplitude and seriousness of the work he continued to produce at least until the end of the 1930s. The sour retrospection more probably reflects his resentment at the fashionable obsession with Ludwig Wittgenstein, who returned to Cambridge in 1929 and soon stole any fire Broad may have had. 
In appearance Broad was short, a little stocky, and bald from an early age. In later life he resembled nothing so much as a very senior warrant officer in the Royal Army Service Corps, with his rigidly set face and darting, suspicious eyes. He died in his rooms in Trinity College, Cambridge, on 11 March 1971. 
Anthony Quinton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30856


Brock, Russell Claude, Baron Brock (1903-1980), surgeon, was born on 24 October 1903 at 840 Old Kent Road, London, the second of six sons and fourth of eight children of Herbert Brock, a master photographer, and his wife, Elvina, daughter of James Carman, of Hinderclay, Walsham-le-Willows, Suffolk. He was educated at Haselridge Road School, Clapham, and at Christ's Hospital, Horsham. An accident in the school laboratory, resulting in severe burns to his face and hands, may well have inspired his interest in medicine and he entered Guy's Hospital medical school in 1921 with an arts scholarship. After an outstanding undergraduate career he qualified LRCP and MRCS in 1926, and graduated MB, BS (London), with honours and distinction in medicine, surgery, and anatomy in 1927. In the same year he married Germaine Louise (died 1978), daughter of Leon Jacques Ladaveze, of Paris, a gentleman of independent means. They had three daughters. 
Following resident appointments at Guy's Brock was appointed demonstrator in anatomy and in pathology, and passed the final FRCS examination in 1929. Elected to a Rockefeller travelling fellowship in 1929-30, he worked in the surgical department of Evarts Graham at St Louis, Missouri, and there developed a lifelong interest in thoracic surgery. On returning to Guy's he became surgical registrar and tutor in 1932 and was appointed research fellow of the Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland. He won the Jacksonian prize of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1935 and was elected a Hunterian professor in 1938. 
Brock's more senior posts began with appointment as consultant thoracic surgeon to the London county council (1935-46) and surgeon to the Ministry of Pensions at Roehampton Hospital (1936-45). From 1936 to 1968 he was appointed surgeon to Guy's and the Brompton hospitals. During the Second World War he was also thoracic surgeon and regional adviser in thoracic surgery to the Emergency Medical Service in the Guy's region. Following the war cardiac surgery, and especially operations on the open heart, was developing apace. Brock played a major part in pioneering the surgical relief of mitral stenosis and of other valvular lesions of the heart. His introduction of the technique to correct pulmonary artery stenosis and right ventricular outflow tract obstruction in the beating heart was inspired by exchange professorships between himself and Dr Alfred Blalock of Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore. Thereafter Brock, when not the initiator, was ever to the fore of new developments in this fast-expanding field of surgery. This came to overshadow some of his earlier contributions to lung surgery, the basis for which had been described in his own classical publication on the anatomy of the bronchial tree in 1946. 
Brock was an outstanding diagnostician, a conscientious teacher, and meticulous in the care of his patients. He gave great service to the Royal College of Surgeons, serving on its council from 1949 to 1967 and being an active member or chairman of many of its standing committees. He was vice-president in 1956-8 and president in 1963-6. He gave the Bradshaw lecture in 1957 and the Hunterian oration in 1961. He was knighted in 1954 and elevated to a life peerage in 1965. On retirement from his hospital appointments in 1968 he continued in private practice for a while, and he also became director of a newly formed department of surgical sciences at the Royal College of Surgeons which had been set up during his presidency. Subsequent alterations to this department caused him much upset and disappointment. 
Brock's medical awards and honours were numerous. He was president of the Thoracic Society of Great Britain and Ireland in 1952; and of the Society of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland, and also of the Medical Society of London in 1958. An elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1965, he had become an honorary fellow of the American College of Surgeons in 1949; the Brazilian College in 1952; the Australasian College in 1958; the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1965; and the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1966. He was honorary fellow or member of a number of surgical societies abroad, as well as the recipient of many foreign and domestic prizes and gold medals. He received the highly prestigious international Gardiner award for 1960-61, and was appointed Lister medallist and orator in 1967. He also received honorary degrees from the universities of Hamburg (1962), Leeds (1965), Cambridge (1968), and Guelph and Munich (both 1972). 
Having been appointed assistant editor of the Guy's Hospital reports before his election to the senior staff, Brock was editor from 1939 to 1960. Thenceforward he contributed a stream of important papers on cardiac and thoracic surgery to medical and surgical journals and textbooks. He was the author of several important books: 'The Anatomy of the Bronchial Tree' (1946), 'Lung Abscess' (1952), 'The Life and Work of Astley Cooper' (1952), and 'The Anatomy of Congenital Pulmonary Stenosis' (1957). 
Brock could be a difficult person to get to know and to some he seemed excessively fussy and meticulous. But he was a man of total dedication and integrity who gave unswerving support to those of his juniors who shared his own very high standards. His students were taught with firmness and courtesy. He was a shy, kindly man who could often seem brusque, particularly in the operating theatre. Outside his professional work he had considerable knowledge of old furniture and prints, and of history, including medical history. Less well known was his interest in private medicine: he served on the governing body of Private Patients Plan and was chairman (1967-77) before becoming its president. He was responsible for the discovery and restoration at Guy's of an eighteenth-century operating theatre on the site of the old St Thomas's Hospital. 
After his first wife's death in 1978, Brock married in 1979 Chrissie Palmer Jones, his secretary, daughter of John Alfred Jones, secretary to a colliery. Brock died in Guy's Hospital on 3 September 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 30857


Brodie, Sir Israel (1895-1979), chief rabbi, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 10 May 1895 as the second son and second of the five children (one daughter; a son died in infancy) of Aaron Uri Brodie (originally Braude or Broide), a sales representative who had immigrated from Kovno, and his wife, Sheina Maggid, whose surname derived from her father's occupation as a popular preacher in Lithuania (Tsemach Isaac, 'the Tsemach maggid'). His schooling at Rutherford College, Newcastle upon Tyne, was supplemented by Jewish instruction, and in 1912 he entered University College, London, and simultaneously Jews' College, London, to prepare for a career in the Jewish ministry. A first-class BA (1915) in Hebrew, Arabic, and Syriac qualified him for research, and he proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1916 to work for a BLitt (completed in 1921) on the origins of Karaism (medieval Jewish sectaries). He served from 1917 to 1919 as a chaplain on the western front. He returned to Balliol in 1919-20. Formal rabbinical training followed, with ordination in 1923 and practical experience in congregational and youth work in the East End of London under the guidance of J. F. Stern. He was in these years also much influenced by the impressive Jewish club leadership of Basil Henriques and by Herbert Loewe at Oxford, who involved him in Jewish adult education and introduced him to the study circle of Claude Montefiore. 
In 1923 Brodie went to Melbourne, Australia, to succeed Joseph Abrahams as rabbi and to take charge of the Jewish ecclesiastical court of Victoria. He was the first minister to visit all the continent's Jewish communities, thereby contributing to a Jewish federal cohesion. He returned to Balliol in 1937 as an advanced student. In 1939 he joined the staff of Jews' College as tutor and lecturer in homiletics -- an appropriate assignment since he was an impressive speaker. But the Second World War took him back to chaplaincy work in France, and he was among the last to be evacuated from Dunkirk. Service in the Middle East with the Royal Air Force prepared him to succeed as senior Jewish chaplain in 1944. He returned to Jews' College briefly as its principal in 1946, and in that year he married Fanny Levine, whom he had known years before as a teacher in Jewish classes: her father, Jacob Levine, was a Hebrew teacher. There were no children. The same year saw the death of Chief Rabbi J. H. Hertz, to whom Brodie was an obviously eligible successor, and he was appointed to the office in 1948: in 1965 he became the first incumbent to retire. Distinctions followed: the presidency of Jews' College, a fellowship (1950) of University College, London, an honorary DCL from Durham University and DD from Yeshiva University, New York, and in 1969 appointment as KBE. A collection of essays presented to him on his seventieth birthday edited by H. J. Zimmels, J. Rabbinowitz, and I. Finestein, appeared in 1967. 
Brodie's courteous manner contrasted with the masterful personality of Hertz, whose public statements had sometimes embarrassed the lay leadership. An attempt was made to impose on Brodie a consultative committee; but, while declaring willingness to consult, he made it clear that he would make his own decisions on all matters. The availability of air travel meant that his tenure would be very different from that of Hertz, and his achievements are best compartmentalized geographically. 
Australian experience familiarized Brodie with the situation of Jewish outposts, their educational problems and risks of erosion. He visited the antipodes, and also quite frequently South Africa, even after it left the Commonwealth, and he tried to attract ministerial trainees to Jews' College. In 1957, as a contribution towards reconstruction of the pitiful remnants of European Jewry, Brodie convened what became a standing conference of European rabbis, the limitations of which were, however, implicit in its restriction to Orthodox representatives, whose following by then constituted minorities within the European Jewish pattern; and the sort of topics that it was prepared to discuss were largely matters of detail. 
Brodie had always been a Zionist. He visited Israel frequently, and once declared his willingness to subordinate his Halakhic (jurisprudential) responsibilities to a central authority in Jerusalem should one ever emerge, although he must have known that this was unlikely. He supported not only the secular Hebrew University of Jerusalem but also the creation of the religiously articulated Bar Ilan University, where a chair was named in his honour. At home he worked hard to advance Jewish education. He secured purpose-built premises for Jews' College, he supported the movement to create Jewish day schools, and concerned himself with the reorganization of part-time Jewish education, while ruling that children whose mothers were not Jewish by birth or Orthodox conversion must be excluded from synagogue classes. He fought a rearguard action, in the face of enthusiasm for all things Israeli, against the introduction in the Ashkenazi synagogues under his jurisdiction of the Israeli (broadly Sephardi) pronunciation of Hebrew. The emergence of the state of Israel stimulated significant reversion towards traditionalism and greater use of Hebrew in prayer among the Progressive (non-Orthodox) congregations; but because of the movement's self-determination in matters involving Jewish status, Brodie maintained an aloofness from it no less distant, if less fulminating, than his predecessor's. 
The greatest crisis of Brodie's incumbency made national headlines of a domestic Jewish issue. Rabbi Louis Jacobs, a lecturer at Jews' College and an impressive preacher, had in popular writings acknowledged the view that if reason is considered God-given, issues of biblical fundamentalism, criticism, and modern science should not be evaded in the pulpit and restricted to muted discussion by mature Jewish minds only. Jacobs was passed over for the principalship of Jews' College; and in 1963 his former congregation purported to re-engage him as minister, despite Brodie's withholding his requisite approval. The attempt was blocked as unconstitutional. Brodie, sensitive to views of rabbis on his own ecclesiastical court whose education had been entirely Talmudic, and concerned at what was regarded as an implicit threat to the authority for Jewish observance, found himself driven into making a statement about intellectualism and authentic Jewish tradition that upset some Jewish intellectuals (including rabbis). His main scholarly work was the publication (1962-7) of the 'Etz hayyim' of Jacob of London, a thirteenth-century compendium of Jewish liturgy, ceremonial, and law. 
Brodie's tenure of the chief rabbinate, itself otherwise unremarkable, reflected changed conditions: the wane of Anglo-Jewish, as of British, influence, and the rise of Israel as the renewed centre of gravity for post-Hitlerian Jewry. The chief rabbinate, safeguarded by act of parliament, represented the hub of a nineteenth-century Anglo-Jewish solidarity that no longer corresponded to the statistical facts of Jewish observance and intermarriage, but it nevertheless remained entrenched by Anglo-Jewish conservatism. Within its framework, any attempt to transcend separatisms (save where Israel's security and fund-raising for Israel were concerned) would have required a character capable of riding out any storm, which Brodie did not possess. As a gentleman, a representative figure of dignity in bearing, as a well-liked chaplain to the forces, and by his devotion to what he considered his duty, he handed on intact to his successor an office of potential leadership, and retained the broad loyalty of some English-born Jews who might otherwise have lapsed. Brodie died in London on 13 February 1979 and was buried at Willesden Jewish cemetery. 
Raphael Loewe', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30858


Brogan, Sir Denis William (1900-1974), historian, was born on 11 August 1900 in Glasgow, the eldest of the four sons of Denis Brogan, a master tailor, and his second wife, Elizabeth Toner. His father, a native of co. Donegal, had briefly lived in the USA and Brogan grew up in a home responsive to the politics of both Ireland and America. Educated at Rutherglen Academy, Glasgow University (MA, 1923), and Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in history in 1925, he was guided towards the USA by Samuel Eliot Morison, then visiting Harmsworth professor at Oxford. A year at Harvard on a Rockefeller research fellowship established the study of the American past and the American present as the ruling passion of his life. 
On his return from the USA, after a brief period on the staff of 'The Times', Brogan was appointed in 1928 as lecturer in history at University College, London, and in 1930 as lecturer in politics at the London School of Economics. He was married in 1931 to Olwen Phillis Frances, an archaeologist, daughter of William Kendall, medical practitioner. They had three sons and a daughter. 
The literary product of these years was his best-known book, 'The American Political System' (1933). Appearing at a turning point both in American national development and in British awareness of the United States, its freshness, pungency, wit, and zest rediscovered America for a generation of British readers and profoundly influenced the perception of American politics in both academic and non-academic circles. The book's emphasis was on the actualities of the political process, made vivid by personal observation, a brilliant if teasing allusiveness, and an astonishing breadth of reading in both contemporary and historical literature. 'An Introduction to American Politics' (1954) had the same qualities; it was indeed a comprehensively revised and rewritten version. 
In 1934 Brogan left London for Oxford, as fellow and tutor at Corpus Christi College. There he expanded his academic interests to take in the study of France, with a brio, a range, and an intimacy analogous to his study of the USA. The impressive first-fruit of this was 'The Development of Modern France, 1870-1939' (1940; revised edition, '1870-1959', 1967), over twice the length of 'The American Political System', and packed with detail. Here for the first time, in English or French, the complex phenomena of modern French politics, at home and abroad, are reduced to a comprehensible narrative that does justice to economic and social factors but keeps the individual, from peasant to president, at the heart of the story. The tone is affectionate, but free of illusion, vivacious and sharp-edged. A later study, 'The French Nation from Napoleon to Petain, 1814-1940' (1957), is marked on a smaller scale by the same characteristics. 
To fit a figure like Brogan into the machine of the Second World War was never easy. He began in the foreign research and press service, moved briefly to the American division of the Ministry of Information, was then for a short time with the political warfare executive, but finally found his niche with the overseas services of the BBC. Perhaps one should rather say 'niches' because Brogan's exuberant energies overflowed from the European service to the North American service; in each capacity his role was that of an intelligence officer, providing background information and policy guidance from his diverse and capacious store of contemporary and historical knowledge. Thrown off, almost, amid these taxing labours was 'The English People: Impressions and Observations' (1943), characteristically precise, yet wide-ranging and shrewd, an essay in presenting the distinctive features of the English way of life by 'a foreigner of a kind'. 'The American Problem' (1944) was a series of loosely linked essays on the evolution of modern America, which discharges an analogous function from west to east. 
In the spring of 1939 Brogan had been elected to the professorship of political science at Cambridge and to a fellowship at Peterhouse and to this he returned at the war's end. His approach to his chair was that of a liberal, a pragmatist, and a historically minded student of institutions. Sceptical of systems, suspicious alike of sociological and philosophical abstractions, he warned in his inaugural lecture, published as 'The Study of Politics' (1946), against imposing on his subject 'a degree of abstractness or bogus neutrality that it cannot stand'. His lectures, delivered with a minimum of notes, regrettably do not survive, but some of the fruits of his approach can be gathered from 'The Price of Revolution' (1951). 
For a historian and an Americanist it was regrettable that Brogan produced no study of the American past on a scale comparable to 'The Development of Modern France'. His 'Abraham Lincoln' (1935, revised 1974, posthumously) is a miniature, albeit a classic one. 'The Era of Franklin D. Roosevelt' (1950, published in Britain as 'Roosevelt and the New Deal', 1952) is a useful, balanced, compact treatment curiously lacking in its author's individual touch. 'American Aspects' (1964), which reprints a number of historical and political articles, including the classic 'The illusion of American omnipotence', has far more of Brogan's range and historical penetration about it. The fact is, however, that the student who would glean all that Brogan has to offer would have to search the pages, particularly the review pages, of a host of journals, but in particular the 'Times Literary Supplement', where his fecund genius, particularly in his later years, found a more natural outlet. 
Brogan retired from his chair in 1968 and died in Cambridge on 5 January 1974. In addition to many honorary doctorates from France and the United States, he was an honorary LLD of Glasgow (1946) and an honorary DLitt of Oxford (1969). He was an honorary fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and became a fellow of the British Academy in 1955. He was knighted in 1963. 
H. G. Nicholas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30859


Bronowski, Jacob (1908-1974), mathematician, poet, and humanist, was born on 18 January 1908 in Lodz, Poland, the first of the three children of Abram Bronowski, haberdasher, and his wife, Celia Flatto. During the First World War the family lived in Germany, and in 1920 they moved to England. Bronowski subsequently attended the Central Foundation School in London and Jesus College, Cambridge. He studied mathematics at Cambridge, achieving a first class in part one of the mathematical tripos (1928), becoming a wrangler in part two (1930), and earning a doctorate in 1933 (the same year he became a naturalized British subject). Besides his work in algebraic geometry, topology, statistics, and mathematical aspects of biology, Bronowski's intellectual interests already had expanded to include philosophy and literature, particularly poetry. This led to his first major work, 'The Poet's Defence' (1939), in which he wrestled with the relationship between the truth of poetry and that of science. It marked the real beginning of his attempts to 'create a philosophy for the twentieth century which [is]... all of one piece' (Bronowski, 15). He continued to develop this theme in his study of the poetry of William Blake, published in 1944. His friendship with poets Laura Riding and Robert Graves induced Bronowski to try his own hand at poetry, a practice he continued throughout his life. He published little of his poetry, but each year his Christmas card to friends and family featured one of his pieces. 
Bronowski left Cambridge in 1934 to take up a lectureship at the University College of Hull. In 1941 he married Rita Coblentz, the sculptor Rita Colin; they later had four daughters. By 1942 Bronowski was recruited to the war effort, in his case pioneering the field of operational research methods. As scientific deputy to the British joint chiefs of staff mission to Japan in 1945 he applied these methods to write a report, 'Effects of the Atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki'. He extended this approach to government research on industrial problems, becoming director of the coal research establishment of the National Coal Board of Great Britain in 1950. From 1959 to 1963 Bronowski served as director-general of process development, when he elaborated his research into smokeless fuel. During this time he acted as a consultant to UNESCO (1948) in Paris and as Carnegie visiting professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1953). Especially significant to his future work in popularizing science, Bronowski began to work as a commentator for the British Broadcasting Corporation. There (particularly in a series called The Brains Trust) he displayed remarkable talent for explaining and conveying scientific concepts to a lay audience. 
To chronicle Bronowski's posts and achievements, however, scarcely captures the eclectic intellectual interests that powered his most enduring contributions. Bronowski saw art and science, the 'two cultures', as 'twin expressions of the human imagination' (Wren, 91). During his Cambridge years he had sought to understand literature as a form of universal knowledge. Bronowski gradually turned from poetry to science as revelatory of imagination, 'a shift of emphasis rather than a shift of position' (ibid.). It was perhaps his wrestling with the betrayal of human values exemplified by the holocaust and the atomic bombing of Japan that caused Bronowski to reverse his earlier views about the value-transcendent quality of imaginative thought. 
The last twenty years of Bronowski's life were dedicated to developing the theme of the humanistic dimensions of science. In his 'Science and Human Values' of 1956 (derived from his lectures at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1953), Bronowski argued that civilization's failures were associated with an arrogant faith in the panacea of value free science unshaped by its social environment. Only an ethical code built on 'truth, trust and freedom to dissent' (Wren, 92) permitted the scientific imagination to flourish. Contemporaries have identified this work as initiating the two cultures debate, and C. P. Snow himself acknowledges Bronowski's contributions in 'The Two Cultures: and a Second Look' (1963). 
In 1964 Bronowski emigrated to the United States to become senior fellow at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in San Diego, California, and later director of its council for biology in human affairs (1970). There he researched the topic of human specificity, which he understood as the attempt to define the unique biological and behavioural characteristics of the human species. This work, which emphasized the special role of imagination for explaining human nature, served as the basis for the thirteen-part BBC television series 'The Ascent of Man' (1973). The series was broadly intended by the BBC to present the development of science to a lay audience in much the way that Kenneth Clark's 'Civilisation' had done for art. Written in July 1969, the shooting of the series took over two years to complete and led to Bronowski's visiting some thirty countries. First broadcast in 1973, it enthralled many from academic and non-academic backgrounds alike, and won Bronowski the Royal Television Society's silver medal for outstanding creative achievement. 
Honours and distinctions recognized Bronowksi's contributions to the humanities and science. He was an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge (1967), a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1960), and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. He delivered a number of distinguished lectures, including the Silliman lectures at Yale University (1967), the Bampton lectures at Columbia (1969), and the Mellon lectures at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC. His own words best sum up the unity of purpose behind his undertakings: 'All that I have written, though it has seemed to me so different from year to year, turns to the same centre: the uniqueness of man that grows out of his struggle (and his gift) to understand both nature and himself. (Biographical sketch from the Bronowski MSS)' Bruno, as he was known to his friends, was widely considered a warm and vibrant man -- a liberal with a strong belief in humanity and the power of education. A meeting with him was 'a powerful tonic which left one feeling intellectually and emotionally stimulated and enhanced' (E. Roll and F. Roll, 'The Times', 11 Sept 1974). None the less, when considering human folly, or weighing public acclaim against his own opinion of an individual's true worth, he could be bitingly sardonic (ibid.). He died of a heart attack on 22 August 1974 at East Hampton, Long Island, New York. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30860


Brooke, Basil Stanlake, first Viscount Brookeborough (1888-1973), prime minister of Northern Ireland, was born on 9 June 1888 at Colebrooke Park, co. Fermanagh, Ireland, the eldest of five children (three sons and two daughters) of Sir Arthur Douglas Brooke, fourth baronet (1865-1907), of Colebrooke, and his wife, Gertrude Isabella (died 1918), only daughter of Stanlake Batson, of Horseheath, Cambridgeshire. He succeeded his father as fifth baronet on 27 November 1907. His social class, family background, and co. Fermanagh upbringing exerted a powerful formative influence on him. His family first moved to Ireland from Cheshire in the late sixteenth century and was awarded estates in co. Fermanagh as reward for military service rendered in quelling the 1641 rising. Its most prominent characteristic thereafter was its consistent record of military service. Fifty-three of its members served in the two world wars (with Brooke's uncle, Alan Brooke, first Viscount Alanbrooke, the most prominent); twelve sacrificed their lives. In addition, it had a strong tradition of political activism. The Brookes repeatedly served as magistrates, sheriffs, and lord lieutenants within co. Fermanagh and from the eighteenth century intermittently represented the county in parliament. Though they did not think of themselves as other than Irish, when they spoke of standing up for Ireland it meant standing up for the protestants of Ireland. While their participation in the Orange order was generally at a local level, it was almost hereditary in character. Their response to the mounting nationalist challenge which emerged in Ireland during the late nineteenth century was to act uniformly and aggressively in defence of the Union. 
Brooke's early career broadly conformed to the well-beaten paths trodden by innumerable sons of the Anglo-Irish gentry. After attending private school in southern France (at Pau) he proceeded to Winchester (1901-5), followed by Sandhurst, and then served with the 7th Royal Fusiliers (1908-11) and the 10th hussars in India and South Africa. During these years it was already evident that he fully identified with the defiant Unionism which had characterized the recent history of his family's political involvement. While on leave in December 1912 he helped inaugurate and organize the Ulster Voluntary Force in co. Fermanagh, and in March 1914 offered to resign his commission and 'return to help the loyalists in Ulster' (Barton, 'Brookeborough', 21). His military service was extended by the outbreak of the First World War. He served throughout the conflict with distinction; he rose to the rank of captain in the hussars, acted as aide-de-camp to General Byng, was mentioned in dispatches, and awarded the Military Cross in 1916 and Croix de Guerre with palm. His experiences on the western front affected him deeply. As a consequence, he lost his religious faith and in early 1916 (before the Easter rising) wrote to his sister of his growing conviction that civil war would be 'worse for Ireland' than home rule (ibid., 25). 
In December 1918 Brooke returned to Colebrooke, intent on restoring his neglected estates, having been away from co. Fermanagh for much of the previous twenty-two years. Five months later (on 3 June 1919) he married Cynthia Mary (1897-1970), second daughter and coheir of Captain Charles Warden Sergison, of Cuckfield Park, Sussex. Their relationship was to be tested and strengthened through bereavement and illness. His wife's social competence, unquestioning devotion, resilience, and determination sharpened his ambition and contributed to its fulfilment. The extent of his debt to her he frequently and willingly avowed in public. They had three sons; the eldest and youngest were killed in action during the Second World War, but the second son, John Warden, also a soldier, survived the war and later entered Northern Ireland politics. 
Whatever his original intentions, on returning home Brooke was ineluctably drawn once more into the political turmoil which Ireland and Fermanagh were then entering. In June 1920 he organized Fermanagh Vigilance -- a small, local, part-time force, designed to counteract the escalating IRA campaign, protect property, and ultimately defend the Union. He decided against calling it the Ulster Volunteer Force in order to encourage Catholic recruitment. Subsequently, he was prominent among those who successfully urged the British government officially to recognize this and other similar organizations which had spontaneously emerged elsewhere in the north. When the Ulster Special Constabulary was established in September 1920 Brooke became Fermanagh county commandant. Almost imperceptibly and certainly unconsciously, through these actions he acquired a reputation and rose to a position of prominence among Ulster unionists. Sir James Craig, Northern Ireland's first prime minister, acknowledged his services by appointing him CBE and offering him a seat in the Northern Ireland Senate. He accepted, but had to relinquish it almost immediately, as the appointment contravened the 'Government of Ireland Act' because he held an office of profit under the crown. Craig described him at the time as 'one of the finest leaders in Ulster today' (Barton, 'Brookeborough', 58). In 1929, Brooke became Unionist MP for the county at Stormont. He accepted the seat from a sense of duty, but also from political ambition; he regarded Colebrooke as 'never enough in itself' (ibid., 15). His thin, wiry frame, with the inevitable cigarette in hand, and clipped, Anglicized accent were to be a feature of Stormont for the next forty years. 
From the outset of his political career Brooke addressed public meetings with a frequency to which he was unaccustomed, and generally spoke in moderate tones. But on 12 July 1933 he made a speech which was sectarian in content, and he repeated its main themes several times over the next nine months. In his remarks he admonished audiences 'to employ good protestant lads and lassies' and not Roman Catholics, as they were 'out with all their force and might to destroy the power and constitution of Ulster' ('Fermanagh Times', 13 July 1933). He also warned of a 'definite plot' whereby southern nationalists would attempt to 'infiltrate' Northern Ireland and subvert its pro-Union majority. The timing of these comments owed much to the strained political context. The formation of de Valera's first Fianna Fail government in Dublin caused apprehension among unionists, while deepening economic depression threatened the party's unity by accentuating its class divisions. His comments also reflect Brooke's growing disillusionment at the persistent unwillingness of most northern nationalists to recognize Northern Ireland even in the short term. As employer, as politician, and later as minister he was more open-minded in his actual dealings with political opponents than these infamous remarks might suggest; they have unduly coloured subsequent assessments of his career. In mid-1940 he was even prepared to contemplate Irish unity if its attainment would induce de Valera to abandon Eire's neutrality and so possibly ensure the defeat of Nazi Germany. 
Brooke's political rise at Stormont was rapid. His progress reflects the dearth of unionist back-bench talent, his relative youth yet considerable experience, extensive social contacts, eagerness to serve, and exceptional personal charm. John MacDermott, a ministerial colleague, said of him that he could have 'sold sand to the Arabs' (interview, 11 May 1979). In May 1929 he was made junior whip and parliamentary secretary at the ministry of finance, and in 1933 became minister of agriculture. At the latter he was knowledgeable, relished the personal contact with farmers afforded by his post, and was supported by civil servants of exceptional quality, who were eager to implement locally the marketing schemes and other radical policy changes then being initiated by Westminster. Though often in later years caricatured as 'a lazy man of limited ability' ('The Autobiography of Terence O'Neill', 40), as a young politician he quickly acquired a reputation for enterprise, energy, and competence, and his influence and standing within the government rose measurably. 
The coming of war was always likely to benefit Brooke's career, enhancing the relevance of his social connections and military background and providing increased scope for his pragmatism and flair for publicity. Craig dissuaded him from returning to full-time military service and, for the first time, he soon began clearly to emerge as a likely future premier. From the outset he demonstrated an unwavering commitment to allied victory. Partly because of his energetic leadership the farmers of Northern Ireland, alone of any region in the United Kingdom, exceeded their tillage quota during 1939-40. His ministerial performance stood out in the context of a Stormont government which in the late 1930s and early 1940s reached unprecedented levels of incompetence and thus attracted increasingly virulent criticism from unionist back-benchers. None the less, Lord Craigavon remained premier and refused to make the cabinet changes which his critics thought necessary. 
Craigavon's death (in November 1940) did not presage any substantive improvement in governmental performance. The ageing John Andrews (minister of finance) who succeeded was unsuited to wartime leadership. Critically, he refused to purge the 'old (ministerial) gang', which was reshuffled rather than recast. Brooke became minister of commerce, a small and hitherto ineffectual department widely blamed both by back-benchers and the public for the persistently high levels of local unemployment. There, supported once more by talented officials, he energetically sought more contracts for local firms from mainland supply departments, unashamedly exploiting his contacts at Westminster, while striving to improve the woeful production record of some of the province's leading heavy industries. Such was his success that, by April 1943, regional unemployment had dropped to 19,000, 5 per cent of the insured population (it had been almost 72,000 in November 1940). 
Meanwhile, support for the Andrews government was collapsing. In particular, it attracted criticism because of its lack of preparation for the German air raids (April-May 1941), its mishandling of the conscription question later that year, its temporary suspension of Belfast corporation, the steady deterioration in local labour relations, and the perceived inadequacy of its post-war planning. The outcome was a wide-ranging Unionist Party revolt which sought sweeping changes in the composition of both leadership and cabinet. The climax was reached at a meeting of Unionist MPs on 28 April 1943 when, faced with ministerial resignations and a possible party split, Andrews agreed to resign. His miscalculations regarding the strength of opposition led him to attribute his fall to the manipulative skills of his successor, Brooke. However, the evidence suggests otherwise; Brooke had consistently urged Andrews to strengthen his government (offering to resign himself to facilitate the process), had been genuinely surprised by the scale of the crisis, and had made no attempt to exploit the unfolding events. Subsequently, he alone was capable of forming a government commanding a Commons majority, and he was eventually asked to do so by the governor, Lord Abercorn. He immediately appointed a new ministerial team (which included Northern Ireland's first non-Unionist Party government member, H. C. Midgley) and it was broadly successful in achieving its agreed priorities -- to bring greater drive to the war effort, devise plans for the post-war years, and maintain the constitution. 
In 1945 Brooke pressed to have national service extended to Northern Ireland in order to lower future unemployment levels, to underline the area's constitutional status within the Union, and also in the hope of attracting Britain's goodwill. Such was his enthusiasm for this proposal that he even suggested increasing state subsidies to local Catholic schools in an attempt to reduce church opposition to it. However, Attlee decided to exclude the six counties from the operation of the 'National Service Bill' in 1946; none the less, Stormont-Westminster relations had meanwhile become markedly closer. This was mainly due to Northern Ireland's cumulative contribution to the war effort -- through its provision of goods and agricultural produce, its volunteer recruits, the commercial and strategic role of its ports and bases, and latterly its use as a training ground and launching pad for military offensives. Acting partly from a sense of gratitude the Treasury in 1943 agreed to provide the region with increased financial support to enable it to catch up with social welfare provision elsewhere in the United Kingdom. This Brooke eagerly welcomed, as he was convinced that 'the only chance for the political future of Ulster' was if she became 'so prosperous that the traditional political attitudes are broken down' (B. E. Barton, 'Northern Ireland in World War Two', 130). 
The improvement in intergovernmental relations seemed threatened by the British Labour Party's electoral victory (9 July 1945). Brooke subsequently feared the imposition from Westminster of 'very strong socialist measures' combined with pressure on his government to accept Dublin rule (Barton, 'Relations between Westminster and Stormont', 2). None the less he opposed party colleagues who, alarmed by the sweeping economic measures being introduced by UK ministers, urged that Northern Ireland should seek refuge in 'dominion status'. He regarded this option as impracticable given Northern Ireland's financial dependence on Britain. Moreover, his relationship with the Labour leadership soon became surprisingly cordial. Both he and his colleagues broadly welcomed the welfare state legislation, aware not only of the extent of local need, but also that the reforms would widen the gulf in social services between north and south, thus reinforcing partition, and would appeal, in particular, to the protestant working class. In Herbert Morrison's opinion the Stormont ministers behaved throughout like 'moderate socialists' (ibid., 8). 
J. A. Costello's decision to withdraw Eire from the empire and create a fully independent 'Republic of Ireland' (with effect from 8 April 1949) provided the unlikely setting for arguably Brooke's foremost political achievement. In the context of Eire's secession and an associated anti-partition campaign he urged that unionists be given reassurance within the text of the 'Ireland Bill' (the Westminster measure ratifying the south's change of status). This Attlee accepted; he included a declaratory clause, stating that Northern Ireland would remain within the Union for as long as a majority at Stormont wished. In fact he had needed little persuading, mainly because he was advised by a high-level government working party that the province's continued inclusion within the United Kingdom was a vital British strategic interest. Its report continued: 'So far as can be foreseen it will never be to Great Britain's advantage that Northern Ireland should form part of a territory outside His Majesty's jurisdiction. Indeed it seems unlikely that Great Britain would ever be able to agree to this even if the people of Northern Ireland desired it. (Barton, 'Relations between Westminster and Stormont', 12)' Constitutional security, improving welfare services, and economic growth helped ensure that the 1950s and early 1960s were Northern Ireland's most harmonious and promising years; its post-war experience contrasted starkly with the relative stagnation and isolation of the south. Mounting unionist confidence was expressed in the increasing willingness of some party members to consider reform. Meanwhile, the voting behaviour of the minority, its increasing political activism within the six counties, and the ignominious collapse of the IRA campaign of 1956-62 all suggested that it was becoming more reconciled to partition. None the less, there were limits to the level of consensus achieved. Numerous nationalist grievances remained, including the restricted local government franchise and its allegedly gerrymandered electoral boundaries, the religious discrimination practised by public bodies and private firms in the north, and the perceived inadequacy of state funding for Catholic schools. 
The Stormont government's failure to initiate fundamental reform was due in large part to Brooke's obsession with unionist unity. He feared a party split which might potentially endanger Northern Ireland's constitutional position. Regarding the minority, his strategy centred throughout on his belief that social reform and economic progress alone would eventually undermine its nationalist aspirations. Thus he failed to support those Liberal Unionists who actively sought accommodation with Catholics by recruiting them into the Unionist Party and were conscious of the changes that had taken place in post-war political and social attitudes. He argued that this was impracticable on political grounds, and noted privately that public 'speeches [on this issue] will only delay matters' (B. E. Barton, 'A Pocket History of Ulster', 1996, 111). From the late 1950s British officials were already warning his government of the 'risk of political disturbance' (ibid., 110) in Newry and Londonderry if religious discrimination was not counteracted. Through his inaction Brooke helped perpetuate the endemic and ultimately fatal sectarian divide in Northern Ireland politics. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that he failed to rise to that higher level of leadership which does not simply pander to its own supporters but dares to chip away at their prejudices. Brooke was born into the landed gentry and became a soldier by instinct and inclination, but he was driven into politics primarily from conviction -- the need to defend and preserve the Union which was then threatened. In his view, during the following decades the threat to its survival persisted and the necessity to defend it therefore did not diminish; this remained his first priority. He himself conceded that he was less 'ecumenical' than others, adding in his own defence, 'it must be remembered that I lived through... the most troubled of times' in Ireland's history (Barton, 'Brookeborough', 234). Though made a viscount in 1952 and later offered an earldom for his services to the state, he never attempted to become a truly national leader with significant cross-community support. 
On 25 March 1963 ill health, old age, and mounting back-bench criticism of his failure to arrest rising unemployment and the drift of unionist voters in Belfast to the Northern Ireland Labour Party impelled Brooke reluctantly to resign as prime minister; he was succeeded by his minister of finance, Captain Terence O'Neill. He retained his seat in parliament until 1968, was created KG in 1965, and developed commercial interests -- as chairman of Carreras (Northern Ireland), a director of Devenish Trade, and president of the Northern Ireland Institute of Directors. He was also made an honorary LLD of Queen's University, Belfast. Meanwhile his wife, Cynthia, had served in the Second World War as senior commandant of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, and was created a DBE in 1959. She died in 1970, and the following year Brooke married Sarah Eileen Bell, daughter of Henry Healey, of Belfast, and widow of Cecil Armstrong Calvert FRCS, director of neurosurgery at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast. 
Brooke died at home at Colebrooke on 18 August 1973; he was survived by his second wife. He was cremated at Roselawn cemetery, Belfast, three days later, and in deference to his wishes his ashes were scattered on the demesne. He was succeeded in the viscountcy by his only surviving son from his first marriage, John Brooke. It might seem an appropriate as well as a tragic irony that the latter (then minister of state for finance) should have delivered the final speech from the dispatch box at Stormont prior to its suspension by Edward Heath's Conservative government on 28 March 1972. In it he quoted from a poem by Rudyard Kipling entitled 'Ulster', written in 1914, about the time his father's involvement in the political affairs of the province might be said to have begun. It ended with sentiments which Sir Basil fully shared: '
Before an empire's eyes the traitor claims his price. 

What need of further lies? We are the sacrifice. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 30861


Brown, George Alfred, Baron George-Brown (1914-1985), politician, was born on 2 September 1914 at Flat 22, I Block, Peabody Buildings, Duke Street, Lambeth, London, the elder son of the four children of George Brown, a grocer's packer who later worked as a driver, and his wife, Rosina (Rose) Harriett, 'nee' Mason. His paternal grandfather, John Brown, was a carter, while his maternal grandfather was an asphalter. For a career in Labour politics, George Brown had impeccable working-class credentials. 
More than that, George Brown saw himself as having been born into and later married into the labour movement. His father had worked in a London dock warehouse and been a member of the Dock, Wharf and Riverside Workers' Union before becoming a car, van, and lorry driver, with his union forming part of the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU). After the First World War his father graduated from branch secretary to a member of the union's executive committee. The young George Brown experienced hard times after his father was sacked for actively supporting the general strike in 1926. 
Brown grew up in a poor working-class community in Southwark. After his birth his parents had left the small flat which they shared with his grandmother Anne Mason in Lambeth for their own accommodation at another Peabody Trust block at Peabody Square, Blackfriars Road, Southwark, near Waterloo station. He attended Gray Street elementary school, then West Square central school, both close to his home. While still at elementary school he became a choirboy and a committed Christian, much influenced by Father John Sankey of the City of London church of St Andrew by the Wardrobe. He was a keen Labour Party supporter, even at school. He later claimed, probably accurately, to have leafleted for Labour in 1922. He left school at fifteen, but attended evening classes run by the London county council near by, near the Elephant and Castle, then Workers' Educational Association and National Council of Labour Colleges courses. 
George Brown gained his first two jobs through an agency which helped promising boys from his and other similar schools. He spent a year as a clerk in a Cheapside merchant firm, then worked in retailing as a fur salesman for the John Lewis Partnership at its Oxford Street store. He worked there until he was twenty-two. He pursued his political interests by seeking a job in his father's trade union. He failed to secure a post as a trade union officer but instead returned to being a clerk in the TGWU ledger room. After two years he applied successfully to be a district organizer based in Watford, where he organized agricultural, brickyard, building, and other workers in the small towns of the area. With the coming of the Second World War he became involved in organizing within war industries, serving on industrial committees and trade boards and also on the war agricultural executive. He volunteered for the RAF but Ernest Bevin, the minister of labour, kept Brown and other trade union officials in their civilian jobs. 
Brown's main ambition lay in politics, not in trade unionism. While living in Streatham, at Mountearl Gardens, he was active in his local Labour Party. In 1932, at the nadir of the Labour Party's fortunes, he became vice-president of the Streatham constituency Labour Party and a member of the national advisory committee of the Labour league of youth. He also became an avid participant in Clarion events sponsored by Sir Stafford Cripps, and enjoyed spending weekends at conferences and schools at the Clarion youth hostel at Hoddesdon. It was through this group that at the age of eighteen he met his future wife, Sophie Levene (1911-1990), like her father, a bookbinder. In marrying her, he married into a very committed Labour Party family: her father, Solomon Levene JP, was a founder member of the Mile End Labour Party and, with his wife, Kate, a lifelong Labour Party activist. They married at Stepney register office on 27 April 1937 and bought a house at 59 Lakeside Crescent, East Barnet, before moving during the war to Potters Bar. In Barnet he quickly became secretary of the St Albans divisional Labour Party, unsuccessfully stood for the East Barnet urban district council in 1938, and went as the constituency delegate to the Labour Party conference in 1939. 
Brown's speech on 29 May 1939 at the Labour Party conference, supporting the expulsion of Sir Stafford Cripps from party membership, first established him as a tough spokesperson for the moderate wing of the Labour Party. In it he struck what were to be characteristic stances. He stated that his constituency party was 'entitled to some greater consideration... than the views of those centres of revolutionary activity in the centre of London which have been sending us such long-winded circulars on the subject'. As well as deploring the distraction Cripps caused from campaigning, he also denounced 'a small, noisy section of intellectuals and the middle class' in his own constituency for trying to tell others what to do. He ended with a call for Cripps and his associates to 'forget to be a leader for a little while and work as a rank and file member' ('Report of the 38th Annual Conference, 1939', 235-6). This speech won the support of that year's party chairman, George Dallas, who had had a long career in the Workers' Union and was a former member of St Albans Labour Party. Dallas helped to secure Brown the nomination as prospective parliamentary candidate for Belper, Derbyshire, a seat with a Conservative majority of only 828 to overturn. Belper was one of several east midlands constituencies whose Labour Party was predominantly working class and loyal to the moderate leadership of the Labour Party. Brown, sponsored by the TGWU, was elected with a majority of 8881 in the general election of 1945, and held the seat until 1970. From 1945 until 1964 the Browns lived at 77 Court Lane, Dulwich, then in 1964 moved to 103 Portsea Hall, Marble Arch. 
In parliament Brown almost immediately became parliamentary private secretary to George Isaacs, the minister of labour. He accompanied Isaacs to Canada and the USA for the annual meeting of the International Labour Organization, and met the big figures in American trade unionism. In 1947 he became parliamentary private secretary to Hugh Dalton, chancellor of the exchequer. While in this role Brown was a conspicuous plotter to replace Attlee as prime minister with Bevin, an activity deplored by Bevin. Attlee, nevertheless, appointed him under-secretary of state for agriculture, a post he held from 7 October 1947 until 26 April 1951. Brown then attained ministerial rank and membership of the privy council, but not membership of the cabinet, as minister of works, a post he held until the fall of the government in October 1951. 
However, now accustomed to a ministerial salary, Brown, faced with a great drop in income, seriously considered leaving parliament and returning to trade union work. He was kept in politics by a $500 a year (later $1250 a year) retainer from Cecil King to advise the 'Daily Mirror', then the biggest mass circulation newspaper. 
Brown emerged from office as a combative anti-Bevanite. Shortly after the general election defeat Dalton reported in his diary that 'Brown thinks it ought to be war to the knife with the Bevanites' (Dalton, 567-8). George Brown actively organized opposition to Aneurin Bevan and the left-wingers loosely associated with him, the Bevanites. In March 1954 he secured a power base. Tony Benn wrote in his diary of this that 'After fifteen years of pleasant slumber the Trade Union Group [of Labour MPs] have been seized in a most unscrupulous 'coup d'etat'' and he described Brown as 'thrusting, ambitious, unscrupulous' (Benn, 'Years of Hope', 178). One of several south London working-class Labour MPs, Brown followed in the footsteps of Bevin, his former trade union boss, and Herbert Morrison, the leading south London Labour politician. He supported Herbert Morrison, for a period, but Attlee's continued tenure of the leadership of the Labour Party led Brown by 1955 to become a supporter of Hugh Gaitskell. While Brown fitted in badly with many of Gaitskell's intellectual supporters (including the so-called 'Hampstead set'), with Gaitskell complaining in his diary on 9 November 1954 that Brown was 'a difficult person, and at times has an irritating chip on his shoulder' ('The Diary of Hugh Gaitskell, 1945-1956', ed. P. M. Williams, 1983, 348), his abilities and his trade union credentials were welcome. Brown also reinforced his anti-left-wing credentials when, at a dinner in honour of the Soviet leaders Nikita Khrushchov and Marshal Bulganin in 1956, he objected to Khrushchov's critical comments on Britain's war efforts and condemned the Soviet pact with Ribbentrop, thereby causing a substantial row with the Russians. 
This probably did no harm to Brown's attempt to succeed Hugh Gaitskell, the new party leader, as party treasurer. However, the hitherto reliable 'loyalist' trade union block vote was divided by an upsurge of support for Bevan in some trade unions and by the candidature of two other 'moderate' trade union-supported candidates. Most areas of the National Union of Miners backed Bevan, as did the railway workers' and shopworkers' unions. In October 1956 Bevan beat Brown by a small margin, 3,029,000 to 2,755,000 votes. Brown won the deputy leadership of the Labour Party in 1960, winning the support of most of the trade union group and also most of the Gaitskellites. In the first ballot he polled 118 to Fred Lee's 73 and James Callaghan's 55 votes; in the second round he gained 148 to Lee's 83. 
This was a high-water mark for Brown within the party. In opposition he increasingly eased stress with alcohol. Ironically, given his ultra-sensitivity to middle-class intellectuals in the Labour Party, his heavy drinking was tolerated by Hugh Gaitskell and Harold Wilson; a contrast to some earlier working-class temperance figures such as Arthur Henderson, who had acted firmly against alcoholism in party officials. Even such supporters as Hugh Dalton were concerned by 1960 about his volatility: Dalton noted in his diary that Brown was the best candidate, even 'though very awkward, vain, sensitive and fundamentally self-seeking and unfaithful' (Dalton, 700). Nevertheless, Brown was respected for his sharp intellect, his position as the ablest trade union MP, and his considerable skills as a speaker in the House of Commons and on public platforms. He was one of the twentieth century's great performers in general elections, an excellent knock-about open-air speaker who dealt brilliantly with hecklers. 
However, Brown's dependence on alcohol and his general volatility undermined his bid to succeed Hugh Gaitskell as the Labour Party leader in 1963. The eminent Liberal Lady Violet Bonham Carter noted in her diary after appearing on the radio programme 'Any Questions?' with Brown in October 1954, 'I have never before -- in the course of an unsheltered life... -- met anyone so completely un-house-trained' ('Daring to Hope', 140). When it came to the leadership contest she expressed views widely held at the time: 'Brown v. Wilson presents a harsh choice between an often (though not always) drunken boor -- rude, clumsy, devoid of finesse or subtlety, but an honest & loyal man -- & a 'very' able, clever, experienced but universally distrusted one, of proven disloyalty' (ibid., 264). The candidature of James Callaghan provided opponents of Wilson with a less volatile alternative than Brown. In February 1963 Wilson polled 115, Brown 88, and Callaghan 41 votes in the first round; Wilson defeated Brown by 144 to 103 votes in the second round. 
Brown was mortified by his defeat. Far from being magnanimous, he withdrew for five days and was not contactable. He asked to be shadow foreign secretary, a post Wilson refused to give him. Brown's drinking remained a problem and he was often unpredictable. Of the many embarrassing incidents, the best remembered was an emotional but drunken tribute to President John F. Kennedy after his assassination; later, early in 1967, the satirical magazine 'Private Eye' coined the euphemism for inebriation 'tired and emotional' in relation to Brown (P. Marnham, 'The Private Eye Story', 1982, 117, cited in Paterson, 8). 
With Labour's victory in the general election of 1964 George Brown became first secretary of state and secretary of state for economic affairs, posts he held from 16 October 1964 until 11 August 1966. The Department of Economic Affairs was intended to be the powerhouse of modernizing and reconstructing British industry. It was responsible for economic planning, increasing productivity, and securing competitiveness in external and internal markets. George Brown and his planning department drew up a long-term economic plan, the national plan, published on 13 September 1965. Harold Wilson later described it as 'a remarkable and thorough piece of work' (Wilson, 137). A controversial part of the planning was carried out by the prices and incomes department of Brown's ministry, which Brown appointed the former Conservative ministry Aubrey Jones to head. Brown was also behind the establishment of the Industrial Reorganization Corporation, which assisted industrial mergers in an attempt to create larger, more efficient units which could compete with industry in the USA and elsewhere. In 1966, faced with a serious balance of payments crisis, the government's determination not to devalue led to the July deflationary measures, which undercut Brown's work. Brown, who by this time accepted the need for devaluation, was dissuaded from resignation by an appeal from over 100 Labour MPs. Staying on in office, he had to argue (against his own views) in favour of a statutory incomes policy. 
On 11 August 1966 Brown achieved one of his aspirations by becoming foreign secretary. He was a successor to Bevin, whom he much admired. Perhaps he also admired Palmerston, for he replaced a portrait of George III with one of Palmerston in his Foreign Office room. He ran the Foreign Office in a highly controversial way, laying great stress on his aim to break down the class prejudice there, and getting the office run more informally (a synonym for his notorious rudeness to civil servants). He continually complained about 'the old, protocol-ridden regime' ('Sunday Times' 7 April 1968, 50). 
Always pro-American, Brown joined Wilson in trying to secure an honourable basis for American withdrawal from Vietnam, but he was less optimistic than the prime minister. Brown was an enthusiastic advocate of British entry into the Common Market. His statement of the British case for EEC entry at the meeting of the Western European Union in July 1967 was impressively argued, and came to be recognized as a state paper of major importance ('The Times', 1 July 1970, 11). Although he refused to be daunted by General de Gaulle's second veto of 27 November 1967, and kept Britain's application for entry active, the failure to be admitted was a major disappointment for him as foreign secretary. Brown succeeded in restoring diplomatic relations with Egypt, and with the help of Hugh Mackintosh Foot, Baron Caradon, British ambassador to the United Nations, he was involved in drafting the Security Council resolution 242 (22 November 1967), which sought to achieve a basis for peace between Israel and the Arab states following the Six-Day War. 
Brown, highly sensitive about his political status after losing the leadership contest in 1960, was increasingly suspicious and resentful of Harold Wilson's preference for dealing with his 'kitchen cabinet' of favoured associates rather than carefully consulting Brown and other ministers. His repeated threats to resign became legendary. Brown had legitimate cause for complaint when Wilson's associates briefed the media that Brown favoured resumption of arms sales to South Africa. What was probably an inevitable breach between the two men came in March 1968, when Brown was outraged that Wilson failed to prioritize seeking out Brown to consult him over the closure of the London gold market and the declaration of a special bank holiday. Brown resigned on 15 March 1968, never to return to office. 
Brown soon regretted resigning. He later saw Wilson, but Wilson made it clear that he would not remove Michael Stewart so Brown could return as foreign secretary and Brown would accept no lesser post. Wilson, according to Richard Crossman, considered giving Brown a leading role at Transport House, the then Labour Party headquarters. Brown addressed some 200 meetings during the general election campaign of 1970, dynamic and impressive performances. However, boundary changes had always made it likely that he would lose Belper, which he did by 2424 votes. In the dissolution honours announced in August 1970 he was made a life peer, taking the title Lord George-Brown of Jevington in the county of Sussex (the location of his weekend cottage), after a lengthy tussle over his title with the Garter king of arms. 
Brown had taken his defeat badly for the Labour Party leadership in 1960 and he took his departure from office in 1968 and the loss of his seat (and thereby the post of deputy leader) even worse. He very soon made clear his differences with the Labour Party in the introduction (finished in December 1970) to his autobiography 'In my Way' (1971). During 1970-75 Labour's repudiation of the EEC was an important component of his alienation from the party. He emphasized the idealism that lay behind the idea of creating the EEC in the 1950s and believed that the idea of entry was too important to be influenced by party-political considerations. Moreover, the former political voice of the trade unions became increasingly their vigorous opponent, writing hostile pieces for the 'News of the World' and, by the early 1980s, for the 'Daily Express' and 'Sunday Express'. 
Labour's failure to assert itself against the trade unions had previously caused Brown to consider the possibility of a centre party, and in March 1976 he moved from the Labour benches to the cross-benches of the House of Lords after opposing a government bill to restore certain forms of legal rights to trade union 'closed shops'. His resignation was accompanied by degrading press photographs of him falling over beside his car and being helped to his feet by journalists. 'One is torn between pity and loathing for a man who is ruined', Tony Benn recorded (A. Benn, 'Against the Tide: Diaries, 1973-76', 1989, 526). Benn saw Brown as 'a fallen angel. He was one of the high-flying leaders of the Party and now earns his living attacking it' (A. Benn, 'Conflicts of Interest: Diaries, 1977-80', 1990, 508). He became president of the Social Democratic Alliance in January 1981 and was a signatory to the 'Limehouse declaration' in February 1981, but delayed actually joining the Social Democratic Party for four years. 
Brown's private life ended equally unpredictably. His family had appeared the epitome of the close-knit London working-class family. Sophie Brown loyally backed him. They had two daughters, Frieda and Pat, and were proud grandparents by the time he entered the cabinet. He also received loyal political support from his brother Ron ['see below']. While his political dedication and his alcoholism put strains on the marriage from the 1960s, there was general surprise when he walked out of his home on Christmas eve 1982 and thereafter lived in Sussex, then Cornwall, with Margaret Rosalinde Mary (Maggie) Haimes ('b'. 1947), his secretary. As his health deteriorated he also turned his back on his Anglo-Catholic religious beliefs and converted to the Roman Catholic church. He died of liver complaints on 2 June 1985 at the Duchy Hospital, Truro, Cornwall. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. He was survived by his wife and by Maggie Haimes. 
Brown's younger brother, 
In parliament Ron Brown was inevitably overshadowed by his older brother, whose accent and speaking style as well as political views he shared. He was briefly an assistant whip in 1966-7 but never liked, and was never liked by, Harold Wilson. He was particularly active in European affairs, serving as a member of the Council of Europe assembly and Western European Union assembly from 1965 to 1976, of the indirectly elected European parliament from 1977 to 1979, and of the Council of Europe and the Western European Union council from 1979 to 1983. He was increasingly embroiled in conflict with the Labour left both within his constituency and more widely. From the later 1960s working-class London Labour MPs like Ron Brown, Ernest Perry, and Bob Mellish felt threatened by ambitious, often middle-class, activists who spoke the irreverent language of 1960s anti-establishment left-wing politics, and who were impatient of suggestions of respecting the older generation of Labour stalwarts. As chairman of the London group of Labour MPs he was described by Ken Livingstone, the left-wing leader of the Greater London council as 'a particular problem' who 'did everything possible to sour relations between Labour MPs and the GLC' ('Daily Telegraph'). To add insult to injury, he shared the name Ron Brown with another, much more left-wing, Labour MP, Ronald H. Brown, and was as a consequence frequently berated by constituents and others for, for instance, supposedly supporting the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He eventually left the party to join the Social Democratic Party in 1981, complaining bitterly of the 'extremism, viciousness and spitefulness' in the Labour Party ('The Times'). He lost his seat in the 1983 election, coming third behind the Labour and Conservative candidates. 
From 1984 to 1987 Brown worked as director of industrial relations for the Federation of Master Builders, and was deputy director-general from 1987 to 1991. He was also a member of the North-West Thames regional health authority (1974-88), and a governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital and its medical college (1964-95), and lay member of its medical research and ethics committee (1980-94). In later life he and his wife, Mary, lived in Pevensey, Sussex. He rejoined the Labour Party in 1997. He died on 27 July 2002 at Eastbourne District General Hospital, Eastbourne, of peritonitis, colonic diverticular disease, and cancer of the thyroid, and was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 30862


Brown, Sir (George) Lindor (1903-1971), physiologist, was born in Liverpool on 9 February 1903, the only son and younger child of George William Arthur Brown, schoolmaster in Warrington, and his wife, Helen Wharram, of Yorkshire. He attended first his father's school and then the Boteler grammar school in Warrington. At eighteen he won a scholarship to the University of Manchester, following his sister, Kathleen, and read medicine rather than chemistry as he had originally intended. He did well in pre-clinical studies, and his physiology teachers, A. V. Hill, H. S. Raper, and B. A. McSwiney, influenced him towards a research career. Encouraged by McSwiney, he took an honours BSc in physiology (1924); after winning the Platt physiological scholarship, he spent a further year doing research in McSwiney's laboratory towards an MSc (1925). He qualified in medicine in 1928 (MB ChB Manch.), winning the Bradley prize and medal for operative surgery. 
McSwiney had moved in 1926 to the physiology chair in Leeds, and in 1928 Brown joined him there as lecturer in physiology, working for some years on the nervous control of the motility of gastric muscle. In 1930 he married Jane Rosamond (died 1975), daughter of Charles Herbert Lees, professor of physics in the University of London, and vice-principal of Queen Mary College. They had met five years earlier in clinical school. There were four children: Helen, who graduated in medicine; Christopher, an engineer; Stephen, an airline pilot; and Humphrey, a biomedical engineer. 
In 1932 Brown took advantage of six months' leave to work in the laboratory of Sir C. S. Sherrington at Oxford, collaborating with J. C. Eccles in an electrophysiological analysis of vagal action on the heart. On returning to Leeds he began his own first fully independent research on ganglionic transmission, with kindred methods. In giving papers to the Physiological Society, he attracted the attention of Sir Henry H. Dale, who offered him a job at the National Institute for Medical Research in Hampstead. Brown took up the appointment in March 1934, joining John H. Gaddum and W. S. Feldberg in Dale's department of biochemistry and pharmacology. 
There followed 'anni mirabiles', during which the cholinergic theory of chemical transmission was established: namely that excitation is transmitted from particular types of nerves to their target structures not by electric currents, but by the release of a chemical transmitter, acetylcholine. Brown and Feldberg's work on the transmission of impulses and release of acetylcholine by the superior cervical ganglion led them to study acetylcholine metabolism in the ganglion, and they were the first to estimate the turnover rate of a transmitter. Working also with Marthe Vogt and Dale, Brown and Feldberg showed that acetylcholine acted as a transmitter at the junction between a motor nerve and voluntary muscle. This was important, not only for general physiology, but also because of the possibility of a chemical link being susceptible to pharmacological manipulation for therapeutic purposes (as has proved to be the case). Brown brought to the group electrophysiological methods, a beautiful experimental technique, and an insight into the physiology of excitable tissues that was vital at the time. He also became increasingly influential in the Physiological Society; he served as honorary secretary from 1941 to 1949; as foreign secretary from 1949 to 1961; and as an editor of the 'Journal of Physiology' from 1940 to 1947. 
With the advent of the Second World War, the institute turned to new activities. Brown, who also became a private in the Home Guard, first engaged in research on motion sickness, body armour, and tank design. Then in 1942 the royal naval personnel research committee (RNPRC) was set up jointly by the Medical Research Council and the chief executive. First to be formed was an underwater subcommittee, in which Brown brought together scientists (including J. B. S. Haldane) and naval officers involved with diving and submarine operations, in an exceptionally fruitful co-operation. He had a flair for removing barriers, and commanded the confidence of his naval colleagues to a remarkable degree. The Hampstead Physiology Laboratory, under Brown's direction after Dale's retirement in 1942, turned to the study of underwater breathing, the effects of excess of oxygen or carbon dioxide on humans (using themselves and colleagues as subjects), and the design of diving apparatus. Other committees, on clothing, gunnery, habitability, and visual problems, followed. Brown remained secretary of the RNPRC until 1949, and was then its chairman for nearly another twenty years. 
With the end of the war the laboratory returned to its previous work, but Brown was now a prominent figure. He was elected FRS in 1946 and appointed CBE in 1947. In 1949 he accepted the Jodrell chair of physiology at University College, London. He was happy and successful there, much strengthening both the physiology department and that of biophysics under Bernard Katz, and developing with J. S. Gillespie important work on adrenergic transmission. They established the relationship between impulse frequency and transmitter release, and clearly distinguished between that release and overflow of transmitter into the circulation. Despite giving up the secretaryship of the RNPRC and of the Physiological Society in 1949, he was carrying many outside activities and a sudden gastric haemorrhage in 1952 made him shed some of these. But new demands appeared, and having served on various Royal Society committees he became its biological secretary from 1955 to 1963. 
In 1960, after advising the electors to the Waynflete chair of physiology in Oxford, Brown was himself offered the post, and accepted. He became a fellow of Magdalen College. Three years later he became a member of hebdomadal council, and also of the Franks commission of inquiry into the working of Oxford University. In 1967 he was elected principal of Hertford College. He resigned his chair, but his research group continued in the pharmacology department. He inaugurated the college's major appeal, negotiated two senior research fellowships, and dealt with student unrest with a light touch. 
Brown was knighted in 1957 and made FRCP in 1958. At various times he served on the Medical Research Council, the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and the governing body of the Lister Institute, latterly as chairman. He was president of the Institute of Information Scientists and of the International Union of Physiological Sciences. He was Feldberg prize lecturer in 1961 and Royal Society Croonian lecturer in 1964. He held honorary doctorates at the universities of St Andrews (1958), Brazil (1958), Liege (1959), Leicester (1968), and Monash (1969), and was a member of the Danish and Brazilian academies of science, and an officer of the Order of the Southern Cross of Brazil (1959). The Physiological Society, which had made him an honorary member in 1970, established in his name the G. L. Brown lecture, given in a number of physiology departments every year. 
Brown had a friendly, invigorating, light-hearted but determined personality. He was an excellent judge of talent and character, a stimulating and supportive head of department, devoted to laboratory work despite all his outside activities, and best and happiest in the company of the young. His recreations included workshop practice, making woodcuts and engravings, playing the flute, and writing topical ballades. 
Early in 1970 Brown was immobilized by a stroke, and though he made a good recovery, he was struck by biliary obstruction in December. The primary tumour was rapidly operated on, but subsequently renal failure set in and he died in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 22 February 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 30863


Brown, Ivor John Carnegie (1891-1974), theatre critic and writer, was born on 25 April 1891 in Penang, Malaya, the younger of the two sons of Dr William Carnegie Brown of Aberdeen, and his first wife, Jean Carnegie. His father, a graduate of Aberdeen University and an expert in tropical diseases, had a practice in the Federated Malay States, and Brown was sent to England to be educated at Suffolk Hall preparatory school and then, from 1902 to 1907, at Cheltenham College. After a year's private tuition by a crammer, he headed the scholarship list at Balliol College at Oxford and took a double first in classical honour moderations (1911) and 'literae humaniores' (1913). He passed sixth into the civil service and was sent to the Home Office. There his career lasted two days, still a strong candidate for a Whitehall record. His first assignment was to minute an application by Staffordshire police for an increased provision of water-closets. He wrote his comments and walked out, thereafter to earn his living as a freelance writing about more interesting matters. 
During the First World War Brown was a conscientious objector, and he hotly engaged in progressive politics. He lectured for the Oxford tutorial classes committee, published two ephemeral books of political theory and three novels, and wrote iconoclastic articles for the 'New Age'. His versatile, profuse, and very fast pen fitted him exceptionally for journalism -- so in 1919 he joined the London office of the 'Manchester Guardian'. There he wrote everything from editorials to colour pieces about sport; but particularly he wrote about the theatre, which became the master passion of his life. On 4 January 1916 he married Irene Gladys ('b'. 1891/2), the elder daughter of Bertha Posener and Carl Hentschel, a photo-engraver who made blocks for Fleet Street newspapers. She was a professional actress who became a successful director of plays, and her knowledge of the far side of the footlights enriched her husband's criticism. There were no children of the marriage. 
Brown was drama critic for the 'Saturday Review' from 1923 to 1930. In 1926 he was appointed Shute lecturer on the art of the theatre at Liverpool University. In 1929 he became theatre critic of 'The Observer' and for the next thirty years, during a brilliant period of change and experiment on the London stage, he was the most influential and perceptive voice in British dramatic criticism. In 1939 he was made professor of drama to the Royal Society of Literature. When the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CEMA; later the Arts Council) was set up during the Second World War, Brown was the obvious choice for its director of drama, a position he held in 1940-42. 
When J. L. Garvin retired from the editorship of 'The Observer' in 1942, Brown was appointed to the post. He carried on as chief drama critic and managed also to make time to write regular leading and feature articles and, when the muse struck, elegant satiric verses. As editor he led 'The Observer' with a light and liberal hand through the difficult wartime shortages of staff and newsprint. He put news on the front page, introduced new blood, broadened the paper's interests, changed its typography, and made it exceptionally well written. But as his own writing was the element in which he preferred to live, he resigned his editorship of the paper in 1948. He continued as drama critic until 1954, but after that devoted himself entirely to his own books. 
Brown was among the most prolific and versatile writers of his generation, publishing more than seventy-five books, including novels, essays, biography, autobiography, criticism, coffee-table books, and even a light (and not very good) play. As well as using the English language expertly, he was one of those logophiles, such as F. G. Fowler, H. W. Fowler, and Eric Partridge, who are fascinated by language itself. He became famous for his books about words, agreeable rambles around correct usage and philology, enlivened by literary allusion, quotation, wit, and personal anecdote. He wrote thirteen of these in all, collecting words as others collect porcelain. In the first, 'A Word in your Ear' (1942), he observed how gargantuan journalese was ruining such good old words as 'epic', 'odyssey', and 'tragedy'. In 'A Charm of Names' (1972) he explored the history of Christian or given names, from Abigail to Zuleika -- of course not forgetting his own name, Ivor. He was the most good-humoured of prescriptivists, but was still incorrigibly convinced that there existed such a thing as correct English, and that it was to be preferred to the other kind. 
Shakespeare was another lifelong enthusiasm. Brown wrote a number of books about him full of amateur common sense and expert theatrical and linguistic wisdom. He was a very professional master of the English language and literature, happiest when writing, which he did very quickly while chewing the end of his handkerchief on the rare occasions when he was stuck for a word or an idea. He was a big, burly, shy man, full of Aberdonian 'gravitas', who could suddenly spark with a flash of frivolity or frolic. 
Brown was chairman of the British Drama League from 1954 to 1965 and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature, and was awarded the honorary degrees of LLD at St Andrews and Aberdeen universities (1950). After the war he lectured much in Denmark, which conferred on him a knighthood of the order of Dannebrog. In 1957 he was appointed CBE. Ivor Brown died in London on 22 April 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30864


Brown, William (1888-1975), mycologist and plant pathologist, was born on 17 February 1888 at Middlebie, Dumfriesshire, the second son and child of Gavin Brown, small farmer and agricultural engineer, and his wife, Margaret Broatch. In 1900 he went to the Annan Academy as a day scholar, obtaining in 1904 a leaving certificate in mathematics, English, Latin, French, and German, and a bursary for Edinburgh University. In 1908 he took his MA degree, with first-class honours in mathematics, qualifying also in physics and other sciences. Until 1906 he had continued to study Latin (first prize and medal); for the rest of his life he read both Greek and Roman authors in their native texts. Following graduation he spent two more years at Edinburgh, qualifying in 1910 for a BSc in advanced botany and zoology. Over the six years of his studies he was awarded fourteen medals. 
In 1912, after two years as a temporary lecturer in plant physiology in the Edinburgh botany department, Brown gained a two-year scholarship to the botany department of the Imperial College of Science and Technology. He became a research student under Vernon Blackman, and was awarded a London DSc in 1916. In 1923 he was appointed assistant professor on the college staff, and in 1928 was made professor of plant pathology in the University of London, the first such post to be established in Britain. In 1921 Brown had married Lucy Doris Allen (died 1966), a graduate of London University (Bedford College) with first-class honours in botany; she was the daughter of a shipping agent and her mother was from a family of London clockmakers. They had a son and three daughters, one of whom, Lucy, taught at the London School of Economics. 
Brown's experimental work on the physiology of fungal growth in culture and of infection of plant tissues was published in a series of eighteen papers (1915-28), and is regarded as a pioneering achievement in these twin subjects. He showed that soft-rot of plant tissues is mediated by fungal secretion of pectinase enzymes and that fungal infectivity is enhanced by nutrients diffusing through the thin cuticle of flower petals and young leaves. His studies of the growth of fungi of the genus 'Fusarium' in culture revealed serious flaws in the taxonomic disposition of species within the genus, which was later revised accordingly. In his paper on combinations of gas and cold storage for control of fungal rots of apple fruits, which was published in the 'Annals of Botany' in 1922, Brown concluded that the effect of fungistatic factors was greatest when the fungal energy of growth was least. This was Brown's major generalization; it led to the concept of fungal inoculum potential for colonization of plant tissues, both living and dead. 
As a supervisor Brown was regarded with affection and respect by his research students. Although he may have appeared conventional in dress and behaviour, his approach to research was anything but so. In his lectures to undergraduates he disdained any tricks of oratory, and his lucid exposition, enlivened by flashes of dry humour, compelled close attention. These qualities are revealed by his lecture entitled 'Spontaneous generation', published in the Royal College of Science 'Journal' in 1952. 
In 1938 Brown was elected FRS. In the same year, he became head of the botany department and continued thus until his retirement in 1953, overseeing a difficult period of post-war reconstruction. As a young man Brown was quite athletic; he was a competent golfer and tennis player. After retirement his chief outdoor interest was gardening. He died in Manchester on 18 January 1975. 
S. D. Garrett', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30865


Browne, John Francis Archibald, sixth Baron Kilmaine (1902-1978), trust administrator, was born in Dublin on 22 September 1902, the eldest of three children and elder son of John Edward Deane Browne, fifth Baron Kilmaine (1878-1946), an Irish representative peer, and his wife, Lady Aline Kennedy (died 1957), daughter of Archibald, third marquess of Ailsa. The family lived in Gaulston in co. Mayo until 1925, when their last estates were sold and they moved to Kent. 
John Browne was educated at Winchester College (where he won the English speech prize, was captain of the school shooting eight, and represented Ireland at rifle shooting) and at Magdalen College, Oxford. He passed moderations in modern history in 1922 and obtained third-class honours in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1925. He then spent four years (1925-9) with British Xylonite before moving to University College, Southampton, as administrative secretary in 1930. His very happy marriage, in that year, to Wilhelmina Phyllis, daughter of Scott Arnott, solicitor, of Brasted, Kent, produced two daughters and a son. 
In 1933 the Oxford Society had been in existence for a year and was looking for a full-time professional secretary. John Browne was appointed and threw himself with characteristic energy and enthusiasm into the task of not only establishing the society as a worldwide organization but of allaying the suspicions of the colleges which in those days felt that a university society might subvert the loyalty of their old members. He launched the magazine 'Oxford' and set up branches throughout the English-speaking world. In 1937 he organized the society's assistance to the university's appeal for the extension to the Bodleian Library and for the improvement of facilities for scientific research. By 1939 he was proposing to raise an endowment fund for the society when war came and he joined the Royal Army Service Corps. He served from 1940 to 1945, rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel, served on the staff, and was twice mentioned in dispatches. 
In 1945 Browne succeeded Thomas Jones as secretary of the Pilgrim Trust. He remained there for twenty-two years, during which time the scope of its benefactions widened enormously. His predecessor's interest had been mainly towards social welfare; Kilmaine (he succeeded to the title in 1946) directed the attention of the trustees towards a wider field of art, learning, and the preservation of the national heritage. He was active in persuading G. F. Fisher, the archbishop of Canterbury, to set up the Historic Churches' Preservation Trust, which the Pilgrim Trust then supported by annual block grants. He secured help for the 'little houses' scheme of the National Trust for Scotland, and his support for the conservation of vernacular housing round the old quay at Harwich was rewarded by his appointment as high steward of the borough (1966-76). He ensured the systematic listing and rescue of medieval wall paintings and was equally active in the preservation of medieval glass, arranging for the glaziers' workshops at York Minster to be converted into a national centre for its repair and preservation. He obtained charitable status for the workshops as the York Glaziers' Trust. He was one of the first to recognize and support the claims of industrial archaeology. 
In 1953 Kilmaine, by then the recognized doyen of trust administrators, also took on the secretaryship of the newly founded Dulverton Trust, which he retained until 1966. Meanwhile, in 1949, he had become chairman of the Oxford Society, to which he devoted much time and energy. When in 1957 several colleges approached the Pilgrim Trust for help with the restoration of their buildings, sadly neglected during the war years, John Kilmaine immediately saw not only the advantage of uniting them in a general appeal but also the necessity for a preliminary assessment of the total amount to be raised. Thus arose the highly successful Oxford Historic Buildings Appeal. His services to the nation were acknowledged by his appointment as CBE in 1956, and his services to Oxford by an honorary DCL in 1973, the year he retired from his chairmanship of the Oxford Society. 
Kilmaine was a distinctive figure, tall, fair, formal in speech and manner. His capacity for work, attention to detail, unerring eye for accuracy, and clarity in summing up a problem were formidable. He could be tactless, and was not above an occasional, somewhat malicious amusement in cutting people down to size. Conscious of his heritage and background, he understandably regretted that events had deprived him of a seat in the House of Lords. If he expected deference, he also extended it to others, with a somewhat old-fashioned respect for position, though his warm sympathy with and interest in all he met (and perhaps his Irish upbringing) caused this to fall short of snobbery. Kilmaine died at Brasted on 26 July 1978. He was succeeded by his son, John David Henry Browne ('b'. 1948). 
D. M. Lennie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30866


Brundrett, Sir Frederick (1894-1974), government scientist, was born on 25 November 1894 at Sunny Bank, Ebbw Vale, Monmouthshire, the eldest in the family of seven sons and three daughters of Walter Brundrett, of Hinxhill, Kent, general secretary and accountant with the Ebbw Vale Steel, Iron, and Coal Company, and his wife, Ada, daughter of James Richardson, of Chorlton-cum-Hardy. He was educated at Rossall School, Fleetwood, Lancashire, and at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. He obtained a first class in part one of the mathematical tripos (1914) and was a wrangler in part two (1916). He then served in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, joining the wireless branch in 1916. After demobilization in 1919 he joined the scientific staff of the Admiralty and was appointed to the Royal Naval Signal School. In 1920 Brundrett married Enid, daughter of George Richard James, schoolmaster, of Chesterton, Cambridgeshire. Their only child, a son, was killed in Italy in 1944. He remained at the signal school until 1937, when he was transferred to the headquarters of the Royal Naval Scientific Service in London and promoted to principal scientific officer. He became a superintending scientist in 1939, assistant director of scientific research in 1940, deputy director in 1942, and in 1946 succeeded Sir Charles Wright as chief of the Royal Naval Scientific Service. In 1950 he was appointed deputy scientific adviser to the minister of defence, serving first under Sir Henry Tizard and then under Sir John Cockcroft, whom he succeeded in 1954 as scientific adviser and chairman of the defence research policy committee. 
During his service in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve Brundrett became engaged in research work on underwater communications with submarines. At the signal school he played a leading part in the development of short-wave radio. He would not, however, have claimed to have made a great contribution to fundamental scientific knowledge, and he once described himself as the worst circuit engineer who ever joined the Royal Naval Scientific Service. His great strength lay in his ability to apply scientific principles to the practical development of new types of equipment. He also showed a great talent for administrative work in the field of science and it was this that enabled him to play such an effective role, first as chief of the Royal Naval Scientific Service and later during his time at the Ministry of Defence. Before he became scientific adviser himself, he had taken an increasing share of the workload, especially after Tizard's retirement, when Cockcroft combined the position of scientific adviser with that of head of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment. He was thus well prepared and established when he himself succeeded in 1954. 
In those days, before the absorption of the separate service departments and the Ministry of Supply into the Ministry of Defence, the scientific adviser's function lay in the co-ordination of policy towards scientific research and the development of new equipment for the armed forces. Brundrett fulfilled this with great skill. He won the confidence not only of successive ministers, but also of successive members of the chiefs of staff committee, who came to rely more and more upon his practical approach and valued his advice on problems ranging well beyond the strictly scientific. Much of the co-ordinating work was done in the defence research policy committee or in specially appointed working groups. Brundrett, being a shrewd judge of people, proved a masterly chairman. 
In 1954 Brundrett became an honorary fellow of Sidney Sussex College. He was appointed CB in 1946, KBE in 1950, and KCB in 1956. He received an honorary DSc from Manchester in 1956. After his retirement from the Ministry of Defence in 1959, Brundrett undertook many other tasks in the public service. He was a civil service commissioner for seven years (1960-67), chairman of the Air Traffic Control Board, and chairman of the naval aircraft research committee of the Aeronautical Research Council (1960-66). 
In appearance Brundrett was small and spare, with bright blue eyes and the air of an inquisitive bird. His approach was direct, his personality warm and outgoing, his interests wide, and, despite the controversies in which he inevitably became involved, he made no enemies. Throughout his life he was keenly interested in agriculture, and he was himself a very successful farmer. He was chairman of the council of the Red and White Friesian Cattle Society, and an authority on the management of contagious abortion in cattle. He became president of the Agricultural Co-operative Association and devoted much energy to the development of co-operative marketing for poultry and eggs. He was an enthusiastic and skilful player of ball games, excelling particularly in hockey, where he was captain of the Hampshire county and civil service teams. He also played cricket for the civil service, and was an eminent stamp collector. He lived latterly at Fieldside, Prinsted, Southbourne, Sussex. Brundrett died at Fieldside on 1 August 1974. 
Richard Powell', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30867


Bryant, Sir Arthur Wynne Morgan (1899-1985), historian, was born on 18 February 1899 at Dersingham on the royal Sandringham estate in Norfolk, the elder son of Francis Morgan Bryant (1859-1938), chief clerk to the prince of Wales, and his wife, May, elder daughter of H. W. Edmunds of Edgbaston. Two years later, on the accession of Edward VII, Bryant's father joined the royal secretariat, becoming registrar of the Royal Victorian Order in 1916, and being knighted in 1920. Bryant's childhood was spent in a house in Lower Grosvenor Place, London, close to the Royal Mews. He attended two fashionable day schools in London before going to Pelham House, Sandgate, followed by Harrow School. In 1916 he gained a history exhibition to Pembroke College, Cambridge, but instead joined the Royal Flying Corps in 1917, becoming a pilot officer. In January 1919 he returned to England, and entered the Queen's College, Oxford, where in 1920 he gained a distinction in the former servicemen's shortened modern history honours course. 
Bryant started his career as a teacher in a London council school in Holloway. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple but in 1923 was appointed principal of the Cambridge School of Arts, Crafts, and Technology. On 16 July 1924 he married Sylvia Mary Shakerley (1900/01-1950), daughter of Sir Walter Geoffrey Shakerley, third baronet, of Somerford Park, Cheshire. Within a year, on his appointment as lecturer in history for the University of Oxford department of extra mural studies, they moved from Cambridge to White House, East Claydon, north Buckinghamshire, where he was to live for the next twenty years. 
In 1929 Bryant became educational adviser to the Bonar Law College at Ashridge, Hertfordshire, and produced his first book, 'The Spirit of Conservatism', imbued with nostalgic Baldwinite traditionalism. Soon he was editing the 'Ashridge Journal'. His nostalgia for an ideal English past had been further expressed in the successful historical pageants he had organized in the vicinity of Cambridge, and then Oxford, which were to lead to his role as co-ordinator of the Greenwich pageants in London in the 1930s. 
Bryant's first book of history was 'King Charles II' (1931), a biography favourable to that monarch as a protector of traditional English interests, which was dramatic in its impact, and also readable; so much so, that it became a best-seller, and the Book Society's monthly choice. A modern reader of it will note the detailed research involved, but also at times the rather sentimental, mannered tone, which was to be a constant in his output. Both aspects were to the fore in his highly successful life of Samuel Pepys, in three volumes (1933, 1935, and 1938), the making of his reputation as a historian. 
Bryant was asked, in 1936, to succeed G. K. Chesterton as writer of 'Our note book' in the 'Illustrated London News' (which he was to write regularly for the rest of his life). In the same year he left his post with the University of Oxford department of extra mural studies, and was from now on to be a freelance writer. In 1937 he became general editor of the National Book Association, a tory counterblast to the Left Book Club. 
Bryant's politics, like those of many people on the right, were affected from 1933 onwards by a naive pro-Nazism. In 1934 he had published a collection of essays entitled 'The Man and the Hour: Studies of Six Great Men of our Time', in which his 'Summary' described Hitler as a 'mystic' who had enabled Germany to 'find her soul' (pp. 143-4). In the late thirties he was still publicly railing against the calumnies with regard to Germany that he believed 'warmongers' to be spreading. 
All this would seem comparatively innocuous, and typical of the attitudes of many at the time; but, even after war broke out, when so many others had recanted, Bryant continued in the same vein, publishing in January 1940 a book (based in part on earlier work), entitled 'Unfinished Victory'; this, while purporting to be an explanation of Germany's attitudes, attempted among other things to justify Germany's actions against the Jews: 'The native Germans... were confronted with a problem -- that of rescuing their indigenous culture from an alien hand and restoring it to their own race' (p. 141). The book ended with a triumphant evocation of the victory of the German revolution. Bryant, in his continual use and reuse of everything he had written, had failed to notice that times had changed. The public reactions to his book soon showed him that they had. 
Bryant swiftly embarked, in responsive reaction, upon his well-known career as a writer of patriotic history, starting with 'English Saga' (1940), and continuing with 'The Years of Endurance, 1793-1802' (1942), and 'The Years of Victory, 1802-1812' (1944). Clear parallels were drawn between Napoleon and Hitler, and England's heroic role in the Napoleonic wars was given a contemporary gloss. These books lacked the detailed research that had marked his writing of the thirties, but were strongly popular in their appeal. They were widely read, and did much to raise public morale. 
In 1939 Bryant's first marriage had been dissolved, and on 29 January 1941 he married Anne Elaine Primula, daughter of Bertram Willes Dayrell Brooke, a retired captain in the Royal Artillery and heir to the last raja of Sarawak (they were to be divorced in 1976). There were no children of either marriage. 
Bryant had always been a very prolific writer. In the post-war period his output was prodigious, with, apart from his journalism, more than twenty books, and many shorter works. Many of these were in the nature of pot-boilers, but his two-volume edition of the diaries of Lord Alanbrooke, 'The Turn of the Tide' (1957) and 'Triumph in the West' (1959), showed that he was still capable of research. The volumes caused something of a furore, because of the criticisms of Churchill contained in them and because they exposed the extent of Anglo-American rivalry over the European campaign in 1944-5. Much of his other output could be best described as 'generalist' history. He had, however, become something of a national institution, and as Britain's leading writer of patriotic history was showered with honours, becoming CBE (1949), a knight (1954), and CH (1967). His one venture into politics, in this period, was his opposition to Britain's entry to the European Common Market. 
Bryant died at New Hall Hospital, Bodenham, Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 22 January 1985. The reputation he left as a historian is a mixed one. Academics have tended to disdain his particular form of popular history. There is a good story about the reactions of A. J. P. Taylor when Bryant was introduced to him as 'our greatest living historian'; yet, to many people, he was just that. His writings have performed a very important function, because by making history a 'good read' he encouraged countless people, who would not otherwise have thought of doing so, to take a real interest in the events of the past. 


@@@@@


doc= 30868


Buchan, Alastair Francis (1918-1976), writer on strategic and international affairs, was born at 76 Portland Place, London, on 9 September 1918, the third son and the fourth and youngest child of John Buchan, first Baron Tweedsmuir (1875-1940), and his wife, Susan Charlotte (1882-1977), daughter of Captain Norman de l'Aigle Grosvenor, third son of the first Baron Ebury. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he took second-class honours in modern history in 1939. After spending a short while at the University of Virginia, he was commissioned in the Canadian army in 1939 (his father being at that time governor-general of the dominion) and saw active service at Dieppe in 1942 and, as a major, in north-west Europe in 1944-5. On 11 April 1942 he married Hope Gordon (died 1997), daughter of David Gordon Gilmour, of Ottawa, Canada, lumberman. They had two sons and a daughter. 
After demobilization Buchan turned to journalism. He served as assistant editor of 'The Economist' from 1948 until 1951, when he went to Washington as correspondent for 'The Observer'. There he remained until 1955, observing at close quarters the political turmoil resulting from the Korean War and the witch-hunts initiated by Senator McCarthy. It was then that he laid the foundations of his expertise in the major problems of defence and nuclear armament that were of increasing concern to decision makers at this period in Washington and elsewhere; and his writing on this topic gained him the respect of senior officials and political figures, as well as his fellow journalists, in both the United States and Europe. 
In 1955 Buchan returned to London and continued to work for 'The Observer' as its diplomatic and defence correspondent. He was there able to pursue a private interest in the life and work of the founder of 'The Economist', Walter Bagehot, which led to the publication in 1959 of an excellent brief study, 'The Spare Chancellor'. But his main interest lay in the increasingly complex and controversial field of defence and nuclear deterrence, and he accepted with alacrity the invitation to become the first director of the newly formed Institute for Strategic Studies in 1958. 
The object which the founders of the institute had in mind was to make generally available information on defence questions, in order to educate public opinion in a debate that was at that time engendering more heat than light. An essential element in this programme was to persuade responsible officials to release more information and share their concerns with a wider public. A difficult path had therefore to be trodden in order to retain the confidence both of Whitehall and of Fleet Street, and in this Buchan succeeded brilliantly. Further, his contacts in the United States enabled him to enlist the interest of such seminal strategic thinkers in that country as Bernard Brodie, Albert Wohlstetter, Thomas Schelling, and Henry Kissinger. European thinkers such as Raymond Aron in France and Helmut Schmidt in Germany were also drawn in. As a result the International Institute for Strategic Studies (as it later became) developed from a simple information centre into the principal forum of strategic debate in the Western world, where officials, journalists, academics, and military men met and freely exchanged ideas. To these ideas Buchan himself made a continuing contribution with his books and articles; but his real talents were entrepreneurial, the capacity to draw ideas out of others. The increasing intelligence and moderation with which such questions as nuclear deterrence, nuclear proliferation, and arms control were publicly discussed in the 1960s in all Western countries owed a very great deal to Buchan's influence. 
Buchan retired from the directorship of the institute in 1969 to take up an appointment as commandant of the Imperial Defence College: the first non-official civilian ever to hold the post. Under his leadership the syllabus was broadened and the membership extended, its changed role being expressed in a new title: the Royal College of Defence Studies. In 1972, at the conclusion of his tour of duty, he became Montague Burton professor of international relations at Oxford, and began to develop a serious graduate school of international politics in that university. He had time barely to lay the foundations, however, when he died suddenly in his sleep on 4 February 1976, in his home, Waterloo House, Brill, near Oxford. His funeral was held in Brill on 10 February. A readership in international relations was established in his memory by Oxford University in 1980. 
Although Eton and Christ Church had equipped Buchan with the agreeable worldliness of an upper-class Englishman, he was fundamentally a Scot, with formidable powers of work and a granite-hard integrity which impressed people even more than did his intellectual ability and the literary fluency he inherited from his father. He was appointed MBE in 1944 and CBE in 1968. In 1973 he gave the Reith lectures, with the theme 'Change without war'. 
Michael Howard', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30869


Hepburn, Patrick George Thomas Buchan-, Baron Hailes (1901-1974), politician and governor-general of the Federation of the West Indies, was born on 2 April 1901 at Smeaton Hepburn, East Lothian, the third son (there was also a daughter) of Sir Archibald Buchan-Hepburn, fourth baronet (1852-1929), a barrister, and his wife, Edith Agnes (died 1923), daughter of Edward Kent Karslake KC. The Buchan-Hepburns were descended from Patrick Hepburn, who was ennobled as Lord Hailes in 1452. Buchan-Hepburn was educated at Harrow School (1915-19) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1919-22). By his own later account, his schooldays were not happy and his academic record was 'quite undistinguished' (Hailes MSS, 5.29). He left Cambridge with no clear ideas for his future. A talented amateur painter and a connoisseur of historic buildings, he proceeded to travel widely. 
From January 1926 to February 1927 Buchan-Hepburn served as an honorary attache at the British embassy in Constantinople. After returning to Britain with political ambitions, he secured appointment as unpaid private secretary to Winston Churchill. Other steps in his political apprenticeship were a foredoomed contest as Conservative candidate for Wolverhampton East in the 1929 general election, and a spell as an elected member for North Kensington on the London county council in 1930-31. At the 1931 general election the Conservative landslide carried him into parliament as member for the East Toxteth division of Liverpool. 'I owe my good fortune very largely to you', he wrote to Churchill (Hailes MSS, 4/2). 
Buchan-Hepburn was no orator and seldom took part in Commons debates; rather, his talent was for organizational work. Importantly for his career, Oliver Stanley, who was widely seen as a future prime minister, took him on as parliamentary private secretary. Between 1931 and 1939 Stanley held ministerial appointments in the Home Office, transport, labour, education, and trade. By remaining with him as parliamentary private secretary throughout these years, Buchan-Hepburn acquired detailed knowledge of the workings of government. In June 1939 he became an assistant government whip and in November he was appointed a junior lord of the Treasury. He retired from this post in June 1940 in order to join the 11th (City of London yeomanry) light anti-aircraft regiment of the Royal Artillery, in which he became a brigade major on staff and served until 1943. Summoned by Churchill back to the Commons, he resumed his appointment as a junior whip in 1944. On 7 June 1945 he married Diana Mary (died 1980), daughter of Brigadier-General the Hon. Charles Lambton and a descendant of Lord Durham. Her first husband, Major William Hedworth Williamson, had been killed at Alamein in 1942. 
When the Conservatives went into opposition in July 1945 Buchan-Hepburn became deputy to James Stuart, the party's chief whip. In 1947 Stuart decided for personal reasons to retire from his post, with Buchan-Hepburn his obvious successor. Churchill was slow to authorize the transition, and Buchan-Hepburn effectively served as 'de facto' chief whip until his promotion was formalized in July 1948. In the same year boundary changes left him without a safe seat to contest at the next election. Churchill failed to persuade the Liverpool tories to endorse him for Garston. Soon afterwards, however, he won endorsement for Beckenham, which he went on to hold from 1950 until his retirement from politics in 1957. 
During the 1950-51 parliament Buchan-Hepburn was centrally involved in the Conservatives' systematic campaign to harry the Attlee administration from office. In government after October 1951 he continued as chief whip, becoming parliamentary secretary to the Treasury and a privy councillor. His effectiveness could be reckoned from the fact that in the years 1951-4 the government's average majority in divisions was twenty-nine, almost double its paper majority. 'A prodigy!' was Churchill's tribute (Hailes MSS, 4/2). 
Buchan-Hepburn was credited by his contemporaries with inaugurating a new style in his office. Typically, tory chief whips had been military men who took a bluntly disciplinarian approach to their responsibilities. Buchan-Hepburn was subtler, more inclined to seek his objectives by turning to account his intuitive perception of the traits and motivations of others. He was articulate, charming, and persuasive, and also had the advantage of looking the part, being tall and notably elegant. He was known in parliament as 'Mr Efficiency' -- but also as 'the Gorgeous Peacock' ('Yorkshire Post', 10 May 1957; 'Sunday Times', 12 May 1957). Behind the charm he was rather vain and sensitive to criticism, and at times his composure gave way to bursts of anger. 'I am not 'pussyfoot' by nature', he once remarked (Hailes MSS, 4/20). But he made few political enemies, and as a chief whip who delivered the desired results, he enjoyed the full confidence of the party's leaders. 
Though Buchan-Hepburn remained personally loyal to Churchill, he was anxious to see Anthony Eden succeed to the premiership, and from 1952 he was among those seeking to persuade Churchill to retire. On attaining the premiership at last in April 1955, Eden kept him on as chief whip until the reshuffle of December 1955, when he promoted him to the post of minister of works with a seat in cabinet. It was an office in which he could apply his architectural interests, but as things turned out he had little time to make an impact. He spent the later months of 1956 embroiled in the Suez crisis, as one of the few in cabinet who from first to last opposed the use of force. Yet in the aftermath of the abortive invasion he took a leading role in cabinet in urging Eden to stay on as prime minister. At the cabinet meeting of 17 December he argued that party unity was at stake and that Eden's departure would be seen as an admission of failure; an argument supported by every other minister who spoke except his old chief Stuart, who had never been an Edenite. 
When on 9 January 1957 Eden did resign, Buchan-Hepburn was the sole minister to give unequivocal support to R. A. Butler for the succession. In a subsequently published letter to the victor, Harold Macmillan, he asked not to be considered for the new ministry. On 15 February Macmillan elevated him to the Lords; reviving the family title, he became Baron Hailes of Prestonkirk. 
A governor-general was needed for the Federation of the West Indies, a newly devised grouping of ten Caribbean islands which the Colonial Office (CO) hoped might become, in time, a viable independent state. Both the CO and the leading Caribbean politicians felt that the governor-generalship should go to a sympathetic colonial administrator such as Sir Hugh Foot, governor of Jamaica. Indeed the colonial secretary, Alan Lennox-Boyd, had already discussed the position with Foot. But Macmillan had other plans. He informed the CO that he proposed to appoint someone with British parliamentary, ministerial, and cabinet experience, as being more appropriate for a territory close to self-government. Hailes's appointment was announced in May. The appointment as GBE followed in September. 
Hailes arrived in the Caribbean in January 1958. To an interviewing journalist he seemed both 'sensitive' and 'practical' (Hailes MSS, 5/29). As governor-general and commander-in-chief he had responsibility for external affairs, defence, and the maintenance of financial stability, along with appointive powers and a veto power over legislation. He also chaired the federal council of ministers -- 'a pretty formidable task', in the CO's judgment (Hailes MSS, 5/3). But within the federal structure the central government was weak 'vis-a-vis' the island governments, and this limited Hailes's ability to maintain the federal momentum in the face of strong inter-island rivalries. Further, leading politicians such as Norman Manley and Eric Williams chose to hold office at island rather than federal level, which placed them outside his sphere of direct authority. His poor relationship with the governor of Trinidad (Sir Edward Beetham) did not help. 
A federal review conference in 1959 foundered upon Jamaica-Trinidad recriminations, and Trinidad in particular began pressing for a separate independence. Hailes sought reinforcement, in the shape of a visit by the colonial secretary, Iain Macleod. The Macleod visit in June 1960 was followed two months later by full internal self-government at the federal level. Hailes approved, but in April 1961, with further constitutional talks approaching, confided to Macmillan that he was 'not very sanguine' (Hailes MSS, 4/16). Late in 1961 the anti-federation outcome of a Jamaican referendum signalled the end of the experiment. The federation was dissolved in May 1962. It was all a 'bitter disappointment' to Hailes (Hailes MSS, 5/77). He had been a conscientious and energetic governor-general, but one whose institutional position was never very strong. His real problem, however, was that he was the agent of a misjudged overall policy. Federation made administrative sense in London, but not much political sense in the Caribbean. 
Following the dissolution of the federation Hailes was appointed a Companion of Honour (1962) and retired once more. In retirement he took on the chairmanship of the Historic Buildings Council for England, a post which he held from 1963 to 1973 and in which his love of art and architecture could find practical expression. He died at his home, 1 Pelham Place, London, on 5 November 1974. There being no children from the marriage, the barony became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 30870


Bullard, Sir Edward Crisp (1907-1980), marine geophysicist, was born on 21 September 1907 at 1 Heigham Grove, Earlham Road, Heigham, Norwich, the only son and eldest of four children, of whom the last were twins, of Edward John Bullard (1875-1950), a Norwich brewer, and his wife, Eleanor Howes (1877-1962), daughter of Sir Frank Crisp, first baronet (1843-1919), solicitor and vice-president of the Linnean Society, and his wife, Catherine ('nee' Howes). Bullard's first schooling was in the mixed primary classes at Norwich High School for Girls, which took both girls and boys in the lower class, and in 1916 he went on to Norwich grammar school, where he was extremely unhappy; things improved when he was sent to Aldeburgh Lodge (now Orwell Park School), Suffolk, in 1919, and his lifelong interest in physics was kindled while at Repton School, Derbyshire (1921-6). He entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1926 and obtained first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos, taking physics, chemistry, mathematics, and mineralogy in part one (1928) and specializing in physics in part two (1929). 
On graduation Bullard began research for his PhD at the Cavendish Laboratory under Patrick Blackett and Lord Rutherford. He initially worked with Harrie Massey (1908-1983) on a study of electron scattering in gases and, later, with Philip Moon building an analogue device to solve Schrodinger's equation (which describes the wave-like behaviour of electrons in the atom). At the height of the economic depression in 1931 he took Rutherford's advice to 'take any job you can get' (Munk, v) and accordingly accepted an invitation from Sir Gerald Lenox-Conyngham to join his fledgeling department of geodesy and geophysics as a demonstrator. On the strength of this post Bullard married Margaret Ellen ('b'. 1907), daughter of Frederick Bevan Thomas, a civil engineer with the Indian railways, and his wife, Annie Whitmarsh ('nee' Phelps), on 25 July 1931. Described as 'an immensely talented [but] restless romanticist' (Revelle, 4), Margaret assisted Bullard with much of his early experimental work, 'keeping many of the notebooks and making the thermal conductivity measurements' (McKenzie, 76). In the 1950s she published three novels based on their lives in Cambridge, Toronto, and La Jolla. 
On joining Lenox-Conyngham, Bullard developed techniques greatly to improve the accuracy of the department's large invariable pendulum, used to measure the strength of the earth's gravity field. As a result, he became a consultant to the Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. and gained his PhD (in physics and atomic physics) in 1932, and his application of this geophysical method to investigate the geological structure of the east African rift valley in 1933-4 established his reputation. He was awarded a Smithsonian research fellowship of the Royal Society (1936-43) and Cambridge's Sedgwick prize in March 1937. By 1936 he had recognized the potential for academic research of the secret seismic survey techniques used by oil companies. Aided by Leslie Flavill, an instrument designer and mechanic of genius, C. Kerr-Grant, Thomas Gaskell, and the geologist Brian Harland, Bullard built equipment and by refraction survey during 1937-8, combined with evidence from boreholes, successfully elucidated the sub-surface structure of much of eastern England. 
In contrast the geology of the ocean floor was at this time still largely unknown. In the autumn of 1936 Bullard met the American geologist Richard Field (1885-1961), who described measurements of the thicknesses of sediments on the continental shelf off the Virginia coastline made by Maurice Ewing (1906-1974) the previous year. Field recommended similar work on the opposite side of the Atlantic, and invited Bullard to accompany Ewing on a cruise to observe the seismic techniques used. Consequently in July 1938 and June 1939, Bullard, Gaskell, and Flavill improved on Ewing's refraction survey technique with sea-floor geophones by using hydrophones floating close to the sea surface (thereby paving the way for modern marine seismic surveys), and measured sediment thicknesses on a transect south-west of Land's End, Cornwall. This showed that, as Ewing had found, the basement sloped down towards the continental edge and confirmed the existence of a major Atlantic sedimentary basin. 
Although many measurements of the increase of the earth's temperature with depth had been made in the nineteenth century using mines and boreholes, lack of knowledge of the thermal conductivity of the rocks through which they passed made it impossible to know whether observed variations in thermal gradient were caused by changes in heat-flow or conductivity. At the instigation of Harold Jeffreys (1891-1989), reader in geophysics in Lenox-Conyngham's department, in 1935 the British Association for the Advancement of Science established a committee to remedy this situation. Bullard developed improved techniques for measurement of thermal conductivity, setting definitive standards which 'have remained largely unchanged' (McKenzie, 75) since. Unexpectedly low temperature gradients had recently been reported from very deep boreholes in South Africa. In 1938-9 Bullard's measurements showed that the anomalous results were accounted for by high thermal conductivities of the local rocks through which the boreholes passed. This enabled him to obtain the first reliable estimate of heat-flux through the continents. 
In November 1939 Bullard joined HMS 'Vernon', the Royal Naval Mine and Torpedo School, Portsmouth. Ships naturally acquire a magnetic field during their construction and this made them an easy prey to German magnetic mines. Bullard was placed in charge of finding ways to protect ships from magnetic and acoustic mines. Demonstrating when necessary an utter disregard for the formalities of normal civil service rules his group, which included Flavill and Gaskell, successfully developed methods for sweeping mines and neutralizing ship magnetic fields. Within eighteen months shipping losses from mines had been reduced to such an extent that, in 1941, Bullard could move to London to join Blackett's naval operational research group in the Admiralty. He first worked on strategies for conducting marine warfare; on analysis of data which Reginald Jones's (1911-1997) scientific intelligence unit at the air ministry was obtaining regarding the German rocket and flying-bomb programme; and then on strategies for attacking firing sites in northern France. In 1944 Bullard was appointed assistant director of operational research. In later years he 'thought of these wartime accomplishments when he was so young as the most important things he had ever done' (Revelle, 2). He remained an adviser to the Admiralty until his retirement from Cambridge in 1974. 
Bullard returned to Cambridge as reader in experimental geophysics in 1945, then head of department in 1947. He tried to continue with seismic and heat-flow research and, as a result of his wartime duties, began work on problems of the earth's magnetic field, but he became increasingly frustrated by lack of equipment, financial support, and ship time. In the spring of 1948 (the year he gained his ScD in geophysics from Cambridge) he became chairman of the physics department at the University of Toronto. There he continued work on heat-flow, and began theoretical studies to show how movement of fluid material in the core of the earth could act as a self-sustaining dynamo, and hence as the source of the geomagnetic field. He encouraged departmental research in geochemistry and methods for the dating of rocks using natural radioactive decay. Despite this, both he and his family were unhappy in Canada, and he accepted directorship of the National Physical Laboratory, Teddington. In June-July 1949 at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California, he designed and, with graduate student Arthur Maxwell ('b'. 1925), built a prototype of the first deep-sea probe capable of accurately measuring the thermal gradient in the sediments of the ocean floor. 
Although he could be forgetful, Bullard was a skilled and sometimes buccaneering manager and an excellent academic supervisor: 'Running things needs confidence... I learned a lot from Rutherford. A thing you must do is spend time with people who are in trouble, either emotional, financial or scientific... you have to remain calm, sympathetic and reasonable' (McKenzie, 80-81). So, despite his 'disconcerting and invigorating habit of dropping into a laboratory or office, hearing what the occupant was doing, and almost always telling him how to do it better' (Cook, 16), he was an effective and well-liked director of the National Physical Laboratory and was created knight bachelor in 1953 in recognition of this service and his wartime work. While at the laboratory he pursued development of the heat-probe -- 'I had superb facilities and no question as to who was going to use them.... If I said do something, they did it' (Shor, 74). The first successful measurements were made in the deep ocean basin south-west of Ireland, in July 1952. Bullard was now able to complete calculations underpinning his dynamo model, one of the first non-military applications of computational fluid-mechanics, using the ACE computer at the National Physical Laboratory. 
In 1955 Bullard returned to Cambridge (at a third of his Teddington salary) as Bye fellow of Gonville and Caius College; he became assistant director of research in the department of geology and geophysics (1956), reader in geophysics (1960), and the first professor of geophysics (1964-74). He was a fellow of Churchill College from 1960 and a visiting professor at the La Jolla laboratories of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, University of California (1963-74). He was by now a firm champion of the idea that the ocean floor was essentially different in nature from the continents, while his own principal fields of research continued to be geomagnetics and heat-flow, and his department became a major centre for palaeomagnetic and marine research. By 1954 analysis of heat-flow data obtained in collaboration with Roger Revelle (1909-1991) and Maxwell of the Scripps Institution, from the Pacific and Atlantic, had shown results hotter than anticipated, and by 1956 Bullard had located a zone of high heat-flow associated with the mid-oceanic ridge. This supported his 1954 hypothesis that excess heat-flow could be explained by upwards transportation of heat from the inner earth by convection. In 1959, although Alfred Wegener's (1880-1930) theory of continental drift was still regarded as complete heresy by the majority of geologists, Bullard, although recognizing that there could be counter-arguments, suggested that recent palaeomagnetic evidence of polar-wandering paths (obtained by his former student Keith Runcorn (1922-1995) and others), also indicated that drift could be a reality, and that the mid-Atlantic ridge might mark the place at which the ocean was widening. Evidence from palaeomagnetism and magnetic and gravity surveys of the sea floor continued to accumulate and Bullard and his colleague Maurice Hill (1916-1966) were among the first to introduce computer processing methods to marine geophysical data reduction. However, interpretation of what such results implied remained controversial. In 1963, in a lecture to the Geological Society, London, Bullard 'at last came out in favour of continental drift without reservations' (Bullard, 16), concluding that the consensus of evidence supporting drift was now convincing and that thermal convection currents, driving sea-floor spreading, provided a plausible mechanism. Inspired by Jeffrey's disbelief in previous attempts to demonstrate the closeness-of-fit of the margins of the continental shelves across the Atlantic, Bullard now recalled Euler's (1776) theorem, that any motion of a sphere over itself can be regarded as a single rotation about a given axis. Working with Alec Smith and J. E. Everett he used the theorem to compute a very convincing match, which they presented at a symposium on drift organized by Blackett, Runcorn, and Bullard in 1964. With growing understanding of the nature of spreading at mid-oceanic ridges and Tuzo Wilson's (1908-1993) recognition of the presence of major transform-faults, Bullard's computational method underpinned the eventual acceptance, in 1966-7, of the concept of plate tectonics. Thereafter, his research was mainly concerned with the origin of the earth's magnetic field. 
In quite different roles Bullard participated in the 1958 conference of experts held in Geneva to establish the technical criteria necessary to monitor a nuclear test-ban treaty; as joint chairman of the Anglo-American ballistic missile committee; and in the Pugwash conferences in the 1960s. As a result he maintained an interest in the detection of underground nuclear explosions. He also served on a number of committees in the Ministry of Defence; as a director of the family firm, Bullard & Sons (1950-55), and of IBM UK (1964-75); and as a consultant to the US president's office of science and technology policy, the California energy commission, and the jet propulsion laboratory of the California Institute of Technology on high-level radioactive waste disposal (1975-8). He was elected to the Royal Society in 1941 and received many honours, including its Hughes and royal medals (1953, 1975); the Chree medal (Physical Society, 1956); Day medal (Geological Society of America, 1959); gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1965); Agassiz medal (US National Academy of Science, 1965); Wollaston medal (Geological Society, London, 1967); the Bowie and Ewing medals (American Geophysical Union, 1975, 1978); the Vetlesen prize (often regarded as the geological equivalent of the Nobel prize, 1968); and honorary ScD degrees from the Memorial University of Newfoundland (1970) and the University of East Anglia (1976). His favourite was reputed to be the stuffed albatross awarded to him in 1976 by the American Miscellaneous Society for 'the most incomprehensible paper of the decade in geophysics' (Revelle, 6) -- a reference to his work on the dynamo theory. 
There were four daughters from Bullard's first marriage (Belinda, Emily, Henrietta, and Polly), the middle two of whom were twins. The marriage was dissolved in January 1974 and on 11 June he married Mrs Ursula Margery Curnow (1924-1989), daughter of Ernest James Cooke, medical practitioner, of Christchurch, New Zealand. Although his health was beginning to fail, Bullard and his new wife emigrated to California in September 1974, where he resumed his (previously visiting) position as a professor at the Scripps Institution. With the 'calm and steady' painter and sculptor, Ursula, Lady Bullard, he was able to 'find peace and... genuine happiness' (Revelle, 4). After a courageous fight against prostate cancer Bullard died in his sleep on 3 April 1980, at his home, 2491 Horizon Way, La Jolla, California, a few hours after the completion of the manuscript (with S. R. C. Malin) of his 196th scientific article, a historical review of the direction of the earth's magnetic field at London since the sixteenth century. His ashes were scattered at sea off the La Jolla coast. Memorial services were held at the Scripps Institution on 16 April, and in Cambridge on 24 May, 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 30871


Bullard, Sir Reader William (1885-1976), diplomatist, was born in Walthamstow, London, on 5 December 1885, the younger child and only son of Charles Bullard (1850-1912), dock labourer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Westlake. The unpropitious opening to this life was conveyed in the first paragraph of Bullard's autobiography 'The Camels must Go' (1961): 'Very early one morning in December 1885 a man of thirty-five walked from a small house in Walthamstow to the London docks, a distance of some eight miles, in the hope of being taken on for a day's work, helping to load or unload some vessel. Having failed to catch the foreman's eye, and holding that it was the willingness of casual labour to hang about all day that encouraged employers to depend on casual labour, he walked home again, and having earned no money he bought no food. On his return home he found that besides a daughter of five years old he now had a son, and he decided to give him the odd christian name his father had -- Reader. It happened to be the man's own birthday, and at the moment it seemed unlikely that any returns of the day there might be would be very happy for either of them. (Bullard, 17)' After a short spell in Canada in 1886-7 (which was not a success) the family returned to various homes in and near London, and a few years later Bullard's father obtained regular employment as a foreman on the British and Foreign Wharf, near Tower Bridge, at 42's'. a week. At the age of eleven Bullard won an Essex county scholarship worth $16 a year for two years, which took him to Bancroft's School at Woodford. He trained as a schoolmaster and spent one year as a pupil teacher, and at the age of eighteen he briefly became an assistant master at a poor school in Walthamstow. All this time he had been following an intensive course of self-education. He 'read everything', showed an early aptitude for languages, enjoyed excellent health, and so emerged successfully from the 'curious [educational] steeplechase' (ibid., 44) in which he had been engaged. 
Bullard's future was determined after he had seen a crammer's prospectus which gave particulars of, among other careers, the Levant consular service, the examination for which required an English essay, arithmetic, good handwriting, and six languages, including compulsory Latin and French. He added Greek, German, Spanish, and Italian, and in 1906 successfully came third out of twenty-five candidates. There followed two years at Queens' College, Cambridge, studying Arabic, Turkish, and Persian under Professor E. G. Browne. 
Bullard's first posting was to Constantinople, first in the consulate-general and then in the embassy as a student interpreter (third dragoman), where he was in time to see the last few weeks of the rule of Abdul Hamid. After two spells as acting consul in Trebizond and Erzurum, in the summer of 1914 he was asked to go to Basrah to take the place of the consul there, who was due to go on leave. This meant a complicated journey -- a fortnight's ride to Diyarbakir, then by 'kelek' (a raft of inflated goatskins) down the Tigris to Baghdad, and finally by steamer to Basrah. He expected to stay in Mesopotamia for six months, but was to be there for six years. 
After Turkey entered the war in October 1914 and an Indian expeditionary force was landed in Basrah, Bullard was naturally attached to it as political officer, helping to erect the rudiments of a civil administration. His chief was Sir Percy Cox, whom he accompanied on two missions to Tehran. After a brief period of leave in England in 1919 (he had survived the war without serious illness except malaria and without any leave) he returned to Iraq in May 1920 as military governor of Baghdad, with the rank of major. 
There followed two years back in London as a member of the new Middle East department of the Colonial Office, set up by the colonial secretary, Winston Churchill, who was 'trying to clear up the confusion in the Middle East' (Bullard, 117). Bullard's colleagues there included Herbert Young and T. E. Lawrence, but his responsibility was confined to Iraq. He attended the Lausanne conference in December 1922, where he was concerned with drawing the frontier between Turkey and the Mosul province of the new Iraqi state. 
In June 1923 Bullard took up his post as consul in Jiddah, where the consulate was 'dilapidated though airy and picturesque' (Bullard, 124) (there was no electricity, so no air-conditioning or refrigerator) and the haunt of a lot of noisy owls. Hejaz was at that time ruled by the Hashemite King Hussein, father of Feisal and Abdullah, now installed in Iraq and Transjordan. Hussein suffered from a keen sense of betrayal, as he saw it, at the hands of the allies, and had become a cantankerous old man who often sorely tried Bullard's exemplary patience. The main income of Hejaz was from pilgrims, and the main task of the consul was to prevent them from being cheated by guides or monarch and to look after the welfare of those, mainly from India, who were British subjects. It was from this time that he acquired the name by which he was always known, Haji. By the time he left in July 1925, the man who was to turn Arabia into a unitary state, 'Abd al- 'Aziz ibn Sa'ud, was battering on the gates of Jiddah, which he finally entered in December 1921, by which time Hussein was an exile in Cyprus. 
Bullard's next two postings, Athens from 1923 to 1928 and Addis Ababa from 1928 to 1930, were comparatively uneventful, but after the resumption of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union he asked for a posting there, curious to see at first hand the much vaunted 'new civilization'. In November 1930 he became consul-general in Moscow, transferring the following June to Leningrad. His four years in the Soviet Union saw the end of the first five-year plan and the beginning of the second. He left Leningrad just before the murder of Kirov, which provided Stalin with the excuse to stage-manage the series of great show trials, but Bullard had seen enough of the iron grip of the secret police and the adulation of Stalin to appreciate how wide was the gulf between the picture painted by unremitting Soviet propaganda and the reality. There was not a great deal of activity in the consulates but, as Bullard said, if there was little bread there were plenty of circuses, and he enjoyed the theatre, opera, and ballet, as well as reading widely and perfecting his Russian. 
Bullard was next offered the post of consul-general in Strasbourg, which he would have liked, but turned down in favour of a colleague from the Levant consular service whose health problems he felt gave him priority. Instead, two years in Morocco proved an equally pleasant contrast. That legacy of the old Ottoman empire, capitulations, was still alive there and involved Bullard in a good deal of legal business. Rather to his surprise, in 1936 he was transferred from the Levant consular service to the foreign service proper and was sent back to Jiddah as minister. He was appointed KCMG at the same time. 
Ibn Sa'ud was a much more rewarding monarch to deal with than King Hussein. Pilgrims were still a major source of revenue (oil was not in commercial production until late in 1939) but they were now much better looked after. One agreeable duty which fell to Bullard was to escort Princess Alice, granddaughter of Queen Victoria, and her husband, the earl of Athlone, brother of Queen Mary, who had been invited by Ibn Sa'ud to be his guests in a crossing of Arabia from Jiddah to Bahrain via Ta'if and Riyadh. The visit was a great success, Ibn Sa'ud for the first time entertaining a European lady to a meal. 
In December 1939 Bullard was appointed, now that the country was at war, to one of the key posts in the diplomatic service, Tehran, first as minister but from 1943 as ambassador. The sympathies of Reza Shah, the autocrat who had ruled Persia since 1921, were with the axis, and there were a great many Germans in the country posing as specialists or businessmen. Pressure to secure their removal increased after the German invasion of Russia in June 1941, and in August British and Russian troops entered the country. The next month Reza Shah, under the mistaken impression that Russian troops were approaching the capital, abdicated in favour of his son Mohamed Reza, and was taken in a British ship to South Africa, where he died. 
Britain and Russia were now allies, and the north-south railway which Reza Shah had built became one of the main routes for the supply to Russia of arms and other essentials. But the interests of the allies were not always easily reconciled. Ensuring adequate food supplies for the local population became one of Bullard's constant headaches, the Russians holding the main grain-growing areas in the north and being reluctant to release supplies to areas where they were most needed. 
Many important visitors passed through Tehran on their way to or from Russia, and at the end of 1943 it became the venue for the first time of conferences of the 'big three'. Much organizational work fell on Bullard and his staff, and an inscription on a wall in the embassy drafted by Bullard commemorated the dinner there on 30 November, at which Churchill sat between Roosevelt and Stalin and, opposite them, Bullard sat between Marshal Voroshilov and Molotov. For his services during the Tehran conference, Bullard was appointed KCB. 
At the end of the war, though invited to accept another post, Bullard preferred to retire. His retirement was as busy as his diplomatic career. He was from 1951 to 1956 director of the Institute of Commonwealth Studies, Oxford; he wrote for Hutchinson's 'University Library' 'Britain and the Middle East' (1951), a model of brevity; he edited the third volume of the Chatham House 'Middle Eastern Survey' (1958); and he chaired both the Libyan currency commission and the abortive attempt to adjudicate on the rival claims of Saudi Arabia, Muscat, and Abu Dhabi, to the Buraimi oasis. He also took some part in local government affairs and did much lecturing in Britain and America. In 1961 he published his autobiography, 'The Camels must Go'. 
But it was for his personality that Bullard was chiefly remembered. He was a humble man. Short and stocky, with a craggy face and deep set eyes, he gave an immediate impression of rock-like solidity. A tireless worker, deeply conscious of his country's past and of the highest standards she had the right to demand from her servants, he was no less conscientious in his attention to detail, for example always arranging (and paying for) Christmas presents for the ever expanding embassy staff. 
In spite of his multifarious duties in Tehran Bullard found time to give two talks to the British Council, on Dr Johnson and Dickens, and another on a subject particularly dear to his heart, 'Changes in the English language in my lifetime'. His love of the literature of many languages was unconfined. He thought he must be slipping when it took him a whole morning to read a book of the 'Aeneid' (in a Jiddah summer); at the other end of the spectrum, when in bed 'with a really bad cold -- the first for years', he read, among much else, Dorothy Sayers's 'Gaudy Night' for the sixth time. 'If I ever fall into the water', he wrote, 'and appear to be drowned, bring in a new book and see if the smell of printer's ink doesn't bring me round' ('Letters from Tehran', 132). 
Bullard was an honorary fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge, Lincoln College, Oxford, and the School of Oriental and African Studies, London. He married on 18 August 1921 at Bamburgh, Northumberland, Miriam Catherine 
(Biddy; 1888-1973)
, daughter of Arthur Lionel Smith (1850-1924), master of Balliol College, Oxford. She stayed with him briefly in Jiddah and Leningrad and for a longer time in Addis Ababa, but they realized that if their children were to be properly educated a house of their own in Oxford was a necessity. The choice was vindicated. They had a daughter and four sons, two of whom followed him into the foreign service, Giles ['see below'] and Julian Bullard (1928-2006), a fellow of All Souls and ambassador in Bonn. Bullard survived his wife by three years, dying in his son Giles's house in West Hendred, near Wantage, on 24 May 1976. Asked for a recipe for longevity he suggested that 'while I do not make a fetish of exercise, I think that a brisk walk -- say about every other Easter -- does nobody any harm' (Bullard, 283). 


After three years with a shipping firm, mostly in Norway, Bullard joined the foreign service in 1955, serving in Bucharest, Panama, Bangkok, and Islamabad. He had two home postings, in the mid-1960s to the personnel department of the Foreign Office, and in the mid-1970s as a senior inspector, both posts requiring great tact, a quality with which Bullard was notably endowed. 
Bullard spent a year at the Centre for South-East Asia Studies in Cambridge, and from 1977 to 1980 was consul-general in Boston, where he met his second wife, Linda Rannells, 'nee' Lewis (died 1992), whom he married in 1982. She brought Bullard four stepchildren in addition to his own children. His next post was as ambassador in Sofia, where for three years in those Warsaw pact days he was only allowed to meet officials. He did, however, manage to visit the Museum of Humour, where he bought volumes of Bulgarian jokes which he declared to be worth their weight in lead. 
A more congenial posting was as high commissioner to the West Indies, based in Bridgetown, Barbados. Only two months after his arrival came the American invasion of Grenada, to topple a left-wing regime and a suspected pro-Cuban plot. This armed intervention in a Commonwealth country was greeted in London with official outrage, but Bullard, who knew the strong feelings about the Grenada regime in other West Indian countries, advised co-operation with the Americans, or at any rate doing nothing to hamper them. The fact that his advice was ignored was something he never referred to, though he was sorely tempted to do so in the face of American criticism. He was appointed CMG in 1981 and KCVO in 1985. 
After his retirement in 1986 Bullard lived at the Manor House, West Hendred, near Wantage, where he was able to engage in many country pursuits and local interests. Like his father, Bullard was quietly spoken, a rock of integrity, and a man of wide reading and subtle humour. He died at his home on 11 November 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 30872


Bullock, Sir Christopher Llewellyn (1891-1972), public servant and businessman, was born on 10 November 1891 at Whiston, Northamptonshire, the second child and second son in the family of seven children (one of whom died at birth) of the Revd Llewellyn Christopher Watson Bullock (1866-1936), later rector of Great and Little Wigborough, Essex, and his wife, Cecil Augusta Margaret Isabella, daughter of Edmund Robert Spearman CMG, British consul in Chantilly and formerly secretary of the Public Works Loan Board, and granddaughter of the fifth earl of Orkney. He was educated at Rugby School, where his father was a master, becoming captain of the running eight and gaining a classical scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he had a remarkable career. He won not only the Abbott and Porson university scholarships in classics, the members' Latin essay prize, and the Browne medals for Latin ode (twice) and Greek epigram, but also the Charles Oldham Shakespeare scholarship and the Whewell scholarship in international law. He was placed in the first division of the first class of the classical tripos in 1913 and was offered a fellowship at Trinity. 
It was, however, to the public service that Bullock turned. After taking first place in the open competition for the home and Indian Civil Services in 1914 he chose India. But the First World War intervened before he took up his appointment and he volunteered for service with the rifle brigade. He was seriously wounded at Ypres in 1915 and was mentioned in dispatches; later, seconded to the Royal Flying Corps, he gained his wings first as an observer and then as a pilot. Becoming unfit for flying in 1917, he was appointed to the air staff and, in 1919, became principal private secretary to Winston Churchill, the secretary of state for air. From 1923 to 1930 he served successive secretaries of state in the same capacity and in 1931, at the exceptionally early age of thirty-nine, he was promoted directly to permanent secretary of the Air Ministry and member of the Air Council. 
It was at the Air Ministry that Bullock's best work was done. In 1919 the government had decided to establish a permanent independent Royal Air Force and Sir Hugh Trenchard was given the task of creating and building up the new service. Bullock became his right-hand man on the civilian side and Trenchard, when he retired in 1929, recorded his gratitude for Bullock's great contribution during what he called 'the hardest years that I think any Department could pass through'. For there were forces in Whitehall, particularly in the other service departments and in the Treasury, that were hostile to the young Royal Air Force and its very survival as a separate service was at times in doubt. Bullock fought with partisan ferocity for the interests of his ministry and it was in this testing atmosphere that his administrative temperament was forged. 
Later the rising menace of Nazism made the expansion of the RAF a concern of first importance, and Bullock's part was again crucial. Against the pacific temper and financial stringency of the times he strove to awaken public and parliament to the need for strengthening the RAF to meet the dangers ahead. His powerful intellect and superb administrative skills were harnessed unstintingly to the task and he drafted nearly all of the important air staff papers for the cabinet himself. It was during these critical years that decisions were taken in the Air Ministry that were vital to Britain's air defence capability when war finally came. Bullock also made a major contribution during the 1920s and 1930s to developing civil aviation, in particular to the pioneering empire air mail scheme. 
Bullock had a strong personality, and once embarked upon a course in which he believed was not easily turned aside. Viscount Templewood thought him 'combative by nature' and elsewhere he was described as 'a fluent talker and not always a patient listener' (Templewood, 51; Stephen Roskill, 'The Times', 30 May 1972). In the bitter interdepartmental battles of the day he conveyed 'a high degree of arrogance' and undoubtedly made enemies (Dean, 89). This told heavily against him when, in 1936, he became the subject of a board of inquiry, appointed by the prime minister, following allegations that he had misused his official position by writing to the chairman of Imperial Airways about the possibility of joining the board of the company should he retire prematurely from the civil service. The approach was made when the Air Ministry was still negotiating with the company about the empire air mail scheme, and a 'Times' leader was strongly critical of Bullock. As a result of the inquiry the prime minister approved summary dismissal, though Stanley Baldwin later wrote that, had he known the whole story, he would never have done so. And Bullock's chief, Lord Hankey, wrote in November 1937: 'the more I think of it the more I feel that the punishment did not fit the crime' (Roskill, 'Hankey', 3.360). The injustice done to Bullock was implicitly recognized during the Second World War, when Bullock was invited to resume a permanent secretary's appointment in the civil service, an offer that he declined because of existing commitments in industries connected with vital war work. Public acknowledgement that his dismissal had been mistaken was belatedly made at his memorial service. It was attended by a representative of the prime minister, members of the air force board, and the permanent under-secretary of the Ministry of Defence. 
After 1936 Bullock showed great fortitude in developing a range of business interests, becoming a director of a number of well-known companies; he remained active in business until his late seventies. He married, on 18 April 1917, Barbara May, daughter of Henry Lupton, a stuff merchant in Leeds, and they had two sons, both of whom enjoyed successful careers in the public service. 
Bullock was appointed OBE in 1919, CBE in 1926, CB in 1929, and KCB in 1932. He died in London on 16 May 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 30873


Bullock, Sir Ernest (1890-1979), organist and music teacher, was born in Wigan, Lancashire, on 15 September 1890, the youngest child of Thomas Bullock and his wife, Eliza Stout. He had one sister, the eldest of the family, and four brothers, and both his parents died while he was still at school. As a small boy he joined the choir at Wigan parish church, an event that proved decisive by bringing him into the care of E. C. Bairstow, then organist at Wigan. Bairstow recognized the boy's talent and his difficult circumstances, and took him as an articled pupil, providing general education at Wigan grammar school. When Bairstow moved to Leeds parish church in 1906 he took the pupil with him into his own home, and assumed responsibility for his musical education. Bullock received his BMus (Durham) in 1908 and passed the FRCO examination in 1909. Appointed in 1912 to be assistant to S. H. Nicholson at Manchester Cathedral, Bullock soon became known as a promising composer of church music, chamber music, and songs. In 1914 he obtained his DMus (Durham) but it was not until 1919, after four years of distinguished service in France as a captain and adjutant in the King's Own Yorkshire light infantry, that he was able to return to music. A few months as organist at St Michael's College, Tenbury, Worcestershire, prepared him for an important spell from October 1919 to January 1928 as organist at Exeter Cathedral, where, with determination that was considered at times ruthless, he put new life into the music of the cathedral, the diocese, and the region. In 1919 he married Margery, daughter of George Hope Newborn, solicitor, of Epworth, Lincolnshire. They had two sons and a daughter. 
When Bullock moved to Westminster Abbey in 1928 he brought similar reforming energy into a reorganization of the daily choral offices and many special occasions, the most spectacular of which was the coronation of George VI on 12 May 1937, for which Bullock composed fanfares and acted as joint musical director. After the bombing in 1940, in which his house (with all his property and papers) was destroyed, the abbey's musical establishment had to be dispersed, and Bullock's career seemed to be in ruins. In 1941, however, he was appointed to be principal of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, a post at that time involving also the Gardiner professorship of music in the University of Glasgow. In his eleven years in Glasgow Bullock made a significant contribution to Scottish music, and he chaired the music committee of the Scottish Arts Council from 1943 to 1950. He was also a member of the music panel of the Arts Council of Great Britain (1945-7). 
Bullock returned to London in January 1953 to succeed Sir George Dyson as director of the Royal College of Music, where his skill in dealing with temperamental students and even more temperamental professors was much admired. His own musical influence, moreover, was more far-reaching than was immediately recognized, his classes in improvisation, in particular, being considered as among the finest experiences that the curriculum offered. From 1952 until 1960 he was joint chair of the associated board of the Royal Schools of Music. 
Although circumstances did not allow him to devote a major part of his time to composition, Bullock produced throughout his career a steady stream of music, principally for church use. His published output included three evening services, two 'Te Deums', and a 'Jubilate', twenty anthems and motets, and a small quantity of organ music and secular songs. His style, derived from Sir C. H. H. Parry and Sir C. V. Stanford, is today regarded as highly conservative, but his music remains effective in the liturgical context for which much of it was intended. In his music, as in his life, Bullock was disciplined, fastidious, and somewhat austere. His friends could rely on absolute loyalty and generosity but realized that there was no welcome for anything frivolous, pretentious, or effusive. 
Bullock was appointed CVO in 1937 and was knighted in 1951. In 1955 he was given an honorary LLD at Glasgow University. He was also honorary RAM and president of the Incorporated Society of Musicians (1947) and of the Royal College of Organists (1951-2). After retirement from the Royal College of Music in 1960 he settled at Welby Cottage in Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire, where he died on 23 May 1979. His wife, a devoted companion for sixty years, survived him by only a few months. 


@@@@@


doc= 30874


Bulman, Oliver Meredith Boone (1902-1974), geologist, was born on 20 May 1902 at Cheyne Walk Studio, Chelsea, London, the second of three children and younger son of Henry Herbert Bulman, artist, and his wife, Beatrice Elizabeth Boone (1864?-1946?), daughter of W. A. Boone, of Canterbury and Ramsgate, art master of King's School, Canterbury. Of the three Bulman children, only Oliver appears to have inherited any graphic ability, and he used it very effectively when making, with his left hand, the hundreds of drawings and diagrams illustrating his scientific papers, books, and lectures; some people even collected his 'doodles' after committee meetings. 
Bulman went to Battersea grammar school in 1910, but an operation for a malignant cyst in his left femur kept him at home for a year when he was twelve years old. Wishing to study geology, which his school could not provide, he became an evening -- and later a day -- student at Chelsea Polytechnic as a pupil of A. J. Maslen. He gained the London University geology scholarship in 1920 and in 1921 he proceeded to Imperial College where he studied geology and zoology; he also attended vertebrate palaeontology lectures at University College, London. In 1923 he took a first-class BSc in geology, with zoology as the subsidiary subject, and also the ARCS. 
Awarded a Beit scientific research fellowship, Bulman proceeded to a London PhD degree jointly with C. James Stubblefield with a thesis entitled 'The Shineton Shales of the Wrekin district, Shropshire' (1926). He spent the first year of an 1851 senior studentship (1925-6) at Imperial College where his fellow research students included Walter Frederick Whittard with whom he wrote a paper on Permian branchiosaurid amphibia. For the remaining two years of the studentship, he moved to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, to study dendroid graptolites under the supervision of Gertrude Lilian Elles at the Sedgwick Museum. 
Bulman's researches were facilitated by following a technique devised by Gerhard Holm of using hydrochloric or hydrofluoric acid to dissolve the rock matrix from the graptolite and also by making serial sections by grinding, as W. J. Sollas had done for 'Palaeospondylus'. Bulman produced two parts of the Palaeontographical Society's monograph 'British Dendroid Graptolites' (1927 and 1928) which, with several subsidiary papers, earned him a Cambridge PhD degree (1928). Bulman was awarded the Imperial College Huxley memorial medal when he returned there in 1928 as a demonstrator in the zoology department. He moved in 1929 to a similar post in the geology department; then in 1931 he became a demonstrator in geology at Cambridge. 
Whereas previously Bulman had been elucidating the structure of dendroid graptolites, he turned to true graptolites when E. H. O. Stensio of Stockholm placed with him for description a series of South American graptolites, isolated from their matrices by Holm. Assisted by Holm's skilfully retouched photographs, Bulman produced a spectacular paper published in the 'Arkiv for Zoologie'. This paper was followed by a seven-part study of Scandinavian graptolites, also published in the 'Arkiv'. Bulman provided new information concerning the early growth stages of graptolite taxa which had a bearing on the interpretation of the evolution of particular groups. Appreciation of his views was helped by the wax enlargements made from serial sections of the fossils. He contributed the article on graptolithina to the 'Handbuch der Palaozoologie' (ed. O. H. Schindewolf, 1938) but perhaps his most influential publication was the second edition (1970) of his 'Graptolithina' volume (in part with R. B. Rickards) of the 'Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology' (ed. C. Teichert). 
At Chelsea Old Church, London, in 1938 Bulman married Marguerite, the elder daughter of William George Fearnsides FRS, professor of geology at Sheffield University, and his wife, Beatrix, daughter of Professor William Whitehead Watts FRS. They had a son and three daughters. 
After W. B. R. King became Woodwardian professor at Cambridge in 1943, Bulman was made reader in palaeozoology (1944). When King retired in 1955 Bulman succeeded to his post and occupied the chair until he resigned in 1966, when he became emeritus professor. He retained editorship of the 'Geological Magazine', which he had taken up in 1934, until 1972. With W. G. Fearnsides he was author of the sixpenny Penguin 'Geology in the Service of Man' (1944; 3rd edn, 1961). 
Elected FRS in 1940, Bulman served on the Royal Society's council from 1952 to 1954 and as a trustee of the British Museum (Natural History) from 1963 to 1970. He was successively president of the geology section of the British Association (1959), the Palaeontological Association (1960-62), the Geological Society (1962-4), and the Palaeontographical Society (1971-4). He was a fellow of Sidney Sussex College (1944) and of Imperial College (1961). He received the Lyell medal of the Geological Society (1953) and an honorary DPhil of Oslo University (1965). He was ScD of Cambridge University (1936) and an honorary member of the Geological Society of Stockholm and of the Palaeontological Society of India. A volume of twenty essays on graptolites, by his students and friends, designed to form a Festschrift, but destined to be a memorial tribute to him, was published by the Palaeontological Association (1974) to which body he had given an inaugural address in 1958. 
Bulman was 6 feet tall but sparsely built. Though he could strongly voice dislike of some, he was kindly and generous, and a staunch friend of others; he had a ready wit and was especially keen to help the careers of his students. He was a lucid and inspiring teacher. He died at his home, the White Cottage, Mount Pleasant, Cambridge, on 18 February 1974, and was cremated in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 30875


Bunting, Basil Cheesman (1900-1985), poet, was born on 1 March 1900 at 27 Denton Road, Scotswood upon Tyne, Northumberland, the elder child of Thomas Lowe Bunting (1868-1925), physician and respected amateur scientist, and Annie Cheesman (1875-1968), daughter of a local mining engineer. One of his earliest memories was of the Northumbrian folksongs sung to him by his nursemaid. After early schooling on Tyneside, he was educated at the Quaker schools of Ackworth, Yorkshire, and Leighton Park, Berkshire. His holidays from Ackworth were spent with a schoolfriend in the west Yorkshire village of Briggflatts. At school he absorbed the elements of Quaker pacifism which led to his being imprisoned for conscientious objection at Wormwood Scrubs and subsequently Winchester from June 1918 until early in 1919. On his release from prison he threw himself into London literary and intellectual life, working in publishing, and with the Fabians. Through one literary contact, Nina Hamnett, he came across the latest work of Ezra Pound, 'Homage to Sextus Propertius', and this discovery was of crucial importance to his poetic development. From 1920 he studied at the London School of Economics, leaving without qualification in 1922 to work briefly as secretary to the MP Harry Barnes. In this role he visited Scandinavia, but failed to enter Russia. 
By 1923 Bunting was in Paris, working for Ford Madox Ford on 'Transatlantic Review' through the influence of Ezra Pound, who had become a close friend and mentor, and whom he followed to Rapallo in 1924. His earliest poems written at about this time show clearly the influence of modernism. In 1925 his father died and he returned to Newcastle, lecturing at Leamington Adult School in 1926. His first 'sonata', as he called most of his extended poems in acknowledgement of their musical form, was 'Villon' (1925): admired by Pound, this poem won him some degree of recognition. Apart from drawing upon the work of Francois Villon, the poem incorporates material from Bunting's growing experience of prisons, in England and later in Paris for drunken assault (he was extricated by Pound). For the next two years he made a living in journalism for a range of London weeklies, chiefly as music critic for 'Outlook' and the 'Town Crier', before a benefactor, Margaret de Silver, enabled him to move back to Northumberland, living and writing in a shepherd's house in the Simonside Hills during 1928. Memories from this period of his life were recalled directly nearly four decades later in 'Briggflatts'. 
In 1929 Bunting travelled in Germany, before moving south to Rapallo again. He arrived in Rapallo by way of Venice, where he met Marian Gray Culver (1900-1982), daughter of Howard Leander Culver, a businessman from Eau Claire, Wisconsin, whom he married on 9 July 1930. They had two daughters, Bourtai and Roudaba, and a son, Rustam, who died in 1952. The children's names reflected Bunting's growing interest in Persian literature. From 1930 to 1933 he assisted Pound in Rapallo, contributing to the journal 'Il Mare', helping with concerts co-ordinated by Pound and Olga Rudge, meeting W. B. Yeats (who was able to recite one of Bunting's poems for him from memory, and recalled their meeting in his correspondence), and other writers including James Joyce and Louis Zukofsky. He also learned to sail, and sailed extensively on the Ligurian coast. His poetry began to be published, in anthologies edited by Pound and Zukofsky, and in a pamphlet, 'Redimiculum Matellarum' (1930). 
A photograph of Bunting taken about 1930 in Rapallo shows a strong, bespectacled profile of a wiry and sailorly man, with a fine goatee beard, apparently content with self and surroundings. He was growing in self-confidence as a poet, dropping the trappings of apprenticeship to reveal a sparse, modernist-classicist voice in which the teachings of Pound and others were moderated by an understanding of a range of older poetries. Though associated with Zukofsky's objectivists and Pound's 'Ezuversity' he was increasingly an individual, isolated to a degree which helped to delay his public notice for more than three decades. 
In 1933 the Buntings moved to Santa Cruz de Tenerife -- for economy, and perhaps to distance themselves from the increasingly strident Pound. Both were poor and unhappy, and Bunting wrote bitterly of his life there. One lasting and important friendship emerged at this time however, with the exiled German artist Karl Drerup: Bunting corresponded with Drerup at intervals for the rest of his life, and Drerup for his part painted one of the few portraits of Bunting. But the Buntings' marriage was over, and in 1937 Marian returned to America with their daughters and (unborn) son. They divorced in 1940. Bunting returned to Britain in 1937, buying a small boat, 'The Thistle', which he sailed on the south coast. He studied seamanship at Nellist's nautical school in Newcastle (1938), and lectured in Northumberland before the Second World War. In September 1940 he joined the RAF -- with some difficulty, as his eyesight was already poor. Like many, his Quaker principles of individual conscience led him to distinguish between the imperialist values of the First World War, in which he was an objector, and the Second World War, which he (and other objectivist poets such as George Oppen) saw as an important principled fight against fascism, in which he wanted to participate. 
Bunting's war was an active and rewarding period of his life (retold, partially, in the sonata 'The Spoils', 1951). In 1942 he arrived in Tehran as an RAF interpreter (on the strength of his knowledge of classical Persian), where he undertook intelligence work and rose rapidly in rank, finishing the war as squadron leader. In peacetime he worked at the British embassy in Tehran, and subsequently as 'The Times' correspondent there. He married Sima Alladadian ('b'. 1931) on 2 December 1948. They had a daughter, Sima-Maria, and a son, Thomas. Bunting's 'Poems' (1950) was published in Texas, with little involvement from Bunting. 'The Spoils', his penultimate sonata, draws on his wartime experiences, and also on his love of Persia and respect for its people and culture: 'Sooner or later we must absorb Islam if our own culture is not to die of anaemia', he wrote at a later date (preface to 'Omar Pound: Arabic and Persian Poems', 1970, 5). 
The family was ejected from Persia by Mossadeq in 1952, and returned to live in Throckley, Northumberland, with Bunting's mother. Bunting scratched a living for his family from local journalism for the 'Newcastle Journal' and the 'Newcastle Evening Chronicle', and had little time for poetry. The poetry world, for its part, had, he thought, forgotten him. But in the early 1960s younger poets including Gael Turnbull and Jonathan Williams 'rediscovered' him, and in 1964 the young Tyneside poet Tom Pickard visited him, starting a friendship which led to the composition of Bunting's final sonata, 'Briggflatts', and its subsequent publication by Stuart Montgomery's influential Fulcrum Press. 
With the exception of the few poems included in Pound's 'Active Anthology' (1933), the work published by Fulcrum Press, including 'Loquitur' (1965) and 'Briggflatts' (1966), were Bunting's first British publications. 'Briggflatts' is at once a modernist poem, cropped from an alleged 2000 lines to a compressed and often elliptical 700, and a romantic celebration of seasons, homecoming, and love, intensely musical both in its patterning of sound and in overall structure. It stands as the high point of Bunting's maturity, and as testimony to a career of long, often isolated development. After it, he was able to complete only a handful of fine poems. For a generation of younger poets it also stands as a unique achievement of English modernism, providing a link with the world of high modernism which had been lacking in British poetry. 

'Briggflatts' was first performed at Morden Tower, the Newcastle reading venue established by Connie and Tom Pickard, in December 1965, the year in which Fulcrum Press published 'Loquitur', Bunting's first extensive collection published in Britain. In 1966 'Briggflatts' appeared in the Chicago magazine 'Poetry', and in a Fulcrum edition, which was greeted with widespread critical acclaim. Reviewing it, Cyril Connolly spoke for many: 'I was quite unprepared for 'Briggflatts' which seems to me one of the best poems I have read and reread for a long time... In Bunting there is a lyrical note which he has been steadily compressing and which makes 'Briggflatts' almost all lyric, or rather intensely musical; the words shine like hoarfrost. ('Sunday Times', 12 Feb 1967)' Bunting's 'Collected Poems' followed in 1968. Critical recognition in the USA and UK continued to grow, and in 1968 Bunting was appointed Northern Arts literary fellow at the universities of Durham and Newcastle, where he gave the series of lectures on poetry now published as 'Basil Bunting on Poetry' (2000). Although further honours followed, including an honorary DLitt from Newcastle University in 1971, and the inevitable presidencies of the Poetry Society (1972) and of Northern Arts (1974-7), his reputation remained somewhat begrudged in Britain, and he lived the remainder of his days in poverty in his native Northumbria, dying in Hexham General Hospital, Northumberland, on 17 April 1985. Following cremation, his ashes were distributed at Briggflatts Quaker meeting-house, Sedbergh. In these closing years of his life he performed two acts of editorial piety in the editing of 'Selected Poems of Ford Madox Ford' (1971) and the Northumbrian pitman poet Joseph Skipsey (1976): this juxtaposition of modernist and local values says much about Bunting's intention, and his consistency. 
Today Bunting's work has a steady readership, and is represented in most of the major anthologies; it is hard to imagine his work being out of print again. This has not always been the case: Bunting's late recognition in his own country was at once a product of his wandering life, a consequence of his outspoken criticism of the literary establishment in Britain, and due to a mistrust of his strong associations with the great modernists, after they ceased to be fashionable. He was unashamedly international in an age when much British poetry was arguably insular or parochial. Out of such elements, and knowledge of his poetic 'masters' Dante and Villon, and other Latin, Persian, Welsh, and classical writers, he constructed a human and evocative modernist poetry built upon the sound of words, intended to be read aloud, harking back to the oral traditions of his Northumbrian nurse: 'Poetry, like music, is to be heard', he insisted (Bunting, 'The poet's point of view', 'Diary of North-Eastern Association for the Arts', April-Summer 1966, 2). 


@@@@@


doc= 30876


Burch, Cecil Reginald (1901-1983), physicist and engineer, was born at 2 Museum Road, Oxford, on 12 May 1901, the fifth child of George James Burch (1852-1914) and his wife, Constance Emily Jeffries, otherwise Baker. Soon after birth Burch was nicknamed Bill by his family and friends. His father was professor of physics at Reading University from 1892 to 1909 and was elected FRS in 1900. His mother founded and ran Norham Hall as a women's residence for language students from overseas. Burch attended the Dragon School, Oxford from 1908 to 1915; in 1981 he wrote of the debt he owed to the school for teaching him the valuable art of public speaking and for persuading Oundle School to admit him without fee. Burch's family was suffering considerable financial hardship at that time due to the closure of Norham Hall caused by the travel restrictions brought about by the First World War. At Oundle (1915-19), in addition to the classics, he was taught manual skills and encouraged to carry out experiments such as the distillation of coal tar. In his 1943 article 'A technologist looks at the future' Burch described how these skills not only helped him in his later work but also allowed him to develop good personal relationships with many technicians and workmen. 
In 1919 Burch and his brother Francis entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, with a scholarship; both took the natural sciences tripos, graduating in 1922, and both joined the Metropolitan-Vickers Co. Ltd in Manchester as college apprentices. This was a very creative phase of Burch's life. In the eleven years that he worked for Metropolitan-Vickers Burch's name appears on twenty-eight patents. Initially he worked with complex electric circuits and was involved in early transatlantic radio transmissions with the BBC. Later, with his colleague N. R. Davis, he developed the technique of induction heating in order to avoid the contamination problems caused by other methods of melting metals. Burch and Davis went on to design large induction furnaces for commercial steel making. This work led Burch to write his only book, 'An Introduction to the Theory of Eddy-Current Heating' (1928). 
In 1927 Burch began to experiment with vacuum distillation, the work for which he is, perhaps, best known. He developed oils and greases with very low vapour pressures (apiezon oils). Using these oils Burch designed oil condensation pumps which were widely used to create vacuums in, for example, large thermionic valves. One of the most famous applications of Burch's research in this area was by J. Cockcroft and E. T. S. Walton who used Burch's high vacuum tubes for part of their work on high voltage proton acceleration at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, in 1932. Burch also found that vacuum distillation could be used on other organic compounds such as vitamin A which had previously been extremely difficult to distil. 
In February 1933 Burch's brother Francis, with whom he lived and worked, died very painfully following blood transfusions given during an operation for peritonitis. Francis's death greatly affected Burch, and he felt unable to continue at Metropolitan-Vickers as every day was a constant reminder of his brother. He left Manchester to go to the physics department at Imperial College, London, in September 1933 as Leverhulme fellow in optics, but remained a paid consultant to Metropolitan-Vickers. At Imperial College Burch entered the second phase of his career. He began studying the optics of non-spherical surfaces and quickly developed a new way of testing mirrors called the wavefront shearing interferometer. He gained his PhD in 1936. In 1936 he went to Bristol as a research associate to continue his optical work. Soon after his arrival Burch met Enid Grace Morice (1899/1900- 'c'.1980), the daughter of Owen Henry Morice; she was also a lecturer. They married on 5 April 1937; they had one daughter, Ann Lindsay. In Bristol Burch built the first Schwarzschild aplanatic aspheric reflecting microscope. He spent many hours, usually at night when vibration was at a minimum, polishing mirrors by hand. 
During the Second World War Burch worked with the Ministry of Aircraft Production to enhance the lenses used for aerial photography. He also spent time working at Metropolitan-Vickers on war-related projects and mirrors for his microscopes. During the war years he patented two lens improvements and a machine to grind mirror surfaces. After the war Burch continued to work in Bristol on microscopes which he exhibited at the Physical Society exhibition in January 1947. As a result he was inundated with requests from research workers for him to make similar microscopes. Much against his better judgement Burch found himself taking on the responsibility of a production run of ten microscopes as well as supervising PhD students in Bristol. As a result of stress caused by his inability to turn down the job, and the drugs he took to keep himself awake, Burch suffered a perforated ulcer which required surgery in 1953. 
While recuperating in Cornwall, Burch became interested in mineral dressing by gravity concentration and invented a mineral classifier to improve tin recovery from mines. During the last years of his career Burch worked on a wide variety of projects including stethoscopes, brazing torches, and mathematical analysis. During his long career he published fifty-six papers and one book, and was granted forty patents. He retired officially from Bristol in 1966 but retained his room in college and continued to work for the rest of his life. Burch was awarded the Physical Society's Duddell medal in 1943, was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1944, was awarded the society's Rumford medal for achievement in 1954, and was made CBE in 1958. 
Burch was tall and very slender. He was a loner who spent long, irregular hours on his work which sometimes affected his health. He died at his home, 2 Holmes Grove, Henleaze, Bristol, on 19 July 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 30877


Burns, Sir Alan Cuthbert Maxwell (1887-1980), colonial governor, was born on 9 November 1887, at Basseterre, St Kitts, the fourth son and fifth child of James Burns (1852-1896), treasurer of the presidency of St Christopher-Nevis and member of the executive council of the Leeward Islands, and his wife, Agnes Zulma Delisle (1854-1914). One of his brothers, Cecil Delisle, was an academic; another, Robert Edward Burns, like their father and grandfather, was in the colonial service; and a third, Emil, was a leading British communist. He was educated at St Edmund's College, Ware, the oldest Catholic school in England, but had to leave early because his family could not pay the fees. Aged only seventeen, Burns was appointed to the treasury and customs department of St Kitts in 1905. His appointment in 1909 as clerk to the magistrate of Basseterre was followed by that of deputy coroner and justice of the peace for St Kitts, magistrate on Anguilla, and in 1912 clerk and provincial secretary to the administrator of Dominica. 
In 1912 Burns became supervisor of customs in Nigeria, and served in Koko and Lagos. No sooner had he earned promotion to the central secretariat cadre than he enlisted in the Nigeria regiment. In 1914 he married Kathleen (Kate) Fitzpatrick (died 1970), daughter of Robert Altman Hardtman, an Antigua sugar planter, and his wife, Alice; they had two daughters. He saw service in the Cameroons campaign, became adjutant of the Nigeria land contingent, and took part in the Egbe expedition of 1918. As private secretary to Sir Frederick Lugard and then to Sir Hugh Clifford, Burns (like the latter, a Roman Catholic) confirmed his reputation as a highly efficient staff officer, and he was soon mounting the promotional secretariat ladder for colonial service high-climbers. A proving period as colonial secretary of the Bahamas from 1924 to 1929, during which he acted as governor, was followed by his return to Nigeria, for further grooming for high office, as deputy chief secretary. In 1934 he was given his first governorship, British Honduras. 
In 1940 Burns was seconded to the Colonial Office on special duty in the rank of assistant under-secretary, as part of the wartime experiment of bringing a serving governor into Whitehall. He became governor of the Gold Coast in 1941, and acted as governor of Nigeria for five months in 1942. At his initiative, and to his unending pride, in 1942 he persuaded a reluctant Colonial Office to admit Africans on to the executive council of the governor of the Gold Coast, and to sanction the appointment of Africans as district commissioners there. He also inspired the constitutional advances of 1946, which provided for an unofficial majority in the Gold Coast legislative council. The fact that the Watson commission inquiring into the Accra riots of 1948 stigmatized the Burns constitution as outmoded at birth perhaps reflects more on the Gold Coast's capacity for political pioneering than on Burns's foresight. His last year in Accra was marred by the so-called 'juju' Kyebi murder case. The confusion and dithering in London -- Rathbone's 'grisly minuet' (Rathbone, 132) -- over his exercise of the royal prerogative prompted Burns to offer his resignation. In 1945 his name had been put forward by the Colonial Office for the governorship of the new Malayan Union, but the colonial secretary's nomination was not accepted by Downing Street. From 1947 until his retirement in 1956 Burns, following the pro-consular footsteps of his old master Lugard after the First World War, became Britain's representative on the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations. At the age of seventy-two he accepted the chairmanship of an inquiry into land resources and population problems in Fiji. 
Burns was a typical example of a scholar-administrator. A scrupulous and hard-working official, he also delved into African history, so that his well-travelled career was marked by a number of authoritative books. His first contained an index to the laws of the Leeward Islands. In 1917 he began a comprehensive annual review, the 'Nigeria Handbook'; he also initiated the 'Nigeria Civil Service List'. His 'History of Nigeria', first published in 1929, reached its eighth revised edition in 1972. After his retirement from the colonial service he published four books: 'Colour Prejudice' (1948), originally written when he was governor of British Honduras; 'History of the British West Indies' (1954); the autobiography 'Colonial Civil Servant' (1949); and 'In Defence of Colonies' (1957), a riposte to the positive anti-colonialism of the United Nations which he had found so disillusioning. On completion of his Fiji mission, he published a volume on that country in the 'Corona' series (1963), and in his nineties he contributed to the BBC series of reminiscences 'Tales from the Dark Continent'. 
Burns's recreations were cricket, writing, ornithology (he maintained an aviary in Christiansborg Castle), and bridge (at one time in the 1920s he was bridge correspondent of the 'Daily Telegraph' and he wrote a book on the game). He served as a purposeful president of the Hakluyt Society, chairman of the Royal Commonwealth Society library committee, and as a council member of the Zoological Society. He had an assertive humanity, 'a way of going to see for himself, cutting out red tape, and getting on with things' (Parkinson, 108), and an ever ready humour. Sparing with words, he was never short on kindness or courtesy. In character and the stout expression of his opinions he was a big man, straight dealing, and impatient of cant. Burns was appointed CMG in 1927, KCMG in 1936, and GCMG in 1946. He was made a knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem in 1942. He died on 29 September 1980 at the Westminster Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30878


Burra, Edward John (1905-1976), painter, was born at 31 Elvaston Place, South Kensington, London, on 29 March 1905 (he had two younger sisters, one of whom died young, in 1929), the son of Henry Curteis Burra of Rye, Sussex, a barrister who also sat as a JP and was at one time chairman of East Sussex county council, and his wife, Ermentrude Ann, daughter of J. S. O. Robertson-Luxford of Salehurst, Sussex. 
Burra went to Northaw Place preparatory school, Potters Bar, but had to be withdrawn on account of ill health. He suffered all his life from anaemia. He was at Chelsea Polytechnic school of art 1921-3 and the Royal College of Art 1923-5. In his early paintings of figures in landscapes he used bright colours decoratively in a manner recalling the designs of Leon Bakst and others for the Russian Ballet and also contemporary book illustration. 
Burra's sardonic commentaries on the inhabitants of Mediterranean resorts and port cities started in 1925, when he accompanied his mother on a visit to Bordighera on the Italian riviera. He wrote to his friend the dancer William Evelyn Chappell (Billy) in what was to become his typical manner of communicating with his friends in letters that were unpunctuated and often illustrated with sharp observations on styles and manners: 'we came back from Bawdi in the Blue train which is 'sposed' to be ever so mondaine but all I saw was ancient invalids and a couple with a baby that looked as if it came off Margate Sands there were a few mondaines tho to lighten the gloom... the native population are too beautiful and wear such exotic garments speshly the men I saw some exotic shirts with Kubismus decorations all over them... its just like an enormous Berwick St only more so... (Chappell, 'Well Dearie!', 16)' From 1926 Burra made regular trips to Paris, visiting nightclubs and music halls as well as the art galleries. As an artist he was occupied in the next few years with the seamier side of life in the sailors' bars and clubs of Marseille and Toulon and the crowded dance floors of Paris clubs. Sitting quietly at the edge of the action, Burra would absorb the goings-on around him. His sharp eye for human eccentricities and an excellent visual memory enabled him to capture, without elaborate sketching, scenes, poses, and styles of dress which he would recreate, subtly satirized, in the studio. Though he was aware of the tradition of French urban realism from Toulouse-Lautrec to Fernand Leger, Burra's linearity and obsessive detail mark his Englishness. 
In 1931 he met in Rye the American poet Conrad Aiken, who shared Burra's attraction to low-life subjects. Burra's watercolour 'John Deth' (1931; Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester University) is based on Aiken's poem of the same title and is a tongue-in-cheek satire, somewhat in the style of the German George Grosz, on gluttony, base sexuality, and corruption. 'John Deth' typifies Burra's dislike of moral (or any kind of) earnestness and his apparently easy-going acceptance of human weakness. In 1933-4 Burra made the first of at least four visits to America (others were in 1937, 1948, and 1955), spending part of his time in Harlem where he observed African-American life with a mixture of amused curiosity and detachment. Settling at once in Harlem, he described the scene to his photographer friend Barbara-Ker Seymer in October 1933: 'New York would drive you into a fit. Harlem is like Walham Green gone crazy we do a little shopping on 116th St every morning and there are about 10 Woolworths of all sorts also 40 cinemas & Apollo burlesk featuring Paris in Harlem which I am plotting to go to It must be seen to be believed. Sophie [Fedorovich, dancer and painter, with whom he was travelling] and I go out and have breakfast at different quick lunches we hope to try the Arabian nights luncheonette tomorrow the food is delish 40000000 tons of hot dogs and hamburgers must be consumed in N. Y. daily... (Chappell, 'Well Dearie!', 83)' From the beginning Burra worked chiefly in watercolour, but made a number of small oil paintings between 1927 and 1931, and a few collages, reminiscent of the work of the Berlin Dadaists, in 1929-30. Also in the early years he made numerous ink drawings, on large sheets of paper and unrelated to paintings, of people dancing and partying, a practice he later discontinued. His paintings, especially from the mid-thirties, were often unusually large for the watercolour medium, and frequently consist of more than one sheet of paper joined together. Burra liked to work on a flat table-top, drawing the design in lightly in pencil and completing the picture section by section in a manner that recalls the Pre-Raphaelites. 
Burra had his first one-man shows at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1929 and 1932. Encouraged by Paul Nash, a friend and neighbour at Rye, he joined in 1933 the avant-garde Unit One, the only artists' group he was ever a member of. In 1936 he showed at the International Surrealist Exhibition in London, and in 1937 in 'Fantastic art, Dada, surrealism' at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. Though influenced by a number of painters in the Surrealist circle -- Giorgio de Chirico, Max Ernst, and Salvador Dali, in particular -- Burra was not in the truest sense a Surrealist. The more conservative side of his temperament shared with Percy Wyndham Lewis, whom he admired, a notion of realism founded on rigorous outline drawing which ran counter to the more anarchic aspects of Surrealism. 
The Spanish Civil War and the Second World War stimulated important changes in Burra's art: while a strong fantasy element persisted, Burra became less the wry, uncommitted observer, his designs were strong and clear, and his imagination responded to the violence with images of brutish soldiers, weird, hooded skeletons, and predatory monsters in bird-like masks. Burra showed these pictures at the Redfern Gallery in 1942, his first exhibition for a decade. He was beginning to receive more recognition. Five of his paintings entered the Tate Gallery's collection between 1939 and 1942. These include his bizarre, underworld vision 'Dancing Skeletons', one of his best-known Harlem scenes (1934) with characteristic exaggerated figures lounging and gossiping on doorsteps, and the massive and baroque 'Mexican Church' ('c'.1938), inspired by a visit to Mexico in 1937 with Aiken to see the novelist Malcolm Lowry at Cuernavaca. In 1945 Burra was the subject of a monograph in the 'Penguin Modern Painters' series with an introduction by John Rothenstein. Later he was fortunate in developing a particularly happy relationship with the Lefevre Gallery where he showed more or less biennially from 1952. The public and critical response to the exhibitions, though generally favourable, was modest and it was not until the retrospective exhibition at the Tate in 1973 that his work began to be widely appreciated. He was made a CBE in 1971. 
Latterly Burra turned increasingly to landscape for his subjects, liking especially lonely places such as the west of Ireland, the Yorkshire moors, north Wales, and parts of the Lake District. In immediate appearance his pictures were calmer than before, but he continued none the less to imbue his landscapes, and even arrangements of flowers and other still-life subjects, with a menacing aspect. Parallel with his other work Burra was involved in designing for the theatre. Starting with sets and costumes for Sir Frederick Ashton's production in 1931 of the ballet 'Rio Grande', Burra worked between then and the late 1950s on six ballets, an opera, and a musical play. 
Except when he was at art school Burra lived in or near Rye all his life. He has been called a recluse, but this is not true. Though a private man and not one for casual acquaintances, he had long-standing and valued friendships, several of them dating from his art school days. The range of his activities was circumscribed by his poor health. He loved travelling and discovering new places, and he read widely, if not systematically, in French and Spanish as well as English literature, including poetry. All his life Burra made regular visits to London to stay with friends, visit the art exhibitions, and, above all, the cinema. 
Burra was unmarried. He died in hospital at Hastings on 22 October 1976. There was a posthumous exhibition of his work at the Hayward Gallery in 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 30879


Burrows, Sir Frederick John (1887-1973), trade unionist and administrator in India, was born at Bollow, Westbury-on-Severn, Gloucestershire, on 3 July 1887. He was fifth of five sons and the youngest of eleven children of John Burrows, a general labourer, and his wife, Ellen Abell. He was educated at Walmore Hill School and joined the Great Western Railway, becoming a goods checker at Backney near Ross-on-Wye. In 1912 he married Dora Beatrice (died 1968), daughter of G. Hutchings, a Hereford railway guard. They had one son and one daughter. He served with the Grenadier Guards during the First World War, became a company sergeant-major, and won the meritorious service medal. 
On his return to the Great Western Railway, Burrows worked initially at Grange Court and subsequently at Ross, where he became a well-known local figure. He was secretary of the small branch of the National Union of Railwaymen (NUR) and eventually became a justice of the peace. Until the mid-1930s Burrows seemed destined to remain a rural railwayman working assiduously to develop a labour movement in a Conservative community. However, thanks to his qualities, he became a member of his Great Western sectional council of the NUR and was elected to the NUR executive for the years 1937-9 as the representative for the union's goods section for south Wales and south-west England. 
Burrows emerged quickly as a prominent member of the union's right-wing faction at a time when the left was increasing its strength among the NUR's activists. In July 1941 delegates to the annual general meeting elected him union president for 1942, a position he retained for the maximum three-year tenure. Although the presidency was a lay position, the volume of business meant that it was effectively a full-time post. Burrows worked closely with the union's new general secretary, John Benstead; their political and industrial views were similar. Burrows insisted that any wartime strike was 'unthinkable', but the industry's strategic importance, backed by state control, ensured wage advances. Under his presidency, the NUR's relationships with other railway unions became unusually cordial. 
Burrows's wartime views articulated a progressive patriotism. 'There must be no two Englands when the peace is planned; no stately homes and insanitary cottages, no Princes of Industry and men on the dole'. Soviet resistance to the German invasion appeared to demonstrate the value of meritocracy. 'There not only do the workers fight, but the workers also lead, and ability only is the password for promotion'. He welcomed the 1944 'Education Act' as a step towards the democratization of education, but felt that a Labour government should tackle 'the Public School question'. His advocacy of equality of opportunity included sexual equality. The exigencies of wartime mobilization should have destroyed any idea of women's inferiority (NUR presidential addresses, 1942, 1943, 1944, NUR collection). 
Despite his widely shared enthusiasm for the Soviet war effort, Burrows remained a thorough opponent of the Communist Party. During his presidency he served on the Labour Party's national executive committee (NEC) as his union's nominee to the trade union section, and strongly opposed communist attempts to affiliate to the Labour Party. However, the NUR voted narrowly at its annual general meeting in 1943 to support communist affiliation. Nevertheless Burrows's reputation among the party's senior politicians increased. He was more active than many trade unionists within the NEC, not least on the party's international committee. His record as NUR president seems also to have attracted the positive approval of Winston Churchill. 
This reputation as a capable representative of the Labour viewpoint led to Burrows's selection as a member of the three-man commission on constitutional reform for Ceylon under Lord Soulbury. The trio arrived on the island in late December 1945 and left early in the following April. Their task was essentially to assess and to amend an earlier constitutional draft produced by the Ceylon ministers. Burrows subsequently worked on the Colonial Advisory Board; in both roles he was regarded as successful. Attlee's verdict in August 1945 was 'first class abilities'. This assessment had particular significance since it was in a prime-ministerial memorandum to the secretary of state for India, Lord Pethick-Lawrence, concerning candidates for Indian governorships. In November 1945 Burrows's appointment as governor of Bengal was announced, a symbolic action in the early months of the Labour government. 
Burrows arrived in India in February 1946. His rapport with the viceroy, Lord Wavell, was immediate. His solidity and imperturbability appealed to the viceroy, as did his pride in his own military experience: 'he is really a complete Conservative in his ideas and thinks the Grenadier Guards the finest body ever collected' ('Wavell: the Viceroy's Journal', 329, 8 Aug 1946). The situation in Bengal was extremely difficult. One feature fitted easily with his established political sentiments, however: he detected communist influence in strikes and other agitations. More seriously, Bengal at this time saw escalating communal tensions between Muslims and Hindus. Burrows was painfully aware of his limited resources of police and army units, in both numbers and morale. 
Within Bengal, Burrows had to bargain with a newly elected and Muslim-dominated provincial government under H. S. Suhrawardy. His attempts to facilitate agreement on an inter-communal coalition were unsuccessful. Instead there were communal conflicts marked by heavy loss of life, first in Calcutta in August 1946, and later that year at Noakhali in East Bengal. The Calcutta killings provoked a sombre comparison by Burrows: 'I observed very great damage to property and streets littered with corpses. I can honestly say that parts of the city... were as bad as anything I saw when I was with the Guards on the Somme' (Burrows to Wavell, 22 Aug 1946, in Mansbergh and Moon, 8, doc. 197). 
The Congress movement criticized Burrows's apparent failure to protect Hindus, but several other observers felt he had achieved as much as was feasible, given his limited resources. 'I realised that I was taking on an extremely difficult job, I did not realise that I was taking on a practically impossible one' was his assessment in November 1946 ('Wavell: the Viceroy's Journal', 369, 3 Nov 1946). The 'impossibility' was the product not just of the situation in Bengal, where partition became increasingly likely, but also of shifts and obscurities within British government strategy. In such a situation Burrows's calmness was a particular strength, when 'holding the ring' seemed to be the only option until the transfer of power in August 1947. 
Burrows's actions were underpinned by a thorough belief in the durability and desirability of the British empire. One episode during his governorship was revealing. In May 1946 he wrote to Attlee deprecating the report of the Anglo-American committee on Palestine. He feared that recommendations responsive to the Jewish case might inflame Muslim opinion in India, but there was a more fundamental concern that would have gladdened the more conservative elements in the Foreign Office: 'I earnestly hope that, at whatever cost, the recommendations of the Report, which endanger the life-line of the British Empire will be repudiated' (Burrows to Attlee, 6 May 1946, Mansbergh and Moon, 8, doc. 205). 
Following his return to England, Burrows served as chairman of the Agricultural Land Commission from 1948 until 1963 and was a director of Lloyds Bank from 1950 to 1958. He was high sheriff of Herefordshire in 1955 and deputy lieutenant from 1950 until his death in 1973. He was appointed GCIE in 1945 and GCSI in 1947. During the 1959 general election he announced in a letter to 'The Times' that he could no longer support the Labour Party. He gave two principal reasons: the party policies on steel nationalization and the municipalization of rented houses. He characterized the latter as 'so Gilbertian that it could well have appeared in 'Alice in Wonderland'' ('The Times', 1 Oct 1959). 
Burrows was physically a commanding figure, 6 feet tall and 16 stone. He spoke in a west-country 'burr' and was thought friendly, a quality which, when allied to firmly held and often conventional views, made him a reassuring figure, not least to those distant from the labour movement. His working life was spent in uniform: the Great Western Railway, the British army, the Bengal governorship. These experiences were readily reconciled with his work within the NUR, given its rule-governed procedures and its strong sense of solidarity. His moderation was complemented by a sense of duty to both workmates and the wider society. 'I have always been prepared to do everything possible for England' was his response to the challenge of the Bengal governorship ('News Chronicle', 7 Nov 1945). His wife, who was awarded the kaisar-i-Hind gold medal in 1947, died in 1968. Burrows died at Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, on 20 April 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 30880


Burt, Sir Cyril Lodowic (1883-1971), psychometric psychologist and eugenicist, was born in London on 3 March 1883, first child of Cyril Cecil Barrow Burt ('b'. 1857), a medical practitioner, and Martha Evans of Monmouth. His younger sister, Marion Burt (1891-1978), became a doctor like her father. From 1893 to 1923 the family lived at Snitterfield, Warwickshire, a country village where Burt's father had his practice. 
Burt's education was in the classics, although he tried more than once to change to science. He attended King's School, Warwick, and later Christ's Hospital, which was then in London. In 1902 he went up to Jesus College, Oxford, to read Greats, graduating with second-class honours in 1906, which he followed by a teaching diploma and a summer visit to the University of Wurzburg in 1908. There he met the psychologist Oswald Kulpe, who was developing an experimental psychology that attempted to deal with the higher functions of the mind such as intelligence. At Oxford he had gone to lectures by the psychologist William McDougall, who opened an important door for him in 1907 by getting him involved in the anthropometric survey of the British people proposed by Francis Galton, in which he was to work on the standardization of psychological tests. This project brought him into contact with the world of eugenics, Charles L. Spearman, and Karl Pearson. 
In 1909 Burt made use of Spearman's model of general intelligence to analyse his data on the performance of schoolchildren in a battery of tests. He arranged the results in a rank order matrix, and tested Spearman's hypothesis of a unitary general factor, 'g', which he found to work fairly well. This first research project was to define Burt's life's work in quantitative intelligence testing, eugenics, and the inheritance of intelligence, and to link him with the Galton-Pearson school of thought. One of the conclusions in his 1909 paper was that upper-class children in private preparatory schools did better in the tests than those in the ordinary elementary schools, and that the difference was innate. The discussion of intelligence and its relation to class was a product of the establishment of universal education in Britain. Intelligence added a new indicator to the eugenicists' discussion of the significance of fertility differentials between classes. If the lower class, along with all its other supposed faults, was less intelligent as well as more fertile, and if intelligence, as the eugenicists claimed, was genetically determined, then the excess fertility of this class would soon pull down the intelligence of the entire population. It was in this context that Cyril Burt's work took place. 
Burt's first post was as a lecturer in psychology at the University of Liverpool, where he was attached to Charles Sherrington's department of physiology. In 1913, with the help of the Eugenics Society, the 'Mental Deficiency Act' was passed. This act stipulated that defective children were to be removed from elementary schools and transferred to special schools for the feeble-minded. Burt was appointed psychologist to the London county council (LCC) with the responsibility of picking out the feeble-minded children. At first he tested only those who were known to be behind their classmates, but later he organized a more general programme, designing and standardizing the tests used and investigating the distribution of learning difficulties in children. In one of his early papers, written for the 'Eugenics Review' in 1912, Burt stated that the evidence was conclusive that intelligence was mainly inherited. This was a position that he was to defend to the end of his long life. 
Burt's quantitative psychology of individual differences was meant as a way of grading children, selecting those that would be suitable for scholarships as well as those that were to be sent to the special schools, allocating children of appropriate ability to appropriate vocations, and fitting education to the child's future status as a worker belonging to a specific class. The LCC post gave him access to very large numbers of children, and he took full advantage of it to found what was essentially a new science of quantitative educational psychology. He was allowed to work in Spearman's laboratory, and the National Institute of Industrial Psychology helped him with research assistants. In 1917 he published 'The Distribution and Relations of Educational Abilities', in 1921, 'Mental and Scholastic Tests' (which gave details of the type of tests he used), and in 1925, 'The Young Delinquent', in which he proposed a complete child guidance clinic staffed by psychologists and social workers. Following up on this suggestion a child guidance council was set up with Burt in the chair, and by 1928 the London Child Guidance Training Centre opened in Islington, providing training for psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers. As a part-time professor of educational psychology at the London Day Training College, Burt also trained child guidance specialists at postgraduate level. In the new field of child guidance Burt's influence was paramount. He also made contributions to vocational psychology through a scheme that correlated occupation with intelligence. 
Burt believed that social inequality had a biological basis, but since he found that the correlation between the IQs of fathers and sons was only 0.50, there had to be considerable social mobility for IQ distribution by class to persist: as it was, nearly half the population was in a class too high or too low. Like other psychometrists, Burt believed in a meritocracy of intelligence, with an educational ladder that would lead the misplaced child up or down to his true place in society. However, through the twenties and early thirties he acted as chair for the Eugenics Society's long-running Pauper Pedigree Project, which was designed to show that the pauper class was a closed, inbreeding group of interrelated families, and that pauperism could be traced to a heritable biological defect of temperament, showing itself in moral imbecility, feeble-mindedness, nervousness, and criminality. The results of the study were published in 1933. 
As an educational psychologist, Burt contributed to a series of policy-making reports on secondary education by the Board of Education consultative committee through the twenties and thirties, beginning with the Hilton Young report of 1919, which introduced the 11+ examination, up to the Spens Report of 1938, which prepared for the introduction of tripartite secondary education in 1944. It should be said that Burt did not originate these educational policies, although they coincided with his point of view. It is not completely clear how much psychometry was actually used in the assessment of the aptitude of children for the different types of education available. By 1939 about one third of the local education authorities still did not have an IQ test as part of the selection process, and many of those that did used very non-standard procedures. By 1952 almost all included some kind of IQ test in their exams. By the mid-1960s, however, a wave of discontent with selection had begun which was to culminate in the introduction of more egalitarian comprehensive schools to replace the several types of elite and not-so-elite secondary school then in existence. 
On 9 April 1932 at the age of forty-nine, Burt married Joyce Muriel Woods ('b'. 1908/9), a former student of his, then aged twenty-three. The marriage was not a success and the couple lived separately for most of it, although they never divorced. There were no children. 
In 1932 Burt succeeded Spearman as professor of psychology at University College, London, continuing the Galton-Pearson line that was the heart of the college's statistical tradition. He cut back on his large-scale collection of data and turned instead to theoretical problems concerned with the technique of factor analysis and its mathematical basis, regarding it as one of a number of possible ways of dealing statistically with variance broken down into separate factors, and comparing it to R. A. Fisher's analysis of variance -- Fisher had succeeded Pearson himself at University College as Galton professor of eugenics in 1933. He also applied it in new areas, to temperament, physique, and the marks of examiners. His major work 'Factors of the Mind' appeared in 1940. It was about this time that Burt began to suffer from severe Meniere's disease. From about 1947 onwards, Burt became concerned to link his work historically with that of Karl Pearson, emphasizing the early contribution of Pearson's mathematics to factor analysis. 
In 1946 Burt was knighted. He retired in 1950 at the height of his fame. Soon afterwards, opinion in education began to swing against him. Ideas which had been progressive in his early years came under attack. Educational psychometry came to be seen as no more than an attempt to justify a class society, at one with the outdated assumptions of the eugenics movement. The inheritance of IQ was now associated with psychologists who argued for genetically determined differences in IQ between races. It is possible that his two new twin studies of 1955 and 1966, and the one that appeared in 1958 under the name of an assistant, J. Conway, were rejoinders to attacks on Burt's position by environmentalist critics. The twin studies argued strongly for a very high degree of heritability for IQ: his data for separated monozygotic twins reared together and apart showed correlations of 0.944 and 0.771. 
Within a year of his death from cancer on 10 October 1971, Burt's reputation suffered a further blow. The problem concerned the twin studies. Leon Kamin of Princeton pointed out that the number of pairs of twins cited in Burt's papers grew over the years from twenty-one to fifty-three, but the correlations remained constant, an impossible degree of reproducibility. Kamin argued that psychometry was scientifically worthless, and politically pernicious. Other psychologists questioned the perfect regression to the mean found by Burt in the relationships between the IQ of parents and children, and pointed out that his papers were full of errors and inaccuracies. Finally, Oliver Gillie, writing in the 'Sunday Times' in 1976, accused him of outright fraud, including the invention of two assistants and several pairs of twins, as well as much of his published data, an accusation that created storms of support and protest for and against Burt. Leslie Hearnshaw, one of Burt's erstwhile supporters, added further damaging details in his intimate official biography of 1979, suggesting that Burt had suffered from personality changes that had resulted in his fabricating data and inventing assistants. 
However, later writers began a process of rehabilitation. Robert Joynson, a psychologist (1989), and Ronald Fletcher, a sociologist (1991), reviewed the evidence once again. Joynson in fact devoted a whole book to countering Hearnshaw's book page by page. Like Fletcher, he argues in high adversarial style as Burt's counsel for the defence. Joynson glosses over the errors and omissions in Burt's figures and in his explanations of the sources of his data by pointing out that, of course, this was not modern data gathering. The IQ results themselves were often no more than roughly estimated, with the tests carried out by very imperfectly trained helpers. The thirty-two new sets of separated monozygotic twins that turned up after Burt's data gathering presumably ceased may have been found in Burt's own attic after much searching, rather than being lost in the blitz (when University College was evacuated to Aberystwyth), and subsequently reinvented, as Hearnshaw suggested. Of the three 'missing' co-workers, M. G. O'Connor, M. Howard, and J. Conway, who worked with Burt on his twin studies, none could have worked with Burt after the war, and O'Connor was never traced. But they might have collected data at an earlier period that were still in Burt's possession. Joynson argues that the unvarying coefficients that first caught Kamin's attention referred mainly to physical and educational measures, in which Burt was no longer very interested, and probably had not bothered to do for the most recent pairs of twins. 
N. J. Mackintosh in dealing with the same problem in 1995 is more critical, though he avoids the accusation of outright fraud. He suggests that Burt's muddle of changed and unchanged correlations was due to multiple careless mistakes, the result of copying figures at different times from different sources; that was clearly the case in his inaccurate quotations from earlier twin studies by other authors. The tables are full of misprints and other errors. Burt's 1966 figures as they stand are completely unreliable; in Mackintosh's view, there can be no innocent explanation of this that leaves Burt's reputation as a careful scientist unscathed. The question of his assistants, however, seems to have been fairly well resolved. It is unlikely that Burt was actually collecting more twin data after his retirement, but it is possible that he was able to find some of his old material bit by bit in the various places where it had been stored. Unfortunately, several boxes of Burt's papers were destroyed after his death. 
It is difficult to separate the problem of Burt's science from the political stance of his attackers and defenders. Burt himself was formed in an era when hereditarianism and eugenics were the norm. His interest in eugenics was shared by an entire intellectual class up to the thirties, and especially by bearers of the Galton-Pearson tradition. But in the post-war climate of egalitarianism selectivity in education began to seem both antiquated and unjust. The movement towards comprehensive schools mirrored the movement to end the segregation of handicapped people. The attack on hereditarianism became an attack on its most prominent exponent, and was led largely by psychologists who were passionate environmentalists. Similarly, attempts to rehabilitate Burt's reputation, though not completely successful, came at a time when egalitarianism and the comprehensive school were under attack, and interest in measurement of ability increasing. Indeed, confidence in IQ testing generally coincides with peaks in popularity of the political right. Adrian Wooldridge in reviewing the controversy in 1994 very convincingly linked this reassessment to a swing against egalitarianism that was powered by Margaret Thatcher's education policies, which depended upon many of the same ideas that Burt had espoused in the 1930s and 1940s. 


@@@@@


doc= 30881


Burton, Richard (1925-1984), actor, was born on 10 November 1925 at Pont-rhyd-y-fen, a village in the Afan valley, 4 miles from Port Talbot, the sixth son and twelfth of the thirteen children of Richard Jenkins, a miner, and his wife, Edith Maud Thomas, who had been a barmaid. His mother died in October 1927, and he was brought up by his eldest sister, Cecilia, and her husband, Elfed James. He was often unhappy and ill at ease, and at fourteen he wrote in his diary 'I am sure that wherever I go, I will not be wanted' (Bragg, 57). The family spoke both Welsh and English, and Richard remained fluent in Welsh throughout his life. He was educated at the eastern primary school, Port Talbot, and at Port Talbot secondary school. At fifteen he left school and went to work in the men's outfitting department of the local co-operative store. Bored, he joined a youth club and experienced the exhilaration of amateur dramatics. He was already a gifted and enthusiastic rugby player, with a reputation as a fearless, if dirty, player whose vindictiveness on the field could be boundless. He was a brawler, and it was to the injuries he sustained in one particularly bruising street fight that he traced the spinal problems that in later life were to cause him great pain. In appearance, the young Richard Jenkins was of medium height, with fine, wide eyes. Sturdily built, he had the body of a rugby half-back, long and solid in the trunk with short legs. He was troubled by boils and his skin was pitted by acne. Nevertheless, he was considered extremely attractive. Convinced that in education lay escape from his job, he focused all his charm on Philip Burton, a teacher at Port Talbot secondary school and an instructor in the local Air Training Corps which Richard had joined, and in September 1941 he went back to school. Burton became Richie Jenkins's legal guardian, and in 1943 Jenkins legally renounced his own surname to become Richard Burton. 
Recognizing his ward's abilities, Philip Burton pointed Richard towards a career as an actor, and arranged an audition for him in Cardiff with the actor and dramatist Emlyn Williams. Richard Burton made his debut as Glan in Williams's comedy 'The Druid's Rest' at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool, in November 1943, making his first London appearance in the same part at the St Martin's Theatre on 26 January 1944. When the play closed, he was called up by the RAF, and spent six months on a special wartime course at Exeter College, Oxford, where he read English in addition to undergoing RAF training. His tutor, Nevill Coghill, a gifted amateur director, was captivated by him. Casting Burton as Angelo in his Oxford University Dramatic Society production of 'Measure for Measure', Coghill proclaimed him 'a genius'. Demobilized in 1947, Burton returned to the theatre, under contract to H. M. Tennent Ltd, and appeared as Mr Hicks in 'Castle Anna' at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in February 1948. Later that year, while filming Emlyn Williams's 'The Last Days of Dolwyn', he met actress Sybil Williams (1929-2013), the daughter of an under-manager in a coal mine at Ferndale, another Welsh mining village. They were married in 1949, and had two daughters, Kate ('b'. 1957) and Jessica ('b'. 1959). 
In 1949, in Christopher Fry's 'The Lady's not for Burning', the stillness and simplicity that were to be Burton's trade mark attracted favourable attention, not least from his director, John Gielgud. He made his New York debut in the same part when the production transferred there in 1950. After his Prince Hal in the Stratford upon Avon history cycle in 1951, his future was assured. Kenneth Tynan wrote of him 'Burton is a still, brimming pool, running disturbingly deep; at twenty-five he commands repose and can make silence garrulous' (Gielgud, 302). He joined the Old Vic in 1953 to play Hamlet for the first time, and remained with the company until 1956. His beautifully modulated voice and controlled physical presence created an impression of sensitivity combined with a startling virility. In 1955 his Henry V won him the 'Evening Standard' best actor award. When he alternated the roles of Iago and Othello with John Neville in 1956, his reputation as the most exciting classical actor of his generation looked unassailable. Burton was notorious for his romantic exploits off the stage. He also had a reputation as both a compelling story-teller in the Welsh tradition, and as a fierce drinker. Asked where his ambition lay next -- Macbeth perhaps, or Lear? -- no one took his reply seriously: 'I want to be a millionaire'. However, when the Old Vic season finished, he settled in Switzerland; he would never appear on the London stage again. 
Burton's first Hollywood film had been 'My Cousin Rachel' (1953), a version of the Daphne du Maurier story, in which he played opposite Olivia de Havilland. It brought him the first of his seven Academy award nominations (he never won an Oscar), and brought him the coveted main role in the biblical drama 'The Robe' (1953). His films in this period included 'The Desert Rats' (1953) and a version of John Osborne's play 'Look Back in Anger' (1959). In 1960 he played King Arthur in the Lerner and Loewe musical 'Camelot' in New York, for which he received the New York drama critics' award in 1961 for the best performance in a musical. In 1961 he flew to Rome to play Mark Anthony in the film 'Cleopatra', which also starred Elizabeth Taylor (1932-2011), the English-born daughter of Francis Taylor, art dealer, who had moved to America on the outbreak of the Second World War. Within a few months, Burton had separated from his wife. The film, one of the most expensive ever made, met with critical disdain. 
During the next thirteen years, Burton made over twenty films, including 'The Comedians' (1967), 'Where Eagles Dare' (1969), and 'Bluebeard' (1972), few of which pleased him or the critics, but in the John le Carre thriller 'The Spy who Came in from the Cold' (1965) he was superb, and his performance opposite Elizabeth Taylor in Edward Albee's 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' (1966) was justifiably acclaimed; both Burton and Taylor were nominated for Academy awards, Taylor winning the Oscar. They had been married in Canada in 1964 after Burton's divorce was finalized. The romance had been conducted under intense press scrutiny; their 1963 film, 'The VIPs', exploited public interest in their real-life affair. Burton was Taylor's fifth husband. She had two sons and a daughter from previous marriages; together they adopted another daughter. 
In April 1964 Burton opened as Hamlet at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre in New York, directed by John Gielgud. The controversial production ran for seventeen weeks, to mixed critical acclaim and immense box-office success. A film of the live performance was made, and although Burton ordered all the prints to be destroyed, one was discovered after his death. In 1966 he returned to Oxford to raise money for the university dramatic society, appearing in the title role in Marlowe's 'Dr Faustus' with Elizabeth Taylor as Helen of Troy. They gave their services freely, but the critics savaged him. The Burton-Taylor Theatre in Oxford was established as a direct result of this production. When Burton said he yearned to be an academic, an honorary fellowship was arranged at St Peter's College, Oxford. 
Burton was appointed CBE in 1970. His drinking was now addictive, and in 1974 his marriage to Elizabeth Taylor was dissolved; they remarried a year later in Botswana, and divorced again in 1976. Burton married Susan Hunt, the daughter of Frederick Miller and former wife of racing driver James Hunt in 1976, while he was playing in Peter Shaffer's 'Equus' on Broadway. 'Equus' impressed the critics, and was filmed. He continued to make films, most of them routine, such as 'Exorcist II: the Heretic' (1977) and 'The Wild Geese' (1978). In 1980 he recreated his role of King Arthur on tour in 'Camelot'. The back problems which had long troubled him intensified: his right arm hung useless at his side, and he was unable to raise the left above his shoulder. Only his closest intimates knew that the stillness on stage that had always been his trade mark was now the stillness of disability. Not until he collapsed in Los Angeles could he be persuaded to undergo surgery on his spine. Fighting a losing battle with alcoholism, he returned to Switzerland to convalesce. His marriage was dissolved in 1982 while he was filming 'Wagner', and in 1983 he married Sally Hay, a continuity girl he had met on the film set. She was the daughter of Jack Hay, motoring correspondent for the 'Birmingham Post'. In the television mini-series 'Ellis Island' (1984) Burton played the father of his real daughter, the actress Kate Burton. It would be his last work. He died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 5 August 1984 in hospital in Geneva, and was buried at Celigny, Switzerland, where he lived. 
Richard Burton had made his first appearance in London when the theatre was dominated by actors of flamboyant lyricism, such as Michael Redgrave, John Gielgud, and Laurence Olivier. His robust sexuality had confounded and excited critical opinion, and his explosion onto the scene was unsettling. Here, for the first time in the twentieth century, was a great classical actor whose plebeian roots were unashamedly apparent. Ever since Irving, leading actors had been assiduously disguising their humble origins and insinuating themselves into the upper echelons of society: knighthoods were commonplace, soon there would be peerages. Burton was a throwback to a much older tradition, the actor as rapscallion. The tabloid press loved him, celebrating his boozy extravaganzas and his torrid personal life, and ignoring the sensitivity and erudition that lay beneath his 'roaring boy' exterior. The new generation of British actors welcomed him too, many of them imagining that his example licensed their own attempts to express Hamlet's neuroses in the raw accents of their native dialects. They did not appreciate that, although Burton was the son of a Welsh miner (and used his native accent to great advantage in the celebrated recording, and somewhat less celebrated film, of Dylan Thomas's 'Under Milk Wood'), the glorious cadences of his mature voice were the result of subordinating himself to rigorous training and discipline. Burton's obituarists deplored his failure to fulfil their expectations, but their ambitions were not necessarily his. He had done what he wanted with his life: he had achieved fame and riches, and had experienced passion. His fortune allowed him to be generous, and his largess was boundless. He retained a certain natural simplicity, and never forgot his family and roots in the small mining community in south Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 30882


Bush, Eric Wheler (1899-1985), naval officer, was born on 12 August 1899 at Simla, the younger son and younger child of the Revd Herbert Wheler Bush, chaplain to the forces, and his wife, Edith Cornelia, daughter of Dr George Cardew, inspector-general of the Indian Medical Service. Mrs Bush returned to England in 1908 with her two sons, leaving her husband as the principal of the Lawrence Memorial School, Murree, until he too returned, to become vicar of Bathford, in 1912. Eric Bush was educated in England at Stoke House, Stoke Poges, and on 10 May 1912 entered the Royal Naval College, Osborne, as a naval cadet. 
After two years' general education, 'Blake term', of which he was a member, proceeded to the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, but the course was interrupted at the end of the first term by the mobilization of the fleet, on 1 August 1914. Bush was appointed to the armoured cruiser 'Bacchante', the flagship of the 7th cruiser squadron, and on 28 August 1914 was present at the battle of the Heligoland Bight. After service in the North Sea and English Channel, the cruiser joined the Mediterranean Fleet and was part of the Dardanelles expeditionary force. On 25 April 1915 Midshipman Bush (promoted in the previous October), commanded a picket-boat which towed boats of the first assault wave to land on Anzac beach and for his services on this day and during the month which followed he was awarded the DSC, besides receiving the first of four mentions in dispatches. In August Bush was similarly engaged during the Suvla landings. 
In March 1916 he joined the new battleship 'Revenge', in which he remained until the end of the war, seeing action only at the battle of Jutland. A sub-lieutenant since July 1917, he was one of the 370 naval officers -- Kipling's 'gentlemen tired of the sea' -- whose education had been interrupted and who were sent to Cambridge University in January 1919 for two terms. By his own account, his main achievement appears to have been the hoisting of a large white ensign on the lantern above his college, Trinity. 
Bush's inter-war career was typical for the period, with service aboard a destroyer in the Baltic and Home Fleet being followed by commissions in the East Indies, where he qualified as an interpreter in Hindustani in 1924, and on the China station, where, in 1932, he joined his first command, the Yangtze (Yangzi) gunboat 'Ladybird'. Between sea jobs he served as a training officer, his infectious enthusiasm for the service producing an exceptional term (two of whose members were to win VCs), attended the Royal Navy staff course, and, from 1934 to 1936, occupied the naval intelligence division's Japanese desk. 
At the end of 1936 Commander Bush was appointed as executive officer of the Mediterranean Fleet cruiser 'Devonshire'. Observation of the fighting during the Spanish Civil War and evacuation of refugees gave the Royal Navy much useful experience, but Bush also found time to get married, on 20 May 1938, during a visit to Cannes, to Mollie Noel, daughter of Colonel Brian Watts DSO, of the Royal Army Medical Corps. They had two sons. 
Promoted in June 1939, Bush became captain, auxiliary patrols, on the outbreak of war commanding the variegated collection of minor warships and conscripted fishing vessels which closed the Strait of Dover to German submarines and dealt with the early magnetic mines. His tireless efforts during the Dunkirk evacuation, at which he was responsible for the La Panne beaches, earned him the first of three DSOs. In June 1941 he returned to sea, in command of the anti-aircraft cruiser 'Euryalus', in which he remained until September 1943, taking part in all the more notable eastern Mediterranean actions during the period and the invasions of Sicily and Salerno. 
Acquaintance with amphibious operations was renewed by Bush's appointment in command of the Force Sword assault group, which he trained and led for the Normandy invasion, where he was responsible for landing 8th infantry brigade at Ouistreham, on the exposed eastern flank of the assault area. After brief command of the battleship 'Malaya' in the autumn of 1944, he returned to combined operations as the chief staff officer of Force W, the amphibious component of the south-east Asia command. He commanded the assaults on Akyab and the Arakan coast operations and was largely responsible for the planning and execution of the invasions of Ramree Island and Rangoon and for the unopposed reoccupation of Malaya and Singapore. 
From late 1945 until June 1948, Bush commanded HMS 'Ganges', the boy seamen's training establishment at Shotley, near Harwich. This was to be his last naval appointment, for he was not selected for promotion to flag rank and was retired from the service, shortly before his forty-ninth birthday. 
An enthusiast for all matters maritime and dedicated to the encouragement of youth, Bush became the secretary of the sea cadet council (1948-59). Towards the end of this time he wrote and had published (in 1958) his autobiography, 'Bless our Ship'. His character and personality show through this modest account of a substantial naval career: patriotic without a trace of jingoism or bigotry, his determination and dedication to duty were tempered by kindliness, a keen sense of humour, and love for his wife and two sons, both of whom followed him into the Royal Navy. 
Leaving the sea cadet council, Bush next became the general manager of the Red Ensign Club, in Stepney, which he ran until 1964. Even in retirement he continued his association with the sea, being engaged for several years by the British-India Steam Navigation Company as a liaison officer and lecturer accompanying educational cruises. So well received were his lectures on the Gallipoli expedition, he was persuaded to write an excellent account of the campaign ('Gallipoli', 1957) based on meticulous research as well as his own experience. Prior to this, he had compiled two anthologies of poetry and prose, one nautical ('The Flowers of the Sea', 1962) and the other military ('Salute the Soldier', 1966). Bush finally retired from the sea to Tunbridge Wells, Kent, where he died on 17 June 1985. 
David Brown', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30883


Bustamante, Sir (William) Alexander (1884-1977), prime minister of Jamaica, was born William Alexander Clarke on 24 February 1884 at Blenheim, Hanover, Jamaica, the elder son and second of the five children of Robert Constantine Clarke, an Irish planter, of Hanover, and his second wife, Mary Wilson, a Jamaican. In later life he shrouded his upbringing in legend. He attended elementary school. In 1904 he was a store clerk, and went to Belmont, St Catherine, to train as an overseer. In 1905 he left for Cuba, where a tramway company employed him. They transferred him as inspector to Panama, where he courted Mildred Edith Blanck, the widow of an English engineer, who had two sons. In 1910 they married at Kingston, Jamaica. He thus had two stepsons, but no children of his own. He worked for the tramway company in Panama certainly until 1919, and reportedly joined the Cuban special police in 1919 or 1920. In 1932 he went to New York as Alejandro Bustamanti, a Spanish gentleman, apparently becoming a hospital attendant. He claimed he made his fortune on the New York stock exchange, but once said he left New York to avoid having to establish his legal status to the American immigration authorities. 
In 1934, as Alexander Bustamante, he opened a moneylending office in Kingston, Jamaica. His secretary was Gladys Maud Longbridge JP, daughter of Frank Longbridge; he married her in 1962. He wrote anti-government letters to the press, sympathizing with the underprivileged. In 1937 he became treasurer of the Jamaica Workers' and Tradesmen's Union. 
By May 1938 Bustamante was undisputed labour leader. He was arrested on 24 May on a sedition charge, which was later withdrawn. He was a key figure in the development between 1938 and 1943 of two rival trade union blocs and two political parties supported by trade union wings. He registered the Bustamante Industrial Trade Union in 1939, installing himself as life president-general. After a waterfront address he was interned on 8 September 1940, but released on 8 February 1942. The hierarchy of the People's National Party of Norman Manley looked after the Bustamante Industrial Trade Union, but on release Bustamante repudiated them. He left the People's National Party to form the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) in 1943. To avoid disqualification from nomination as a candidate under a name not legally his own, he became William Alexander Bustamante by deed poll. His party won the 1944 elections, and he became leader of government business and minister of communications from 1945 to 1953. 
In 1947 Bustamante was elected mayor of Kingston. The JLP won the 1949 elections with a reduced majority. In 1951 its constitution stated the goals as self-government, British Caribbean federation, and dominion status within the Commonwealth. Bustamante, however, never supported federation strongly. He became chief minister and minister of local government in 1953, but after his party's defeat in 1955, led the opposition. He was president of the West Indies Democratic Labour Party from 1958 to 1960, but resigned to campaign for Jamaica's withdrawal from the federation. His opposition led to the 1961 referendum which decided on secession. The JLP won the 1962 elections. With independence in 1962 he became the first prime minister, keeping responsibility for external affairs and defence. He was sworn of the privy council in 1964. He retired in 1967, at the age of eighty-three. 
Bustamante was a Roman Catholic with deep respect for the church's guidance. He was tall, striking, flamboyant, vigorous, and courageous. His recreations were farming, swimming, motoring, and, in youth, horse-breaking. He was a spellbinding, clowning demagogue with great authority over the masses. He was economically and politically conservative, and led a conservative labour-based party. He opposed socialism and upheld the traditional values of Jamaican society. In 1962 he told the house: 'I am for the West. I am against communism'. 
Bustamante had deep compassion for the working classes and strove to improve their economic lot. He said: 'I belong to no class. I belong to all classes. But I plead for the poor of the poor, for I come from the gutter of poverty and I once knew what hunger was and what nakedness was.' He shared working-class affection for the British monarchy. 
Bustamante was knighted in 1955, appointed GBE in 1967, and became a National Hero (Jamaica) in 1969. He was made an honorary doctor of laws of Fairfield University, A, in 1963 and of the University of the West Indies in 1966. He held the national order of cedars, Lebanon; the distinguished order of the brilliant star with special grand cordon, Republic of China; the grand gold cross, Order Gran Heraldica de Cristobal Colon, Dominican Republic; and the gran cordon, order of Liberatador, Venezuela. Bustamante died at his residence in Irish Town, Jamaica, on 6 August 1977. 
I. M. Cumpston', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30884


Butler, Sir James Ramsay Montagu (1889-1975), historian, was born in the master's lodge, Trinity College, Cambridge, on 20 July 1889. Both his grandfather and his father, Henry Montagu Butler (1833-1918), had been headmaster of Harrow School, and in 1886 the latter was appointed master of Trinity College. His first wife had died three years earlier, and in 1888 he married second a 21-year-old former Girton student who had recently graduated in top place in classics, Agnata Ramsay, daughter of Sir James Henry Ramsay, tenth baronet, of Bamff, Perthshire ['see 'Butler, Agnata Frances (1867-1931)]. Jim Butler, as he was always known to his friends and in his family, was the eldest of the three sons born of the second marriage. Of the first marriage there were two sons and three daughters. 
At the age of thirteen Butler moved from St Faith's preparatory school, Cambridge, to Harrow School with an entrance scholarship and quickly showed great ability and brilliant promise. Four years later he became head of the school. In 1905 Butler took the Trinity College examination and was awarded a scholarship; but he did not matriculate until October 1907. As an undergraduate his great ability was further confirmed by the award of a long succession of university scholarships and prizes for Latin and Greek verse and prose, culminating in the chancellor's classical medal (1911). In 1910 he was elected president of the union, and he crowned his successes by gaining first class honours in part one of the classical tripos (1909) and in part two of the history tripos (1910). In 1913 his college elected him to a prize fellowship, and the thesis which he submitted for the competition was published as 'The Passing of the Great Reform Bill' (1914, reprinted 1964). 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Butler joined the Scottish Horse, a yeomanry regiment with which he served in the Gallipoli campaign of 1915 and in Egypt. In 1916 he joined the directorate of military operations in the War Office, and then served on the general staff in France. He was twice mentioned in dispatches and in 1919 was appointed OBE (military division) 'for services in connection with operations in France'. 
On demobilization Butler returned to Trinity College. He was one of the tutors to Prince Albert (later George VI) and Prince Henry (later duke of Gloucester) when they went to Cambridge for a year, for which he was appointed MVO (4th class) in 1920. 
In 1922 Butler was nominated for one of the two parliamentary seats then allocated to the ancient universities and was elected as an independent. He played a prominent part in the debates leading to the passing of the 'Oxford and Cambridge Universities Act' in July 1922, whereby commissions were set up with powers, for a limited period, to amend the universities' and colleges' statutes and ordinances. This ultimately led to the admission of women to full membership of Cambridge University. In the general election of December 1923, fought on the issue of tariff reform, Butler stood again as an independent Liberal; but he was narrowly defeated by his cousin, Sir G. G. G. Butler, on the second ballot under the transferable vote system then in force. 
Soon after his father's death in 1918 Butler moved from the lodge of Trinity College to the set of rooms at the top of the spiral staircase at the north-west corner of the Great Court, with lovely views over the Backs. There almost for the rest of his life he delighted to entertain his friends, especially to small lunch and dinner parties. Though a teetotaller himself, he was always a generous and delightful host. In 1925 he published a memoir of his father's thirty-one years as master of Trinity College, which remained a valuable social history of the politics and mores of Cambridge in that period. He was appointed a tutor by his college in 1928, and in the following year a university lecturer in history. In 1931 Trinity appointed him senior tutor, a responsible post which he held with success for seven years. 
In the Second World War Butler served in the army intelligence corps, and from 1942 at the civil affairs and military government central organization. His work for France was recognized by his appointment as chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. In 1947 he was appointed regius professor of modern history in succession to G. N. Clark, and he held that chair until 1954. In his inaugural lecture, delivered on 26 January 1949, he argued that 'History has a strong claim to rank as one staple of a liberal education' and outlined the plans for the military histories of the war ('The Present Need for History', 1949). Meanwhile in 1946 C. R. Attlee as prime minister had announced the government's intentions on the latter subject, and that Butler had been appointed chief military historian and editor of the whole series. It finally comprised forty-one volumes on grand strategy, the principal campaigns, and civil affairs and military government after the end of hostilities. Butler himself wrote the two grand strategy volumes covering September 1939 to August 1942 (vol. 2, 1957, and vol. 3, part 2, 1964). For his work on this project he was knighted in 1958. 
In February 1955 Butler was elected vice-master of his college, an arduous and responsible post which he held with distinction for five years. When he resigned the regius chair in 1954, the university promptly elected him an emeritus professor of modern history. Having thus shed some of his responsibilities, he accepted a request that he should write the authorized biography of Philip Kerr, eleventh marquess of Lothian, a wartime ambassador in Washington ('Lord Lothian', 1960). 
In his very full life Butler's chief recreations were rock climbing and long walks in wild country -- on the continent as well as in the British Isles. He never married, and his college and university always stood first in his interests and affections. He made a generous benefaction to Trinity College in his lifetime and another under his will. As a young man he left the Anglican church of his father and adopted the doctrines of Christian Science, to which he adhered strictly to the end of his life. When in 1975 he apparently suffered an accident and was obviously in great pain, it was only with difficulty that he was persuaded to enter a nursing home in Cambridge -- for a rest and not for treatment. He died there on 1 March, and on 10 May 1975 a large congregation in the college chapel was bidden to recall 'the rare beauty of his character' and 'the gentle humorous charm of his manner'. No one who knew him would challenge that encomium. 
Stephen W. Roskill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30885


Butler, Reginald Cotterell (1913-1981), sculptor, was born on 28 April 1913 at Buntingford, Hertfordshire, the only child of Frederick William Butler and his wife, Edith Barltrop, the master and matron of the Buntingford workhouse. His father was a distant relative of the Irish poet William Butler Yeats, and his grandfather had been a gardener at Chatsworth under Sir Joseph Paxton. His mother was of Anglo-French extraction and a distant relative of the poet George Crabbe. From the age of fourteen he was educated at the Hertford grammar school. He learned a great deal about the crafts and handling of tools in his father's Buntingford community. 
Reg Butler (as he preferred to be known) entered architectural practice locally in 1933 and was sufficiently successful to be elected ARIBA in 1937. He was a lecturer in architecture at the Architectural Association School (1937-9), and continued with architectural journalism throughout the war and until 1951. In 1938 he married (Mary) Joan (Jo), daughter of Robert Child, a farmer; they had no children. With his friend Rosemary, a sculptor, daughter of Matthew Young, doctor of medicine, he had two daughters. During the Second World War, as a conscientious objector, he worked as a blacksmith in Sussex. He was interested in sculpture from 1937 onwards, initially being influenced by African primitive art and the work of Henry Moore. His first one-man show was at the Hanover Gallery, London, in 1949. He was awarded the first Gregory fellowship in sculpture at the University of Leeds (1951-3), and in 1951 also became a lecturer at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, eventually becoming head of the department, a post he held until 1980. The Arts Council of Great Britain and the Greater London council commissioned work from him for the Festival of Britain in 1951. In 1952 the British Council invited him to take part in an exhibition at the British pavilion at the Venice Biennale. 
Butler was awarded the 'grand prix' in an international competition for an intended monument, entitled 'The Unknown Political Prisoner', in 1953, for a sculpture to be placed on the Russian-German frontier in Berlin. The sculpture was never built and the maquette was destroyed by a Hungarian refugee when it was exhibited at the Tate Gallery in London. Butler was able to make a second small model. 
Butler's earlier work shows an acute awareness of trends in Britain and Europe after the war and has close affinities to sources as diverse as Henry Moore, Graham Sutherland, and Francis Bacon, as well as to Picasso, Julio Gonzalez, Germaine Richier, Alberto Giacometti, and at a later stage, Balthus and Hans Bellmer. This suggests a certain eclecticism in his nature, but it is fair to say that he was equal to the sources of his inspiration, and at times excelled them. He enjoyed argument and was a stimulating and respected teacher. He loved fast cars and was excited by modern technology and by science fiction. He was one of a number of sculptors working with forged and welded metals in the 1950s. Critics tended to find the work harsh and threatening, reflecting a mood of post-war anxiety which Sir Herbert Read summed up as 'the Geometry of Fear'. 
In the mid-1950s Butler's work turned from spiky biomorphic metaphors towards a more realist concern with the female figure. Increasingly its erotic nature suggested that the sculptor was searching to invent a series of modern Venuses. In his William Townshend lecture at University College, London, in November 1980, Butler talked at length about his admiration of Stone Age fertility figures. His own last series of doll-like figures, owing something to Indian and Japanese inspiration, seemed to relate twentieth-century sexual fantasies to an ancient tradition. The bronze casts were painted with a sugar-almond surface and were not unlike the treatment of female flesh in the paintings of Lucas Cranach. Heads and limbs were made in interchangeable units, the eyes were made of painted resin and covered with a glassy lens, and human hair was implanted in the skulls, but not in the pubic areas. His creations, combining both lust and compassion, achieved the potency of their primitive ancestors. 
Butler continued to be a prominent and controversial figure whose work was admired throughout Europe and in the United States. He is represented in the Tate collection, the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, DC, as well as in many other museums. In 1965 he was elected to the Royal Academy of Belgium. A posthumous memorial exhibition took place at the Tate Gallery in November 1983. Reg Butler died on 23 October 1981 at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, where he had lived since 1953. 
John Read', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30886


Butler, Richard Austen, Baron Butler of Saffron Walden (1902-1982), politician, was born at Attock Serai, Punjab, India, on 9 December 1902, the eldest of a family of two sons and two daughters of Sir Montagu Sherard Dawes Butler (1873-1952) and his wife, Anne Gertrude Smith (1876-1954). His father, who had passed top into the Indian Civil Service, was a member of a remarkable academic dynasty (since 1794) of Cambridge dons, which included a master of Trinity, two headmasters of Harrow, and one of Haileybury. He later became governor of the Central Provinces and, finally, of the Isle of Man. His mother, warm, sympathetic, and encouraging, and to whom Butler was always devoted, was one of ten talented children of George Smith CIE, a Scottish teacher, journalist, and editor in India. She was the sister of Sir George Adam Smith. 
When Butler was six he fell from his pony and broke his right arm in three places, an injury which was aggravated by a hot-water bottle burn. The arm never fully recovered, and successful games playing was thus ruled out, though he became a keen shot. Returning to be educated in England, Butler attended the Wick preparatory school at Hove. Having rebelled against going to Harrow School because of a surfeit of Butlers there and having failed a scholarship for Eton College, Butler (by now known as Rab as his father had intended) went to Marlborough College. After a final year learning modern languages, which were better taught than the classics he had earlier endured, Butler went to France to improve his French with the diplomatic service in mind. He won an exhibition to Pembroke College, Cambridge -- the money was needed -- which, after a first class in the modern and medieval languages tripos (1923), was converted into a scholarship. He became secretary of the union as a Conservative. An unsuccessful love affair and a mainly nervous collapse did not stop him becoming president of the union (1924). In his fourth year Butler gained a first in history (1925) and a fellowship at Corpus Christi College. 
While an undergraduate Butler had met Sydney Elizabeth Courtauld (1902-1954), a capable, strong-minded girl, who became his wife on 20 April 1926. Her father, Samuel Courtauld, an industrialist, settled $5000 a year on Butler for life tax-free. This financial independence enabled him to decide on a parliamentary career, though his father told him that strong personal executive decisions were not his forte and he should aim for the speakership. While the honeymooners went round the world, the Courtauld family secured for them a fairly safe seat, Saffron Walden in Essex, and on their return Butler was duly selected without the complication of competing candidates. He had a comfortable victory in the general election of 1929 and held the seat until his retirement in 1965. Before the election he had become private secretary to Sir Samuel Hoare, and he soon became known to the party hierarchy. His first notable public act was a sharp exchange in 'The Times' with Harold Macmillan, who was advised to seek 'a pastime more suited for his talents' than politics ('The Times', 28 May 1930; Howard, 41). 
In the National Government in 1931 Hoare became India secretary and Butler his parliamentary private secretary. At the second round-table conference Butler was deeply impressed by M. K. Gandhi, the current hate figure of many Conservatives and of his father. After a tour of India, Butler became Hoare's under-secretary in September 1932. His support of constitutional reform and knowledge of the Indian scene made him a natural choice, even though he had been in parliament only three and a half years and was easily the youngest member of the government. India was the issue on which Winston Churchill was challenging Stanley Baldwin, and in the Commons Butler compared himself to 'the miserable animal', a bait 'in the form of a bullock calf tied to a tree, awaiting the arrival of the lord of the forest' ('Hansard 5C', vol. 276, col. 1011, 29 March 1933; Howard, 376). Yet he was never devoured by Churchill and proved himself Hoare's able lieutenant in defending the 'India Bill' throughout the fierce two and a half year war waged against it by the Conservative right wing. 
The Butlers had since 1928 lived in the constituency, first at Broxted and then at Stansted Hall, Halstead, where their three sons and a daughter were largely brought up, and where in 1935 Baldwin came for the weekend and Churchill was invited -- something which the new prime minister remembered in 1940. They also had a flat in Wood Street, London, until they moved to 3 Smith Square in 1938. They entertained generously in both London and the country. 
Neville Chamberlain's accession to the premiership in May 1937 brought Butler a welcome release from the India Office but not a department of his own. Nevertheless, his stint as parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of Labour gave him a useful acquaintance with the depressed areas and with mass unemployment. After nine months he went to the Foreign Office as under-secretary of state in February 1938. With the foreign secretary, the first earl of Halifax, in the House of Lords he was once again prominent -- in the long run, indeed, too prominent. The policy of appeasement cut across the Conservative Party much more deeply than India or unemployment, and, when Churchill took over, Butler was on the wrong side of the divide. Appeasement was held against him in a way it was not against those more minor supporters of the Munich agreement, Lord Dunglass (Alec Douglas-Home) and Quintin Hogg. 
Butler was an enthusiastic Chamberlainite and like Chamberlain regarded Munich not as a means of buying time but as a way of settling differences with Adolf Hitler. Winding up for the government in the House of Commons on the day that Churchill had earlier delivered a powerful polemic against the Munich agreement, Butler maintained that Britain had 'two choices -- either to settle our differences with Germany by consultation, or to face the inevitability of a clash between the two systems of democracy and dictatorship', unwisely adding that war settled nothing ('Hansard 5C', vol. 339, col. 453, 5 Oct 1938). He was disposed, however, to interpret Benito Mussolini's invasion of Albania as a general threat to the Balkans, until Chamberlain told him not to be silly and to go home to bed. Butler remained an appeaser down to the outbreak of war. He did not favour an alliance with Russia, and he opposed the Polish alliance signed on 25 August 1939 because it would have 'a bad psychological effect on Hitler' (Howard, 85). Indeed even after Britain had declared war Butler remained something of an appeaser. After Chamberlain's fall he, together with Alec Dunglass and two friends, drank to the 'King over the Water' and described Churchill as the greatest political adventurer of modern political history (Colville, 122). 
Despite his conspicuous identification with the 'ancien regime', Butler survived Churchill's reconstruction of the government in May 1940. 'I wish you to go on', Churchill told him, 'with your delicate manner of answering parliamentary questions without giving anything away'; the prime minister also expressed appreciation of having been asked to 'Butler's private residence'. The Foreign Office was now a backwater, whose calm was only disturbed by Butler's imprudent conversation with Dr Bjorn Prytz, the Swedish minister in London in June 1940. 'Britain's official attitude', Prytz telegraphed Stockholm after his interview, 'will for the present continue to be that the war must go on, but [Butler] assured me that no opportunity for reaching a compromise would be neglected if the possibility were offered on reasonable conditions'. When Prytz's telegram came to the prime minister's notice, he complained to Halifax that Butler's 'odd language' indicated a lukewarm attitude to the war if not defeatism. Even so, Churchill magnanimously accepted Butler's highly unconvincing explanation of the damaging incident (Roberts, 232-4). Butler was lucky to keep his job. Bombed out of both Smith Square and his father-in-law's house, Butler went for a time to stay in Belgrave Square with Henry (Chips) Channon, his parliamentary private secretary since 1938. 
Butler remained at the Foreign Office against his wishes when Sir Anthony Eden, whom he did not admire, succeeded Halifax in December 1940. But in July 1941 after nine years as an under-secretary he became president of the Board of Education. Even further removed from the war than the Foreign Office, education was nevertheless a political minefield and had seen no major reform since 1902. Ignoring Churchill's warnings not to stir up either party politics or religious controversy, Butler decided on comprehensive reform. Although in the end he had to exclude the public schools, every child was given the right to free secondary education and, to make that right a reality for the poor, provision was made for the expansion of both nursery and further education and for the raising of the school-leaving age. All Butler's formidable diplomatic and political skills were needed to secure the agreement of the churches as well as the acquiescence of Churchill and Conservative back-benchers, whom Butler thought 'a stupid lot'. The 1944 'Education Act', which Butler believed would 'have the effect of welding us into one nation -- instead of two nations as Disraeli talked about' (Timmins, 92, 95), was Butler's greatest legislative achievement and was deservedly called after him. 
Butler became chairman of the Conservative Party's post-war problems central committee in 1941, and in November 1943 he joined the government's reconstruction committee. The only leading Conservative clear-sighted enough to oppose an early election, he became minister of labour in Churchill's 'caretaker' government in May 1945. After the electoral defeat in July -- Butler's own majority fell to 1158 -- Churchill made him chairman of the Conservative Research Department, although his own bizarre preference was for Duncan Sandys. At that time there was little to be chairman of, but with the considerable assistance of David Clarke, and later, Michael Fraser, whom Butler rightly described as 'the best adjutant the party has ever had', the department was up to strength by the end of 1946 (R. A. Butler, 140). Like Churchill, who thought it would tie the hands of the next Conservative government and cripple the party now, Butler was chary of embarking upon detailed policy-making, though for different reasons. He thought the time was not yet ripe for it, wanting to make sure that the party was facing in the right direction before it made firm commitments. In 1946 Butler also became chairman of the industrial policy committee, whose members included three future chancellors of the exchequer as well as Oliver Stanley and three other future cabinet ministers. 
From these two positions Butler exerted the major influence in reshaping Conservative policy and producing the civilized Conservatism of the post-war party. In 1947 the industrial policy committee produced the 'Industrial Charter', which, Butler told Lord Woolton in 1949, 'placed the party on the fairway of modern economic and political thought' (Ramsden, 'Age of Churchill', 134). His later more detailed verdict was that 'the 'Charter' was... an assurance, that in the interests of efficiency, full employment, and social security, modern Conservatism would maintain strong central guidance over the operation of the economy'. Mass unemployment was to be a thing of the past; as Butler put it, those who advocated 'creating pools of unemployment should be thrown into them and made to swim' (R. A. Butler, 146, 61). The right wing regarded Butler's efforts as 'pink socialism', a recurring charge under various names in his later career. He himself believed that, without the rejection of unemployment and the acceptance of the welfare state, the spectre of the thirties would not be exorcized and the Conservative Party would remain in opposition. Accordingly Butler was happy in 1950 to welcome 'as a healthy piece of constructive work' 'One Nation', the first pamphlet of a group of nine new tory MPs, among whom were Iain Macleod, Angus Maude, Edward Heath, and Enoch Powell. The pamphlet described full employment as 'a first responsibility of government', and called on the Conservative Party 'to act as a balancing force, to ensure that liberty and order reinforce one another'. 
Since Marlborough, painting had been Butler's chief hobby; after the war he occasionally painted with Churchill, once being commanded by him to 'take the mountains', while his leader would 'take the sea' (R. A. Butler, 33). Butler thought their paintings were of about the same standard. 
Contrary to the general expectation and his own, Butler became chancellor of the exchequer in October 1951 and inherited the usual economic crisis. He tackled it by import controls and the resurrection of monetary policy. Butler himself favoured more drastic measures, having accepted a plan cooked up in the Bank of England and the Treasury. Under this plan, known as Robot, the pound was to be allowed to float (or rather sink); it was to be made (partially) convertible into dollars; and most of the sterling balances held in London were to be blocked. While Robot's first two provisions seem reasonable in retrospect, they would not have worked in 1952. As the British economy was then overloaded because of the excessive rearmament programme bequeathed by the Labour government, devaluation was inappropriate. Exports would scarcely have increased and imports would have been made more expensive. Britain's trading position would have been made still worse by the proposed very limited convertibility. Even the Treasury admitted that much of Britain's export trade might be faced with conditions of great difficulty. The third element of Robot was scarcely less damaging. Although Australia and other members of the sterling area were to be allowed to convert 10 per cent of their reserves into dollars, they would hardly take kindly to 90 per cent of their reserves being frozen. Apart from its effect on Britain, the plan broke the rules of the International Monetary Fund from which the government proposed to borrow money, would probably have killed the newly formed European Payments Union from which it had also just borrowed on a large scale, would have broken up much of the sterling area, and would have infuriated the west Europeans, the Commonwealth, and the United States. Nevertheless, had it not been for the opposition of Lord Cherwell and his chief economist, Donald MacDougall, Robot would have been accepted. Fortunately, after Cherwell had put to Churchill a paper, drafted by MacDougall, pointing out that Robot would produce a sharp rise in food prices and unemployment, the plan was defeated in cabinet. 
Butler's wholehearted embrace of Robot, even though, as he admitted to his colleagues, his economic advisers were violently opposed to it, was markedly out of character. An innately cautious and prudent politician, he had spent much of the six years in opposition repudiating the kind of economics and the kind of Conservatism that Robot embodied and implied. To adopt his own earlier metaphor, Robot would have put the Conservative Party back 'in the rough'. It would have been disastrous politically and economically, undoing at a stroke all Butler's efforts and achievements of the last six years. Not surprisingly, therefore, despite what he said in his memoirs, Butler later admitted that his opponents had been right all along (Cairncross, 270). The next few months showed that not only had Robot prescribed the wrong remedies for the putative crisis but there had never been a crisis. As was becoming customary, the Treasury's assumptions and estimates all turned out to be mistaken. Not long after a cautious budget in March, when Butler raised the bank rate to 4 per cent and cut food subsidies by 40 per cent, but also cut income tax and increased pensions and welfare benefits to help the worst off, the reserves began to increase not drain away. 
By September such was Butler's standing that in the absence of both Churchill and Eden he was left in charge of the government. Later in the autumn he was able to tell the lord mayor's banquet that the country had gained an invaluable breathing space; and he was the star of the tory party conference at Scarborough. By the end of the year the reserves were much higher than anybody in the Treasury had thought possible. By 1953 Butler had more scope to promote expansion and in his second budget was able to cut income tax and purchase tax and to promise the abolition of the excess profits levy. In the summer when, with Eden ill in Boston, Churchill was felled by a stroke, Butler again took charge of the government. The gravity of Churchill's illness, concealed by his entourage, was known to Butler; this was perhaps the first occasion on which he could have become prime minister had he striven for the job. He had no such thoughts and ran the government well. 
After Robot's demise Butler 'reverted', as he said, 'to normal Keynesian economics' (Seldon, 559), and initially his policy differed little from Labour's. This led 'The Economist' to introduce 'Mr Butskell... a composite of the present Chancellor and the previous one' who spoke up for the course of moderation from both sides of the house. Butler had long been regarded by the Conservative right as being little better than a socialist, while the Labour left tended to regard Gaitskell as rather worse than a Conservative. Certainly both Gaitskell and Butler favoured Keynesian techniques and sought to maintain full employment. Both were moderates and both had good political manners. Both, too, had considerable respect for each other, but Gaitskell had (in Butler's words) 'unquenchably socialist' convictions and a strong belief in equality; Butler had no such convictions or beliefs (R. A. Butler, 160). Moreover, he had in contrast to Gaitskell a belief in monetary policy and much less interest in planning. Butler favoured convertibility; Gaitskell defended exchange controls and the sterling area. They differed, too, on the far greater emphasis that Gaitskell (rightly) gave to the need for Britain to invest more and consume less. 
At the Treasury, Butler, who was one of the two best post-war chancellors, had two special difficulties. Sir Walter Monckton had been made minister of labour by Churchill to conciliate the unions, and conciliation entailed conceding excessive wage claims, sometimes in concert with the prime minister and without consulting the chancellor. 'Walter and I', Churchill told Butler one morning in 1954, 'settled the rail strike in the early hours of the morning on their terms. We did not think it necessary to keep you up' (R. A. Butler, 164). In any case, the government had no alternative but to rely on what Butler in his 1954 budget speech called 'voluntary moderation'. That policy had in fact worked well in 1952 and 1953 when rises in wages were small, but then it broke down, leaving what Butler later called 'a gaping hole in our armour' (ibid.). Butler's second special difficulty was the Conservatives' pledge to build 300,000 houses a year, which Macmillan, the minister of housing, never allowed the chancellor or the cabinet to forget. In consequence, too many of the nation's resources went into the housing drive. In 1954 Butler's third budget was, as he said, a 'carry-on affair' with few changes, but later in the year he predicted the doubling of the country's standard of living within twenty-five years. 
On 9 December 1954 Butler's wife died after a long and painful illness. His grief and the loss of her influence as well as the effects of three gruelling years affected Butler's political judgement. His troubles were in any event growing: inflation and balance of payments difficulties necessitated a 'stop', and in February 1955 Butler raised the bank rate and brought back hire-purchase restrictions. Contrary to the later right-wing orthodoxy, Butler's fault was not to interfere too much but too little. Until 1955 industrial investment was inadequate, and virtually nothing was done to make particular industries more efficient. All the same, the record of the chancellor and of the government was one to be envied by all their successors. Apart from the mess they inherited from Labour, the Churchill administration avoided the sort of economic crises that plagued its predecessor and future governments. Butler loosened the economy without endangering social peace. The welfare state was protected and improved. By pursuing 'one nation' centrism the government engineered a contented country. 
The electorate's response in 1955 was to say it wanted more of the same. Butler produced for Eden an electioneering budget, taking 6died off income tax. That was his first mistake. After the election Eden invited him to give up the Treasury, but Butler refused, which was his second mistake. Butler then had what he called 'a very disagreeable summer', being the target of criticism both from his own side and the opposition (R. A. Butler, 179). Gaitskell accused him of having deliberately deceived the electorate, while his Treasury advisers slowly awoke to the growing danger of inflation which their bad budgetary advice had acutely exacerbated. After Butler had failed to persuade the cabinet of the need to cut the bread subsidies and take other drastic measures, a run on the pound compelled an autumn budget whose unimaginativeness underlined the errors of its predecessor -- Butler's third mistake. In December 1955 Eden decided to replace him with Macmillan, who showed by his stipulated terms for his transfer, to which the prime minister weakly submitted, that he was determined also to replace Butler as Eden's heir apparent. Disregarding the advice of Harry Crookshank, Macmillan's oldest friend, that he was committing 'sheer political suicide', Butler consented to become merely lord privy seal and leader of the house -- his fourth and biggest mistake (Howard, 221). He needed a change, but ministerial power in British politics rests with the big departments and for Butler to allow himself to be left without a department was a gratuitous act of unilateral disarmament. 
Macmillan later admitted that in the light of subsequent events his demands implied that he was 'actuated by some degree of personal rivalry with Butler' (Macmillan, 693). Though Macmillan was to the left of him on economics, there was no issue on which Butler was, in the eyes of the Conservative Party, seen to be right wing. Many Conservatives saw him as a 'Butskellite'. Hence he was always more popular in the country than in his own party. His appearance was not charismatic, with his damaged arm, his sad, irregular features, and his clothes, described by Channon as 'truly tragic'. But behind it there was a Rolls-Royce mind and a sharp sardonic wit which he enjoyed exerting at the expense of his colleagues. He was the master of many types of ambiguity -- 'there is no one's retirement party Mollie [his second wife] and I would like more to attend' -- and occasionally the cause of ambiguity in others. In the autumn Eden's colleagues, his supporters, and the newspapers had become increasingly disenchanted with the prime minister; and his mishandled reshuffle, whose most conspicuous features were the moves of Butler and Macmillan, brought a renewed press bombardment. Butler watched the prime minister's travails with detachment; 'I have been very calm', he said. But, unlike Macmillan, he was indiscreet in public. Questioned at Heathrow airport about articles hostile to Eden in the Sunday papers, Butler expressed his 'determination to support the Prime Minister in all his difficulties'. While Eden could have done without that sort of support, it was another of Butler's declarations which won the headlines: Eden, he said, is 'the best Prime Minister we have' (Howard, 222). No doubt the new lord privy seal was correct in saying that those words were not his but the reporter's; he had merely given his assent to them -- and a denial to the reporter would of course have been even worse. Yet they sounded like a typical 'Rabism', and had Butler felt more warmly to Eden he would probably have been more careful. Describing the episode in his autobiography, Butler said that Eden's reshuffle did not receive a favourable press, characteristically adding that 'a series of articles began to appear assessing [Eden's performance] in decidedly unflattering and somewhat unfair terms' (Howard, 222; R. A. Butler, 183). 
Butler was ill when President Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal Company in 1956 and was in no danger of being infected by the collective hysteria that followed in Britain and France. He missed the first cabinet meeting at which the fatal route to Port Said was mapped and he was not included in the Egypt committee that Eden set up, though he occasionally attended it. His freedom from departmental responsibilities would for once have been an advantage, but cool, detached advice was not what Eden wanted. Over Suez Butler's predicament was acute. Far too intelligent to accept Eden's likening of Nasser to Mussolini, he had nevertheless an 'appeasing' past to live down. Believing that party and public opinion required action of some sort, Butler also believed that Britain should act in accordance with international law. 
Hence Butler was in a similar position to John Foster Dulles, the American secretary of state, and was driven to similar deviousness: as the international position altered, different expedients had to be produced to prevent Eden launching an attack on Egypt. But what was permissible in Dulles, trying to divert an ally from folly, looked less so in the cabinet's nominal number two seeking to restrain his leader, sick and unbalanced though Eden was. Butler would probably have done better to state his position unequivocally or to keep quiet or to resign; doubts were not enough. Even so, if he had succeeded, as his phrase went, in keeping Eden 'in a political strait-jacket' he would have done the prime minister and the country a great service. But by October Butler had run out of strait-jackets, and he used the wrong tactics for defeating the Anglo-French-Israeli plan. Instead of joining with Monckton in direct opposition to a grubby conspiracy which was bound to fail, Butler implausibly advocated that Britain, France, and Israel should mount an open attack on Egypt which would have been scarcely less disastrous. After the UN had voted for an emergency force and an Israeli-Egyptian cease-fire seemed imminent, Butler tried to prevent the Anglo-French invasion as it was by then redundant; and when two days later Eden told the cabinet that a cease-fire was essential, Butler like Macmillan strongly supported him. 
Butler's deviousness over Suez was honesty itself compared with the duplicity of Eden and some colleagues; and he was more consistent than Macmillan whose fire-eating bellicosity first drove Eden on towards destruction and who then suddenly demanded peace. Yet Butler's lack of enthusiasm for the use of force had offended the party's large pro-Suez element (many of whom disliked him anyway), and his failure to prevent it had disappointed the antis. He ended up pleasing virtually no one. By contrast, Macmillan, whose record on Suez was far worse -- he later admitted that it was 'a very bad episode' in his life (Horne, 1.447) -- had pleased the gunboat-minded by his initial fire-eating and then disarmed the opponents of force by his sudden switch to favouring a cease-fire. Unlike Butler, Macmillan was thought at least to know his own mind, even if he changed it. Butler had made matters still worse for himself by being, even by his standards, inordinately indiscreet. While in public he robustly defended Suez, he said very different things in private, being almost suicidally imprudent at a dinner of right-wing MPs. Butler's varying indiscretions to different back-bench groups gave the impression that he was not playing the game. Others were playing a deeper one. 
Eden's retreat to the West Indies to recuperate left Butler to do the salvage work at the head of a weak and divided government. Inaccessible in Jamaica, Eden to his intense annoyance was largely ignored. 'I know', Butler condescendingly telegraphed to him, 'how difficult it must be for you to form a judgement on all that has gone on since you left' (Lamb, 'Eden Government', 297-8). Eden, who probably thought it would have been easier to do so if he had been kept fully informed, can have been little more comforted to hear from Butler that there were 'many who would like to see you back, including members of the Cabinet' (Ramsden, 'Winds of Change', 320-21). In Whitehall Butler was at his best, running the government as competently as he had done when Churchill was incapacitated. Yet as acting head of the government he was saddled with what he called 'the odious duty of withdrawing the troops' (R. A. Butler, 194). While Selwyn Lloyd thought that in Eden's absence he had been 'splendidly supported' by Butler (Lloyd, 252), Rab gained little credit for limiting the damage he had not caused. Instead, the salvage man was blamed for the wreckage. 
Butler did not mount a leadership campaign after Suez. Maybe he was too busy; maybe he thought it was unnecessary because he was bound to win; or, more probably, he thought Eden would be able to hold on until Easter or even the summer, so that a campaign would be premature. All the same, when Eden resigned on 9 January, Butler spent the evening pondering what he should say in his first broadcast to the nation as prime minister. In reality his chances had faded in the aftermath of Suez. The cabinet voted overwhelmingly for Macmillan, and back-bench soundings gave a similar result. Churchill preferred Butler personally but gave his backing to Macmillan, as did the chief whip, the chairman of the party, and the chairman of the 1922 committee. Eden gave no advice to the queen: he disliked both men but he preferred Butler. Butler took his defeat well. Macmillan refused him the Foreign Office, and Butler did not insist, accepting the Home Office while remaining leader of the house. At least he now had a department. He also, as under Churchill and Eden, had the government to run from time to time. When Macmillan in 1958 went on his Commonwealth tour after settling his 'little local difficulties' over the resignation of his entire Treasury team in January, Butler was left, as he said, 'to hold the baby'. As usual he held it well, and this time was popular. As home secretary he was a reformer, which was less popular. 
After the October 1959 election Butler became chairman of the Conservative Party in addition to being home secretary and leader of the house. Other than demonstrating that there was almost no limit to his capacity for transacting public business at which he was indeed the unrivalled master, there was little point in Butler's new job. It was in any case scarcely compatible with his existing ones. His leadership of the house entailed trying to get on with the opposition in the Commons, while his chairmanship of the party entailed attacking the opposition in the country. Further, as home secretary, Butler was intent on penal reform, while many of his party faithful were intent on the return of flogging. However Butler was always adept at squaring circles, and he squared those three. Much more important to him than the acquisition of offices was his wedding, in the presence of the couple's ten children, on 21 October 1959 to Mollie (1907-2009), a relative by marriage of his late wife, and widow of the polar explorer Augustine Courtauld; she was the daughter of Frank Douglas Montgomerie of Castle Hedingham, Essex. The marriage was strikingly happy and gave Butler renewed strength. 
Butler was an outstanding home secretary, making few mistakes in handling a notoriously tricky department and initiating much useful legislation. He was stuck with the government's 'Homicide Bill', which introduced degrees of murder, since it was already on its way through parliament when he was appointed. The bill, which had been made necessary by the disagreement between Lords and Commons, was difficult to defend, but Butler deftly put it on the statute-book. While he was at the Home Office, he became a convinced abolitionist, though that did not cause him to err on the side of leniency, when considering whether or not to grant a reprieve. Even at the time, many thought his decision to allow the hanging of James Hanratty a serious misjudgement. 
Elsewhere the prime minister allowed him 'a completely free hand' with his reforms (R. A. Butler, 197), a liberality probably assisted by Macmillan's awareness that they would make the home secretary a target of right-wing abuse. When home secretary, Winston Churchill had laid down that 'the mood and temper of the public with regard to the punishment of crimes and criminals is one of the unfailing tests of the civilisation of any country' (Howard, 255). Butler took Churchill's dictum as his text and, undeterred by signs that many on the right of his party would fail that test, he embarked on a comprehensive plan of penal reform. Pointing out that after examining all the available evidence the pre-war Cadogan committee had concluded that flogging was not a deterrent, Butler declined to reintroduce corporal punishment. His refusal annoyed the new MP for Finchley, Margaret Thatcher, who voted to bring back the birch or the cane for violent young offenders, the only time in her Commons career that she voted against the party line. It was then, as Butler wrote, that he had his main controversy with elements in the Conservative Party, 'Colonel Blimps of both sexes -- and the female of the species was more deadly, politically, than the male' (R. A. Butler, 200). The annual seaside outing of the hangers and floggers at the Conservative Party conference in full cry against the home secretary was not a spectacle for the squeamish, but at Brighton in 1961 Butler routed his opponents with a brilliant speech. 
Much of the legislation for which the Home Office was responsible, Butler told a Conservative Party conference meeting in 1959, was still 'laced in Victorian corsetry' (R. A. Butler, 202). After the Wolfenden committee had recommended the effective removal of prostitutes from the streets and the legalization of homosexual acts between consenting adults in private, Butler found that the Colonel Blimps of the parliamentary party would allow him to enact only the first part of the committee's recommendations. Elsewhere, however, he could loosen the Victorian corsets without over-exciting the darker emotions of the Conservative right. The law on charities was reformed, and licensing hours and the law on obscene publications were both liberalized. In addition, by the introduction of betting shops, Butler's 'Betting and Gaming Act' for the first time enabled the poorer classes to place a bet without breaking the law. 
Butler's modernizing social legislation was broadly supported by the left wing of the party and by centrist and liberal opinion in the country; it was opposed or grudgingly endured by the Conservative right. On immigration Butler was supported by the right and opposed by those who were usually his allies. Churchill had favoured legislation to curb it, the Eden government had come close to introducing restrictions in 1955, and Macmillan had considered legislation in 1958. Between 1959 and 1961 the annual number of immigrants from the West Indies, Africa, and the Indian subcontinent grew from 21,000 to 136,000; so, although immigration had been scarcely an issue at the 1959 election, legislation had become inescapable by 1961. Even so, both Butler and Macleod, by then leader of the house, who together piloted the 'Immigration Bill' through the Commons, found their task distasteful. The bill was bitterly attacked by the serious press and savaged by Gaitskell, who denounced Butler and Macleod as hypocrites for failing to stop it by threatening resignation. None the less Labour, a little later, abandoned its opposition to restricting immigration, and the Wilson government soon introduced controls which were stricter than Butler's. 
In October 1961 Butler lost two of his offices, retaining only the Home Office, but after making what he later called 'a staunch decision to back the Common Market' he was made overseer of the Common Market negotiations which in practice meant little (Howard, 296). In March 1962 Macmillan, tired of the squabbling between the Colonial and Commonwealth offices, formed a new central Africa department and persuaded Butler to take charge of it. This was a real job, if a thankless one; characteristically, Butler merely added it to his other one. But in the cabinet massacre of July 1962 he lost the Home Office and was left with his central African responsibilities, with the honorific title of 'first secretary of state' plus the intimation that he would be serving as deputy prime minister. Macmillan was thus able both to heap burdens onto the good-natured Butler and to strip him of them again almost at will. For nearly all his long parliamentary career Butler had been a minister: this gave him a unique experience of administration but made him too addicted to Whitehall ever to think of withdrawing. He had, too, the character and quality of a great public servant. 
Macmillan weakened his government by banishing Butler from the home front. Yet the government gained in Africa. At the Victoria Falls conference in July 1963 Butler achieved the seemingly impossible feat of an orderly dissolution of the Central African Federation without conceding full independence to Southern Rhodesia. 
Butler made no attempt to take advantage of Macmillan's considerable troubles in the first half of 1963, and the prime minister's revived fortunes had persuaded him to fight the next election, when his prostate operation altered that decision. Butler was yet again asked to deputize. In January 1962 the prime minister had told Butler that if he went before the election 'all falls to you', but those words of reassurance were soon broken. In the summer of 1963 Macmillan told Hailsham that if he resigned before the election he wished Hailsham to be his successor, and when Hailsham asked about Rab, since he was surely the most obvious successor, Macmillan replied that 'Rab simply doesn't have it in him to be Prime Minister' (Howard, 290; Walters, 111). Macmillan was determined to prevent Butler succeeding him and played an unprecedented part in choosing his own successor, at first supporting Hailsham and then switching to Home. At the Conservative Party conference at Blackpool, where the first round of the leadership struggle was fought, Butler ostentatiously and probably misguidedly kept himself aloof from all that was going on. But he successfully put forward his claim to make the leader's speech in place of Macmillan on the Saturday. The Homes and the Butlers lunched together before that final rally. Home told them that he was going to see his doctor for a medical examination the following week because he had been approached about being the party's leader. Both Rab and his wife were 'amazed' by this intelligence, having thought like other cabinet ministers that Home had ruled himself out when he avowed in cabinet that in no circumstances would he be a candidate (M. Butler, 97). At the rally that afternoon, by reading out a long letter from Macmillan and by some remarks of his own, Home upstaged Butler, whose speech flopped. His text was good but, probably unnerved by Home's revelation and conduct, he eschewed all the oratorical arts, and the applause was more dutiful than wholehearted. 
The second round of the leadership contest was fought in London but not under Queensberry rules. The prime minister devised a procedure under which he kept control of events. By naively or negligently agreeing to his proposals, the cabinet effectively abdicated in favour of Macmillan and his choice -- a grave misjudgement by all the leadership contenders, except of course Home. And after fudged consultations with cabinet ministers by the lord chancellor, Lord Dilhorne, and with MPs by the whips, some of whom knew the answer they wanted and went on until they got it, Macmillan adjudged his contender -- Home -- the winner. 
When Dilhorne's figures of the cabinet's voting -- ten for Home and only three for Butler -- were published many years later, they were seen to be 'impossible', as Macleod had judged them at the time. Dilhorne's claim that both Boyle and Macleod himself supported Home was self-evidently absurd. His phoney figures were presumably caused more by the faulty procedure, wishful thinking, incompetence, and, possibly, deafness than by outright chicanery; otherwise they would have been more plausible. Although in giving Home 87 first-choice votes of MPs to 86 for Butler, the legerdemain of the chief whip, Martin Redmayne, was less blatant than that of the lord chancellor, his accountancy, too, was creative. The news of Home's victory was leaked on 12 October 1963, the day before Macmillan was to see the queen. There was still, nevertheless, an opportunity for a third round, since a decision reached by such dubious means inevitably caused a row. That evening a meeting of cabinet ministers at Enoch Powell's house telephoned Butler urging him to fight. Hailsham did the same, telling him 'you must don your armour, dear Rab'. Butler, who was, he said, 'just dozing off', merely undertook to take note of what Hailsham had said and possibly act on it; but his only response the next morning, after his doze, was to ask the lord chancellor to call a meeting of all the leading candidates (Walters, 132-3; personal knowledge). Home felt like withdrawing, but was dissuaded by Macmillan, who ignored the opposition to his 'compromise' choice and did not change his intended advice to the queen. Shortly afterwards Home was on his way to the palace, where he was asked to see if he could form a government. Even then Butler could have prevailed. Had Butler 'stood firm', as he later agreed with Boyd-Carpenter, he would have been prime minister (Boyd-Carpenter, 178-9). Home could not have formed a government without Butler, and without Hailsham, Maudling, Macleod, Boyle, and Powell, all of whom would have refused to serve if Butler had given a lead. Powell later spoke graphically of having handed Butler 'a loaded revolver and told him that all he had to do was pull the trigger' (R. Shepherd, 'Enoch Powell', 1996, 260). His wife, too, was urging him on, but his heart was not in the fight, and after reserving his position Butler became foreign secretary on 20 October. Perhaps, as his father had long ago told him, he could not take strong personal executive decisions. Perhaps, like his old chief in 1940, Halifax, he did not really want the job. More likely he was inhibited by fears of splitting the party; and Home had been a friend since their Chamberlain days. Yet certainly their 'friendship' did not lead Butler to think that Home was fitted to be prime minister. He told Home on the day of his triumph that he spoilt the image of modernization, and shortly afterwards he described the prime minister as 'an amiable enough creature' who did not understand economics or even education at all (Ramsden, 'Winds of Change', 209; Howard, 332). 
In any case Butler's forbearance did not help the Conservatives. The supporters of both Butler and Hailsham thought their man would win the election of 16 October 1964, and both were probably right. Even Home only just lost it. Later Alec Home came to believe it might have been better had Butler got the top job, since anybody else was seen as a somewhat 'unnatural' successor (Thorpe, 310). After painful second thoughts, Macmillan in the eighties came to a similar conclusion (Horne, 2.582). 
The rest, politically, was anticlimax. The job Butler had wanted in 1957 and 1960 no longer presented much of a challenge. He ran the Foreign Office easily, but had no opportunity or inclination to do anything of note. Had the Conservatives won the 1964 election, he would not have been reappointed. Butler was given no part in the election preparations and only a bit part in the election itself, though he gave one rather unfortunate interview, in which he agreed with a 'Daily Express' journalist that the election might slip away from the tories in the last few days. After the election he lost his chairmanship of the Conservative Research Department, which he had held for twenty years. Home offered him an earldom which he refused; in 1965 the new prime minister, Harold Wilson, offered him the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge, which he accepted. He then accepted a life peerage in 1965 and took his seat on the cross-benches. Butler was the first non-Trinity man to become master for 250 years, and his appointment was at first not wholly welcome in the college. Nevertheless he and his wife were pre-eminently successful there, and in 1972 91 out of 118 fellows present voted for the maximum extension of Butler's term of office. In 1971 he published his autobiography. Lively, wise, and relatively accurate, 'The Art of the Possible' was a strong contrast to the multi-volume efforts of Eden and Macmillan and was one of the very few political autobiographies to enhance its author's reputation. This was followed in 1977 by 'The Conservatives', a history of the party, which Butler edited and introduced. In the same year he retired from Trinity. 
Butler was sworn of the privy council in 1939, and was appointed CH in 1954 and KG in 1971. He was awarded honorary degrees by thirteen universities (including Oxford and Cambridge, both in 1952), and elected an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1941, Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1952, and St Antony's College, Oxford, in 1957. He was rector of Glasgow University (1956-9), high steward, Cambridge University (1958-66), chancellor of Sheffield University (1960-78), chancellor of Essex University from 1962, and high steward of the city of Cambridge from 1963. He was president of the Modern Language Association and of the National Association of Mental Health from 1946, and of the Royal Society of Literature from 1951. He was given the freedom of Saffron Walden in 1954. 
His son, Adam, was a member of the 1979 Conservative government, but Butler like Macmillan had no great liking for the new Conservative regime. In February 1980 he successfully opposed in the Lords the government's proposal to allow local authorities to charge for school transport, which he saw as a breach of the 1944 act's promise to provide free secondary education for all. Butler's portrait was painted by Margaret Foreman for the National Portrait Gallery, where he was last seen in public. He finished 'The Art of Memory' (1982), which was little more than a footnote to its predecessor and was published after his death. He died on 8 March 1982 at his home, Spencers, in Great Yeldham, Halstead, Essex. 
A Baldwinian Conservative, opposed to drastic change and dedicated to compromise, Rab Butler, even more than Macmillan, was chiefly responsible for the humane and moderate 'one nation' toryism of the post-war period. Others, of course, played an important part. But Butler did more than anybody else to slough off the Conservatives' dismal legacy of the thirties, to commit the party to full employment and the welfare state, and hence to secure its early return to power. Similarly his failure to win the party leadership in 1963 proved a delayed but fatal blow to 'one nation' toryism -- at least in the twentieth century. 
In his farewell message to the 1963 party conference, Macmillan hailed the coming into existence of 'the party of our dreams', which accepted a 'pragmatic and sensible compromise between the extremes of collectivism and individualism'; yet at the very same time he was blocking from the leadership the man who had done even more than himself to establish that compromise. The 1964 election was crucial. A Conservative victory would have consolidated such a party and probably produced a Labour realignment. Defeat led to the later polarization of the parties and an abandonment of Macmillan's 'compromise' -- as Macmillan and Butler both lived long enough to see. By barring Butler's way in 1963 Macmillan had inadvertently helped to turn the 'party of our dreams' into one more like his nightmare. By the 1980s much of the party's leadership had not only repudiated 'the pragmatic and sensible compromise between the extremes of collectivism and individualism', it had stigmatized the governments of Macmillan himself and of other tory prime ministers as misguided collaborators with the socialist enemy. 
A man of great intelligence, Butler was in most respects superbly equipped for politics. He was sometimes accused of deviousness, but he was often more honest (and more indiscreet) than his colleagues. His trouble was not that he was more devious than them, merely that he was worse at it. Indeed he retained a strong vein of innocence, rare in sophisticated politicians. He was also abnormally good-natured, and inspired great affection. Yet at crucial periods he was unable fully to mobilize his support in the parliamentary party and he was inept at advancing his own claims. Hence Eden and Macmillan were able to push him around almost at will and to land him with unsuitable offices; that was made easier for them, too, by Butler being more a public servant than a politician. His achievement as both, however, was immense. 


@@@@@


doc= 30887


Butlin, Sir William Heygate Edmund Colborne (1899-1980), fairground proprietor and founder of holiday camps, was born in Cape Town, Cape Colony, where his parents had emigrated, on 29 September 1899, the elder child of William Butlin and Bertha Hill (died 1933). His parents came from contrasting social backgrounds: his father, scion of west-country clergymen, was genteel and preferred playing tennis to running the cycle-importing business which was supposed to support them, while his mother, daughter of a baker turned fairground showman, was left holding the reins of the business as well as the babies. She brought Billy (as he was always known) and his brother back to England, and took up the itinerant life of a gingerbread seller at west-country fairs. Butlin lodged with his aunt until his brother died of infantile paralysis, whereupon he joined his mother with her horse and caravan. His schooling, which had begun only when he was eight, therefore became intermittent. Bertha then married again and emigrated to Canada with her second husband, Charlie Rowbotham, a Bristol gas fitter, fostering out Billy until they sent for him in 1912. 
In Toronto, Butlin started work as a messenger boy, but, realizing that he had an aptitude for art, he studied at night school and graduated to drawing advertisements for Eatons department store. The outbreak of war saw him become one of the Canadian army's youngest (and smallest) soldiers serving in France, where he survived the lousy life of the trenches as a stretcher-bearer. After demobilization, he returned to Eatons to draw, but was lured by memories of the outdoor life of a travelling showman. In 1921 he worked his passage back to England and received a warm welcome from his mother's family on their west-country fair circuit. 
Butlin's uncles set him up with a hoopla stall and, from such small beginnings, within thirteen years he rose to become 'one of the most successful showmen in Europe' (Butlin and Dacre, 30). He displayed great business acumen, aiming for quick returns and a memorable image to attract custom. His trade mark of an enormous embroidered B on a white jacket dates from this period. His readiness to innovate was demonstrated in 1922 when he took his (distinctively decorated) stall to the Christmas circus established by Bertram Mills at London's Olympia. Here he met prosperous showmen wintering away from the seaside resorts, and over the next few years he realized that they were benefiting from the new motor charabanc trade which was beginning to damage the vitality of the rural fairs at which Butlin made his summer living. From these contacts he learned about a resort in seemingly remote Lincolnshire, and by early 1927 had visited Skegness, assessed its potential, and established an amusement park there -- with hoopla stalls, a helter-skelter, a haunted house, and an electric car track. Butlin observed the public's fondness for birds and animals, and quickly followed the amusement park with a zoo, and another park at nearby Mablethorpe. He was no longer a travelling showman, though he continued to live in a caravan (a luxury one) next to his mother, whom he had brought back to Britain in 1925. 
In 1928 Butlin introduced the American-made Dodgems to Skegness. More importantly, he secured the sole European agency for their sale. This was 'a major turning point' in his life, for with that success he 'came into the really big money' (Butlin and Dacre, 89). By the mid-1930s he had a chain of fairgrounds around the coast and complementary winter amusement centres in London, though the trade was sometimes rough, and Butlin carried a cut-throat razor in his top pocket. He also ran the Christmas fairs at Kelvin Hall, Glasgow, and Waverley Hall, Edinburgh, as well as at Olympia. Until her death in 1933 Butlin's finances and several of his ventures were managed by his remarkable mother -- 'always dressed in black alpaca, with a bunch of keys dangling from a gold chain around her waist... [giving] the impression of being a woman not to be trifled with' (Butlin and Dacre, 100). 
Thus Bertha helped Butlin to accumulate the necessary savings towards, but did not live to see the inception of, the venture which made him a national figure -- his first holiday camp, opened at Skegness, at Easter 1936. The idea had grown from Butlin's observation of families on sodden seaside holidays sheltering from the rain in amusement parks, forbidden by landladies to return between mealtimes to their boarding-houses. He contrasted this with the happy holiday atmosphere he had enjoyed in 1914 at a lakeside camp provided by Eatons for its employees, and dreamed that he could create a similar camp in Britain, but with provision against the variable British climate. 
The idea of summer holiday camps was not new in Britain, as Butlin acknowledged. His scheme had been preceded by numerous private, philanthropic, and self-help ventures. However, although Butlins was aiming at lower- and middle-income groups at this time, he was offering a 'Luxury Holiday Camp' -- with electric lighting, and 250 bathrooms for 1000 people. His plans included a theatre, a gymnasium, a swimming-pool, and many other indoor and outdoor sports facilities, all set in landscaped grounds. Such facilities necessitated economies of scale, and large numbers made the desirable camaraderie of a camp initially difficult to achieve, but Butlin's inspired innovation of organized jollity supplied by his 'Redcoats' broke down the campers' reserve. Many became regular visitors, encouraged by winter campers' reunions, the first of which was held at Olympia on new year's eve 1936. They were not deterred by criticisms of the 'Wakey-wakey, rise and shine' atmosphere, which to outsiders seemed like regimentation, but which was regarded by campers as a 'matey' necessity in the organization of their holiday. Moreover, Butlins was unique in making special arrangements for children, allowing husband and wife unparalleled freedom together. The camp was expanded to 2000 beds in the second year, and Butlin instituted Sunday night celebrity concerts by variety theatre and radio stars to entertain and attract them. In his third year he made another brilliant stroke, which gave him mayoral endorsements and publicity throughout England -- a regionalized beauty contest with a final at the Skegness carnival. 
Butlin's success should also be seen in context. England was recovering from the depression, the 'Holidays with Pay Bill' was under discussion, and, at $3 in high season, he was offering a week's holiday at a new standard for the price of a good week's wage. Butlin lobbied actively for the bill which was passed in 1938. Despite enormous difficulties in the building of the Skegness camp (successfully hidden from his creditors), Butlin achieved his dream, and Butlins Ltd was floated in order to finance further expansion. A second camp was opened at Clacton in 1938, the advertising for which (like that of Skegness) was half funded by the London and North-Eastern Railway, on whose lines the camps lay. Butlin's genius for public relations was displayed again, as he successfully invited prominent figures like Amy Johnson, Victor Sylvester, Len Hutton, and Gracie Fields -- to the delight of the campers. In 1938 Butlin also staged the Empire Exhibition at Glasgow. The man who had arrived in 1921 with $5 was now worth tens of thousands. 
The Second World War interrupted Butlin's progress. His camps were sequestered for military purposes: Skegness, for instance, was renamed HMS 'Royal Arthur' by the Royal Navy (and subsequently claimed by Lord Haw-Haw to have been sunk with all hands!). Nevertheless, Butlin was able to finish building his half-completed third camp, at Filey, for the RAF, and tendered successfully to build two more for the navy, at Pwllheli and Ayr -- entering into a risky but valuable contract to buy these three back when the war ended, at three-fifths of their building costs. 
During the rest of the war Butlin fulfilled a number of roles. For Lord Beaverbrook at the Ministry of Supply he sorted out problems of morale in the hostels occupied by women workers in the munitions industry, particularly by providing relaxation facilities -- so that 'hostels' became 'residential clubs'. In 1943 he brought his fairground rides out of retirement to promote 'Holidays at Home' weeks for workers trapped by wartime travel restrictions. In 1944 he was appointed MBE for his hostel work, and embarked on his final wartime task, as honorary adviser to the twenty-first army group regarding leave centres in Europe following the allied invasion. Butlin successfully established nine '21 Clubs', where servicemen could relax with carefully vetted young women, in the Low Countries and Germany. 
The return of peace meant Butlin could resume his career as holiday camp caterer. He activated the buy-back clause on Filey, Pwllheli, and Ayr, and thus, with Skegness and Clacton, was well placed to cater for the huge pent-up demand for holidays. Butlin opened Filey, his showplace, with typically flamboyant strokes. Tommy Handley and the 'ITMA' cast appeared under the slogan 'Stars You Have Heard -- But Seldom Seen'. Music lovers were attracted by an extravagant production of 'La Boheme' imported from Naples, and Shakespearian aficionados by the Bristol Old Vic Company. Such ventures helped to counter criticisms of standardization and mass-produced entertainment, and there are indications that large numbers of campers in the 1940s were middle-class. Holidays with pay were now well-nigh universal, but taking an entire family on holiday was still a pricey business, and, with tariffs increased to nearly $1 a day, many working-class families did not find it easy. Nevertheless, Butlin claimed 1.6 million people visited his camps in the late 1940s. 
By 1947 Butlin was a millionaire. In 1948, however, he overextended himself, and nearly suffered disaster. Together with A. C. Critchley he set up Butlins (Bahamas) Ltd to create a luxurious holiday village to tempt American tourists. Problems with labour and local politicians, sterling crises, and Critchley's failure to raise a promised reserve of City money, all topped off by the effect of the Korean War on American investors, together conspired to drive the company into liquidation. Butlin himself was 'virtually broke' (Butlin and Dacre, 194). Moreover, he had neglected his British operations. The result was an attempt by City investors to oust him from control of Butlins. He was not a man to back down in the face of difficulties, however, and by mobilizing the small shareholders on his side he kept control of the company. 
During the 1950s Butlin reasserted himself in the public eye by sponsoring or taking part in various events such as the cross-channel swim, and the John o' Groats to Land's End walk. His promotion of ballroom dance festivals brought considerable business to his camps as well as contributing to the popularity of the pastime. He maintained that his secret was to give people what he liked, which because he was an ordinary person meant that he gave his customers what they liked. He listened to what they said and learned from it. He bought several chains of hotels, and then opened three more camps, at Bognor Regis in 1960, Minehead in 1962, and Barry Island in 1966, thus establishing a camp within 200 miles of every major centre of population. In 1961 the company's stated aim was to cater for 'the middle income group' (Ward and Hardy, 110), though it also chased the growing youth market, and isolated parts of the camps were given over to big parties of teenagers. A seal of respectability was provided by the visit of the queen to Pwllheli in 1963, and in 1964 'Mr Happiness' was knighted. 
Butlin told his associates that his aims in life were 'money, power, and women' ('''Billy Butlin',' Secret Lives', Channel 4, 26 Nov 1997). He was a short, stocky man, of enormous drive, with an engaging grin and an engrossing personality. However, in his dealings with his staff, bonhomie was sometimes overlaid by a cold autocracy. He demanded total commitment to the business although this had harmed his own private life. On 29 March 1927 he had married Dorothy Mabel (Dolly), daughter of John Cheriton, fish-and-chip shop proprietor, of Tiverton. Their marriage (which produced a daughter) deteriorated as Butlin spent all his time building up his business. By 1938 Dolly's 'sister' Norah Faith (in reality her niece) was acting as his housekeeper and hostess, and then as mother to three children, including Bobby, his successor at Butlins (actually Norah's son from an earlier marriage, whom Billy adopted). Dolly refused him a divorce, but her death in 1958 allowed him to marry Norah on 21 September the following year. The marriage was principally for the sake of their children, for Norah's relationship with Butlin had deteriorated as early as the 1940s, for similar reasons to Dolly's. Butlin soon found solace, however, with Sheila, the nineteen-year-old daughter of Walter Devine, a multiple grocer of Liverpool, who appreciated how far business was always Butlin's priority after he quickly installed her as chief receptionist at his London office. He had two children with her, this time being less of an absentee father, and following his divorce from Norah in 1975 married her in September 1976. 
By now Butlin had retired to Jersey. Public tastes and competitors' strategies had begun to change by the mid-1960s; package holidays abroad and self-catering holiday camps at home began to diminish the camps' profitability. In 1968 a cash-flow crisis in the face of a tax demand prompted Butlin suddenly to hand over the company to his son Bobby. Butlin chafed at his non-involvement in the business, and resented changes instituted by Bobby; however, father and son came together to fight off a take-over bid from Phonographic Equipment, a firm which supplied gambling machines, which both regarded as unsuitable to Butlins' family image. By 1972 the company was back in profit, and in a friendly take-over (possibly engineered by Butlin himself) it was sold to the Rank Organization for $43 million. 
Butlin devoted time to gardening on a grand scale at Blair Adam House, his Jersey home, and to enjoying his aviary of 1200 budgerigars; but he was incapable of fully retiring, and built up new business interests on Jersey, including several hotels and a holiday village, as well as playing the stock market. He also became more deeply involved in charity work, particularly through the Variety Club of Great Britain (on which he had been a formative influence during the 1950s) and the Grand Order of Water Rats; altogether he donated at least $5 million, chiefly to underprivileged children. His choice of charities was typical of the showman, although his friends and family also recalled his shy and unostentatious side. He died of stomach cancer at Blair Adam House, Jersey, on 12 June 1980, and was buried in St John's cemetery, Jersey. 


@@@@@


doc= 30888


Butterfield, Sir Herbert (1900-1979), historian, was born at Oxenhope, Yorkshire, on 7 October 1900, the eldest of three children of Albert Butterfield, chief clerk at a Keighley woollen mill, and his wife, Ada Mary Buckland. He was educated at Keighley trade and grammar school, and went up to Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a history scholar in 1919 and graduated first class in both parts of the historical tripos (1921 and 1923). In 1923 he was elected to a fellowship at that college, which he retained continuously, except during his tenure of the mastership, until his death. He married Edith Joyce (Pamela), daughter of the Revd James E. Crawshaw, a Methodist minister, in 1929; they had three children. 
As a young man Butterfield was a voracious reader of plays, novels, and poetry. His first book, 'The Historical Novel' (1924), based on a prize-winning undergraduate essay, was a defence of the historical imagination. This literary tendency was still visible in the often rather florid prose of his second and much more substantial book, 'The Peace Tactics of Napoleon' (1929). This attempted to restore the sense of contingency and the unexpected to the making of the treaty of Tilsit (1807), the terms of which Butterfield attributed more to incompetent Prussian intrigues than to limitless Napoleonic imperialism. But the breakthrough to national and international recognition came with his iconoclastic 'The Whig Interpretation of History' (1931), which purported to show how the traditional teleology of British constitutional development was in fact an invention of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century lawyers. It was a plea not to privilege certain parts of history simply because these appeared to point to the present day, and to understand ideas in their historical rather than their contemporary contexts. 
The book established Butterfield in the public mind as the 'hammer of the whigs', not altogether justly. In fact, he entertained a sympathetic preoccupation with the development of liberty, particularly 'English' liberty. This was evident from his engagement with Acton, sometimes described as a Catholic whig. It was disconcertingly apparent in his next sensation, 'The Englishman and his History' (1944). Here he argued that: ''wrong' history was one of our assets. The whig interpretation came at exactly the crucial moment, and, whatever it may have done to our history, it had a wonderful effect on English politics' (pp. 6-7). This was much more than a 'piece of wartime spirits-raising' (Elton, 733). It was certainly in no sense a retraction; Butterfield was merely asserting that while the identification of English history with the development of liberty might have been accidental and even misleading, it was also fortuitous. His subsequent attack on the Namierite preoccupation with 'structures' of faction and familial interest, 'George III, Lord North, and the People' (1949), was also profoundly whiggish in conception: the people, as represented by the Yorkshire Association, are brought into the political process, thus enabling the avoidance of a French-style revolutionary upheaval in the long run. Eight years later, he returned to the fray with an unusually bitter attack on the Namier school in 'George III and the Historians' (1957). 
In the meantime Butterfield's interests had expanded dramatically. He had been asked to give a series of lectures on the history of science, which was published as 'The Origins of Modern Science, 1300-1800' (1949). It was another sensation, especially when Butterfield argued that the scientific revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries outshone 'everything since the rise of Christianity and reduces the Renaissance and Reformation to the rank of mere episodes, mere internal displacements, within the system of medieval Christendom' (p. vii). The charge that Butterfield had ignored the experimental side of science was not entirely fair. But it is certainly true that the book, despite his own best intentions, was essentially a whig outline of the growth of scientific progress. 
That same year a series of lectures which the Cambridge faculty of divinity had asked him to give was published as 'Christianity and History'; much to Butterfield's own surprise this was perhaps his most successful book. With the exception of a brief chapter at the end of 'The Englishman and his History', his work before 1949 had contained very few references to religion. Now Butterfield became something of a sage among many Christian intellectuals, a prophet even. The book was translated into French, German, Spanish, Italian, Chinese, and four Scandinavian languages. The Christianity Butterfield espoused was not so much theological as philosophical, almost anthropological; it was biblical but not exegetical. He eschewed the study of doctrine and of the institutional church(es). His emphasis on human cupidity and sinfulness, but also his underlying humanity and tolerance, struck a deep chord among those who, in the aftermath of the Second World War, were seeking new (or old) faiths after so many other gods had failed. 
A year later Butterfield extended his interests yet further into the theory of international history. His earlier studies on Napoleonic diplomacy had already stressed the importance of contingency over inevitability. In 'The tragic element in modern international conflict' (1950) Butterfield began to develop a pessimistically 'Christian' view of international politics. He was particularly critical of national self-righteousness and utopianism in foreign policy: conflict could only be managed, not abolished; and there was no such thing as total security, which could only be bought at the cost of the total insecurity of others. Butterfield could see no pattern in international history, no working towards a preordained goal, only the mysterious workings of 'Providence': all the statesman could do was 'work with Providence'. Once again, Butterfield's work was widely acclaimed not just in Britain -- where he soon co-founded and chaired the British Committee on the Theory of International Politics (1958) -- but in the United States, where it resonated among 'realist' historically minded political scientists, Christian and unchristian, such as Hans Morgenthau, Kenneth Thompson, and Louis J. Halle. They were taken aback, however, by his temporary advocacy of unilateral western nuclear disarmament. 
By 1950, therefore, Butterfield's five main intellectual preoccupations -- historiography, the history of science, eighteenth-century constitutional history, Christianity and history, and the theory of international politics -- were established. He continued to elaborate them over the next twenty-five years in invited lectures and in essays, such as those published in 'History and Human Relations', 'Christianity in European History', 'The Reconstruction of an Historical Episode: the History of the Enquiry into the Origins of the Seven Years War' (all 1951), 'Christianity, Diplomacy and War' (1953), 'Man on his Past: the Study of the History of Historical Scholarship' (1955), 'International Conflict in the Twentieth Century' (1960), 'Charles James Fox and Napoleon: the Peace Negotiations of 1806' (1962), and 'Sir Edward Grey in July 1914' (1965), in which he pointedly refused to join the stampede to acclaim Fritz Fischer's one-sided indictment of imperial Germany's responsibility for the outbreak of the First World War. 
Underlying these and other diverse projects was a series of interlocking themes. The first was Butterfield's essentially whiggish preoccupation with harmony and balance. Thus he saw the travails of George III 'not as a conflict but as a tide -- one which throughout the century is bringing wider classes of Englishmen to intellectual awareness and a realization of the part they might play in politics' ('George III, Lord North, and the People', 9). He believed that the same virtues might be extended to the sphere of international relations: 'It is the function of foreign policy to create situations in which virtue does not depend on a great power's good intentions, but is ensured on the whole by the general disposition of forces' ('History and Human Relations', 220). This quest for harmony extended into the historiographical sphere, particularly in his early attempts to reconcile Bury's scientific history with the literary approach of Trevelyan. 
At the same time Butterfield was an invincible sceptic. Despite his professional eminence he remained very much the outsider, critical of official collections of documents, which he believed to be designed to mislead as much as to enlighten. Indeed Butterfield was sceptical about the value of all documents, thanks perhaps to his 'distrust of the witnesses by his awareness of original sin' (O. Chadwick, 'Acton and his History', 1998, 213); unlike his teacher Harold Temperley, he produced only one collection of edited documents, volume 3 of 'Select Documents of European History', which covered the years 1715-1920 (1931). Even more radically, in his first book he had criticized the Rankean documentary method and spoken of the 'impossibility of history' ('Writings', ed. McIntire, xlvii). Later he doubted whether 'the mere study of antecedents... can ever provide a complete accounting for any decision made by a human being' (introduction to H. Temperley, 'Frederic the Great and Kaiser Joseph', 2nd edn, 1968, xix). To this extent 'all histories' were 'only interim reports'. 
Butterfield's scepticism was also reflected in his rejection of all grand designs, both historiographical and contemporary. 'Liberty', he argued, 'comes to the world from English traditions, not from French theories' ('Napoleon', 18), while the 'real history of freedom is the profounder story of the slow growth of reasonableness among men' (ibid., 44). In particular, he denied that history 'provides us with patterns which we can immediately transpose into the context of contemporary politics' ('History and Human Relations', 173). Instead, the study of history should promote wisdom, not mechanically but osmotically: Butterfield wanted: 'knowledge not to lie heavily on the mind, not to be used in a narrow or literal spirit, but to sink into the walls of [the historian's] brain so that it was turned into wisdom and experience -- then such a person would be able to acquire the right feeling for the texture of events, and would undoubtedly avoid becoming a mere slave of the past. (ibid., 181)' Only by showing the requisite mental 'elasticity of mind' could the historian achieve this. 
Butterfield was an unorthodox and original historian, but his intellectual debts were manifold. He took from Acton his distrust of power, from Ranke his celebration of the cultural diversity of the European state system, from Harold Temperley his love of humour and paradox, from Hegel, perhaps, his feel for unintended consequences, and from Max Weber, conceivably, his recognition of the ethics of limitation over the ethics of aspiration. 
Butterfield's interests expanded additively rather than substitutively. He was also in constant demand as a speaker and essayist. This meant that he did not escape the accusation of superficiality, nor did his later preference for meditation over production go unremarked upon. He wrote only two longer historical monographs, both of them criticized for their documentary range. The first, 'The Peace Tactics of Napoleon', remains little known, impenetrable and -- although it certainly informed his subsequent views on international relations -- did not lead to a larger-scale study of Napoleon. It needed a new preface thirty years later (1967) to remind the reader of its central themes. Similarly, his second major work, 'George III, Lord North, and the People', was not followed by the planned biography of Charles James Fox; and with the exception of the work of J. C. D. Clark his writings on the eighteenth century have left no lasting legacy. In the last thirty years of his life Butterfield never wrote another monograph. Many enterprises were left unfinished, especially his projected history of diplomacy, the longer study on Acton, and the biography of Temperley. He was also criticized for ignoring social and economic factors. 
In many ways Butterfield's career progressed through co-operation with 'Providence'. He might well have read English literature had the Peterhouse scholarship competition not been for history. He suppressed his early desire to enter the Methodist ministry, when an academic career beckoned. Later he achieved lasting recognition primarily in fields in which he had not shown, and did not profess, any previous expertise. Both 'Christianity and History' and 'The Origins of Modern Science' were responses to providential invitations. He accepted the mantle of prophet thus thrust upon him neither eagerly nor opportunistically, but with outward humility. 
For most of his life Butterfield combined his writing with the supervision and lecturing of undergraduates and research students at Peterhouse and Cambridge University. He was not a dominating supervisor in the conventional sense, but his corrosive questioning of historical presuppositions in discussion sometimes disorientated his pupils as much as stimulated them. From 1938 to 1952 he was editor of the 'Cambridge Historical Journal'. He made no attempt to found a school, though his influence on the works of a later generation of Conservative historians, such as Maurice Cowling's 'Religion and Public Doctrine in Modern England' (1980), was palpable and acknowledged. Perhaps his most lasting institutional influence was in the Republic of Ireland, where he acted as external examiner to the National University of Ireland, and served on O Dalaigh's commission on higher education. His critique of national historical teleologies was enthusiastically embraced by the new 'revisionist' school of Irish historians, and was singled out for mention by the Revd Dr Brendan Bradshaw in his famous anti-revisionist polemic in 'Irish Historical Studies' in 1989. 
Although he showed some early ambiguity about charismatic authoritarian leaders, such as Napoleon, Butterfield's personal politics were firmly Liberal: he referred to himself as a 'new whig', of the non-utopian variety. Unlike Harold Temperley, he neither sought nor achieved contemporary political influence. 
Butterfield was elected to the chair of modern history in 1944, and appointed to the regius professorship in 1963 and, somewhat belatedly, to a fellowship of the British Academy in 1965. From 1955 to 1968 he was by later standards an unusually uncontroversial master of Peterhouse; and from 1959 to 1961 he was, rather less happily, vice-chancellor of the university, during which period he was a jealous guardian of the independence of the university against the state, and the individual colleges against the university. A knighthood followed in 1968. He received thirteen honorary degrees including an honorary DLitt from Cambridge in 1974. 
To those who knew him Butterfield was an engaging, though in many ways an enigmatic, figure. His personal irreverence belied the studied remoteness of much of his later prose and the homespun wisdom of his popular works. He was a teetotaller and a therapeutic pianist. The Christianity which permeates so much of his mature work had been a constant feature of his personal life from a very early age. He was a Methodist lay preacher in Cambridge and the surrounding villages until 1936, and continued to attend Wesley Methodist Chapel on Christ's Pieces every Sunday morning. He was an unconfirmed Anglican communicant in college chapel as master and remained so after his retirement to Sawston in 1968. He died at his home, 26 High Street, Sawston, on 20 July 1979. He was cremated and his ashes were buried beneath a tile in the aisle of Peterhouse Chapel. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 30889


Byers, (Charles) Frank, Baron Byers (1915-1984), politician, was born in Liverpool on 24 July 1915, the only son (there were two younger daughters) of Charles Cecil Byers (1888-1957), a Lloyd's underwriter, vice-chairman of United Molasses Ltd, and one-time Liberal parliamentary candidate, and his wife, Florence May, daughter of James Fairclough of Northenden, Cheshire. 
Educated at the Hall School, Hampstead, and at Westminster School, Byers was captain of football and athletics and princeps oppidanorum at the latter. He went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in October 1934, and emerged four years later with a third-class honours degree in politics, philosophy, and economics. He was awarded his blue and international colours as a 220 yard hurdler and held the British universities' record for over twelve years. At Oxford his interest in politics developed. He was a Liberal by temperament, instinct, and upbringing; he became chairman of the Union of Liberal Students and the University Liberal Club (1937), and often recalled with a wry chuckle that his treasurer was one Harold Wilson. 
Having left Oxford in 1938 Byers joined Gray's Inn. On 15 July 1939 he married another Liberal stalwart, Joan Elizabeth, daughter of William Oliver, company director of Spicers Ltd of Alfriston, Wayside, Golders Green; they had one son and three daughters. Byers's legal studies ended when on 2 September 1939, the day after the outbreak of the Second World War, and only a few weeks after his marriage, he enlisted in the Royal Artillery. In due course he became a lieutenant-colonel on the staff of the Eighth Army. His courage and determination, which were natural attributes, were recognized when he was appointed OBE in 1944, mentioned three times in dispatches, awarded the Croix de Guerre with palms, and was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. 
Byers had been adopted as prospective Liberal parliamentary candidate for the North Dorset constituency at the age of twenty-two and returned to England in July 1945 for the general election. He won a remarkable and unexpected victory, and became one of only twelve Liberals in the Commons. He was at once conspicuous for his political flair, judgement, and administrative ability, and became chief whip in 1946 after only a few months in the house. However, largely because of boundary changes, he narrowly lost his seat in 1950, and failed to regain it in 1951. Already a part-time director of the Rio Tinto Company (later RTZ), he now became full-time, organizing the company's world-wide exploration programme. By 1959 he was in a position to resume his political work, and he became for many years the dominant figure in the Liberal Party as director of its election campaigns, chairman (1950-52 and 1965-7), president, general fund-raiser, and peripatetic speaker. He was responsible almost single-handedly for the survival of the party in a difficult period. He contested, without success, a by-election in Bolton in 1960. 
When in 1964 the Liberal Party was offered its first two life peerages, Byers was an obvious choice. In 1967 he became leader of the Liberal peers, a position which he held unchallenged until his death. He was sworn of the privy council in 1972, and became chairman of the Company Pension Information Centre in 1973 and part-time consultant at Marks and Spencer in 1977. He was chairman of the Anglo-Israel Association, a member of the committee on privacy (1970-72) led by Kenneth Younger, chaired a far-reaching report on the organization of British athletics (1968), and was enthusiastically involved in a host of voluntary activities where he was able to demonstrate his passionate concern for people as individuals, particularly the young, the sick, and the deprived. 
For twenty years Byers was an outstanding and widely admired party leader in the House of Lords. He was lean, wiry, red-haired, and pugnacious; his carefully prepared speeches were appreciated for their logic, forceful delivery, and conciseness of argument. His Liberalism was both caring and practical, as is shown by his moving contributions to the debates on the 'Immigration Act' in 1971. He had an impish and irreverent sense of humour. His occasional impatience was no more than a reflection of his quickness of mind, as was the brusque bark of 'Byers' with which he answered the telephone. He had a profound and sympathetic knowledge of parliamentary customs and procedures, and made a distinctive contribution to the all-party talks in 1968 on the reform of the upper house. 
Byers suffered heart attacks in 1973 and again in 1978 but remained fully active. On 6 February 1984 he had his third and fatal attack when he was working in his room at the House of Lords. It is said that members do not die in the house, because coroners have no jurisdiction in a royal palace, but 'on the way to hospital'. It was the only time that Byers broke a parliamentary convention. 
Wigoder', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30890


Caird, George Bradford (1917-1984), biblical scholar, was born in Springfield, Wandsworth, on 19 July 1917, the youngest of three children and only son of George Caird, an engineer who was from Dundee but was then in London because of war work, and his wife, Esther Love Bradford. The family home was afterwards in Birmingham, where Caird attended King Edward's School (1929-36) and went on to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He took a first class in both parts of the classical tripos (1938 and 1939), with distinction in Greek and Latin verse. From Cambridge he went on to study for the Congregational ministry at Mansfield College, Oxford (1939-43), and at the same time did postgraduate research, for which he gained the degree of DPhil in 1944. From 1943 to 1946 he was minister of Highgate Congregational Church in London, and the instincts and styles of the preacher remained with him throughout his life. In 1945 he married Viola Mary (Mollie), daughter of Ezra Benjamin Newport, schoolmaster, of Reigate, and, after their move to Canada which soon followed, they had three sons (one of whom was John Caird, the theatre director) and one daughter. Caird never tired of talking of his children, all of whom came to be professionally noted, and of his grandchildren. 
Caird's career specifically as an academic scholar of the 'Bible' began when he went to St Stephen's College, Edmonton, Alberta, an institution of the United Church of Canada, to teach 'Old Testament' (1946-50). In 1950 he became the first professor of 'New Testament' in the newly formed faculty of divinity at McGill University, Montreal, and he stayed there until 1959; in addition he was (1955-9) principal of the theological college of the United Church in Montreal. He greatly admired the United Church, which fitted well with his spiritual and theological tendencies. But Oxford was his spiritual home, and Mansfield and English Congregationalism drew him back: he became tutor in theology at Mansfield in 1959 and principal in 1970. His academic duties were complemented by service to the church: he was an observer at the Second Vatican Council and in 1975-6 was moderator of the general assembly of the recently formed United Reformed church. 
In Oxford theology Caird's comprehensiveness of scope, command of language and evidence, and deep theological emphasis, combined with his excellence as a lecturer, quickly established him as a central figure. He was appointed to a readership in 1969, and in 1977 became Dean Ireland's professor of the exegesis of holy scripture, a position which carried with it a professorial fellowship at Queen's College. As the senior person in 'New Testament' studies in Oxford, Caird exercised a deep influence and was greatly admired by many of those who heard him. 
Caird's books included: 'The Truth of the Gospel' (1950), a general account of the whole range of Christian doctrine; a commentary on the books of 'Samuel' in 'The Interpreter's Bible' (1953); 'The Apostolic Age' (1955); 'Principalities and Powers' (1956); commentaries on 'St Luke' (1963), on 'Revelation' (1966), on Paul's letters from prison (1976); and 'The Language and Imagery of the Bible' (1980), which received wide notice and was awarded the Collins Religious Book award in 1982. At the time of his death he was preparing a theology of the 'New Testament', which was afterwards completed by one of his pupils, L. D. Hurst, and published as 'New Testament Theology' (1994). In addition, a volume of essays, intended as a Festschrift but appearing, sadly, as a memorial volume, was 'The glory of Christ in the New Testament: studies in Christology in memory of George Bradford Caird', edited by L. D. Hurst and N. T. Wright (1987). Among other scholarly achievements may be mentioned his work on the 'Septuagint' -- he was Grinfield lecturer on the 'Septuagint' at Oxford for four years from 1961; his work as joint editor of the 'Journal of Theological Studies', from 1978; and his interest in biblical translation, as shown by his warm support for the 'New English Bible', for which he served on the 'Apocrypha' panel from 1961. 
Caird's academic distinction was recognized by honorary doctorates of divinity from St Stephen's College, Edmonton (1959), the diocesan (Anglican) college in Montreal (1959), and Aberdeen University (1966). In 1966 he also gained Oxford's own doctorate of divinity. In 1973 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. 
Caird's thinking combined a moderate criticism, a somewhat conservative theological position, and a strong sense for linguistic nuances and literary values. His handling of the 'Bible' followed critical lines but rejected scepticism; he was judicious and fair but also quite combative in controversy, and his opposition to the work of Rudolf Bultmann was marked. He greatly emphasized the historical Jesus, while denying that the quest for him would lead away from theological values. Biblical authority was central in all his thinking, yet he completely rejected the fundamentalist understanding of scripture. Religion for him filled the whole of life and affected attitudes to sickness and health, life and death, peace and war (he was a committed pacifist), and such matters as the situation in South Africa. He particularly stressed the element of metaphor and myth in human talk about the divine, and thought that much distortion had arisen because interpreters had taken as literal expressions that were meant from the beginning to be literary figures. 
Music was important to Caird, and he wrote several hymns, some of which were included in standard hymnals. Precision in language was central to his personality; he relaxed in joy among family and friends. In the year in which he would have retired from his chair, he suddenly died in his home, Brook Cottage, Bassett Road, Letcombe Regis, Oxfordshire, on 21 April 1984. He was survived by his wife. 
James Barr', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30891


Calder, Peter Ritchie, Baron Ritchie-Calder (1906-1982), author and journalist, was born on 1 July 1906 at 6 Newmonthill, Forfar, Forfarshire, the youngest in the family of one daughter and three sons of David Lindsay Calder, linen worker (later works manager), and his wife, Georgina, daughter of John Ritchie, master mason. He was educated at Forfar Academy, which he left at the age of sixteen. 
Calder began his career in 1922 as a police court reporter with the 'Dundee Courier'. He then worked with the D. C. Thomson Press before joining the 'Daily News' (1926-30), the 'Daily Chronicle' (1930), and the 'Daily Herald' (1930-41). During these years his range of interests broadened considerably. Politically he was, and always remained, a dedicated socialist and member of the Labour Party, and the social problems and political strife of the inter-war years provided many subjects for perceptive record and comment. In 1927 he married Mabel Jane Forbes McKail (1906-2001), daughter of David McKail, a physician, of Glasgow. They had three sons and two daughters; the middle son, Angus Calder (1942-2008), was later a distinguished historian and literary critic. 
A chance assignment to cover a science story opened up a completely new field for Calder. He realized that application of new scientific knowledge could powerfully augment the conventional approach to social problems. A timely stimulus to this new interest was provided by acquaintanceship -- which grew into close and lasting friendship -- with John Boyd Orr, who was making a name for himself in the field of animal and human nutrition. Seeing malnutrition as a global problem, Calder devoted much effort to publicizing Boyd Orr's ideas and activities. This he did not only through his own newspaper connections but also through documentary films, then establishing themselves as a powerful means of influencing public opinion. Boyd Orr's book 'Food, Health and Income' was published in 1936 and Calder played an important part in producing a film version entitled 'Enough to Eat?'

The outbreak of the Second World War inevitably diverted much of Calder's activity into other fields. During the blitz his vivid reports helped to make the world aware that temporarily the front line of the war was in London. In 1941 he was appointed to the political warfare executive of the Foreign Office, a service for which he was appointed CBE in 1945. One of his first tasks during this time was to assist, with Boyd Orr, in the production of a film, 'World of Plenty', to show the world how Britain was using food sent from the USA. 
The immediate post-war years were very favourable to the resumption of Calder's career, initially as science editor of the 'News Chronicle' (1945-56) and as a member of the editorial staff of the 'New Statesman'. The new Labour government was committed to a radical programme of social reform in which a key element was to be the harnessing of science to national needs. On a wider front, the newly created agencies of the United Nations sought to achieve similar ends internationally. In recording and promoting all these activities he found himself involved to an extent that severely taxed even his seemingly boundless enthusiasm and energy. He clearly understood that progress could be made only if public opinion was informed and favourable. 
Despite the euphoric view of science created by great wartime achievements such as atomic energy, radar, and penicillin, the post-war media paid little more than lip-service to science. To help to alleviate this, Calder took a leading role in establishing the Association of British Science Writers, of which he was the first chairman (1949-55), and in which he always took great pride. In 1960 he was awarded the Kalinga award for science writing. 
After the war Calder undertook many assignments for United Nations agencies, often on the initiative of Boyd Orr, who became the first director-general of the Food and Agriculture Organization and invited him to attend the famine conference in Washington (1946) as a special adviser. He went on arduous missions to study the utilization of human resources in north Africa, Congo (1960), and south-east Asia (1962). 
Calder's exceptional knowledge of international affairs led the University of Edinburgh to appoint him to the Montague Burton professorship of international relations (1961-7). This was a remarkable tribute to a man who had had no formal higher education. His fluent and easy manner, and varied reminiscences, appealed to the students. The appointment opened many academic doors and he was awarded honorary doctorates by the Open University (1975) and York University in Ontario, Canada (1976). He was senior fellow at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, Santa Barbara, California, USA (1972-5). 
Calder was passionately devoted to the cause of peace, particularly in the post-war years when there was so much uncertainty about where atomic weapons would ultimately take us. He was president of the British Peace Council and a leader of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He wrote a number of books on scientific, medical, and environmental topics for a general audience, including histories of the World Health Organization (1958) and the Weizmann Institute (1959). In 1966 he was created a life peer as Baron Ritchie-Calder of Balmashannar and three years later was made chairman of the Metrication Board, retiring in 1972. He died on 31 January 1982 at the Western General Hospital, Edinburgh. 
Trevor I. Williams', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30892


Cameron, (Mark) James Walter (1911-1985), journalist and author, was born in Battersea, London, on 17 June 1911, the elder son (there were no daughters) of William Ernest Cameron, barrister and novelist, and his wife, Margaret Douglas Robertson. His Scottish links always remained unshaken. His grandfather was a highland divine, whose Gaelic ecclesiastical writings won him local renown, and his father was a lawyer turned author under the name Mark Allerton. He was educated, on his own testimony, 'erratically, at a variety of small schools, mostly in France', and then started real work, filling paste pots, at the age of sixteen for 15's'. a week, in the offices of D. C. Thomson's 'Red Star Weekly' in Dundee. 
Escaping to the 'Scottish Daily Express' in 1938, Cameron was able to afford to marry his first love, Eleanor (Elma) Mara Murray ('b'. 1913/14), an artist. She was the daughter of George John Murray, a surgeon of Dundee. It was an idyllic but cruelly brief affair, cut short by her death in childbirth in 1940. A daughter was born. Turned down for the armed forces because of 'organic cardiac disease', Cameron moved in 1939 to the 'Daily Express' in Fleet Street, subbing other people's copy. He met Elizabeth O'Conor working in the art room of the newspaper, and they were married at the Chelsea register office, London, on 25 November 1943. She was the daughter of Stanley Punshon Marris, a retired clergyman, and the former wife of Denis Armor O'Conor, with whom she had a son. She was also to have a son with Cameron. 
As the war ended, Cameron stumbled on his real trade. One assignment sent him to India at the moment of the independence negotiations; he started to comprehend the moral impetus behind the Asian and the worldwide revolt against imperialism. He had Jawaharlal Nehru and M. K. Gandhi for his tutors. Another assignment took him to Bikini when the American atomic bomb was exploded; his allegiance to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, launched much later, was born in that forgotten summer of 1946. A third assignment took him to expose the brutality and corruption of Syngman Rhee's regime in South Korea. And back at home he chose his own allies with some delicacy. When the 'Evening Standard' engaged in what he justly believed to be a shameful slur against the Labour minister, E. John St Loe Strachey, in 1950, he resigned from the Beaverbrook newspapers altogether, and when Edward Hulton, the owner of 'Picture Post', fired its talented editor, H. T. Hopkinson, for daring to attempt to publish Cameron's Korean dispatches, he resigned again in sympathy (1951). 
Soon thereafter Cameron's genius flowed in the truly great and truly Liberal 'News Chronicle' of those times. Many contributed to the triumph: Sir Gerald Barry, his editor; Tom Baistow, his foreign editor; and Vicky, the cartoonist, soon to become the closest friend of all. His passion and his wit and his readiness to fit every incident into the worldwide scene were all part of his charm. His matchless integrity was part of it too, and yet he could wear his armour without a hint of pride or piety. He could raise journalism to the highest level of literature, like a Swift or a Hazlitt. 
But the Liberal hour did not last; the Liberal financiers killed off the 'News Chronicle' in 1960. Other wars, requiring investigation, had broken out, and Cameron could turn to other instruments than his pen. To persuade the world that the North Vietnamese were made of flesh and blood, in 1965 he staked all the fortune he had not got, and all his precious time and energy, to get in and out of Hanoi with a camera crew. His film, 'Western Eyewitness', was shown on BBC television and was also bought by several overseas stations. 
Most of Cameron's journalistic accomplishments were recited in what he called his 'experiment in biography', 'Point of Departure', published in 1967. Another title, 'An Indian Summer', which appeared in October 1974, offered even more enticing prospects. After the dissolution of his previous marriage in 1969, in January 1971 he married Moneesha Sarkar (1930-2013), airline receptionist, the daughter of Kandrachanda Ayuppa Appachoo, coffee planter. She had a daughter and a son from a previous marriage. She took him on honeymoon to her native land, which ended in a car crash. A bundle of skin, bones, wood, and wire was somehow trans-shipped back to London and there stuck together by the National Health Service and Cameron's wife. 
All such accidents, susceptibilities, memories, and broken hopes and dreams were woven together into a single thread in 'An Indian Summer'. It is a book about ancient and modern India, brave, beautiful, astringent, withering, and, just occasionally, savage; an Anglo-Indian classic fit to take its place beside 'A Passage to India' by E. M. Forster. Cameron was appointed CBE in 1979. In 1965 he won the Granada journalist of the year award. He had honorary degrees from the universities of Lancaster (DLitt, 1970), Bradford (LLD, 1977), and Essex (DUniv 1978). He died at his London home, 3 Eton College Road, Chalk Farm, on 26 January 1985. 
Michael Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30893


Cameron, Neil, Baron Cameron of Balhousie (1920-1985), air force officer, was born in Perth on 8 July 1920, the only son and younger child of Neil Cameron, an inspector of the poor, and his wife, Isabella Stewart. His father died in the year he was born and he and his sister were brought up by his mother and grandfather in Perth. Having attended Perth Academy he worked in the Royal Bank of Scotland. After joining the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve in May 1939 he was called up on the outbreak of war and qualified as a pilot. He joined 17 squadron towards the end of the battle of Britain, was commissioned in 1941, flew in Russia with 151 wing, and in 1942-3 served with the desert air force in 213 squadron. In 1944-5, now a squadron leader, he commanded 258 squadron and flew Hurricanes and Thunderbolts in Burma, earning the DFC (1944) and DSO (1945) for his outstanding leadership. 
Having been awarded a permanent commission after the war, Cameron instructed at the School of Air Support, Old Sarum, and attended the Staff College. He married, in 1947, Patricia Louise, the daughter of Major Edward Asprey, a civil engineer; they had a son and daughter. In 1949 he went to the Air Ministry, where he became seriously ill with subacute bacterial endocarditis. He was never again allowed a full flying category, making his eventual rise to the top of the RAF particularly remarkable. A spell instructing at the Staff College (1953-6) enabled him to deepen his thinking and begin writing about air power, and he saw something of the academic world while commanding London University air squadron (1956-8). He then served as personal staff officer to the chief of the air staff (1958-60), commanded RAF Abingdon (1960-62), attended the Imperial Defence College (1963), went to the supreme headquarters of the allied powers in Europe (1964), and in 1965 -- now an air commodore -- became assistant commandant at Cranwell. There ensued four years in the Ministry of Defence working in Denis Healey's programme evaluation group and as assistant chief of staff (policy), when he showed the ability to take an overall defence view but in the process aroused suspicions among his single-service contemporaries, and he subsequently saw little chance of further advancement. Nevertheless after serving at headquarters air support command and RAF Germany he was promoted to air marshal in 1973 to become air officer commanding 46 group. Ten months later he became air member for personnel, where -- at a time of major cuts in RAF strength -- he combined his essential humanity with the ability to take hard decisions, notably in the matter of redundancy. 
Cameron became chief of the air staff (CAS) in 1976 but had hardly had time to make much impression before the sudden death of Sir Andrew Humphrey led to his service as chief of the defence staff (CDS; 1977-9) and marshal of the Royal Air Force (1977). As CAS he had already emphasized the need for better communication within the RAF and deeper thinking about air power, and as CDS he was determined to argue the defence case in public debate; he held strong views on what he saw as a dangerous growth in Soviet military power, and his much publicized reference in China to the Russians as 'an enemy' led to their calling him 'a drunken hare' and to a minor political storm at home. Of the domestic issues he faced the most difficult was service pay, where he led his colleagues in confronting the government and winning the battle for the military salary. 
After handing over as CDS in 1979 Cameron was appointed principal of King's College, London, in August 1980, giving him the opportunity to show his leadership qualities in the academic environment that had eluded him in his youth. Here, despite failing health, he played a major part in the restructuring of London University and in particular the merger between King's, Chelsea, and Queen Elizabeth colleges. He was created a life peer in 1983 and a knight of the Thistle the same year. He had been appointed CBE (1967), CB (1971), KCB (1975), and GCB (1976). He received an honorary LLD degree from Dundee in 1981. 
Cameron's many wider interests included the RAF rugby football union, the RAF Club, the RAF Museum, the Trident Trust, and the British Atlantic committee, and underlying all else was a deep Christian faith rooted in his experience when ill in the 1950s and quietly but sincerely demonstrated through his support for St Clement Danes and organizations such as the Officers' Christian Union. A man of great honesty, integrity, and forthrightness, who was widely respected, he saw no difficulty in combining a firm military stance based on a belief in nuclear deterrence with his strongly held Christian convictions. He died in the Middlesex Hospital on 29 January 1985. 
Henry A. Probert', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30894


Campbell, Sir David (1889-1978), physician, was born at Patna, Ayrshire, on 6 May 1889, the son of Agnes Smith Campbell, a seamstress. He was educated, by scholarships throughout, at Ayr Academy and at Glasgow University, where he graduated BSc and MA with honours in 1911 and MB ChB with honours in 1916, the most distinguished graduate of his year. He served as captain and then acting major in the Royal Army Medical Corps from 1916 to 1919 and in France in 1918 was awarded the MC as an immediate decoration in the field. On demobilization he returned to Glasgow as assistant to the renowned Professor Ralph Stockman in materia medica and therapeutics and in 1921 became Pollok lecturer in materia medica and pharmacology. On 4 August the same year Campbell married Margaret ('b'. 1890/91), a schoolteacher, daughter of Alexander Lyle, head teacher at Kerse near Grangemouth, and his wife, Isabella Paterson. Campbell often said that this was by far the best thing he had ever done. There were no children. In 1924 he took his MD with honours with a thesis on rheumatoid arthritis, winning the coveted Bellahouston gold medal. He spent 1925-6 as Rockefeller medical fellow at Johns Hopkins University, and in 1928 published 'A Handbook of Therapeutics', a great advance in its time on most preceding textbooks in the subject. During this period he was physician to out-patients (1920-29) and later assistant physician (1929-30) to the Western Infirmary, Glasgow. 
The phase of major public achievement in Campbell's career opened with his appointment to the regius chair of materia medica in Aberdeen in 1930. Within two years he was dean of the faculty, a post he held for twenty-seven years until his retirement in 1959. He found the Aberdeen school in an early stage of outward-looking reform, and accelerated the process immensely. His shrewdness, pawky humour, tight mental discipline, nice judicial sense, and firmness with opposition made him a formidable chairman and administrator. Several major and beneficial appointments were largely to his credit, notably those of James Learmonth in surgery, Dugald Baird in obstetrics, and John Stirling Young in pathology. He put his influence behind the creation of an imaginative medical complex on the spacious heights of Foresterhill, to include the clinical and related departments of the university and soon to become the envy of many other medical schools. At the same time he ran an efficient department and was a conscientious and approachable teacher: his lecture notes, meticulously written out as they were meant to be read, with nicely judged classical allusion and quotation, bear witness to a medical scholarliness regrettably all but dead. His lectures on tea, tobacco, and alcohol are particularly remembered. 
In 1936 Campbell joined the General Medical Council as representative of Aberdeen University and in 1949 became its president, serving also as chairman of its disciplinary committee. The challenges he met there on a larger scale were similar to those he had faced earlier in Aberdeen, and the same qualities again served him well. Those post-war years were a time of radical and potentially stressful change for medical education and practice, and a more volatile personality than Campbell's might have served these causes less well than he did. He resigned from the council in 1961. 
Campbell was knighted in 1953. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Glasgow, Liverpool, Dublin, and Aberdeen and of DCL from Durham. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and of the royal colleges of physicians of London and of Glasgow. 
In his long retirement Campbell was a kenspeckle figure often seen on the Aberdeen golf links and occasionally in the medical school. He excelled in golf and also in billiards: he is believed in Aberdeen to have been billiards champion of the Athenaeum. For many years he organized, with the flair and efficiency once devoted to more serious things, an annual golf competition for which he was the handicapper, later presenting the Ashley Mackintosh cup to the winners at the annual dinner of the Aberdeen Medico-Chirurgical Society; year by year the company waited affectionately for the well-known references in his presentation speech, not only to the competition but to settled convictions of Campbell himself -- rabbits and tigers in handicapping, and the best of all arrangements being a committee of one, with powers. 
Campbell died from cardiac failure at his home, 252 North Deeside Road, Milltimber, Peterculter, Aberdeenshire, on 30 May 1978. Lady Campbell survived him. 
William Walker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30895


Campbell, Patrick Gordon, third Baron Glenavy (1913-1980), journalist, was born at 21 Great Denmark Street, Dublin, on 6 June 1913, the eldest of the three children of Charles Henry Gordon Campbell, second Baron Glenavy (1885-1963), later governor of the Bank of Ireland, and his wife, Beatrice Moss Elvery, distinguished painter, and daughter of William Elvery, businessman, of Rothbury, Foxrock, co. Dublin. Campbell spent the first nine years of his life in London until the family returned to Dublin. As both his father and his grandfather, James Henry Mussen Campbell (1851-1931), lord chancellor of Ireland under the union and later chairman of the Irish Free State, were supporters of the pro-treaty party, they were marked for IRA reprisals during 'the troubles'; on Christmas eve 1922 the family was roused at gunpoint and herded out on to the lawn where they watched their home being set on fire. 
Campbell was stimulated by the artistic interests of his parents who were part of circles which included Samuel Beckett, Elizabeth Bowen, and J. B. Priestley. His father himself had a novel admired by D. H. Lawrence and Katherine Mansfield. As a child Campbell was already tall and gangling (his knees knocked together so hard, he was to recall, that they were severely bruised) and he developed a sometimes paralysing stammer. His time at Crawley's preparatory school, Castle Park in Dublin, Rossall School, and briefly at Pembroke College, Oxford, was undistinguished. When he went down from Oxford after four terms without taking a degree his father did his best to launch him in business, without success. For two years he was an apprentice for an electrical firm in Munich. He left for Paris after being attacked for mocking the Nazi anthem. As a last resort his father sent him with an introduction to Robert Maire Smyllie, the Falstaffian but shrewd editor of the 'Irish Times'. Smyllie tested him out by sending him to do a piece on a visit to the Dublin Zoo; it appeared unchanged the following day; and after a spell learning to type and failing to learn shorthand, Patrick Campbell was finally launched on his successful career with Smyllie nurturing Campbell's gift for prose. 
Smyllie pursued a policy of sending his more promising recruits on a round of jobs: Campbell was briefly a feature writer, leader writer, literary editor, film critic, and parliamentary sketch writer, his mordant humour at the expense of some members of the Dail establishing his reputation with readers. The 'Irish Times' was one of the most respected English language newspapers, but after three years Campbell felt Dublin was becoming too small. He left for Fleet Street to work for Lord Beaverbrook, who had known and admired his grandfather. He failed to make an impression at either the 'Daily Express' or the 'Evening Standard', and when the Second World War broke out he returned to Ireland where, as Smyllie declined to take him back, he struggled to establish himself as a writer and joined the Irish marine service, in which he stayed until 1944. It was a difficult decision, as many Irish were joining the British forces. Certainly after the war Campbell felt uncomfortable that he missed 'a fearful experience that millions of other people endured and some others failed to survive' (including his sister Elizabeth who was killed in an air raid in London). On 7 August 1941 Campbell married Sylvia Alfreda Willoughby-Lee, a secretary for the 'Daily Mirror', and daughter of Captain Kenneth Willoughby-Lee MC, of Muizenberg, South Africa. In 1944 Smyllie relented, and offered Campbell the job of writing 'An Irishman's diary', a popular column which he had to produce five days a week. The column provided the format he followed for the rest of his life: 'a situation with a beginning, a middle and an end -- almost a short story -- with myself right in the middle of it' (Campbell). 
By 1947 Campbell felt sufficiently confident to return to Fleet Street to do a weekly column for the 'Sunday Dispatch', a paper which Smyllie abhorred. It proved to be very popular, as did the monthly article he wrote for the magazine 'Lilliput' from 1947 to 1953. The more literary and distinguished 'Lilliput' began to assume greater importance in Campbell's life. Here he built up his reputation as a humorist and was compared favourably with essayists James Thurber and Stephen Leacock. His best work from this period can be found in 'Patrick Campbell's Omnibus' (1954). 
But the 'Lilliput' job put a strain on Campbell's already faltering marriage. In 1947 he was divorced and on 6 August 1949 he married Cherry Margaret Lowson Lawson, daughter of Major George Lowson Monro, of the Indian army. By the time of their marriage she had charged her name to Campbell by deed poll. They settled in Dolphin Square, London, where Brigid, his only child, was born. During this period Campbell also became a film writer for the Rank Organization, then at the height of its film production era, and he was employed as an 'additional dialogue writer' for Pinewood Studios. He also made his mark in gatherings such as the Thursday Club. 
Agreeable though the life was, it did Campbell's writing no good; this became, as he admitted, mechanical. One by one he lost his regular jobs. But after a shaky spell which culminated in the end of his second marriage in divorce, a series of entertaining recollections of past episodes in his life for 'The Spectator' (later collected in 'Come Here till I Tell You', 1960) led to his being offered a column in the 'Sunday Times'. There he perfected the style which allowed him to 'toss up a trifle of experience and keep it in the air with great dexterity for minutes before letting it spin away into fantasy' ('The Times'). When E. G. (Ned) Sherrin suggested he should become one of the resident talkers in BBC television's 'Not so Much a Programme, More a Way of Life', he decided to risk trying out his stammer on a mass audience. In the end Campbell used his stammer to point up jokes -- or, often, to make ordinary statements sound as if they were jokes. Later he won more kudos in the 'Call my Bluff' series in the protracted battle with Frank Muir's team. Gratifying though it was for him to receive tributes, as he often did, for giving the stammer a new image, he always insisted that he would willingly have got rid of it if he could. 
Campbell's public profile increased sales of his books: fifteen were published, chiefly for the Christmas market, in the space of twenty-three years. Most of them were collections of his articles, the exceptions being 'My Life and Easy Times' (1967), his autobiography, which was also a moving tribute to his father, and 'How to Become a Scratch Golfer' (1963), a light-hearted look back over one of the two recreations he listed in 'Who's Who' (the other being, simply, 'pleasure'). As a golfer he had in fact been quite close to international standard, on one occasion surviving four rounds of the Irish open amateur championship, defeating a leading Walker cup contender in the process. 
Campbell's second marriage was dissolved in 1966 and in the same year he married Vivienne, previously wife of Charles Orme, and daughter of Charles Knight MC. He had worked with her for years on film and television scripts. After their marriage they went to live in the south of France, where they remained -- except when television and other commitments brought him back to England -- until he died of viral pneumonia, following a few years of ill health, in University College Hospital, London, on 9 November 1980. He was succeeded in the barony by his brother Michael Mussen (1924-1984). 
Campbell had succeeded his father as Lord Glenavy in 1963, but he rarely reminded anyone of his title. Thanks to his stammer, his height, and his imposing appearance -- he had something of the look of a Roman emperor about him -- he became a well-known and much imitated public figure, remembered as a skilled humorist and raconteur. 


@@@@@


doc= 30896


Camps, Francis Edward (1905-1972), forensic scientist, was born on 28 June 1905 at Teddington, Middlesex, the eldest of the three sons of Percy William Leopold Camps (1878-1956), a general practitioner and surgeon, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Joseph Redfern, of Matlock. He was educated at Marlborough College, Guy's Hospital, the School of Tropical Medicine at Liverpool, and Neuchatel University, Switzerland. He qualified MRCS LRCP (1928), graduated MB BS (London, 1930) and MD (1933), received the diploma in tropical medicine and hygiene (Liverpool, 1931), and was elected FRCPath (1964) and FRCP (1968). 
After qualifying in medicine in 1928 Camps practised first as a house physician at Guy's Hospital and then as a junior partner in general practice in rural Essex. In 1935 he abandoned clinical medicine and became a pathologist at the Chelmsford and Essex Hospital, specializing in bacteriology and epidemiology. There the Essex coroners sought his help in improving the standard of post-mortem reports, and he became increasingly involved with criminal cases. It was not, however, until after the Second World War that Camps turned to forensic medicine as a full-time career. He started lecturing at the London Hospital medical college in 1945, being appointed lecturer in 1953, reader in 1954, and professor in 1963. On his retirement in 1970 he became emeritus professor, having established the department as a leader in its field. Apart from lecturing to undergraduates and postgraduates at the London Hospital, Camps lectured in forensic medicine at the medical schools of the Royal Free Hospital, the Middlesex Hospital, and University College Hospital. He examined in the medical faculties of five British universities, and played a large part in persuading the Society of Apothecaries to set up the diploma in medical jurisprudence. He was consultant pathologist to the Emergency Medical Service during the war, holder of a travelling fellowship of the Kellogg Foundation, and honorary consultant in forensic medicine to the army (1964-70), an appointment he particularly valued. 
Camps was tireless in his enthusiasm and advocacy for his subject and served on many committees, including the British Medical Association special committee on the recognition of intoxication in the relation of alcohol to road accidents (1951), the coroners' rules committee of the Home Office (1953), the mortuaries' committee of the Ministry of Housing and Local Government (1955), and the Home Office Scientific Advisory Council (1965). He was a founder of the British Association in Forensic Medicine in 1950, and was its president in 1958-60. He was the moving force behind the formation of the British Academy of Forensic Sciences in 1959, and served as its president (1963) and secretary-general (1960-71). He edited its journal, 'Medicine, Science and the Law', from 1960 until his death, at which time he was president of the Society for the Study of Addiction and vice-president of the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths. 
Camps married three times. His first wife, Dulcie Williams, was a nurse whom he met when working at Guy's Hospital. They had a son and two daughters, but later divorced. In 1942 he married Mary Ross Mackenzie MD, a pathologist and daughter of James Ross Mackenzie, lecturer in anaesthesia at Aberdeen. They had a son and a daughter. She died in 1970, and two years later Camps married Ann Elizabeth Robinson PhD FRIC, a toxicologist at the London Hospital. Camps held strong views, sometimes in opposition to his colleagues, and had exceptional stamina. He worked hard in the mortuary, laboratory, and court, and also as a lecturer, writer, and broadcaster; he rarely refused a case or an invitation to speak. He published several books, many of which are landmarks in forensic medicine; as editor of the second edition of 'Gradwohl's Legal Medicine' (1968), he won the Swiney prize in 1969. He travelled widely, being particularly concerned to advance his subject in other countries, and was well known in the United States. 
Of the large number of important cases in which Camps was involved, perhaps the best-known were those of Hume, Christie, and Emmett Dunne. He was deeply interested in Jack the Ripper. As a person, Camps was impressive but modest, enthusiastic and charming. He was popular with students, and they with him. Outside his work, his interests included fishing and gardening. He was a delightful host or guest, having a rich sense of humour, and also a loyal, devoted friend, and a stimulating colleague and teacher. 
A heavy smoker, Camps was convinced that he had inoperable cancer, when he died of a ruptured gastric ulcer at the Chelmsford and Essex Hospital on 8 July 1972. His wife survived him. A memorial service was held in the parish church of St Augustine with St Philip, Stepney Way, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30897


Cardew, Michael Ambrose (1901-1983), potter, was born on 26 May 1901 at Wimbledon, Surrey, the third son and fourth child in the family of five sons and one daughter of Arthur Cardew, a civil servant, and his wife, Alexandra Rhoda, daughter of George William Kitchin, dean of Winchester and of Durham. He was educated at King's College School, Wimbledon, and in 1919 obtained a scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford. He obtained a second class in classical honour moderations (1921) and a third class in 'literae humaniores' (1923). 
From childhood Cardew was surrounded by ceramics, which filled his parents' houses in Wimbledon and at Saunton, north Devon. It was the rural pottery made by Edwin Beer Fishley to which he was deeply attracted and he used to visit him at Fremington. When Fishley died in 1911, Cardew felt a sense of deprivation from which came the realization that if pots of the generous warm nature of Fishley's were to be obtained, he would have to make them himself. In the summer of 1921 he persuaded Fishley's grandson to give him lessons in throwing. Few though these were, they confirmed Cardew's love for the craft and precipitated a crisis in his academic work. He was faced with the ultimatum: either to give up potting or to surrender his scholarship. As he had long wanted to study philosophy, Cardew reluctantly agreed to put potting aside. The study of Plato and Aristotle, and the discipline of the school, left their mark. To his innate mental qualities -- an alertness and ability to master and express his thoughts in clear and vigorous language -- Cardew added a knowledge of method, and 'how to be capable of going on learning'. 
In January 1923 he went to St Ives to meet Bernard Leach and Shoji Hamada. Leach has described how 'he strode in, nose and brow straight, handsome as a young Greek god, eyes flashing blue, hair waving gold, and within an hour announced that this was where he wanted to work'. In July he was back. Leach found that his first and best pupil 'possessed a sense of form, the potter's prime gift'. Here he also met Katharine Pleydell-Bouverie, Norah Braden, Tsuranosuke Matsubayashi, and William Staite Murray. 
In 1926 Cardew decided that he must be self-supporting and that he wanted to make slipware rather than the stoneware produced by Leach. Through S. Gordon Russell he found the disused pottery at Greet, near Winchcombe in Gloucestershire. Two years later he had confidence in his powers as a thrower, held his first exhibition in London, and was making a monthly average of 350 golden-brown pots. They were cheap and made to be used. The total value of what he made in 1928 was $293 12's'. 6died He was producing the most genuine lead-glazed slipware since the eighteenth century. In 1931 he was awarded the Kokuga prize at the National Artists' Society's annual exhibition in Japan. The section for craftsmen had been established in 1928. Cardew showed a large wide dish, a milk pan, with a combed pattern which demonstrated his fluency in slip trailing. It was filled with sushi after it won the main prize. 
Cardew always lived simply, with few material comforts. He loved the music of Handel and Mozart, which he played on clarinet and recorder. In 1933 he married Mary-Ellen (Mariel), the daughter of Baron Russell, journalist and contributor to 'Printer's Ink'. They had three sons: Seth, who followed his father as a potter; (Brian) Cornelius McDonough Cardew (1936-1981), composer; and Ennis, accountant. In 1939 they bought the inn at Wenford Bridge at St Breward in Cornwall, and converted it into a pottery. It remained their home despite long periods of absence and separation. In 1946 he sold the pottery at Winchcombe to Ray Finch, who continued to work there with Sidney Tustin as assistant. 
Cardew was appointed pottery instructor at Achimota College in the Gold Coast in 1942 with responsibility for the tileworks at Alajo. Here he began to make stoneware. The years between 1942 and 1945 were not only demanding -- they were also unsuccessful to a degree which has subsequently been considered disastrous. Dicon Nance, who worked with him, has maintained that Cardew made endless technical mistakes and that he disregarded practical advice. On the closure of the factory, Cardew decided to move up the River Volta to open a pottery at Vume Dugame. Here again he was less than successful because of poor raw materials, disasters in the kilns, and ill health. He still produced pots 'among the most beautiful to come from the hands of any modern potter' aided by Clement Kofi Athey (G. Wingfield-Digby, 'The Work of the Modern Potter in England', 1952). 
Cardew returned to Wenford Bridge in 1948. Two years later he was appointed pottery officer for the Nigerian government. He travelled extensively and learned Hausa. From 1952 until 1965 at Abuja, as pottery officer for the department of commerce and industries, he at last achieved success, encouraging such potters as Ladi Kwali, and himself absorbing an understanding of the techniques and decoration of the indigenous culture. He used the incised native styles on stoneware bowls, casseroles, jars, jugs, stools, and teapots, because, as at Winchcombe, his pots were always intended for use. 
Cardew retired to Wenford Bridge in 1965, the year in which he was appointed MBE (CBE followed in 1981). He also received an honorary doctorate from the Royal College of Art in 1982. His hard apprenticeship in Ghana, together with his capacity for continuing to learn, bore fruit in his book 'Pioneer Pottery' (1969). In addition to scientific analyses, this contains the essence of Cardew's experience and thought, showing him to have been a philosopher as well as a potter. This aspect of his thought was revealed in 1976 when he wrote: 'Ethics is about our duties to our neighbour but aesthetics is about our duty to all the things and creatures of the world we belong to. Our aesthetic conscience is therefore just as tender and just as imperious as the ethical conscience.' Cardew's thoughts were invariably challenging and well expressed, not least in his autobiography 'A Pioneer Potter' (1988), which he had wished to call 'A potter's progress'. It encapsulates his career, his trenchant views, and his clarity in expressing them. That it leaves a number of questions unanswered, questions he might have answered but for his suffering a stroke, may be regretted but for those who wish to read between the lines, inferences can be drawn. Cardew had gifts as a teacher which found expression in the tours and demonstrations which he gave in the USA, Canada, and Australia. While he never taught in a formal sense, he taught many by example. Until his death, in Truro on 11 February 1983, he retained the energy and force of character which found expression in his pots. 
A recent account of Cardew remarks that he was 'the exemplary maker of our time. His life as a potter made him alternately fiercely miserable and supremely happy. He asked himself hard questions and drove himself to the limits both physically and spiritually' (Harrod, 401). The film 'Mud and Water Man' (1973) portrayed him 'as an essentially tragic figure, half angry, half humorous, caught between cultures, a man out of time and place' (ibid., 464), and yet at Wenford Bridge, at the end of his life, he was at home and showed himself to be a remarkable combination of his education and his skills, ever articulate, persuasive, one of the great potters of the twentieth century and one whose work has been reassessed and much appreciated since his death. In his autobiography, those who did not know him will meet the honest, invincible, unbroken Cardew. Examples of his pots can be seen in the collections of the University of Wales at Aberystwyth; the Surrey Institute of Art and Design, University College, Farnham; the City Museum and Art Gallery at Stoke-on-Trent; and the York City Art Gallery. He is also represented in the national collections, at the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, and the university museums at Oxford and Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 30898


Cardus, Sir (John Frederick) Neville (1888-1975), writer on cricket and music critic, was born on 3 April 1888 at 4 Summer Place, Rusholme, Manchester, the illegitimate child of Ada Cardus (1870-1954). His forenames were registered as John Frederick. His father may have been John Frederick Newsham ('b'. 1867), whom the seventeen-year-old Ada married three months later, on 14 July 1888. The marriage, however, did not last long, and the description of Newsham as a 'smith' hardly fitted Cardus's own comment that his father may have been 'one of the first violins in an orchestra' (Cardus, 'Autobiography', 15). The boy lived with his maternal grandparents. Robert Cardus, his grandfather, had a policeman's pension, Ann Cardus took in washing, and the household finances were augmented through the activities of Ada (who briefly returned home) and her sister Beatrice as prostitutes. 
Yet the home was not quite the slum Cardus suggested and, even for the poor, the community of Rusholme, in late nineteenth-century Manchester, offered cultural expression in its cosmopolitan nature, free libraries, and music-halls. The young Cardus took what he could from his working-class background, learning to read and write at the board school in Rusholme, using the libraries and his grandfather's 'Manchester Guardian', and getting his taste for music as a chocolate seller in the Comedy Theatre. Variously, he had delivered his grandmother's washing, boiled type in a printer's business, and driven a carpenter's handcart before, in 1904, he had become a clerk in an insurance agency with the Fleming brothers, benevolent employers who encouraged him in his self-education and would let him off to watch cricket at Old Trafford. This was the time when he acquired his deep affection for Lancashire cricket and for the game's 'golden age'. He remained indebted to the Flemings, who for eight years (1904-12) 'stood between me and destitution' (Cardus, 'Autobiography', 41). 
Great literature, especially Dickens, and philosophy had their place in Cardus's grandiose pursuit of culture, but it was music which mattered most. He attended concerts at the Free Trade Hall and heard the first performance of Elgar's first symphony on 3 December 1908. He saw Sir Thomas Beecham conduct 'Madama Butterfly', and his own first musical criticism, 'Bantock and style', appeared in the monthly 'Musical Opinion' in 1912. 
Yet in music, unlike cricket, Cardus was no performer (though he briefly took singing lessons) and it was his cricket in that same year (1912) which gave him his first opportunity. On the strength of his figures as an off-break bowler in Manchester league cricket, he successfully applied for the post of assistant cricket coach at Shrewsbury School. When war broke out in 1914, he volunteered for service but his poor eyesight brought rejection. The headmaster, C. A. Alington, was aware of his unusual interests -- he had spotted him reading Euripides in translation -- and appointed him as his secretary. The idyll of Cardus's four years at Shrewsbury -- 'because of Alington, I call myself an Old Salopian' (Cardus, 'Autobiography', 81) -- ended when Alington went to Eton. He was willing to take his secretary, but only if he could be assured that Cardus would not be conscripted. 
C. P. Scott, editor of the 'Manchester Guardian', took the persistent 28-year-old into his office -- just as Alington had done -- as a secretary. By 1917 Cardus was learning the all-round trade of reporting and briefly writing on drama and music. Two years later he reported his first cricket match. Throughout the inter-war period readers of the ''M. G.'' would be avid followers of N. C. on music and Cricketer on cricket. 
Security (although all his life he was fearful of being poor again) allowed Cardus to marry, on 17 June 1921, Edith Honorine Watton King (1887/8-1968), a schoolmistress, daughter of John Thomas Sissons King, schoolmaster. He gave his father's name (perhaps for respectability) as Frederick Cardus. There were no children. At about this time Cardus, who had always been known as Fred, adopted the name Neville, which alone appeared on his marriage certificate. His twin interests, at their lowest, now ensured 'a balance at the bank' (Cardus, 'Second Innings', 87). 
Cricket, even more than music, provided the medium through which Cardus could display his treasure house of literary knowledge and satisfy his aesthetic appreciation of grace and movement. Neither his account of his marriage nor that shortly afterwards, of his one great scoop -- A. C. MacLaren's eleven beating the 1921 all-conquering Australians, with Cardus the only major journalist present -- stands microscopic examination. Both show his abilities in embellishing the non-essentials to make a well-told tale. 
Cardus was essentially a writer with a talent for handling words, presenting balanced and harmonious prose, and drawing on his deep reservoir of reading. Above all, he wrote for others' enjoyment because he enjoyed writing. Cricket and music were the chosen media through which he expressed himself. The one gave him the greater fame, the other the greater satisfaction. In his approach to both he sought to understand the emotions which lay behind the technical performances. He was a romantic in the sense that he paid more attention to the spirit and beauty of what he saw and heard than to the mechanics of endeavour and achievement. 
In his cricket writing Cardus was an innovator. On what had been, in earlier hands, a descriptive and narrative enterprise, he imposed criticism. To the sights and sounds of the game he brought his own use of imagery, metaphor, and allusion, with which he created a mythology of characters and scenes. But elegance and wit redeemed him from pomposity. 
Cricketers took on the guise of characters: Macartney, Figaro; MacLaren, Don Quixote; Spooner's batting matched the poetry of Herrick. Yet none of this imagery gainsaid Cardus's ability to analyse. Of Wilfred Rhodes he wrote: 'Flight was his secret, flight and the curving line, now higher, now lower, tempting, inimical... every ball a decoy and one of them -- ah, which? -- the master ball' (Cardus, 'Autobiography', 158). 
In commercial terms Cardus was an immediate success. He doubled the summer sales of the 'Manchester Guardian' and, as early as 1922, a publisher had given permanency to his reports in 'A Cricketer's Book'. There followed 'Days in the Sun' (1924), 'The Summer Game' (1929), 'Good Days' (1934), and 'Australian Summer' (1937). All were distillations of his 9000 words a week. In the twenty years between the wars he wrote some 2 million of them, even submitting 1200 words on an August bank holiday totally rained off. 
In 1927 Cardus succeeded Samuel Longford, as the chief music critic of the 'M. G.' so holding two of the paper's major portfolios. As with cricket, he got to know the performers, notably Beecham and (later) Sir John Barbirolli. Cricket was for watching: Cardus cultivated the art of listening and the ability to interpret for his readers what he heard. The fame he had quickly acquired as a cricket writer came more slowly as a music critic. Even when he had made his name, year by year, with some 4000 words a week, from two or three concerts, he remained aware that a musical error of fact might bring two dozen letters of protest; a cricket one, possibly a thousand. Others, such as his friend and rival Ernest Newman, were already established. What made him different was his total independence of judgement. He could be out of step with his contemporaries and sometimes ahead of them. He wrote intuitively, conveying his own aesthetic delight and putting an essential truth into a telling phrase; Sibelius, for example, composed 'mainly in nouns and verbs with eloquent dashes of silence' (obituary, 'Guardian'). As in much else in his life, he was 'his own man', as J. B. Priestley called him (ibid.). 
Cardus was ready to champion little-known composers such as Gustav Mahler and Anton Bruckner -- both of them in the central European tradition in which he delighted. Pursuit of that tradition took him to Salzburg, whose festivals provided some of his finest moments. Arturo Toscanini conducting the opera 'Die Meistersinger' there in 1936 would 'remain in the mind for a lifetime because of its beauty and dignity. The banner of song opened with a width and nobility that caused happiness and sadness. Toscanini held us like children' (Brookes, 152). Perhaps in the end the danger, in both cricket and music, was that readers came to appreciate the words more than the deeds they portrayed. Yet there were no concessions to the faint-hearted and 'M. G.' readers had to keep up with him. This approach would later cause problems for him in Australia. 
In the early years of Cardus's work, Manchester and the Halle Orchestra were central to his writing, though some adverse notices in the 1930s during the depression, when audiences fell, caused economic concern to performers. London came to make greater claims on him, while the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 brought an end to his work as both cricket and music critic for the 'Manchester Guardian'. In 1940 he took himself off to Australia (and there were critics of his decision) to work for the 'Sydney Morning Herald'. 
At first Cardus enraged his readership by the savagery of his attacks. What he viewed as a genuine attempt to raise standards was seen as arrogant and insensitive. Once he had mentally accepted that Sydney was not Salzburg he struck a balance. By 1942 his writing was acceptable and understood, while he made a major cultural impact on Australia with his Sunday evening broadcasts called 'Enjoyment of Music' and a similar midweek programme for children. With fewer demands on his time and living, at first, a somewhat solitary life in Sydney, he found time to write his 'Ten Composers' and 'Autobiography'. 
Then, in a period of uncertainty, Cardus travelled between Australia and England five times in two years before finally settling in England in 1949, for the rest of his life. Yet a post-war England was alien to him and he was conscious he had not shared its hardships: 'My exile in Australia had disqualified me' (Cardus, 'Full Score', 194). After some false starts, notably with Beaverbrook's 'Evening Standard' in 1948, he returned (1950) to the 'Manchester Guardian' as its London music critic, where he wrote 'Music surveys', introducing readers to the music they might be going to hear or at least might read about later. Many of the themes remained endemic to his pre-war interests in the classical tradition, with little concession to modernism. Mahler found an undue place, as a prelude to the analytical study 'Gustav Mahler: his Mind and his Music', which he published in 1965. 
Another volume of autobiography, 'Second Innings' (1950), was followed by a third, 'Full Score' (1970), when Cardus was over eighty. Several of his earlier cricket books were reprinted. He also wrote a biography of Beecham (1961) and edited a memoir on Kathleen Ferrier (1971). His devotion to the singer was so profound that some critics suggested that it precluded his objective judgement of her talent. With Beecham his relationship had had its ups and downs but the book allowed him to dwell on a past in which he more and more took comfort. 
Cardus made few forays into the post-war cricket world, although he reported two MCC tours to Australia in the 1950s and the 'Ashes' series in England in 1953. 'Wisden Cricketers' Almanack' claimed him for an article virtually every year. He took great pleasure in being elected president of Lancashire County Cricket Club in 1970-71. Other honours had already come his way. He had been appointed CBE in 1964 and became, in 1967, the first music critic to be knighted. In 1972 he was elected an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music. 
The death of Cardus's wife in 1968 ended a marriage which had lasted nearly fifty years. The couple had seldom lived in the same house and both valued the independence which their separate lives gave them. Yet the friendship -- it was scarcely intimacy -- was sustained by their meals together, letters, and phone calls. After her death he stopped living in his club (the National Liberal) and moved into her flat. Cardus enjoyed the company of ladies (and in particular of Margaret Hughes, his 'cricket wife', and Else Mayer-Lismann, his 'music wife') and retained to the end of his life an old-world gallantry. He was a gregarious man, with a close circle of friends of both sexes. Good food and wine, talking, and membership of several London clubs were aspects of his lifestyle. 
In his final years Cardus still wrote, though the way 'The Guardian' handled his copy from the Edinburgh festival in 1969 upset him. The days of expansionist writing, untouched by sub-editors, were long since past and his association with the paper of his heyday diminished in happiness at the end. It was an opinion he expressed in Robin Daniels's 'Conversations with Cardus' (1976). 
Sir Neville Cardus died at the Nuffield Clinic, London, on 28 February 1975 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. Despite living to almost eighty-seven, he had changed relatively little from the lean, ascetic figure of moderate height, with sharp features, sleek hair, and strong glasses. The tributes to him as a writer were generous. Intellectually, music had been his first string but cricket had been his passport to fulfilment. And in cricket, if not in music, he had changed the course of reporting. He would have his imitators and parodists, and no serious cricket writer would remain unaffected by him. His last entry in 'Who's Who' (1975) showed something of his enigmatic approach to life: 'Recreations: anything not in the form of a game'. 


@@@@@


doc= 30899


Carline, Richard Cotton (1896-1980), painter and writer, was born at 72 Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 9 February 1896, the youngest of the five children (four sons and one daughter) of George Francis Carline (1855-1920), painter, and his wife, Annie Carline (1862-1945) ['see under 'Carline family], in later life also a painter, daughter of John Smith, of Buckhurst Hill. As a painter Carline also followed earlier family generations, as well as his brother Sydney Carline (1888-1929) and only sister, Hilda Carline (1889-1950) ['see under 'Carline family]. After attending the Dragon and St Edward's schools in Oxford he studied art from 1913 under Percyval Tudor-Hart at his schools first in Paris and then in Hampstead, being influenced by Tudor-Hart's theories of colour and tonal value. 
In 1916 Carline joined the Middlesex regiment before serving as an officer in the Royal Flying Corps, first in wireless and then in experiments in camouflage and aids to identification of enemy targets from the air. In 1918 he and Sydney were appointed official war artists, Richard recording the war from the air on the western front and then (in 1919) both brothers depicting the aerial warfare in British zones in the Middle East. Their work constitutes the most comprehensive group of paintings from the air in the Imperial War Museum. 
Carline studied at the Slade School of Fine Art in 1921-4. In 1916 his parents had moved to Hampstead. With all three artist children living there their home became what Gilbert Spencer described as 'a focal centre', combining hospitality with endless discussion on art and its theory. The participation in this circle of Henry Lamb, Charles Ginner, Mark Gertler, and John Nash indicates its principal characteristics -- which were always Carline's: the clear but careful representation of familiar motifs, freshly seen. For a few years from as early as 1914 he achieved an unusually simple and direct realism of striking psychological concentration. Elected to the London Group in 1920, he exhibited with it until the 1970s. His work was consistently admired by Sir Stanley Spencer, whose importance in Carline's circle was consolidated by his marriage to Hilda Carline in 1925. In 1930 a series of often vertiginous paintings of masts and rigging was the last in which, during seventeen years, Carline's work had been marked by an unusual clarity and feeling for light. Thereafter his painting was less exceptional and less continuous. Remaining a strong colourist and more interested in content than in style, he developed a controlled sensuousness of paint owing something to Gauguin and fauvism. 
The change in Carline's art coincided approximately with the premature deaths of his remaining brothers (he had taught under Sydney's mastership at the Ruskin School of Drawing, Oxford, in 1924-9), with the impact of the breakup of the Spencers' marriage, with intensification in the climate of discussion to include socio-political as well as aesthetic concerns, and with an expansion in Carline's own horizons. His art was influenced by the community-orientated figurative painting he saw in four pre-war visits to the USA, and he became a strong advocate of public mural painting in Britain. In the USA he also admired schemes to improve the place of artists in society and the work of artists' own organizations. 
Carline's principal achievement during his last five decades was to generate contacts and creative interaction within local, national, and international communities and across boundaries of style, genre, and culture. He was motivated by strong beliefs in peace, friendship, and freedom. Tirelessly active, he was a natural organizer, finding it difficult to say no (a trait related to his instinct always to seek what was positive in the art of others rather than to criticize it). Organizations of which he was at various times chairman included the Artists' International Association (including its important refugee and regional committees); the International Artists' Association (co-founder, 1952; chairman of the UK national committee from 1959; honorary president, 1968-80), an affiliated organization of UNESCO, for which as its first art counsellor he organized its first post-war international art exhibition in Paris; and the Hampstead Artists' Council (co-founder). A member of the Britain/China Friendship Association, he selected and accompanied to China exhibitions of British historical art and watercolours in 1957 and 1963. 
Opposed to exclusiveness in selection, Carline felt that exhibitions and organizations should be broadly based and that child, naive, and ethnic art were as worthy of serious consideration as Western fine art. Through books and exhibitions he advanced appreciation of African art and of the picture postcard, and in his work at home and overseas under Cambridge University as an adviser on art education and examiner, he contributed significantly to the establishment of more liberal criteria for conducting art examinations and judging excellence in children's art. His 'Draw they Must' (1968) is a history of four centuries of art teaching in general education in Britain and of its modern extension overseas. 
From 1939 to 1945 Carline did important technical and liaison work on camouflage, writing the Ministry of Aircraft Production's official report on industrial and aircraft camouflage. On 13 June 1950 Carline married Nancy Mona Higgins ['see below']; they had a son and a daughter. They continued the tradition of broad-ranging hospitality of Carline's parents. In his last decade Carline was instrumental in the creation of several exhibitions on the art of his family circle and in twentieth-century Hampstead. His 'Stanley Spencer at War' (1978) is a key account of his brother-in-law as man and artist up to 1932. 
Carline's general attitude was consistently open and progressive. He preferred art of pronounced directness, a quality seen in the clarity of his own early work and in his manner of expression as writer and speaker. A certain combination of idealism with outspokenness may account for his remaining somewhat outside the establishment of his day, despite the unfailing courtesy of his approach. In the last years of his life appreciation of his early achievement as a painter increased notably. He is represented in the Tate collection, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and other public collections. He died in Hampstead on 18 November 1980 and was buried in Sunningwell cemetery, Oxfordshire. A memorial retrospective was held at the Camden Arts Centre, London, June-July 1983. 
Carline's wife, 
Richard Morphet', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30900


Carnell, Edward John (1912-1972), science fiction writer, journal editor, and literary agent, was born on 8 April 1912 in Plumstead, London, the only child of William John Carnell, a charge hand who worked at the Royal Arsenal in Woolwich, and his wife, Louisa Woollett. 
Ted, as he was always known, became a printer, but joined the army at the outbreak of war in 1939, was promoted to sergeant, and served as a gunner in combined operations, when he was involved in more than one beachhead invasion. He was already devoted to the more peaceful microcosm of science fiction, and loved to tell the tale of how, patrolling the Mediterranean in a corvette, he had boarded a deserted ship; on the captain's desk lay a gold watch and a copy of 'Astounding Science Fiction'. He took the latter. 
Carnell attended Britain's first science fiction convention in 1937, together with other devotees who were later to succeed as writers, including Arthur C. Clarke and Eric Frank Russell. His administrative abilities soon came to the fore. He was made treasurer of a newly formed Science Fiction Association, and edited the journal of the British Interplanetary Society. After the war, with backing from dedicated followers, Carnell published 'New Worlds', Britain's most successful and long-lived science fiction magazine (200 issues between 1946 and 1970). As 'New Worlds' achieved regular publication, Carnell added a sister magazine, 'Science Fantasy' (eighty-one issues between 1950 and 1966). Later Carnell added a third magazine, the American-originated 'Science Fiction Adventures', which, through his intervention, survived when the parent magazine died, to yield twenty-seven issues between 1958 and 1963. 
These magazines were crucial to the development of British science fiction: they allowed native writers to find their own audience, instead of having to adopt an American idiom for the New York market. Writers who took advantage of this, and supported Carnell, included Arthur Sellings, J. G. Ballard, Brian Aldiss, and Michael Moorcock -- the last taking over the editorship of 'New Worlds' in 1964, when Carnell's health, and his publishers, were failing. Under Moorcock, 'New Worlds' became as much a crusade as a magazine, while Carnell went on to lead a quieter life as editor of a regular series of anthologies, 'New Writings in S-F', which provided a forum for a generation of newer authors. Twenty-one numbers were published between 1964 and Carnell's death in 1972, whereupon H. Kenneth Bulmer -- another British stalwart -- took over the editorship. 
Carnell also edited many anthologies: 'No Place Like Earth' (1952), 'Gateway to Tomorrow' (1954), 'Gateway to the Stars' (1955), 'The Best from New Worlds Science Fiction' (1955), 'Lambda I and other Stories' (reprinted 1964), 'Weird Shadows from Beyond' (1965), and 'Best from New Writings in S-F 1-4' (1971). 
Carnell was always steady, reliable, and honest, and thoroughly understood routine science fiction. As his magazines and his writers succeeded, he was practically forced to become a literary agent in order to market the fiction he had summoned into being. Thus the E. J. Carnell Literary Agency was founded. He knew none of the techniques, but learned fast, representing such writers, in whole or in part, as John Christopher, Theodore Sturgeon, Damon Knight, Frederik Pohl, Samuel Delaney, Harry Harrison, and the British authors already mentioned. Carnell never failed to be surprised when he managed to sell a book to a regular publisher such as Faber and Faber, or to get $30 from the Spanish. Then his high, nervous chuckle would come into play -- not always echoed by the more ambitious of his authors. 
The science fiction world provided Carnell with his few recreations. He was chairman of the first world convention to be held outside the United States (London, 1957). He was one of the four founders of the respected international fantasy award in 1951, which immediately recognized the merits of such works as George Stewart's 'Earth Abides' (1949) and the trilogy by J. R. R. Tolkien. Very little science fiction appeared in hardcover before the 1950s. Carnell helped promote hardcovers, becoming a founder and member, with Kingsley Amis and Dr George Porter, of the selection board of the Science Fiction Book Club, on which he served for many years. He was English linkman for the Trieste science fiction film festivals (1961 onwards), the first such international events. Throughout all this activity, Carnell remained a Plumstead man, modest and pleasant, a good friend to his friends and authors. Indisputably, he did more for British science fiction on the administrative side than anyone else. His was an example of the way in which devotees valiantly supported the literature no one but they seemed to love; his pleasant nature and fondness for 'loony' jokes left their imprint on British science fiction. 
In 1939 Carnell married Irene, daughter of William Henry Read Cloke, a caterer. They had a son and a daughter. Carnell died at St Nicholas Hospital, Plumstead, on 23 March 1972; his remains were cremated on 30 March at Falconwood cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 30901


Caroe, Sir Olaf Kirkpatrick Kruuse (1892-1981), administrator in India, was born in London on 15 November 1892, eldest of the three children of William Douglas Caroe (1857-1938), architect and son of the Danish consul in Liverpool, and his wife, Grace Desborough (died 1947), daughter of John Rendall, barrister. From Winchester College, where his maternal uncle Montague Rendall was headmaster, he won a demyship to read classics at Magdalen College, Oxford, entering in 1911. In 1914, on the outbreak of war, he enlisted in the Royal West Surrey regiment, rising to the rank of captain. 
To his delight, Caroe spent the whole of the war in India. There, in addition to rather tedious military duties, he began to learn Urdu and Pashto and explored Indian architecture and landscape. India held for him a certain magic, a mixture of Edwardian duty and the thrill of the exotic preserved from childhood readings of Kipling and Flora Annie Steele. He was determined to return after the war. His regiment went home in November 1919 and two months later, on 10 January 1920, he married his pre-war girlfriend, Frances Marion 
(Kitty; died 1969)
, eldest child of Atherton Gwillym Rawstorne, bishop of Whalley. Later the same year, having topped the post-war service examinations, he returned to India as a member of the Indian Civil Service. Kitty, to whom he was devoted, followed in 1921 with the first of their two sons. 
In October 1923, after three years' service in the Punjab, Caroe managed to obtain a transfer to the Indian political service and was posted to the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) as city magistrate of Peshawar. Postings in Mardan and Kohat followed, before, in 1929, he was appointed secretary to the NWFP chief commissioner. In April 1930 he was dispatched as acting deputy commissioner to Peshawar when the city was paralysed by crowds protesting against the arrest of the brothers Dr Khan Sahib and Abdul Ghaffar Khan, local leaders of the Indian National Congress. Caroe reoccupied the city peacefully on 5 May, but trouble flared again and in one incident he ordered troops to fire on an unruly crowd, killing about a dozen people. Although the government saw no need to censure him (and indeed confirmed him as deputy commissioner and in 1932 appointed him CIE), the affair was subsequently invoked by the Congress as proof of his antipathy to Indians. 
In 1933 Caroe was appointed chief secretary to the North-West Frontier Province government and then, in 1934, deputy secretary to the government of India's foreign (external affairs) department. In July 1939 he was promoted to foreign secretary. In this capacity he made official visits to Afghanistan and Nepal and focused attention on India's vulnerable north-eastern frontier, the beginning for him of an abiding interest in Tibetan autonomy. Appointed CSI in 1941, he was promoted to KCIE in 1944 and KCSI in 1945. 
In March 1946 Caroe was appointed governor of the North-West Frontier Province. The province had a new Congress ministry headed by Dr Khan Sahib which, to Caroe's eyes, showed dangerous signs of interfering with the executive. The viceroy, Lord Wavell, was sympathetic, but privately he believed that Caroe had not adjusted to the idea of Britain leaving India. As Caroe tried to guide and discipline the new ministry, rumours spread that he favoured the Muslim League. This was not true (he had a particular dislike of Jinnah), but he felt constrained to warn Khan Sahib that, given his Pathan constituency, he ought not to appear to be taking instructions from plains-dwelling Hindus -- advice which led to Nehru's charge that he was unfit to be governor. As popular opposition to the ministry swelled, Caroe pressured Khan Sahib to go to the polls, further antagonizing Nehru. No election could be fair, Nehru argued, while an anti-Congress governor held sway. Stung by the accusation of partiality, Caroe refused to offer his resignation, but he was tired and, as a slightly built, sensitive man, he appeared to his colleagues to be close to collapse. In June 1947 Mountbatten succeeded in persuading him to take two months' leave while a provincial referendum was held. Caroe understood this to be a temporary expedient, but afterwards, even though the province had voted to join Pakistan no offer came for him to return to duty. With hindsight Caroe was glad he went when he did. He thought partition a dreadful mistake, but consoled himself that he at least had retained friends on all sides, including the Khan brothers and eventually even Nehru. In old age he was proud to have been the only British ex-governor invited back as a state guest by both Pakistan and India. 
In retirement in Sussex Caroe championed Tibetan independence and, after the Lhasa uprising of 1959, founded the Tibet Society of the United Kingdom, which assisted in the resettlement of Tibetan refugees. He was also a leading member of the Royal Central Asian Society and the Conservative Commonwealth Council. Among his friends he counted Harold Macmillan and Lionel Curtis, for the latter of whom he wrote extensively in the 'Round Table'. He published several books, including 'Soviet Empire' (1953), intended as a riposte to left-wingers who condemned only capitalist forms of imperialism; 'The Pathans' (1958), which gained him the degree of LLD from Oxford; and, with Sir Evelyn Howell, a translation from the work of the seventeenth-century Pashto poet Khushhal Khan (1963). A devout Anglican, he also chaired the Chichester diocesan pastoral reorganization committee. 
In January 1969 Kitty died, plunging Caroe into loneliness. He continued to write on central Asian affairs, but increasingly concentrated on putting the record straight about his service in the North-West Frontier Province. He reworked numerous drafts of an autobiography and responded in point-by-point detail to memoirs and monographs published on the transfer of power era. Caroe died on 23 November 1981 in hospital, and was privately cremated on the 27th. He was survived by his two sons, Richard and Michael. 


@@@@@


doc= 30902


Carr, Edward Hallett (1892-1982), historian and diplomatist, was born at 62 Gladsmuir Road, Upper Holloway, London, on 28 June 1892, the first of three children, to Francis Parker Carr (died 1945), who worked in the family business of Carr's Inks, and Elizabeth Jessie, 'nee' Hallett. A scholar at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1906, he won an entrance scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, and went up in October 1911 to read classics. After illness abruptly curtailed his studies, he none the less won the Porson prize and the Craven scholarship and took a first in both parts of the tripos (1915-16). The country had been at war since 1914. Because of previous illness Carr was judged unsuitable for the fighting services and instead was recruited as a temporary clerk at the Foreign Office, where he worked in the all-encompassing contraband department that organized the blockade against the central powers. His remit extended to Russia, where he worked to get goods in (while they fought the Germans) and later to keep goods out (once the Bolsheviks seized power). He served at the Paris peace conference and its succeeding conference of allied ambassadors (1919-22), being made CBE for his efforts in 1920. 
Still only a third secretary but very much a specialist on central and east European affairs, Carr was transferred back to London in 1922. On the eve of his departure for Riga as second secretary in January 1925 he hastily married, on the 22nd, Anne Rowe, 'nee' Ward (died 1961), the widow of Gilbert Rowe, a close acquaintance made during official tours of eastern Europe to review territorial problems still outstanding. Anne brought with her three children: Rachel ('b'. 1917), Philippa ('b'. 1919), and Martin ('b'. 1921). To these Carr added John ('b'. 1926). Riga was entirely uneventful except for Carr's mastery of Russian, which resulted in a memorable biography of Dostoyevsky (1931), a delightful portrait of Herzen and his circle, 'The Romantic Exiles' (1933), and a penetrating study of Bakunin (1937). 
After returning to London in 1929, Carr also began reviewing and writing (under the 'nom de plume' John Hallett) on both Russian industrialization, which caught his interest, and German affairs, which fell within his purview in the Foreign Office. It was Hitler's attempt to break out of the constraints created by the allies in 1919 (of which Carr strongly disapproved) that seized his attention and resulted in the first 'realist' monograph on international relations in the twentieth century: 'The Twenty Years' Crisis' (1939). That treatise, still widely read worldwide and still somewhat shocking to untutored minds, was made possible only by leaving the Foreign Office and taking up the Woodrow Wilson chair in international politics at the University of Wales in Aberystwyth in 1936, which he held until 1947. Although rarely noted, Carr's speedily constructed text 'International Relations since the Peace Treaties' (1937) is a model of clarity and compression, explaining the main events of those years from the unusual vantage point of access to Foreign Office records which were not declassified for another thirty years. 
Once again war supervened, and after a false start at the Ministry of Information Carr joined 'The Times' as a leader writer on foreign affairs in 1940, graduating to assistant editor when Barrington-Ward finally succeeded Dawson to the chair in the following year. It was here that Carr made his most dramatic impact on public opinion with the publication of 'The two scourges', about war and unemployment, in December 1940. Henceforth his advocacy of radical social reform matched the mood of the country and paved the way for the Beveridge report of 1942 and Labour's victory in 1945. His writing on foreign affairs was no less significant or controversial. Under Carr 'The Times' became the platform for pressing on a reluctant prime minister (Churchill) the policy of accommodation with the Soviet Union in its desire for a protectorate over eastern Europe at the war's end. Much of the rationale for both this and social reform was also expressed in the best-selling 'Conditions of Peace' (1942). Carr's prognostications on the importance of economic and social planning on a European scale, free of editorial constraint, appeared later, as he withdrew from 'The Times', in 'Nationalism and after' (1945) and his Oxford lectures, 'The Soviet Impact on the Western World' (1946). A sequel appeared with his BBC lectures in 1951 in the form of 'The New Society' which was, however, subsequently more notable as the precursor to his iconoclastic polemic 'What is History?' (1961), delivered as the Trevelyan lectures at Cambridge, where he had moved as senior research fellow at Trinity in 1955. From 1947 he had to live by his writing. With the exception of two years (1953-5) at Balliol College, Oxford, he was effectively something of an outcast, and even there not entirely viewed without suspicion, his views on the Soviet Union scarcely in tune with the severe deterioration in the political climate following the Berlin blockade (1948-9), which had been worsened still further by the outbreak of war in Korea (1950). 
By then, however, the urge to dig more deeply into the Soviet experiment had enveloped Carr in full-time historical research and in writing what became a massively detailed fourteen-tome 'History of Soviet Russia' (1950-78), researched and written with the help of several able hands including, latterly, R. W. Davies and Tamara, widow of the biographer Isaac Deutscher. The 'History' was later crisply summarized as a textbook, 'The Russian Revolution from Lenin to Stalin' (1979). The premiss for the work was that the Soviet Union was as legitimate a subject of study as England under Henry VIII; that the Soviet experience had something to teach mankind; and that the system in some form was here to stay. As time went on, the first assumption took hold and opened up a field of research to many scholars who had had no idea that such work was practicable; the second assumption gradually fell away or was subsumed under lessons for less developed countries which have now largely been discarded; and the final assumption collapsed with the downfall of the Soviet Union in August 1991. By then, however, Carr had died, leaving behind him a partially completed history of the Communist International -- 'Twilight of Comintern' (1982) and 'The Comintern and the Spanish Civil War' (1984). The latter was pulled together for publication by Tamara Deutscher. 
Carr's intellectual journey had been occasioned by an accident of fate through what he witnessed from afar at the Foreign Office in 1917. As a result his life became extraordinarily fruitful, packed with controversy at every step, and left a great deal to posterity; but a price was paid in terms of his private life. He left Anne at the end of the war, and cohabited with Joyce Marion Forde, 'nee' Stock ('b'. 1903), who was the jilted wife of the noted anthropologist (Cyril) Daryll Forde, until January 1964. He then married (Catherine) Betty Abigail Behrens (1904-1989), historian of France, on 10 December 1966, only to part with her in the summer before his death, which occurred at a nursing home in Queen Edith's Way, Cambridge, on 4 November 1982; he was cremated at Cambridge crematorium in Huntingdon Road. 
Fervently individualist, ferociously intelligent, and scrupulously honest, Carr was by nature reserved and taciturn. Burdened by emotions with which he found it difficult to cope, he was always more relaxed in writing than in conversation. He none the less had a mordant wit and a certain charm when he chose to exercise it, delighting in gossip yet without ever entirely escaping a sense of guilt -- doubtless stemming from a strict Victorian upbringing -- at such reckless indulgence. No one ever claimed that he was boring. 


@@@@@


doc= 30903


Carritt, (Hugh) David Graham (1927-1982), art historian and picture dealer, was born at 2 Royal Avenue, Chelsea, London on 15 April 1927, the only son of Reginald Graham Carritt, a lecturer in music, and his wife, Christian Norah Begg. He had two sisters, one older, the other his twin. Arriving at preparatory school, he was told he might have one magazine subscription. He asked for 'Country Life', which he had been enjoying in bound volumes since he was five or six, in his grandfather's library. He was sent to Rugby School when twelve. Starved of beautiful things to look at, he wrote to owners of collections within bicycle range, asking if he might visit. 
Carritt won an open scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, where he took a third-class degree in modern history (1948). While at Oxford he caught the attention of Benedict Nicolson, editor of the 'Burlington Magazine'. Nicolson took his protege to visit the art historian Bernard Berenson in Florence -- 'The finest eye of his generation', was Berenson's considered judgement. 
Always a Londoner, Carritt settled first in a flat over a dairy in Mayfair, working as a private dealer and writing not only for the 'Burlington Magazine', but also for the 'Evening Standard' and 'The Spectator'. In 1964 he joined Christies' old master paintings department, where he played a large part in reviving the fortunes of the firm; and in 1970 he set up David Carritt Ltd, owned by the international art-investment company of Artemis. Here, in his later years, he mounted a number of small and very personal exhibitions. 
For a quarter of a century, between 1952 when he discovered a Caravaggio ('The Concert', Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) in a retired naval officer's house, and 1977 when he saw that a picture ('Psyche Showing her Sisters her Gifts from Cupid', National Gallery, London) catalogued as by Carle van Loo in Lord Rosebery's Mentmore collection sale was in fact an early J. H. Fragonard, Carritt dazzled the art world and intrigued the general public with a series of detective feats remarkable for their number, variety, and importance. 'Connoisseurs agree', stated the 'New York Times', 'that he had no peer, and has no successor'. 
Carritt himself took most pleasure in his discovery of a painting by Rogier van der Weyden ('St Ivo'[?], National Gallery, London) at the cottage of Joan, Lady Baird. This beautiful picture was not just lost; it was unrecorded. Its attribution to van der Weyden entailed much pacing round the Flemish rooms of the National Gallery. He also attributed the Tiepolo allegory fixed to a ceiling of the Egyptian embassy in London, scanned by countless pairs of eyes before his comprehended it. There was a fictional flavour to his discovery of five large and very dirty Francesco Guardi canvases rolled up like linoleum in a Dublin shed. In 1956, when he was still in his twenties, a photograph in the Courtauld Library recalled to Carritt a drawing in Hamburg, on the basis of which he attributed to Durer a painting held to be by a minor Veronese master. 
Carritt published little, but devoted much effort to other men's causes. Pierre Rosenberg, for example, in the catalogue of the Paris Chardin exhibition of 1979, acknowledged his very significant contribution to that great enterprise. 
In the earlier days, when he practised regularly, Carritt was an excellent pianist, and his knowledge of the baroque and Viennese classics was thorough. He was a witty and indiscreet talker. Friends relished his cooking. Colleagues agreed that he was no businessman. Friends and colleagues united in admiration of his courage when in the grip of cancer. He died on 3 August 1982 at his flat at 120 Mount Street, London. He never married. 
H. J. F. Jones', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30904


Carter, John Waynflete (1905-1975), bibliographer and antiquarian bookseller, was born at 6 High Street, Eton, on 10 May 1905, the eldest of two sons and two daughters of Thomas Buchanan Carter, an architect but later an Eton master and in Anglican orders, and his wife, Margaret Teresa Stone. Strong family connections on both sides prompted his lifelong devotion to Eton College, where he was a king's scholar (and eventually became a fellow in 1967). He was subsequently, from 1924, a scholar of King's College, Cambridge, where he took first classes in both parts of the classical tripos. In his last year at Cambridge he attended A. E. Housman's lectures, which he found highly sympathetic. Housman's account of the Renaissance editors of Catullus encouraged Carter's collection of the works of a poet whom he long cherished intentions of editing (the books are now at the University of Texas). Carter repaid his debt to Housman by editing his 'Collected Poems' (editions from 1939 onwards, anonymously) and 'Selected Prose' (1961); and with John Sparrow he compiled a bibliography first published in 1941 and revised in 1952. His enthusiasm for old books was thus sharpened by the critical spirit and a systematic approach that marked all his bibliographical work. His wife, Ernestine Marie Fantl (1906-1983) ['see 'Carter, Ernestine Marie], daughter of Siegfried Fantl of Savannah, Georgia, whom he married in 1936, shared his tastes and discrimination; she became a leading fashion writer and an associate editor of the 'Sunday Times'. 
On leaving Cambridge Carter joined the London branch of the New York publishers and booksellers Charles Scribner's Sons, for whom he worked as European agent from 1927 to 1939, returning after war service as managing director from 1946 to 1953. The antiquarian book business Carter built up rapidly gained a high reputation in the trade. He came into contact with the book collector Michael Sadleir, who as a director of Constable's published his first book, 'Binding Variants in English Publishing, 1820-1900' (1932). 
It was Sadleir, too, who had the courage to publish 'An Enquiry into the Nature of Certain Nineteenth Century Pamphlets' (1934), in which Carter had collaborated with Graham Pollard. The young co-authors had come to suspect as creative forgeries some fifty early 'editions' of the lesser works of prominent Victorian authors (for example, the so-called 'Reading' edition of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's 'Sonnets from the Portuguese') which all antedated the known first editions and were therefore of special interest to collectors. The 'Enquiry' combined textual criticism with the chemical analysis of papers and intensive scrutiny of the typographical anachronisms these expensive pamphlets shared. It made a fine detective story in a great age of detective stories, and its final, carefully unstated indictment of the then most eminent and respected of living British book collectors, Thomas James Wise, created a sensation. The bibliographical establishment was strongly defensive of its pundit, but Carter (as the better-known of the two authors) did not weaken; neither did Pollard and Sadleir. Beyond initial general denial, Wise could offer no defence; he died in 1937. Carter and Pollard continued to gather additional evidence for a second edition of the 'Enquiry', which eventually came out posthumously (much augmented in a 'Sequel', by Nicolas Barker and John Collins) in 1983. 
Carter's bibliographical interests extended far beyond scrutinizing suspect Victorian pamphlets. He had excellent taste in fine printing, particularly of the sixteenth century, and his own fine italic hand was modelled on the calligraphy of the same period. His enthusiasms for the prose of Sir Thomas Browne and the illustrative work of Paul Nash were happily combined in the Curwen Press edition of 'Urne-Buriall' (1932), a masterpiece of inter-war British book production. With his bookseller friends Percy Muir and David Randall he made a speciality of music manuscripts and first editions. His serendipity as a book hunter once discovered a set of Audubon's signed drawings of 1827 for 'Birds of America'. Carter discerned the potential of detective fiction as a collecting genre, on which he contributed a pioneering essay to 'New Paths in Book Collecting', which he edited in 1934. He was a pioneer, too, in the history of science, preparing in 1938 a Scribner catalogue of 'Science and Thought in the 19th Century'. His interest continued as the fashion and the academic discipline developed, with the great 'Printing and the Mind of Man' exhibition of 1963, and its authoritative catalogue; Carter was one of the principal organizers. 
In 1939 Carter joined the Ministry of Information, first in censorship duties and from 1944 in New York, where his work for British information services included 'Victory in Burma' (1945), to tell America of the British share in the burden of war in the Far East. He returned to Scribner's in 1946, until the London branch closed in 1953. In 1951 his career as a bookseller had culminated in his tracing and purchasing the Shuckburgh copy of the 'Gutenberg Bible', which as a great novelty he arranged to be flown across the Atlantic to its new owner. Carter briefly resumed his career in the public service as personal assistant to Sir Roger Makins, then ambassador in Washington, from 1953 to 1955; he was appointed CBE for his services in 1956. He then joined Sothebys as an associate director (1956-72) and was much involved in the rapid expansion of the firm, using his transatlantic connections to great advantage. 
In 1947 Carter was Sandars reader at Cambridge University; the lectures were published as 'Taste and Technique in Book-Collecting' (1948), and were followed by 'Books and Book-Collectors' (1956), a gathering of his elegant occasional writings. His 'ABC for Book Collectors' (1952, and frequently revised) was immediately recognized as authoritative; it is still valued, not least for its pungent commentary. Carter was a regular contributor to the 'Times Literary Supplement', and to the 'Book Collector', edited by his friend John Hayward. Although he never produced the major work of scholarship his friends hoped for, having too modest an estimate of his own capacity, he was a fine ambassador for the whole world of antiquarian books. Some members of the trade, thinking him condescending, disliked him, but he was unfailingly kind, and generous with his time, particularly to beginners. The award of the gold medal of the Bibliographical Society in 1974 (by which time illness forbade a formal presentation) showed that the world of books knew what it owed him. 
Carter's standards were high, in scholarship and deportment alike. Tall and handsome in appearance, elegant in dress, with an eyeglass 'before which' (his 'Times' obituarist, A. N. L. Munby, claimed) 'head waiters quailed', he took his transatlantic cultural responsibilities seriously enough to compose a short treatise on the correct mixing of a dry Martini. Carter died at St George's Nursing Home, 61 St George's Square, Westminster, on 18 March 1975. 


