@@@@@


doc= 30905


Wilson, Eleanora Mary Carus- (1897-1977), economic historian, was born in Montreal, Canada, on 27 December 1897, the only daughter and younger child of Charles Ashley Carus-Wilson (1860-1942), then professor of civil engineering at McGill University, Montreal, and his wife, Mary Louisa Georgina (died 1935), daughter of Colonel Martin Petrie, who had been one of the earliest women students at University College, London. Apart from her early transatlantic years, Eleanora Carus-Wilson was quintessentially English, in both her personal and her scholarly style. Her life and work were accomplished in symbiosis with Westfield College, London. Her maternal grandfather had been a foundation trustee of the college. Its benefactor and founder, Miss Dudin Brown, had been introduced to its future principal by her mother, who was subsequently a lecturer in English on the staff for five years in the 1880s and then active in the administration. Eleanora went to Westfield herself in 1918 after St Paul's Girls' School, graduating BA in 1921, and returned after some years as a schoolteacher, taking her MA with distinction in 1926 and working as a part-time lecturer at Westfield in 1930-31. Her first edited book in 1932 was a history of the college. She was Leverhulme research fellow there in 1936-8. Then, when a senior academic, once again she became increasingly identified with Westfield -- as a governor after 1965 and as president of the Westfield College Association from 1974. She was due to take the chair at the governing body on the day she died. 
Apart from her years as a temporary civil servant in the Ministry of Food during the Second World War, Eleanora Carus-Wilson's life, like that of her parents, was encompassed by scholarly pursuits, always centred on London. Eileen Power became her main mentor when she became a member of her seminar in the 1930s. The research bridgeheads made under Eileen Power's direction proved to be the territories which Eleanora Carus-Wilson consolidated with magisterial authority during the remainder of her life. Eventually the mantle of Eileen Power fell upon her own shoulders when she herself had become a leading medievalist: as lecturer (after 1945) at the London School of Economics, then reader (1948), and as professor of economic history at London University from 1953 to her retirement in 1965. English medieval trade was her first and last major field -- with the study of the urban centres which cradled it, the organizations which sustained it, and the principal industry which provided its base. 'The overseas trade of Bristol' and 'The Iceland trade' appeared in a volume edited by Eileen Power and M. M. Postan in 1933, consolidated by a substantial volume of documents edited for the Bristol Record Society in 1937. 
This aspect of Eleanora Carus-Wilson's work culminated in 1963 with the authoritative volume, written jointly with her own pupil Olive Coleman, 'England's Export Trade, 1275-1547' -- a meticulous and comprehensive critical assessment of the surviving customs accounts. Concern with the quantitative record of medieval trade (involving formidable difficulties of interpreting refractory documents) matched equally meticulous investigations into its commercial structures (notably the Merchant Venturer organizations in London and Bristol) and into the connections between trade, industry, and urban development more widely -- in particular for Bristol and Exeter. Integral with this was the study of the cloth industry itself, notably in the major chapter in the 'Cambridge Economic History of Europe' (vol. 2, 1952). Her most renowned article, which raised some controversy over its wider interpretation, was provocatively entitled 'An industrial revolution of the thirteenth century' ('Economic History Review', 11, 1941) and was an equally meticulous documentation of the introduction and diffusion of the fulling mill. 
With such a steady consolidation of scholarship in a major, defined field, Eleanora Carus-Wilson became widely recognized for her intellectual authority: as associate member of the Royal Academy of Belgium (1961); fellow of the British Academy (1963); trustee of the Cassel Educational Trust (1963); Ford's lecturer in English history at Oxford University (1964-5); president of the Economic History Society (1966-9), president of the Society of Medieval Archaeology (1966-9); honorary LLD of Smith College, USA (1968); honorary fellow of the London School of Economics (1969). In all this the person matched the scholarship. Eleanora Carus-Wilson knew her own measure and her own mind. She kept things very much under control. She was precise, clear-cut, self-assured, always restrained and polite. But her eyes could slightly narrow behind her glasses and remarks dulcet in tone, softly spoken in the reticent, even prim, style of a very English lady, could mask a devastating content. She had a personal and intellectual authority about her which women academics in England -- particularly, perhaps, distinguished women academics of her own generation -- possessed in unrivalled measure. 
Not having married, she filled her days with activities over a wide spectrum of academic and cultural affairs right to the end of her life. She listed 'music and mountains' as her recreations, which signalled long-standing membership of the Bach Choir and annual active holidays with friends in Switzerland. Even in her scholarship there was vivid personal awareness; usually hidden but allowed to escape in some of her less formal pieces. 'The significance of the secular sculpture in the Lane Chapel, Cullompton', for example, is a charming account of medieval cloth-making equipment, with teazel frames and shears being wielded by angels in the vaulting (and John Lane's merchant's mark prominent upon the frames). Its splendid precision of observation and detail establishes a lively dialogue between present and past, between her own awareness and the living history of which she wrote and to which she had dedicated her life. Eleanora Carus-Wilson died at St Charles Hospital, Ladbroke Grove, London, on 1 February 1977. 
Peter Mathias', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30906


Cary, Sir (Arthur Lucius) Michael (1917-1976), civil servant, was born in Harrow, Middlesex, on 3 April 1917, the eldest of four sons of (Arthur) Joyce Lunel Cary (1888-1957), author, and his wife, Gertrude Margaret Ogilvie (1891-1949). His younger brothers included the composer Tristram Cary. He went to Eton College as a scholar from 1931 to 1935, and won the king's prize for German. He won a major classical scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, where he took first classes in classical honour moderations and 'literae humaniores' (1937 and 1939). He was prominent in college life and gained a half-blue at lacrosse. He passed the home civil service examination and joined the Air Ministry in 1939. He spent little more than a year there before joining the Royal Navy in December 1940. 
During the Second World War Cary, who had shown an interest in electronics at Eton, served as a radar instructor, then as radar officer on the aircraft-carrier 'Illustrious' before joining the staff of the director of radar equipment in the Admiralty. Early in 1945 he left the navy and returned to the Air Ministry, where he became private secretary to the parliamentary under-secretary of state for air, John Strachey. Finding him deluged with vast numbers of letters about demobilization, Cary asked for a team of bright young people to draft less formal replies and speed up the process. This was an early example of his positive method of work -- to size up a problem, find the solution, and persuade colleagues to take action. 
Cary soon became private secretary to the secretary of state for air. He was promoted to assistant secretary in 1951. After a spell as head of the air staff secretariat he went to Paris as counsellor in the United Kingdom delegation to NATO. He was admirably suited for the post, not least because of his fluency in French and German. He became a well-known figure in NATO, and in wider circles in Paris. 
On his return to the Air Ministry in 1958 Cary became assistant under-secretary of state (personnel). This post primarily concerned RAF personnel, and involved many visits to talk directly with service personnel about their problems. In 1961 he then became deputy secretary of the cabinet, initially under Sir Norman Brook and subsequently under Sir Burke Trend. He was much involved in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, when he was acting cabinet secretary because of his chief's illness. 
In 1964 Cary became second permanent secretary in the Admiralty in the newly reorganized and unified Ministry of Defence. The next four years were difficult. There was much inter-service bickering over policy and roles. Resources were cut, which led in 1966 to the resignation of his minister, Christopher Mayhew, and the chief of the naval staff. The hard grind of these years required all his skills. He suffered a near-fatal heart attack and went on a recuperative voyage. He fell ill again and was flown off to hospital in Malta. 
Cary was the last secretary of the Admiralty (Samuel Pepys had been the third). The first sea lord had seen to it that on Cary's arrival he was immediately measured for his 'board rig', invented by Winston Churchill for civilian board members to wear while on Royal Navy ships. Cary was the last person entitled to wear it. He questioned whether it was appropriate for him to appear on the Admiralty's letters patent as 'A.L.M. Cary Esq. C.B., late Lieutenant R.N.V.R.' after a row of senior admirals. He was told that records showed that no other secretary had held commissioned rank in the Royal Navy. 
Cary next became permanent secretary of the Ministry of Public Building and Works, where from 1968 to 1970 he worked hard at modernizing the ministry, welding professional and administrative staff into single teams as recommended in the 1968 Fulton report, and paying many visits overseas to find out how the ministry managed its stewardship of government buildings. Once he stayed overnight at an RAF airfield in the Persian Gulf manned totally by males unaccompanied by wives. Cary inquired about accommodation for his female private secretary -- then a relative rarity -- and was told she would be safe in the sick bay under armed guard. 
The year 1970 saw the advent of very large Whitehall departments. The Ministry of Public Building and Works was abolished and its functions included in the new Department of the Environment, in which Cary became the secretary, housing and construction. He was caught again by changes in the machinery of government in 1971, when he was sent as secretary to the newly established procurement executive, a free-standing part of the Ministry of Defence. He became its chief executive in 1972. He was permanent under-secretary of state for defence from 1974 until his death. 
In all these posts -- five in six years -- there was a heavy, time-consuming and sometimes acrimonious problem of reorganization, restructuring, reducing, and redeploying of staff. Cary was heavily involved in the Labour government's defence review, which started in December 1974. Its aim was to cut defence expenditure from 5.5 per cent to 4.4 per cent of gross national product by 1985. In policy terms the outcome was to concentrate primarily on NATO and Europe. Service manpower was cut back and substantial equipment savings achieved by re-phasing or delaying deliveries. Cary was chairman, until he died, of yet another committee tasked with reviewing defence organization. 
Cary was an extraordinary man by any standards. Possessed of outstanding intellectual ability, he used it not only in his career but over a wide range of other interests. He excelled in making harpsichords and clavichords in the well-equipped workshop in his house at Blackheath, to which he moved in 1947. He had a deep commitment to the highest standards of workmanship. He chose the wood and other materials with the utmost care, made the plans with meticulous concentration, and cut every piece with exactitude. The completed instrument was proudly endorsed with the letters A.L.M.C. He also had a penchant for old Rolls-Royce motor-cars -- rather battered -- starting in the 1950s with a 1926 model. Into these he crammed his family and careered in style around the streets of Paris when he worked there. He was twice married: In 1942 he married Betty Yingcheng, daughter of Sao-Ke Alfred Sze, a Chinese diplomat, whom he divorced in 1946. In the same year he married Isabel Margaret (died 1998), daughter of Charles Duff Leslie, mining engineer; they had four sons (one adopted) and a daughter. 
Cary had enormous self-confidence. He was immensely good with people. He was relaxed and informal. His habit of talking to everyone on visits frequently upset minutely timed programmes. He was an outstanding conversationalist, enjoying his own talk as well as that of others. He was a complex character. He had much talent and so many interests that he did not always find it easy to decide on which to concentrate. He believed that there was more to life than work. He was a quick worker and a natural delegator, but as a craftsman his attention to detail was total. 
Cary enjoyed to the full a wide and active social life. Growing up in the Joyce Cary family meant much to him. His own family life was important to him; family gatherings, rituals, and celebrations mattered. This zest for living a full life, and a range of abilities that few possessed, prevented him attaining the Whitehall heights that in early days had seemed within his reach. This was his choice. 
Cary was appointed CB in 1964, KCB in 1965 and GCB in 1976. In 1967 Cary was elected a fellow of Eton; in 1971 he became commodore of the Civil Service Sailing Association; in 1972 president of the Institution of General Technician Engineers; and in 1973 he was elected to an honorary fellowship of Trinity College, Oxford, and to a fellowship of the Royal College of Art. He died suddenly of a coronary thrombosis at his home, Huntswood House, Harpsdon, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, on 6 March 1976. 


@@@@@


doc= 30907


Casey, Richard Gavin Gardiner, Baron Casey (1890-1976), politician in Australia and diplomatist, was born on 29 August 1890 in George Street, Brisbane, Queensland, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Richard Gardiner Casey (1846-1919), a pastoralist with mining interests, of Brisbane, and his wife, Evelyn Jane (1866-1943), younger daughter of George Harris, merchant, of Brisbane. He was educated at Melbourne Church of England grammar school, Melbourne University, and Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he graduated with a second class in mechanical sciences in 1913. Casey returned to Australia via the United States and had barely begun an engineering career when he joined the Australian Imperial Force in October 1914. He served in Egypt, Gallipoli, and France, rising to the rank of general staff officer. He was awarded the MC in 1917 and appointed to the DSO in the following year. 
When his father died in 1919, Casey returned to Australia to assume his father's directorships. However, he craved travel and public service, and on 1 October 1924 the Australian prime minister, S. M. Bruce, appointed him Australia's first liaison officer attached to the cabinet secretariat in Whitehall. Casey's task was to keep Bruce 'au courant' with day-to-day imperial problems, and occasionally to act for the Australian government in relations with the City and at the League of Nations in Geneva. While in London, Casey married Ethel Marian Sumner 
(Maie; 1891-1983)
, writer and artist, and daughter of Major-General Sir Charles Snodgrass Ryan, surgeon, of Melbourne, on 24 June 1926. They were to have a daughter and a son. 
In 1931 Casey joined the newly formed United Australia Party and entered the Australian federal parliament as member for Corio (Victoria). His rise was rapid, and he served as assistant treasurer from 1933 to 1935 and as treasurer from 1935 to 1939. His financial management was orthodox, though he had a social conscience which in 1938 led to Australia's first 'National Health Insurance Bill'. Unfortunately R. G. Menzies chose the issue to split the cabinet in a challenge to the leadership of the prime minister, Joseph Lyons, and the bill was shelved. In April 1939 Lyons died, and Casey, Lyons's favourite for successor, chose to stand aside for Bruce. It was a bad miscalculation: Bruce reneged, Casey's rival Menzies assumed the mantle, and Casey lost the treasury. 
Menzies appointed Casey minister for supply and development to organize the economy for the impending war. In October 1939 Casey visited London (where he was sworn a privy councillor) for supply talks and to help decide Australian military commitment to Europe. With Casey safely out of the country, Menzies won over the Country Party, who still had wanted Casey as prime minister. Consequently Casey resigned his seat to become Australia's first minister to the United States in March 1940. There he worked hard, usually in harness with the British ambassador, to bring the Americans into the war against Hitler and to secure a guarantee of aid against potential Japanese attacks on British possessions in the Pacific. Both objectives were achieved by late 1941. 
Casey's work impressed Winston Churchill, who, in early 1942, appointed him British minister resident in the Middle East with a seat in the war cabinet. Among his most ticklish jobs was negotiating the replacing of Sir Claude Auchinleck as commander by Alexander and Montgomery in August 1942. After El Alamein, Casey concentrated upon civil administration. He employed characteristically simple and direct methods. Cabinet was persuaded to 'mop up' inflation in the Middle East, including Iran, by buying up $221/4 million of local currencies with gold between 1943 and 1945. Wheat shortages were solved by massive procurement campaigns. A Lebanese political crisis was averted when a Casey bluff induced the French to release the local cabinet from gaol. 
So successful was Casey's trouble-shooting that, in early 1944, Churchill made him governor of Bengal to secure the base for the drive by Mountbatten against the Japanese in Burma. Here too his new broom was effective. He reorganized the embattled administration, inoculated virtually the whole population (54 of 65 million) against smallpox, and set about a gigantic food procurement programme to offset the likelihood of another famine of 1943 proportions, when over a million had died. Casey's methods impressed the government of India, which gave him an extra $10 million subvention in his first year, but upset local politicians, and in his last year in Bengal he ruled by decree. In March 1946 he returned to Australia and in the next year became federal president of the Liberal Party. 
Only in December 1949 did Casey manage to re-enter Australian politics and the ministry. From 1951 to 1960, as minister for external affairs, he encouraged closer relations with Asia and the United States via the Colombo plan and ANZUS and SEATO pacts. A notable achievement was the Antarctic treaty of 1959 which secured the continent for peaceful scientific research. In 1956 he privately opposed the use of force over Suez, an issue which helped lose him a ballot for the deputy leadership of the Liberal Party. He retired in 1960 and was created a life peer, as Baron Casey of Berwick and the City of Westminster. From 1965 to 1969 he was governor-general of Australia. In the latter year he was created KG, the first Australian to receive the honour. Always happiest as a lieutenant to the great, Casey had a pleasant, direct manner, innate decency, and a capacity for sustained work which made him one of Australia's and the Commonwealth's outstanding diplomatists and administrators. Nevertheless, he lacked the mental agility, political sense, and sheer ruthlessness necessary to achieve the Australian prime ministership, to which he long aspired. He died of pneumonia in St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, on 17 June 1976, and was buried on 22 June in Macedon cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 30908


Thompson, Gertrude Caton- (1888-1985), archaeologist, was born in London on 1 February 1888, the younger child and only daughter of William Caton Thompson, of Lancashire-Yorkshire stock, and his wife, Ethel Gertrude, daughter of William Bousfield Page, surgeon, of Carlisle. Her father, a barrister and head of the legal branch of the London and North Western Railway, died when she was five years old. Her mother remarried in 1900; her new husband was George Moore, a general practitioner of Maidenhead who was a widower with four sons and a daughter. Her father had ensured her financial independence and, after being educated privately and at the Links School, Eastbourne, until the First World War she enjoyed a social life in London and the country, and included one auspicious visit to Egypt among her travels abroad. 
In 1917 Caton-Thompson was employed by the Ministry of Shipping and promoted to a senior secretarial post in which she attended the Paris peace conference. She declined a permanent appointment in the civil service, and in 1921, aged thirty-three and with none of the usual qualifications, she began her archaeological studies under the Egyptologist Flinders Petrie at University College, London, joining his excavations at Abydos in Upper Egypt that winter. The next year was spent at Newnham College, Cambridge (with which she remained associated for the rest of her life), and in attending university courses. She returned to Egypt in 1924 and joined Petrie and Guy Brunton at Qau el Kibir. While they concentrated their excavations on predynastic cemeteries she had concluded, well ahead of her time, that settlement sites would be more informative, and in characteristically independent fashion she embarked on her own excavations on the site of a predynastic village at Hamamiyyah. There she made the first discovery of remains, well stratified, of the very early Badarian civilization. With Guy Brunton she wrote 'The Badarian Civilization' (1928). 
In 1925 Caton-Thompson turned to north-western Egypt and the desert margins of Lake El Faiyum, accompanied by the Oxford geologist Elinor Gardner, to assist in an attempt to correlate lake levels with archaeological stratification. In three El Faiyum seasons they discovered two unknown neolithic cultures which proved later to be related to the Khartoum neolithic. They published their findings in 'The Desert Fayum' (1934). Her next assignment followed an invitation in 1929 from the British Association for the Advancement of Science to investigate the great monumental ruins at Zimbabwe in southern Africa. She confirmed the conclusion reached by David Randall-MacIver in 1905 that they belonged to an indigenous African culture and were not, as widely believed, of oriental origin. She was also able to date the ruins back to the eighth or ninth century AD and to produce evidence of Zimbabwe's links with Indian Ocean trade. 
Having completed her Zimbabwe report with her usual speed ('The Zimbabwe Culture', 1931) Caton-Thompson embarked in 1930, with Elinor Gardner, on an extended campaign of excavations on prehistoric sites at Kharga oasis. These excavations, the first on Saharan oasis sites, inaugurated a far-ranging programme of research on the palaeolithic of north Africa and led to her book 'Kharga Oasis in Pre-History' (1952). 
Caton-Thompson's last excavations, in 1937, were the only ones outside Africa apart from some fieldwork in Malta in her student days. These were at al-Huraydah in the Hadhramaut, southern Arabia, where she excavated the Moon Temple and tombs of the fifth and fourth centuries BC. Carried out in a region then rarely visited by Western, let alone female, travellers, they were the first scientific excavations in southern Arabia. Again she was accompanied by Elinor Gardner. A third, less compatible, member of the party was the writer and traveller Freya Stark. 'The Tombs and Moon Temple of Hureidha, Hadramaut' appeared in 1944. 
Caton-Thompson retired from fieldwork after the Second World War and from her home in Cambridge pursued her research activities and visited excavations in east Africa. She never sought or accepted a professorship. In 1961, already in her seventies, she became a founder member of the British School of History and Archaeology in East Africa (later the British Institute in Eastern Africa), served on its council for ten years, and was later elected an honorary member. An honorary fellowship of Newnham College, Cambridge, and an honorary LittD (1954) of that university were among academic honours bestowed on her. She was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1944 and not long before her death a fellow of University College, London. 
Professionally Gertrude Caton-Thompson was a formidable personality, a trenchant critic, adamant in academic argument, and an indefatigable worker. She was an intrepid traveller and at Abydos, it is said, slept in an emptied tomb with cobras for company and a pistol under her pillow to ward off prowling hyenas. Although by nature quiet and retiring, she was excellent company and her dry humour and laconic, incisive comments on people and events became a rich source of anecdote in Cambridge circles. She was a generous benefactor, especially of the National Trust for the purchase of land near where she lived, Court Farm, Broadway, Worcestershire; a home happily shared with two former Cambridge colleagues, the De Navarros, for thirty years. She died there on 18 April 1985. She was unmarried. 
L. P. Kirwan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30909


Cazalet, Peter Victor Ferdinand (1907-1973), racehorse trainer, was born on 15 January 1907 at Fairlawne, near Tonbridge in Kent, the fourth and youngest child and third son of William Marshall Cazalet (1865-1932) of Fairlawne and his wife, Maud Lucia Heron, daughter of Sir John Robert Heron-Maxwell, seventh baronet, of Springkell, Dumfriesshire. The Cazalets were a Basque family who came to England as Huguenot refugees. Peter Cazalet was educated at Eton College, where he developed as an excellent all-round player of ball games and made a century in the cricket match against Harrow at Lord's, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he obtained a third-class degree in chemistry in 1930, a cricket blue, and half-blues for rackets, real tennis, and squash. 
It was during his three years at Christ Church that the young man, who as a child used to hide whenever a pony was produced, suddenly took to riding. Determined, fearless, and superbly co-ordinated, he soon became a proficient amateur rider over fences and hurdles. After a brief unproductive flirtation with industrial chemistry, he spent two years improving his jockeyship and learning stable management with the successful Berkshire trainer Sonny Hall. 
In 1932 Peter Cazalet inherited Fairlawne, a large William and Mary house, his eldest brother having been killed in the First World War and the second brother wishing to live elsewhere. He began to build up his own small string of jumpers with H. E. (Harry) Whiteman holding the trainer's licence. It was then, in the early thirties, that Anthony Mildmay, who had been in Cazalet's house at Eton, asked whether he could come and ride out in the mornings on his way to work in the City. Thus was born a friendship and sporting partnership which flourished until Mildmay's untimely death by drowning in 1950. Its saddest and best known moment, at least before the war, was when Mildmay's reins came unbuckled in the 1936 Grand National, allowing his horse Davy Jones, who had a clear lead and looked a certain winner, to run off the course before the last fence. Cazalet rode in that and four other Nationals but a bad fall in 1939 compelled him to give up riding and take out his own trainer's licence. 
Cazalet spent the Second World War first in the Royal Artillery (1939-40) and then, with Mildmay as one of his platoon commanders, as a Welsh Guards company commander in the guards armoured division. The moment peace came the two friends returned to Fairlawne, determined to create a training stable run on the best possible lines and, above all, to win the Grand National, preferably with Mildmay in the saddle. That goal was thwarted for a second time when Mildmay finished a close third on Cromwell in 1948, having ridden blind over the last two fences with his head forced down on his chest by an attack of cramp (a similar attack almost certainly caused his death two years later). The friends never achieved a Grand National win but Mildmay -- M'Lord as a devoted racing public knew him -- was leading amateur in each of the post-war seasons leading up to his death, and did National Hunt racing a great service by communicating his enthusiasm to Queen Elizabeth and persuading her and her daughter Princess Elizabeth to have a horse in training with Cazalet. The partnership horse, Monaveen, won for the first time in 1949 but when Princess Elizabeth became queen she decided to concentrate on flat racing, so it was in the queen mother's blue and buff colours that Dick Francis went out from the Cazalet stable to ride Devon Loch in the 1956 Grand National. Fifty yards from the winning post, with victory in his grasp, Devon Loch collapsed. That bitter disappointment did not diminish the queen mother's support for National Hunt racing and, of the 1100 winners Cazalet trained at Fairlawne, more than 250 carried her colours. They were ridden by several great stable jockeys including Bryan Marshall, Dick Francis, Bill Rees, Arthur Freeman, and, perhaps the most stylish of all, David Mould. 
Three times leading trainer, Cazalet sent out what was then a record total of eighty-two winners in 1964-5. Fairlawne was run on old-fashioned lines but, though a strict disciplinarian with a merciless eye for detail, its master was also scrupulously fair. A high proportion of his stable lads stayed with him throughout their working lives and were both glad and proud to do so. They and the horses alike were always beautifully turned out and, even if some later trainers with all-weather gallops at their disposal might reckon the Fairlawne facilities barely adequate, the Cazalet horses were always as fit as horses can be made. 
Himself rather shy and uninterested in what he considered pointless chit-chat, Cazalet was, by normal standards, a somewhat aloof figure on the racecourse. But, once formed, his friendships were very seldom broken and often a highly developed sense of humour warmed and brightened his attitude to life. 
On 14 December 1932 Cazalet married Leonora, daughter of Leonard Rowley and stepdaughter of the author P. G. Wodehouse; they had a son and daughter. Their son, Edward, particularly delighted his father by becoming a first-rate amateur rider; having forsaken the turf for the bar, he later became a QC and a judge. Leonora Cazalet died in 1944 while undergoing a minor operation and in 1949 Cazalet married Zara Sophie Kathleen Mary, daughter of Sir Harry Stapleton Mainwaring, fifth baronet, and former wife of Major (Alexander) Ronald George Strutt, later fourth Baron Belper, with whom she had one son. She and Cazalet had three sons, one of whom died in 1956. 
Cazalet died at Fairlawne on 29 May 1973. Each January, weather permitting, the Anthony Mildmay Peter Cazalet memorial steeplechase is run over 3 miles 5 furlongs at Sandown. When it was first run, called simply the Mildmay memorial, Cazalet won it with Cromwell, Mildmay's favourite horse, ridden by Bryan Marshall. 
John Oaksey', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30910


Cecil, David George Brownlow, sixth marquess of Exeter (1905-1981), athlete and politician, was born in the family's vast 350-year-old ancestral home, Burghley House, Stamford, Lincolnshire, on 9 February 1905. He was the second child and elder son in the family of four children of the fifth marquess, William Thomas Brownlow Cecil (1876-1956), and his wife, Myra Rowena Sibell ('b'. 1879), daughter of William Thomas Orde-Powlett, fourth Baron Bolton. Lord Burghley, as he was to be for more than fifty years, was educated at Eton College and from 1923 at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he studied engineering and obtained a BA in 1926. He was selected for Britain's 1924 Olympic team but hurdled poorly. However, in 1925 this striking blond-haired, aquiline-featured young patrician emerged as the world's pre-eminent hurdler. 
Burghley won both the high and low hurdles event in the inter-varsity sports against Oxford in 1925, 1926, and 1927 and became president of the Cambridge University athletics club in his last year. The time of 42.5 sec. recorded in Burghley's diary after he ran round the Great Court of Trinity College, Cambridge, before the twenty-third of the twenty-four noon-time chimes, was still unsurpassed half a century later. He went on to represent Great Britain in eleven full international matches and to win eight Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) titles and three British empire titles. He set English native records for the 120 yards high and 220 yards low hurdles with 14.5 and 24.7 sec. In 1927 he very briefly held the world's 440 yards hurdles record, set at 54.2 sec. at Stamford Bridge, London. 
Burghley's greatest hour came in the 400 metres hurdles final at the 1928 Olympic games in Amsterdam where, by deliberately running for third place in the semi-final, he arrived quite fresh for the six-man final. He and Britain's T. C. Livingstone-Learmonth drew the disadvantageous outside fifth and sixth lanes. Ranged against them were the world record holder and defending champion, F. Morgan Taylor (USA), Frank J. Cuhel (USA), the Italian Luigi Facelli, and Sweden's Sten Pettersson. Burghley went off seemingly too fast but reached the tenth and final flight of the all-wooden barriers just ahead of Cuhel. His finish was described as 'obstinate' and at the tape he won by a long yard in the Olympic record time of 53.4 sec., with Cuhel second and Morgan Taylor third, both in 53.6 sec. In that era before track suits he donned his greatcoat and confined his comment to 'The Americans are frightfully good losers'. In the fashion of the day his father, who sat alone at the back of the main stand, made no comment whatsoever, but his mother was later found to have kept a secret scrapbook of her son's many triumphs on the track. 
Burghley's enjoyment of amateur athletics was such that four years later he defended his Olympic title in Los Angeles. By this time he was married, a father, and an MP. In the general election of 1931 he had won the Labour-held seat of Peterborough with a majority of 12,434. Under the California sun he ran his fastest ever time of 52.2 sec. but still finished behind his fellow Cambridge blue Robert Tisdall of Ireland (51.7 seconds) and the two Americans Glen Hardin and his old rival Morgan Taylor. In the 4 x 400 metres relay he ran an outstanding third stage for Great Britain in 46.7 sec. behind America's world record-breaking quartet, adding a silver medal to his collection. He was the British Olympic captain in both 1932 and 1936. 
From 1933 to 1937 Burghley was chairman of the Junior Imperial League (president 1939). In the general election of 1935 he held his seat with a reduced majority. In the House of Commons, Burghley and Alan Lennox-Boyd (later Viscount Boyd of Merton) were the two fastest speakers and cherished their visits to the office of the 'Hansard' shorthand writers, where they had to be permitted to improve rather than merely correct their speech proofs. Burghley, though a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards until 1929 (when he resigned and obtained seats on the boards of a number of companies), was unable to take up combatant service in 1939 owing to a persistent leg injury. He was appointed a staff captain tank supply in 1940, and became assistant director with the rank of lieutenant-colonel in 1942. In August 1943 he left parliament to become governor of Bermuda, where he captivated many American and other allied visiting dignitaries. He was created KCMG in the same year. 
Burghley was chairman of the organizing and executive committee of the fourteenth Olympiad, held in Wembley stadium in London in 1948. George VI adamantly refused to attend and the prime minister, C. R. Attlee, was obliged to intervene since Olympic protocol required that the head of state of the host nation declare the games open in person. Predictably the king's sense of duty prevailed, and on 29 July he performed the ceremony. Burghley, who had only two years, instead of the customary six, in which to organize these first post-war games, had worked tirelessly in surmounting all the difficulties in an era of rationing, bomb damage, and national austerity. The success of this quadrennial festival of what was then amateur sport was a credit to his zeal. Some of his team were less richly honoured for their heroic efforts to make the games a British success than might have been appropriate had not an honour of any kind been withheld from their chairman. Burghley was president of the AAA (1936-76), the International Amateur Athletic Federation (1946-76), and the British Olympic Association (1966-77, chairman 1936-66). His fervent, some thought naive, belief that amateur and Olympic sport were a palliative in international strife brought him into conflict over the award in 1974 by the International Olympic Committee of the 1980 or twenty-second Olympiad to Moscow. He was obdurate in the face of mounting entreaties after the invasion of Afghanistan that Britain should pull out. Supported by lords Killanin and Luke, his defiance of the well-known wishes of the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, resulted in his being ostracized by those who thought British participation would also demoralize the four millions imprisoned in Soviet gulags and be an insult to the captive peoples of eastern Europe. 
Despite hip replacement operations, Burghley hunted with vigour, latterly with the Burghley hunt, up to 1967. He had succeeded to the marquessate in 1956. He often gave priority to local affairs over debates in the House of Lords because, as he said, 'They are of more importance to Mrs Buggins because it is her roof which is leaking'. In 1961 he was elected mayor of Stamford. He was honorary FRCS and had an honorary LLD from St Andrews University (of which he was rector from 1949 to 1952). 
On 10 January 1929 Burghley married Mary Theresa, fourth daughter of John Charles Montagu-Douglas-Scott, seventh duke of Buccleuch and ninth duke of Queensberry, at a time when the announcement of her engagement to Prince Henry, later duke of Gloucester, was regarded as imminent in royal circles. They had a son and three daughters but the son died of tubercular meningitis at the age of thirteen months in 1934. The marriage was dissolved in 1946 and on 12 December that year Burghley married Diana Mary (died 1982), widow of Lieutenant-Colonel David Walter Arthur William Forbes and daughter of the Hon. Arnold Henderson. The only child of his second marriage, Lady Victoria Leatham, was to become a vigorous and enterprising chatelaine of Burghley House, where he died on 21 October 1981. He was succeeded in the marquessate by his brother William Martin Alleyne Cecil (1909-1988). 


@@@@@


doc= 30911


Cecil, Robert Arthur James Gascoyne-, fifth marquess of Salisbury (1893-1972), politician, was born on 27 August 1893 at Hatfield House, Hatfield, Hertfordshire. He was the elder son and second of the four children of the politician James Edward Hubert Gascoyne-Cecil (1861-1947), who became the fourth marquess of Salisbury in 1903, and his wife, Lady Cicely Alice Gore (died 1955), daughter of the fifth earl of Arran and a descendant of Lord Melbourne. As heir to the marquessate, he bore the name Viscount Cranborne. To his friends he was known all his life as Bobbety. His was a patrician inheritance, and his lengthy career in the Conservative Party and the House of Lords was nothing if not patrician. The irony was that the period in which he most famously defended his traditionalist values, the late 1950s and early 1960s, was also the time of his political marginalization within his own party. 
Cranborne was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, but left Oxford for war service without completing his degree. Commissioned as a lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards, he saw action in France and won the Croix de Guerre. He was invalided home in September 1915 and on 8 December married Elizabeth Vere (died 1982), daughter of Lord Richard Cavendish. In 1916 he served as personal military secretary to the earl of Derby, secretary of state for war. 
After the war Cranborne joined a City billbroking firm, with which he stayed for some ten years. His entry to politics came at the general election of 1929, when he was returned as Conservative member for South Dorset. In 1934 he attained junior office, becoming parliamentary secretary to Anthony Eden (later the earl of Avon), who was at that time lord privy seal and minister without portfolio. Here began a long ministerial association. When Eden went to the Foreign Office in 1935, Cranborne accompanied him as under-secretary. When Eden resigned in February 1938 in protest against Neville Chamberlain's decision to parley with Mussolini, Cranborne resigned with him. In a personal statement to the Commons which angered Chamberlain, Cranborne described British policy towards Mussolini as a surrender to blackmail. The Munich agreement spurred him to a further attack; Chamberlain's achievement, he argued, was certainly not peace with honour, for the agreement had turned upon 'throwing [Czechoslovakia] to the wolves' ('Hansard 5C', 339, 4 Oct 1938, 232-3). 
Not surprisingly, Cranborne was brought back into office by Winston Churchill, who made him paymaster-general in May 1940 and then dominions secretary with a seat in cabinet in October. He was effective at the Dominions Office and soon acquired further responsibility. Churchill and Eden wanted him to speak for the government on foreign affairs in the upper house, and for this purpose he was raised to the Lords in January 1941 in his father's barony of Cecil of Essendon (though he continued to use the courtesy title of Lord Cranborne). In February 1942 he was appointed colonial secretary and leader of the House of Lords; the latter position was one his father had occupied as recently as 1925-9. He became at the same time Conservative Party leader in the Lords. Both his father and grandfather before him had held this office; he would retain it for fifteen years, the longest term since his grandfather's in 1881-1902. In November 1942 Cranborne left the Colonial Office and was for ten months lord privy seal, while continuing as leader of the Lords. Having declined an invitation to succeed Lord Linlithgow as viceroy of India, he returned to the Dominions Office in September 1943. He remained in charge of both dominions and the Lords until the 1945 election. 
Cranborne was an influential figure in the reformulation of Conservative policy that followed the Labour victory. He was quick to acknowledge that the Conservatives would have to come to terms with a changing Britain. The age of unrestricted democracy, he wrote to Eden in 1946, had arrived, and power now lay in the hands of 'the small man'. The sensible option for the Conservatives was to give the voter 'a stake in the country... that he himself knows he will lose if, as an elector, he acts irresponsibly' (Ramsden, 'Age of Churchill and Eden', 175). He was thus an early advocate of the property-owning democracy, albeit for essentially paternalist and strategic reasons. 
Throughout the Labour years Lord Salisbury (as he became in April 1947) was leader of the opposition in the Lords. Some have judged this the 'most effective' phase of his career ('DNB'). Leading a Conservative majority in the Lords but faced with the unprecedented situation of a Labour majority in the Commons, he devised guidelines, known unofficially as the Salisbury rules, under which the opposition would oppose while not rendering the system of government inoperable. In essence the Lords could choose to amend, but would not destroy or alter beyond recognition, the bills that comprised the government's declared programme. The gas and electricity nationalizations, for example, were treated in this way. But the government's plan to nationalize the profitable and efficient iron and steel industry was quite another matter. For Salisbury such a measure would constitute 'a definite step towards Communism' ('Hansard 5L', 162, 24 May 1949, 1018), and was in any case in excess of the government's mandate since it had not been fully spelt out in the 1945 manifesto. Faced with intense Conservative opposition, the government in 1947 postponed the 'Iron and Steel Bill', and in January 1948 introduced a 'Parliament Bill' with the aim of reducing the Lords' delaying power from two years to one. Having tried and failed to negotiate a compromise measure of upper house reform, Salisbury felt free to move the rejection of the 'Parliament Bill' and did so in three successive sessions. It was eventually enacted against Conservative resistance in December 1949. The 'Iron and Steel Bill' also became law late in 1949, but an amendment moved by Salisbury ensured that it would take effect only if Labour won the next election. Herbert Morrison spoke of Salisbury's intolerable interference; others said of Salisbury that he had political flair to match Morrison's, 'with the advantage of four centuries' start' ('The Times'). 
Back in power in October 1951, Salisbury was reappointed leader of the House of Lords. He was Commonwealth secretary, serving his third term with the dominions, from March to November 1952, after which he became lord president of the council. In June 1953 it was he who carried the sword of state at the queen's coronation. Salisbury spoke for the right in Churchill's cabinet. He opposed any merging of British interests with European, argued for curbing non-white immigration, deplored a colonial policy of 'concessions under pressure' (Goldsworthy, 2.5), and regretted the changes in the Commonwealth, particularly the precedent established by the 1949 decision to let India remain a member after becoming a republic -- for this undercut a principle he held dear, that allegiance to the crown should be a necessary element of Commonwealth membership. In foreign affairs and defence he was an implacable cold warrior; his reaction to Churchill's notion of a summit with the Soviet leadership in July 1954 was a resignation threat. 
From June to October 1953, when Eden was hospitalized, Salisbury was acting foreign secretary. Churchill's incapacitation by a stroke in the same period brought Salisbury into consideration as a potential caretaker prime minister who could, if need be, keep the seat warm for Eden. When he became premier at last in 1955, Eden did not feel able to appoint Salisbury foreign secretary, but chose to keep him on as lord president and leader of the Lords. But during the Suez crisis of 1956 Salisbury was a member of Eden's innermost group, the Egypt committee. The support he gave Eden's policy reflected both his determination to crush Egypt's challenge to Britain's great-power status and his personal loyalty to Eden. After the collapse of the invasion he urged Eden to stay on as leader. But in January 1957 Eden resigned, and the queen turned to Salisbury for advice on the succession. He and the lord chancellor, Lord Kilmuir, interviewed each cabinet minister in turn in Salisbury's office, an experience which several ministers likened to being summoned to the headmaster's study. Here it was that Salisbury put his famous question: 'Well, which is it, Wab or Hawold?' (Kilmuir, 28). 
Under the new prime minister, Harold Macmillan, Salisbury retained his position as lord president and leader of the Lords. At the end of March, however, he abruptly resigned from the government. The immediate occasion was the cabinet's decision to release Archbishop Makarios from detention; another relevant factor, not disclosed at the time, was Salisbury's exasperation at the government's continued dithering on immigration (Hennessy and Seldon, 111). Macmillan, who was related by marriage to Salisbury but found him a difficult colleague, wrote in his diary: 'The Cabinet, much as they all like him personally, feel like a man who has got rid of an inflamed tooth' (Horne, 2.38). Privately, Macmillan was relieved that Salisbury had chosen to resign over a containable issue. 
Two months later Salisbury took the government severely to task for agreeing to allow British ships to use the Suez Canal on Egypt's terms. His course as a die-hard opponent of the imperial retreat was now set. By the early 1960s he was increasingly focusing his attack on the government's policy of decolonization in Africa. To him this policy was doubly deplorable. First, in yielding to nationalist pressures it amounted to 'our old friend the policy of Appeasement through weakness in a new form' ('The Spectator', 7 Feb 1964). Second, it entailed the betrayal of British settlers in Kenya and the Rhodesias. Early in 1961 he set up an informal 'watching committee' in the parliamentary party, with the aim of influencing the government's African policy in a rightward direction. His most biting public attack was launched in the Lords in March 1961, when he accused the colonial secretary, Iain Macleod, of setting out not to negotiate with the white settlers but to outwit them. He described Macleod as unscrupulous, and, in his most reverberant phrase, as 'too clever by half' ('Hansard 5L', 229, 7 March 1961, 307). This was not just a political assault but a personal one; Sir Colin Coote may have had it in mind when he wrote later that Salisbury 'embodied the definition of a gentleman as one who never gives offence unintentionally' ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Salisbury went on to resign from the presidency of his local Conservative constituency association in Hertfordshire, while accepting in 1962 the office of patron of the Monday Club, a group of younger Conservatives who shared his views on Africa. In the mid-1960s the Rhodesian rebellion became his last-ditch issue. He could not condone the illegal declaration of independence; he nevertheless sympathized with the Europeans' cause, and at the Conservative Party conferences of 1965 and 1966 spoke out against the imposition of penal sanctions. But although Salisbury had his following in the party's imperial wing and strong connections with the settlers, he did not now carry weight with the party's policy-making leadership, and indeed had not done so since his resignation. His convictions did not change, but the times did, and in most political quarters he came to be seen simply as a reactionary. 
Certainly Salisbury was a deeply traditional Conservative. He was devoted to monarchy, church, country, and empire: institutions emblematic of order, hierarchy, and national pride. He defended his values with a strong will and, as his two resignations showed, independence of mind. If in the end it was the loss of empire that hurt him most, it was because empire was intrinsic to his notion of British identity. Empire signified national honour as well as national power. Further, he could not accept that its loss was inevitable. To him the essential problem, just as it had been in the appeasement era, was weakness at the core: a failure of British resolve. 
Roy Jenkins judged Salisbury 'sour and malevolent' at the time of his attack on Macleod (Jenkins, 44). Generally Salisbury was known as a man of charm, wit, and courtesy. But when high principles were at stake, as his 'Times' obituarist put it, 'passion could galvanize his slight frame and lift his light voice to icy disdain'. It was a bitterly disdainful Salisbury that his opponents saw much of in his later years. What also needs to be noted is that to have patrician values is to be motivated by an ethic -- a paternalist one, to be sure -- of public service. Salisbury had this; it no doubt had much to do with his Cecil heritage; and it probably played at least as great a part as personal ambition in leading him into a political career. 
Salisbury also led a busy life outside politics. He served as chair of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments in 1957, and from 1959 to 1966 was a trustee of the National Gallery. He was chancellor of Liverpool University from 1951 to 1971, a fellow of Eton College from 1951 to 1966, and, because of his work for science while lord president, a fellow of the Royal Society from 1957. Other honours included the high stewardship of Hertfordshire from 1947, the chancellorship of the Order of the Garter from 1960 (he had been appointed KG in 1946), and eight honorary degrees. After leaving government he returned to the business world in which he had begun his working life, taking on directorships with the British South Africa Company and the Westminster Bank. 
Salisbury and his wife had three sons, the second of whom died in 1934 and the third in 1944, while on active military service. The eldest son succeeded as the sixth marquess when Salisbury died at Hatfield House on 23 February 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 30912


Chadwick, Sir James (1891-1974), nuclear physicist, was born on 20 October 1891 at Bollington, near Macclesfield, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter (who died young) of John Joseph Chadwick, cotton spinner, and his wife, Annie Mary Knowles. Chadwick's father moved to Manchester to establish a laundry and, when that failed, became a railway storekeeper. James meanwhile was left in the care of his grandmother and attended Bollington Cross School. About 1902 he rejoined his family in Manchester, finding the change in lifestyle difficult to adjust to. Unable to afford to take up a scholarship to Manchester grammar school, he attended the Central Grammar School for Boys instead, being greatly encouraged in mathematics by Mr Wolfenden. 
At sixteen Chadwick won a scholarship to Manchester University where he enrolled as a physicist by mistake, but found himself fascinated by the professor, Ernest Rutherford, and his approach. In Chadwick's third year Rutherford asked him to devise a method of making accurate inter-comparisons of different radium sources, important for setting international standards. Chadwick was successful and graduated with first-class honours in 1911, publishing his work jointly with Rutherford in 1912 ('A balance method for comparison of quantities of radium and some of its applications', 'Proceedings of the Physical Society', 24, 141-51). Chadwick remained at Manchester as demonstrator, receiving his MSc in 1912 and being elected Beyer fellow of the university. He made the first direct measurements of absorption of gamma rays by gases, pointing out incidentally that the concentration of ions in the upper atmosphere could not be 'wholly due to the radiation from the radioactive material in the earth' ('The absorption of gamma rays by gases and light substances', 'Proceedings of the Physical Society', 24, 152-6), and then, together with A. S. Russell, undertook a difficult series of measurements of the excitation of gamma rays by alpha and beta rays. The precision of his results, coupled with the elegance of his published accounts, established Chadwick as a first-class experimentalist. In 1913, on Rutherford's strong recommendation, he was awarded an 1851 scholarship to study for two years with Hans Geiger in Berlin. Here he learned German and met a number of eminent physicists, including Albert Einstein, Otto Hahn, and Lise Meitner. Using a new prototype electric counter he rapidly found that beta radiation gave a continuous, rather than a line, spectrum, contradicting the then generally accepted view and posing a theoretical problem that was not resolved until Fermi's postulation of the neutrino twenty years later ('Intensitatsverteilung im magnetischen Spektrum der Beta-Strahlen von Radium B + C', 'Deutsches Physical Gesellschaft. Verh.', 16, 383-91). 
Chadwick's work ceased abruptly in August 1914 on the outbreak of the First World War, when he was interned as an enemy alien at Ruhleben racecourse near Spandau. Conditions were hard and food was appalling, but a number of societies were established, including a science circle of which Chadwick was the secretary. They set up a rudimentary laboratory, and here Chadwick continued some simple research using radioactive toothpaste. A fellow internee, Charles Ellis, was attracted to physics by Chadwick and became a long-term colleague. Chadwick returned home in 1918 having, as he considered, grown up, but with his digestive system shattered beyond recovery. 
Rutherford immediately offered Chadwick a part-time teaching job at Manchester (for he was too debilitated to work more). Here he used an alpha-particle scattering technique to make the first direct measurements of the charge on atomic nuclei, demonstrating unambiguously that the nuclear charge was indeed equivalent to the chemical atomic number. He also showed that the electrostatic inverse square force law holds to a high degree of accuracy in the neighbourhood of the nucleus and concluded that there are no electrons in the region between the nucleus and the innermost electron ring -- a hitherto untested assumption ('The charge on the atomic nucleus and the law of force', 'Philosophical Magazine', 40, 1920, 734-46). This work, begun in Manchester, was finished at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, to which Rutherford was appointed professor in 1919. Gonville and Caius College offered Chadwick a Wollaston research studentship and then, in 1920, the university awarded him the Clark Maxwell studentship. He was elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius in 1921 and in the same year gained one of the first of Cambridge's new PhD degrees; half of his thesis comprised an account of his work on alpha-particle scattering and half described his work with Etienne Bieler on the size and shape of the helium nucleus, work which has been cited as 'marking the birth of strong [nuclear] reactions' (A. Pais, 'Inward Bound', 1986, 240, cited in Brown, 51), for they provided direct evidence that electrostatic force alone could not explain the extremely strong forces present in and just around the nucleus. 
Chadwick's 'de facto' position as Rutherford's right-hand man and overseer of research at the Cavendish was officially recognized in 1923 when the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research appointed him assistant director of research at the Cavendish. Rutherford in 1919 had succeeded in the first artificial disintegration of an atomic nucleus, by bombarding nitrogen with alpha particles, and now the main thrust of research at the Cavendish was understanding the structure of the nucleus. Chadwick and Rutherford undertook a systematic study which established incontrovertibly the transmutation of light elements by incident alpha particles and provided further evidence for a, hitherto unknown, strong force within the nucleus. Their results were contested in 1924 by Hans Pettersson and Gerhard Kirsch, working in Vienna. The ensuing 'Vienna controversy' raged for four years and was resolved, largely in Rutherford's and Chadwick's favour, only when Chadwick travelled to Vienna and the two groups compared their particle counting procedures. It brought about a realization that visual scintillation counting was highly susceptible to observer bias, and prompted the Cavendish move to develop automatic counting techniques. 
In 1925 Chadwick married Aileen Maud Stewart-Brown, daughter of a stockbroker and member of one of Liverpool's most prominent families. Vivacious and self-assured, she had a devastating effect on the shy, reserved Chadwick. Peter Kapitza, his best man, wrote to his mother in Russia, 'Chadwick is up to his ears in love and the crocodile [Rutherford] growls that he is not working enough' (J. W. Boag and others, eds., 'Kapitza in Cambridge and Moscow', 187-8). Twin daughters, Joanna and Judy, were born in 1927, the year in which Chadwick was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Through the 1920s Rutherford and Chadwick had speculated occasionally about the possibility of a neutral particle, which they initially thought of as a tightly bonded proton-electron pair, playing a fundamental role in nuclear structure. Chadwick sporadically tried two experimental approaches to finding these 'neutrons', either by synthesizing them from protons and electrons, or by knocking them out of an atomic nucleus. These experiments were minor adjuncts to his main experimental programme, and were hampered by his weak polonium source of alpha particles. By 1930, however, he had obtained a stronger polonium source, and had set a research student, Webster, to work on investigating the puzzling radiation from beryllium which was bombarded by alpha particles. When in 1932 the Joliot-Curies in Paris reported that gamma radiation from beryllium disintegration was sufficiently energetic to knock protons out of paraffin wax, Chadwick was in an excellent position to recognize what the radiation was: not gamma radiation but neutrons which, because of their lack of charge, were very penetrating and very difficult to detect by conventional methods. Working night and day for about three weeks Chadwick showed that the radiation from beryllium ejects particles from most of the light elements, and studied the tracks of target atoms as they recoiled from the collision. He published his results in a letter to 'Nature', 'Possible existence of a neutron', in February 1932, concluding that the difficulties of interpreting the radiation as gamma rays disappear 'if it be assumed that the radiation consists of particles of mass 1 and charge 0, or neutrons' (p. 312). He followed this up with a full paper, 'The existence of a neutron', in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' (136, 1932, 692-708). Chadwick was awarded the Nobel prize in 1935 for his discovery. He was soon immersed in further investigations of protons, electrons, neutrons, and the newly discovered positrons, showing in 1935 (with Goldhaber) that the neutron was indeed an elementary particle ('The nuclear photoelectric effect', 'Proceedings of the Royal Society', 151, 479-93). 
By then it was clear to Chadwick that further investigation of nuclear physics necessitated large-scale accelerators, particularly E. O. Lawrence's new cyclotron, and he was frustrated by Rutherford's inability to agree that the Cavendish should develop in this direction. When in 1935 the University of Liverpool offered Chadwick the Lyon Jones chair of physics he accepted with pleasure, for he was offered money and facilities to develop the moribund physics department in the direction he wanted. Aileen was glad to return to her native city as a professor's wife. They already had many friends there and Chadwick found the atmosphere more relaxing than at Cambridge. Chadwick galvanized the department and obtained an unprecedentedly large grant from the Royal Society to build a cyclotron, proposing a multidisciplinary research programme which looked not only at the structure of the nucleus, but also at the biological effects of neutrons and the use of radioactive isotopes in biochemistry. He also made his mark in the general affairs of the university. James Mountford, later the vice-chancellor, recalled that his 'disinterested devotion to excellence in any academic sphere inevitably demanded and gained attention, respect and eventual gratitude... he stripped sloppy thinking of its pretensions and though invariably kind to individuals and sensitive to their difficulties, he was never deflected from his own high standards of judgement. (Brown, 138)' In the city, also, he became a member of a commission reporting on cancer research and treatment in Liverpool. 
The Liverpool cyclotron was finally completed in 1939 a few months after the discovery of nuclear fission: uranium bombarded with neutrons split into two smaller atoms, and released sufficient neutrons to continue the process; a chain reaction could ensue. With the outbreak of the Second World War an atomic bomb was seen as a possible weapon. Chadwick, as a member of the Maud committee, was soon overseeing the collaborative efforts of a number of universities and Imperial Chemical Industries to investigate uranium fission and production. The Liverpool cyclotron did more war work than any outside Los Alamos. By the spring of 1941 Chadwick had realized that 'a nuclear bomb was not only possible -- it was inevitable. Sooner or later these ideas could not be peculiar to us. Everybody would think about them before long, and some country would put them into action' (C. Weiner, 'Sir James Chadwick', oral history, 1969, American Institute of Physics, College Park, Maryland; cited in Brown, 205). So worried that he could not sleep, he resorted to sleeping pills, which he continued to take for most of his remaining years. He realized that full-scale production of a bomb would need North American help, but American nuclear research was still proceeding at a leisurely pace, aimed more at power plants than at bombs. The Maud report of July 1941, written largely by Chadwick, convinced both the British and, crucially, the USA, that a nuclear bomb was achievable in the current war. When, two years later, collaboration was finally agreed between the British efforts, now codenamed Tube Alloys, and the vast American Manhattan project, Chadwick became the scientific adviser to the British members of the Combined Policy Committee. He rapidly gained the confidence of General Groves, who was in charge of the joint effort, and became the only man apart from Groves and his second in command to have access to all the American research and production facilities. His support for Groves and his diplomacy in reconciling American and British interests during this period ensured a continuing stake for Britain in the project and her future as a nuclear power after the war. In 1946 Chadwick persuaded a reluctant Groves to share future supplies of uranium with Britain, essential to her further nuclear development. Chadwick was a member of the government's advisory committee on atomic energy, and chairman of the nuclear physics subcommittee and his views both that production of independent nuclear weapons was essential to Britain's defence strategy, and on the related question of the types of nuclear power to develop, were influential in post-war policy. He was knighted on 1 January 1945. 
On his return to Liverpool in the summer of 1946, Mountford recorded that he had never seen a man 'so physically, mentally and spiritually tired' as Chadwick, for he 'had plumbed such depths of moral decision as more fortunate men are never called upon even to peer into... [and suffered]... almost insupportable agonies of responsibility arising from his scientific work' (Brown, 323). Turning down the offer of the Jacksonian professorship at Cambridge, Chadwick plunged into rebuilding the Liverpool department, obtaining money from the Royal Society to build the new, high-energy synchrocyclotron now deemed necessary for investigating the mesons which had been found to mediate proton-neutron interactions. However, although he realized that it was inevitable in nuclear physics, the 'Big Science' and teamwork consequent on the Manhattan project held little appeal for Chadwick, and he found Liverpool, now launched on a downward economic spiral, depressing. In 1948 when his old Cambridge college, Gonville and Caius, invited him to be master, having failed to agree on an internal candidate, Chadwick felt duty-bound to accept, especially since his Liverpool department was now prospering. His main regret was having to resign as vice-president of the Royal Society because college meetings clashed with council dates; he thus forfeited the chance of becoming president. 
Chadwick's chief aim as master of Caius was to raise the academic standards of the college. His tenure saw a gradually increasing proportion of students accepted from state schools, a broadening of the fellowship to canvas the best available from other colleges and universities, and a great increase in the number of research fellows, all made possible by the improvement in the college finances that Chadwick engineered. However, the fellowship of Caius at the time were a contentious body in whom ultimate authority in the college rested and Chadwick was deeply upset by the antagonism engendered by the college's internal politics. He resigned the mastership in 1958. 
The Chadwicks bought a house in north Wales, Wynne's Parc on the outskirts of Denbigh, where they spent ten happy years. Chadwick spent much of his time editing Rutherford's collected papers for publication. In 1968 they moved back to Cambridge to be near their daughters. Chadwick had received many honours: the Copley and Hughes medals of the Royal Society, the Faraday medal, and the Franklin medal. He held the American medal for merit and Germany's order of merit, the highest honours these countries can bestow on foreign citizens, and honours from universities and scientific societies all over the world. In 1970 the queen made Chadwick a Companion of Honour. Tall and dark, with a dry sense of humour, Chadwick was a very humble man who found public speaking so daunting that ill health often precluded him from delivering the lecture. Yet behind the reserve his students and colleagues detected a great kindness and an overriding concern for his duty. Chadwick died in his sleep on 24 July 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 30913


Chain, Sir Ernst Boris (1906-1979), biochemist, was born on 19 June 1906 in Berlin, the only son of the two children of Dr Michael Chain, a Russian-born industrial chemist, and his wife, Margarete Eisner, who was related to Kurt Eisner, the socialist prime minister of Bavaria assassinated in 1919. Chain's parents were both Jewish, and faith played an important role in the house. His father died in 1919, leaving the family without an income; Chain's mother turned the family home into a guest house, but nevertheless their financial situation remained strained. The young Chain showed flair for both music and science, but the influence of his cousin (Mrs Sacharina, a widow twenty years his senior, who joined the household in 1923) turned him towards science. 
Chain was educated in Berlin at the Luisengymnasium and the University of Berlin from which he graduated in chemistry and physiology in 1930. He then obtained a doctorate for research in the chemical department of the Institute of Pathology at the Charite Hospital. After graduation Chain dabbled with the idea of a musical career, performing on numerous Berlin platforms, writing as music critic for the newspaper 'Welt am Abend', and (unsuccessfully) attempting to organize exchanges of musicians between Russia, Germany, and Argentina (1930-31). However, contemporaries said that Chain now began to realize that, although a good pianist, he would never be a truly great one. 
With the election of Hitler to power in 1933 Chain emigrated to Britain and sought to begin a scientific career. After a few months at University College Hospital, London, he obtained a place in the department of biochemistry at Cambridge. Chain worked under Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins for a second PhD, believing a Cambridge doctorate would advance an English career. During his years at Cambridge, Chain developed an irrational fear of being poisoned in the laboratory, which led to panic attacks and weakness. As a result, stomach pains were misdiagnosed as a psychological illness and he was temporarily placed in a specialist nursing home, from which he was released only by the combined efforts of a European acquaintance and his friend Ashley Miles. He was then seen by Mrs Sacharina's doctor in Paris, who diagnosed appendicitis. 
The election of Howard Florey to the chair of pathology at Oxford in 1935 set the scene for Chain's subsequent life. Florey believed that experimental pathology would benefit from the collaboration of pathologists with chemists and offered him the chance to develop a department of biochemistry within the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology. In 1936 he became university lecturer and demonstrator in chemical pathology. At Florey's suggestion he began to study the mode of action of a bacteriolytic enzyme, lysozyme. This led him to read other accounts of the production of anti-microbial substances by micro-organisms, and, during discussions with Florey in 1938, he suggested that they should jointly investigate some of these substances. Their decision to do this was motivated by scientific rather than medical interest, but fortunately penicillin (found by Fleming in 1928) was one of three substances chosen for study. Fleming had first believed that penicillin might be useful as an antiseptic, but he was quickly disheartened by its instability and did not realize that it might cure bacterial infections. Thus, for more than ten years, penicillin had aroused little medical interest. 
Although Chain was confident that the problem of penicillin's instability could be overcome, little progress with its purification was made until N. G. Heatley suggested that it could be transferred from organic solvent into a neutral aqueous solution. In the spring of 1940 Florey, urged by Chain to begin his intended biological experiments, showed that preparations of penicillin no more than 1 per cent pure would protect mice from infections with streptococci and staphylococci when introduced into the bloodstream. This dramatic result entirely changed the focus of research. High priority was given to the laboratory production of enough penicillin for a small clinical trial. With the success of this trial, even using only 3 per cent pure preparations, penicillin suddenly became a substance of major medical importance and of potential value in surgery during the Second World War. 
Chain, together with Edward P. Abraham, showed some bacteria were resistant to penicillin because of their production of a penicillin-inactivating enzyme, penicillinase. They then began to purify penicillin and, early in 1943, joined with Sir Robert Robinson, Wilson Baker, and others to study its chemistry. Chain became a strong supporter of a greekLetterbeta-lactam structure for penicillin, which was proposed in October 1943 but remained controversial until Dorothy Hodgkin and Barbara Low confirmed it two years later by X-ray crystallography. During these war years Chain played an active part in a major Anglo-American enterprise to produce penicillin by chemical synthesis. However, although this collaborative effort threw interesting light on the chemistry of penicillin it failed in its final aim, and, in the event, it was the increased yield obtainable by fermentation of 'Penicillium chrysogenum' that enabled penicillin to be produced on a large scale. 
Chain was a stimulus to Florey and for some years their relationship was amicable, but it deteriorated when Chain began to complain that he was receiving too little credit for his research and to believe that his failure to realize his ambitions in England was due to his foreign background. In 1948 he left Oxford for Rome to become director of a new international research centre for chemical microbiology at the Istituto Superiore di Sanita. Before leaving he married, on 7 October 1948, Dr Anne Ethel Beloff ['see below'], who was herself a biochemist; they subsequently collaborated in studies of the mode of action of insulin. They had a son (Benjamin) and then twins, a son and a daughter (Danny and Judy). Their married life was most contented. 
In Rome, Chain faced no financial problems and set up a pilot plant for antibiotic production. He was strongly in favour of collaboration between academic and industrial institutions. He became a consultant to the Beecham Group and suggested that it should explore further the potential of penicillin. Two members of this company, G. N. Rolinson and F. R. Batchelor, were seconded to his laboratory in 1956 to become acquainted with penicillin fermentation. During their visit they made observations that later led to the isolation of the nucleus of the penicillin molecule and to the chemical synthesis from this nucleus of a series of new and clinically valuable penicillins. 
In the 1950s Chain became anxious about the future of the Istituto Superiore di Sanita after its influential director-general, Domenico Marotta, had retired. In 1961 he accepted the chair of biochemistry at Imperial College, London, although he retained his position in Rome until 1964. His requirements were expensive and the return to England involved him in plans for a new department with a fermentation plant and the raising of relatively large sums of money to construct and maintain it. Despite a number of large grants, the financial base for his operations was not entirely secure. 
At Imperial College, Chain worked with different colleagues on a variety of topics, ranging from a phytotoxin to an inducer of interferon production and the mode of action of insulin. But, as the time for his retirement in 1973 approached, he became deeply absorbed in an unsuccessful attempt to ensure that his successor would be in a field closely related to his own and would not be a molecular biologist. 
Chain's role in the initiation of the work on penicillin in Oxford was his major contribution to medicine. He shared a Nobel prize with Fleming and Florey in 1945 and was elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1949. He became an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1965 and was knighted in 1969. His many honours from other countries included the Paul Ehrlich centenary prize in 1954, appointment to the order of the Rising Sun, second degree, from Japan in 1976, and the grand decoration of honour in gold of the Federal Republic of Austria in 1973. In 1976 he became foreign member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. 
Chain was a highly gifted and voluble man, with a jolly face, which was permanently adorned with a voluminous moustache. He was able to converse fluently in German, French, Russian, and Italian, as well as in English, and was socially engaging. Music always remained a major interest in his life and he played the piano with distinction. Throughout Chain's later life his Jewish identity became increasingly important to him. He became involved with the Weizmann Institute of Science at Rehovoth, becoming a member of the board of governors in 1954, and later a member of the executive council. He ensured his children were brought up securely within the Jewish faith, arranging much extra-curricular tuition for them. His views were expressed most clearly in his speech 'Why I am a Jew' given at the World Jewish Congress Conference of Intellectuals in 1965. 
In 1971 Chain built a house at Mulranny in co. Mayo. He died there on 12 August 1979. 
Chain's wife, 
E. P. Abraham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30914


Challans, (Eileen) Mary (1905-1983), novelist, was born on 4 September 1905 at Dacre Lodge, 49 Plashet Road, Forest Gate, West Ham, London, the first of two children born to Frank Challans (1875-1941), a physician, and his wife, Mary Clementine Newsome Baxter (1877-1960). Educated locally at Romford House School, she left home to attend Clifton high school in Bristol in 1920. In 1925 she went up to St Hugh's College, Oxford, receiving her bachelor's degree (a third in English) in 1928. 
Mary Challans had always wanted to write, but her solitary and bookish childhood in an unaffectionate and unsympathetic family had given her neither the breadth of experience nor the discipline she needed to begin a literary career. Rejecting both marriage and teaching, the two paths generally open at this time to a young woman with a university education, she decided to return to Bristol, hoping to earn her living by odd jobs while trying to write in her spare time. She worked as a clerk and a factory worker while developing a friendship with a young man who introduced her to amateur theatre in Bath. Here she participated in a world which would influence all of her later writing, discovering a bohemian life in which gender as well as social roles were matters of performance. An attractive and athletic young woman with dark, curly hair, she was beginning to develop the dedication to honesty and truthfulness that would shape her public persona and private values. Her writing, however, did not flourish and, pressed by economic circumstances, she developed rheumatic fever and was forced to return to her parents' home in 1932. 
Recovering slowly, Mary Challans realized that her work on a novel set in medieval France was insubstantial and unmanageable. Abhorring dependence on her family, she decided on an unusual course which would enable her to earn her own living while giving her the vital contact with people for which she also longed. In 1933 she returned to Oxford to train as a nurse at the Radcliffe Infirmary, becoming a state registered nurse in 1937. Her experiences in hospital nursing gave her an understanding of the body which would inform all of her writing. She also now confronted directly issues of sexual orientation as well as gender and class. Few women with her education entered nursing in the 1930s, and most of her classmates were both younger and working-class. She found herself in an institution with strict hierarchies separating (female) nurses and (male) doctors, a setting in which she also recognized for the first time her own lesbian desire, falling in love in 1934 with a fellow student, Julie Mullard ('b'. 1911), who became her lifelong companion. 
This important relationship both resolved and posed many problems for Mary Challans, not the least of which was how she was to write about issues at once intensely personal and socially challenging. Struggling with both her vocations (nursing, writing) and with her sexual identity in the social and moral context of English life in an atmosphere of war, she completed her first novel, 'Purposes of Love', in 1939. Drawing on her own hospital experiences, she chose the pseudonym Mary Renault to mask her identity and embarked on a literary career which would include five more accomplished novels with contemporary settings -- 'Kind are her Answers' (1940), 'The Friendly Young Ladies' (1944), 'Return to Night' (1947), 'North Face' (1949), and 'The Charioteer' (1953) -- before she turned to the historical novels set in ancient Greece which established her reputation. 
But Mary Challans was unable, despite the success of her first book, to leave nursing for writing. In 1939 she was called up by the Emergency Medical Service and assigned to Winford Hospital in Bristol where, assisted by conscientious objectors, she briefly worked with Dunkirk evacuees, an experience on which she would later draw both for setting and characters in 'The Charioteer', her moving novel about male homosexual relationships. By the end of 1940, she accepted a position as a nurse in the brain surgery ward of the Radcliffe Infirmary, where she continued to work until 1945. 
Disillusioned with post-war England, Mary Challans was eager to leave nursing for literature when the war effort no longer required her skills. In part as a result of her good luck in winning an award of $125,000 for the rights to 'Return to Night' from MGM film studios in 1946, she decided to leave England with Mullard for South Africa in 1948. She never returned. Settling first in Durban, then moving to Cape Town in 1959, she garnered many awards in later years, including an honorary fellowship from St Hugh's in 1982, but the end of the war, her two trips to the Mediterranean in 1954 and 1962, her physical distance from England, and intimacy with Mullard occasioned the shift from the early contemporary novels of manners to the mature historical novels of Hellenic life: 'The Last of the Wine' (1956), an account of two male lovers during the Peloponnesian War; her two books about Theseus, 'The King must Die' (1958) and 'The Bull from the Sea' (1962); 'The Mask of Apollo' (1966), a novel about the theatre and Greek politics; the first two books about Alexander the Great, 'Fire from Heaven' (1970) and 'The Persian Boy' (1972); her fictional biography of Simonides, 'The Praise Singer' (1979); and the conclusion to the Alexander trilogy, 'Funeral Games' (1981). 
Expatriate life with Mullard in South Africa enabled Mary Challans to devote herself to literature. She was an active member of the PEN Club in Cape Town, serving as its president for many years, but she remained reticent about her personal life while she grew increasingly sure of herself as a writer. Her novels both obscured her life and allowed her to explore issues vital to her (war, peace, heroism, career-vocation, women's roles, sexual expression, and both male and female homosexuality). The clear shift in her work from contemporary to Greek settings has begun to receive important critical attention, for it divides her career in a way which may be obvious if simplistic: the meticulously researched classical settings allow her to mask material too explosive to deal with directly while simultaneously giving her an 'academic' freedom to write about her subjects with both personal and critical safety. Mary Renault's reception has been unfairly mixed: she is 'popular' with a sophisticated audience, yet only recently have readers begun to take her seriously as a consummate artist not only in her Greek novels but in her earlier work. There are many reasons for this reputation: one must certainly be her femaleness; others include her choice of genre (historical fiction), as well as her public representation in the press as a grey-haired and cardiganed matron. Her interest in sexuality and specifically in homosexuality and fluid gender roles and identities may also have contributed to her marginalization -- yet these very interests warrant a re-evaluation of her achievement in an era more liberal than the one in which she began to write. 
Mary Challans was at work on a new novel set in France at the time of the crusades when she died of cancer at a hospital near her home, 3 Atholl Road, Camps Bay, Cape Town, on 13 December 1983. After a funeral service at the Anglican cathedral in Cape Town on the 15th, her body was cremated and her ashes scattered at Ceres, near Cape Town, on the plateau above Camps Bay. 


@@@@@


doc= 30915


Chamberlin, Peter Hugh Girard (1919-1978), architect and town planner, was born at the Waldorf Hotel, Aldwych, London, on 31 March 1919, the son of Hugh Noel Girard Chamberlin, an army officer of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, and his wife, Eleanor Penelope, 'nee' Chamberlin, who died in childbirth. He was brought up by an aunt, Kitty Evershed, at 60 South Edwardes Square, Kensington. 
Chamberlin was educated at Bedford School and Pembroke College, Oxford (1938-40), where he read politics, philosophy, and economics but left without a degree. During his youth he was an enthusiastic traveller: his jaunts included a trip on the Trans-Siberian Railway. A conscientious objector, he worked during the war years first as a farm labourer, then for civil defence in London. In 1940 he married Jean Evelyn Raper-Bingham (1912-1997), the daughter of a civil servant; they were close, but apparently agreed not to have children. It was she, always a strong influence on Chamberlin's career, who encouraged him to register as a student in the school of architecture at Kingston Polytechnic, then headed by Eric Brown. His talents were recognized and after qualifying in 1948 he became deputy head of the school and, for a time, Brown's professional partner. 
It was at Kingston that Joe Chamberlin, as he was always known, met his fellow tutors Geoffry Powell and Christoph Bon. 
In 1951 all three men submitted entries to the competition for a public housing development at Golden Lane on the northern edge of the City of London. Powell was the winner. With his colleagues he formed the partnership of Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon in 1952 to develop the scheme. The Golden Lane estate, complete with shops, pub, sports centre, and community hall, was constructed in several phases between 1953 and 1963. The precise elegance and free use of colour seen in the earlier blocks at Golden Lane were echoed in the Cooper Taber seed warehouse at Witham, Essex (1955; dem.), and the Bousfield School in Kensington, completed in 1956, which confirmed Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon's high standing among the new post-war practices. 
The success of Golden Lane led to the commission which was to dominate the work of the partnership for three decades: the Barbican. Its initial ideas for the development of the blitzed 35 acre site were submitted to the City of London corporation in June 1955. Chamberlin's report envisaged 'a district residential in character and with an identity of its own, surrounded by the quite different -- but complementary -- busy, commercial life of the City' (Chamberlin, 347-8). A dense development, with 300 residents to the acre, was advocated. The construction of the residential element of the scheme (with over 2000 flats) began in 1963 but the final component, the arts centre, was opened twenty years later. For a time the practice numbered over seventy people, with schools and housing work supplementing the principal projects. (The firm designed only one private house.) 
The architecture of the Barbican, much heavier and more monumental in character than Golden Lane, with exposed concrete as the dominant material, reflected the influence on Chamberlin, in particular, of Le Corbusier's later work, with its strongly expressionistic and romantic qualities. This penchant for the monumental was shared by Powell, who was the finest draughtsman of the three, while Christoph Bon's sure grasp of detail contributed to the formation of a distinctive style, at once imposing and surprisingly decorative. It was Bon's talent for detail, reinforced perhaps by the time he spent working in Milan, which gave the firm's work its remarkably tactile and even sensual character. 
In 1959 Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon were commissioned, on the recommendation of Leslie Martin, to prepare a master plan for the future development of the University of Leeds in tune with the projected expansion of student numbers. Le Corbusier was again a major influence on the project, constructed over the next fifteen years though never realized in its entirety thanks to spending cut-backs and the listing of some of the existing buildings scheduled for demolition. The aim was to connect the campus, which had developed piecemeal since the 1870s, with the city centre, using land made available by clearance of unfit housing and by roofing over, at the university's expense, the new Leeds inner ring road, then under construction. (This key move was the suggestion of Chamberlin.) As at Golden Lane and the Barbican, Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon demonstrated a conviction that modern architecture could have a civic dimension: the centrepiece of the redeveloped campus was a great square, ringed by social and residential, as well as teaching, accommodation. The lecture-theatre block, the work of Chamberlin, was a particularly bold composition, with stacks of lecture rooms arranged on a model -- without central aisles but with rows of side doors for latecomers -- subsequently developed at the Barbican arts centre. One of the residential buildings on the campus, designed by Bon, straddled the stone wall of a disused cemetery and was faced in red brick in deference to the solid Victorian houses of the neighbourhood. 
The expressive and explicitly romantic qualities in the practice's work, seen vividly in the buildings at New Hall, Cambridge, begun in 1962 (the project was never completed to the original designs), worried some critics: Pevsner found the Barbican towers 'wild and wilful' while the New Hall concrete domes were interpreted as covert historicism. Geoffrey Chaucer School in Southwark (1958-62) was contained under a striking, tent-like hyperbolic paraboloid roof. Though far removed, in intention and effect, from the excesses of postmodernism -- a fashion for which none of the partners had any sympathy -- this aspect of Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon's work reflected a realization of the shortcomings of the modern movement, in particular its rejection of the lessons of history and of traditional urban forms. 
The firm had no sympathy with the 'towers in a park' vision of modernity epitomized by the London county council's Roehampton estate: its sympathies were firmly urban and were reflected in the planning scheme of 1958 for Boston Manor in west London. Ultimately unrealized, it was much publicized; Huw Weldon devoted an edition of the television programme 'Monitor' to it. The Boston Manor project, developed by Chamberlin in collaboration with Graeme Shankland and David Gregory-Jones, proposed a dense 'living suburb' where residential development, a mix of low- and high-rise, was integrated with offices, a shopping centre, and educational and entertainment facilities, all served by two underground stations. The development, housing 15,000, would be 'a different kind of new town: a suburban community within the city. A piece of metropolis on the inner edge of its green belt'. Boston Manor would have been a Barbican for the suburbs, the best of suburb and city, 'an architecture of towers and squares, paved promenades and green lanes' (Chamberlin, 347-8). 
Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon was a practice where work was done collectively, with all the partners collaborating on projects, but it is clear that Chamberlin's abilities as strategist and planner contributed significantly to its success. He was appointed CBE in 1974. Joe Chamberlin's taste for travel -- as well as for films, theatre, and large cars -- continued until the end of his life. He was taken ill on a trip to the temples of Abu Simbel in 1978 and died on 23 May that year at his home on an island in the Thames, Mill House, Sonning, Berkshire. 
Chamberlin's early death was a blow to the practice, which remained heavily involved in completing the Barbican, with added responsibilities falling on Powell and Bon. Geoffry Powell was married twice: first, on 24 July 1954, to Philippa Jane Cooper, an artist, with whom he had two daughters and a son (who died as an infant). The marriage was subsequently dissolved. Then in 1971 he married the radio producer and broadcaster Dorothy Louise Grenfell Williams (1934-1994), with whom he had a son. Powell, an enthusiastic traveller, amateur archaeologist, and coin collector, died at St Anthony's Hospital, North Cheam, Sutton, on 17 December 1999. 
Christoph Bon, whose family background in the hotel business was reflected in his notable culinary abilities, remained single until he married Jean Chamberlin months before her death. Bon and the Chamberlins had always been close, sharing homes in London, Berkshire, and southern France, and Bon ended his days in Joe Chamberlin's childhood home at 60 South Edwardes Square, Kensington. It was there that he died on 21 October 1999. 
With the retirement of Powell and Bon in 1985, the practice was renamed Chamberlin, Powell, Bon, and Woods, with Frank Woods as managing partner and Powell and Bon as consultants. In 1989 Woods merged the practice with that of Austin-Smith, Lord. Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon's significance in the history of post-war architecture lies in the practice's bold enlargement of the vocabulary of modernism, including its frank exploration of historical sources, and its determined pursuit of a modern architecture which addressed real urban, as well as social, issues and eschewed the destructive philosophy on which so much development after 1945 was based. 


@@@@@


doc= 30916


Chambers, Sir (Stanley) Paul (1904-1981), civil servant and industrialist, was born at 3 Russell Road, Bowes Park, Southgate, London, on 2 April 1904, sixth of the eight children (six boys and two girls) of Philip Joseph Chambers, commercial clerk (later company secretary and finally cigar merchant), and his wife, Catherine Emily Abbott. He was educated at the City of London School and as an evening student at the London School of Economics, acquiring the degrees of BCom in 1928 and MSc (Econ) in 1934. His occupation was given as 'commercial teacher' at the time of his marriage, on 31 July 1926, to Dorothy Alice Marion ('b'. 1899/1900), a shorthand typist, daughter of Thomas Gill Baltershell Copp, printer. They had no children. 
In 1927 Chambers joined the Inland Revenue tax inspectorate, initially based in Leeds and in London. His brilliance there was soon recognized and in 1935 he was selected for secondment to serve on the Indian income tax inquiry committee. In 1937 he was appointed income tax adviser to the government of India, with the rank of joint secretary, and he instituted a scheme for the deduction of income tax at source from salaries and wages. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 income tax in Britain needed to be sharply raised, which would create difficulty in paying it in two half-yearly lump sums. Chambers was therefore recalled from India and in 1940 appointed assistant secretary to set up a deduction scheme. With a small committee he devised a plan whereby each deduction was a proportion of the tax assessed for the previous year. The trade unions, however, soon began agitating for deductions to be related to current pay. This at first appeared impossible and Chambers wrote a white paper saying so, but the agitation continued. Meanwhile, in 1942, he was promoted to membership of the Board of Inland Revenue. Eventually A. G. T. Shingler, a principal inspector of taxes, devised a solution to the problem with the cumulative principle, which became the basis of the PAYE (pay as you earn) system. After working out the detailed operation of the scheme, which placed a burden of tax collection on employers, Chambers succeeded in winning the consent of the rest of his department, and of ministers, trade unions, and the employers' organizations. It took effect in 1943 and played a vital role in raising revenue during the war. Another achievement of his Inland Revenue days was the negotiation with the USA of the first double taxation agreement made by Britain, which has been described as 'a landmark in international fiscal cooperation' ('The Times', 5 Jan 1982, 10h). In 1945 Chambers was seconded to the Allied Control Commission for Germany as finance director of the British element. His success in this post helped prepare the ground for the German 'economic miracle'. 
In 1947 he resigned from the civil service and was appointed a director of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (ICI). In 1948 he became finance director, in 1952 one of three deputy chairmen, and from 1960 to 1968 he was chairman, the first to come from outside the company. He did much to modernize the organization and public image of ICI, and took it into Europe and America. The chemical industry was then undergoing great change as it moved from coal to oil as the basic raw material, and Chambers initiated a fundamental review of company policy. He concluded that ICI could best serve the public interest by satisfying its shareholders and concentrating on growth and profitability. The implications of this decision challenged the prevailing scientific ethos of the company, but Chambers intended to make it a major player in an increasingly competitive international market. He therefore increased borrowing to fund expanded production and oversaw a reorganization of the management structure, devolving power to divisional chairmen in order to free the directors to concentrate on the development of long-term strategy. He sought a company with a clear direction, but one capable of responding quickly to changing circumstances. In order to implement the necessary reforms Chambers called in the American management consultants McKinseys: the act of bringing in outsiders to remedy internal problems was another challenge to the corporate psychology. 
During Chambers's time as chairman ICI's exports doubled in value, but his reputation was severely damaged by the failed take-over bid for Courtaulds in 1961-2. Chambers conducted the negotiations personally and his open style with the press ensured widespread publicity for the bid. He fatally misjudged, though, the price that would have to be offered to Courtaulds shareholders in order to persuade a majority to accept the merger: more than once he was forced publicly to raise his 'final' offer, which was finally made unconditional. This gave the Courtaulds directors, of whom he had been highly critical, valuable ammunition with which to resist the take-over. The proposal had been imaginative, indicative of ICI's ambitions under Chambers, but its failure damaged the image both of the company and of its chairman. A further blow came with a mismanagement of capital resources in 1966, which led to some expensive short-term borrowing. In 1968 he retired as chairman. 
Chambers was a director from 1951 to 1974 of the National Provincial, later the National Westminster Bank, and, on leaving ICI, he was appointed chairman of three insurance companies, the Royal, the London and Lancashire, and the Liverpool and London and Globe. He was also a part-time member of the National Coal Board from 1956 to 1960. Between 1951 and 1972 he served, mostly as chairman, on committees reviewing the organization of the customs and excise department, departmental records, London Transport, and the British Medical Association. He also served various terms as president of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, the British Shippers' Council, the Institute of Directors, the Royal Statistical Society, and the Advertising Association. In his later days he entered the academic world as vice-president of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (1969-74), the first treasurer of the Open University (1969-75), and pro-chancellor of the University of Kent (1972-8). 
Chambers's enormous energy and drive showed in his rapid movements and speech and his quick grasp of detail. He was always ready to delegate work; he pushed people hard, but his generous appreciation of their efforts, his great personal charm, and his obvious mastery won him their support and affection. Despite being, as chairman of ICI, one of the highest-paid men in British industry at the time, Chambers lived simply. He was a keen gardener, and enjoyed music, Scrabble, and bridge, but read little. His first marriage was dissolved in 1955, and on 23 September of that year Chambers married Edith Pollack ('b'. 1917/18), whose previous marriage was also dissolved, second daughter of Robert Phillips Lamb, accountant, of Workington, Cumberland. They had two daughters. 
Chambers was appointed CIE in 1941, CB in 1944, and KBE in 1965. He was awarded an honorary fellowship at the London School of Economics, and honorary degrees by the universities of Bristol (1963), Liverpool (1967), and Bradford (1967). The Open University gave him an honorary degree in 1975. He died at his home, 61 Northwick Avenue, Kenton, London, on 23 December 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 30917


Chaplin, Sir Charles Spencer (1889-1977), film actor and director, is believed to have been born on 16 April 1889, at 8 p.m., in East Street, in the south London borough of Walworth. No birth certificate has ever been found. One of two sons of music-hall performers Charles Chaplin (1863-1901) and his wife, Hannah Harriett Pedlingham Hill 
(1865-1928; known professionally as Lily Harley)
, the future film comedian's earliest years were far from comfortable. His parents separated when he was a baby, and Hannah Chaplin began experiencing financial reversals when unable to perform. Charles Chaplin senior refused to support his family monetarily, and by 1895 Hannah's economic situation was so dire she had to seek public assistance at Lambeth workhouse. Between 1896 and 1898 Hannah and her two sons, Sydney and Charles, were in and out of workhouses and comparable public institutions for London's poor. This 'Dickensian' childhood had an undeniable impact on the art of Charles Spencer Chaplin. 
As a boy Charlie Chaplin knew what it was like to be painfully self-conscious of tattered and ill-fitting clothing, to go to bed hungry, or to have no bed at all. He also knew the stigma of the workhouse. What separated him from other victims of his situation was the knowledge that his family had experienced a glamorous alternative to a life of poverty. Besides memories of childhood comforts and his mother's career, Chaplin was aware that his father was enjoying celebrity, as a minor music-hall star, even while Hannah and her children suffered. Chaplin's dreams of becoming a performer on stage eventually enabled his physical escape from poverty. The psychological impact of being poor never left him. Ironically, Chaplin later used his experiences with destitution to create themes in motion pictures that would earn him one of the highest salaries in the world. 
Charles Spencer Chaplin began performing in music-hall in December 1898, as one of the Eight Lancashire Lads, a troupe of child dancers managed by William Jackson, a neighbour of Chaplin senior. Hannah spent part of 1898 in Lambeth workhouse before being transferred to Cane Hill Asylum because of mental illness. The authorities demanded that Chaplin senior take charge of his sons, and Sydney and Charlie lived with their father until Hannah was discharged from the asylum that November. Employment as a member of the Eight Lancashire Lads enabled Charlie to get room and board, provided extra income for Hannah, and may have relieved Chaplin senior of some of his estranged wife's demands for child support. The boy enjoyed working in the music-hall until 1900, when Hannah forced him to quit for fear his health was being affected by life on the road. 
With his mother again institutionalized for mental illness, and his father now dead from the effects of alcoholism, the fourteen-year-old Chaplin used his earlier experience in vaudeville to seek employment opportunities at Blackmore's theatrical agency in London in 1903. Fortunately Blackmore's, which catered not only for music-hall but also for legitimate theatre, was assisting the stage producer Charles Frohman in casting the part of a streetwise boy in one of the first theatrical productions featuring the fictional detective Sherlock Holmes. Chaplin got the part. He was able to tour in Sherlock Holmes companies for the next three years, and worked with the two most successful Holmes delineators of the day, H. A. Saintsbury and William Gillette. The young thespian learned a great deal about acting and stagecraft from these mentors. 
Legitimate theatre had greater prestige than music-hall in the early 1900s, but employment in British variety was more plentiful. When his final Sherlock Holmes tour ended in March 1906, Charles joined his older brother Sydney as a music-hall comedian in a Wal Pink sketch, 'Repairs'. Two months later the seventeen-year-old vaudevillian was performing in William Murray's skit 'Casey's Court Circus' with a troupe of child actors. Chaplin remained with Murray's company for over a year. By this time Sydney Chaplin had gained recognition as a music-hall comedian while working for Fred Karno, the most successful comic sketch producer in British variety. Syd Chaplin persuaded a reluctant Karno to hire his younger brother in February 1908. Charles Chaplin's experience in Fred Karno's music-hall complemented, but was very different from, the discipline he received in legitimate theatre. 
The origins of British music-hall can be traced to the singing of bawdy songs in early nineteenth-century London taverns. Over the years amateur singing gave way to organized programmes in which professional performers sang, exchanged jokes, and directly interacted with patrons while under the watchful eye of a chairman overseeing the evening's activities. Despite the addition of a stage and proscenium arch in specially constructed music-halls built after the mid-nineteenth century, most entertainers still directly addressed their audience and expected them to join in the singing of the chorus. This relationship between performer and patron differed markedly from the theatre, where actors interacted with one another while behaving as though the audience was not there. 
By the end of the nineteenth century legitimate theatre was feeling the economic impact of British music-hall and retaliated against its competition through legal harassment. Since the patent theatres had the exclusive right to perform dialogue, any music-hall attempting to produce a short play as part of its bill was subject to prosecution. Fred Karno circumvented the restriction on spoken dialogue by having 'speechless comedians' perform his sketches. The type of red-nosed comedian in baggy trousers -- also known as an 'eccentric' or 'grotesque' -- featured in the Karno productions was a popular figure in British and American vaudeville at the beginning of the twentieth century. These comedians prided themselves in using ingenious body language to establish their characters' personalities, motivations, and reactions. Karno's approach to slapstick comedy, emphasis on mime, and his innovative 1904 sketch 'Mumming Birds' had a major impact on Charlie Chaplin's artistry as a comedian and film-maker. 
In 'Mumming Birds' Karno comedians portrayed both the horrible music-hall 'artistes' and contemptuous 'patrons' who actively demonstrated their disapproval of the performers. Central to the action was a comic drunk, played by a Karno star, who interacted with both artistes and fellow 'audience members'. 'Mumming Birds' was a self-reflexive parody of British variety's entertainments, its audience-performer interaction, and the music-hall experience itself. The skit was so successful that Karno had a number of companies performing 'Mumming Birds', both in Britain and abroad, before 1914. Chaplin played the comic drunk in a troupe that Karno sent to America in 1910 and again in 1912. In 1913 he was persuaded to leave Karno and sign a one-year contract to work for Mack Sennett's Keystone Film Company in Edendale, California, for the not inconsiderable salary of $150 a week. Chaplin appeared in thirty-four comedy shorts, and one feature length Keystone picture, in 1914. 
Sennett's slapstick farces featured former vaudevillians and circus clowns playing variations of the grotesque. As with Karno's sketches, the comedians performed in mime, executing complicated physical business involving split-second timing. Sennett also exploited the motion picture medium's ability to manipulate time and space for humorous effect, often speeding up the action so that the comic acrobatics looked even more frenetic and bizarre. Given the similarities in Karno and Sennett's humour, it is not surprising that Chaplin was able to adapt his stage slapstick to meet the demands of the Keystone films. Chaplin was, however, initially uncomfortable with Sennett's style of film-making and displeased with his first Keystone picture, 'Making a Living'. 
In 'Making a Living' Chaplin played a conman in a frock coat, top hat, and monocle -- a costume similar to what he wore in the Karno sketches -- who by the end of the film becomes embroiled in a chase and a fist fight. A pleasant but undistinguished farce, Chaplin believed the fast overall tempo of 'Making a Living' and its concluding chase prevented him from developing his character's personality and most effective comic business. The British appearance of this conman also made the character out of place for an American audience and setting. Charles Spencer Chaplin brilliantly addressed all of these problems in his next film released by Keystone, 'Kid Auto Races at Venice'. Purportedly filmed in forty-five minutes, this was an improvised production shot on location during an actual children's toy car race in Venice, California. In this film Chaplin's character -- now dressed in the famous costume of too small derby, tight vest, large trousers, and ill-fitting shoes -- continuously disrupts a 'documentary' film-maker's attempts to record the event by 'mugging' in front of the camera. Though lacking in plot, 'Kid Auto Races at Venice' enabled the comedian to overcome the disappointments of his previous motion picture and set the standard for his distinctive film style. 
Chaplin claimed to have initially been inhibited by the film-making process, but the self-reflexive focus of 'Kid Auto Races at Venice' allowed the budding film-maker to dominate the medium both in front of the camera and behind it. As Karno adapted 'Mumming Birds' to parody the music-hall, so Chaplin used 'Kid Auto Races at Venice' as a vehicle to question film-making itself. Where Chaplin's previous film character was forced to conform to the external rhythms of 'Making a Living', his new 'grotesque' was the focus of 'Kid Auto Races at Venice' and dictated the film's content and pace. Chaplin would now make films in which his soon to be iconic screen character dominated the frame. 
Although portrayed in the majority of his early films as a member of the working class, Chaplin's character was soon identified by audiences as 'the little tramp'. Rather than desiring immediately to concentrate upon a personality associated with tramp iconography, Chaplin wanted a screen persona that was versatile -- a problem with the British stereotype in 'Making a Living'. While a variation of the vaudeville grotesque, this man's ill-fitting attire was not substantially different from the clothing of the other people attending this public event in Venice, California. What made this figure particularly incongruous -- and cinematic -- was his eccentric walk. 
In his 'Poetics' Aristotle stated that a figure of comedy is defined by a 'mark of the ridiculous' -- a variation of the dramatic hero's 'tragic flaw'. Unlike tragedy, comedy does not traditionally associate this comic flaw with real pain, although it does create difficulties for the person so afflicted. Eccentric body language, as a 'mark of the ridiculous', was common to music-hall grotesques. But Chaplin's pigeon-toed gait went beyond an obvious comparison with a 'normal' manner of walking. His type of movement was an internal parody of the kind of motion associated with the early motion picture medium itself. An inherent deficiency of many primitive films was a 'flicker' which prevented a realistic representation of movement. This technical problem with the new medium was soon rectified, but the erratic shuffle of Chaplin's 'tramp' was forever associated with the idiosyncratic flickering of early motion-picture expression. Of the handful of true cinematic icons, the oldest is Charlie Chaplin's tramp. 
Having identified his screen character and self-reflexive approach for making film comedy, Chaplin spent 1914 working with Keystone's stock company of pretty women and slapstick grotesques. During this time Chaplin refined his character, expanded his knowledge of the medium, experimented with various types of comic film narrative, and developed his practice of having the 'tramp' shoot brief glimpses at the camera to suggest a connection with the viewer. Chaplin's Keystone films proved particularly popular and, in 1915, he signed a one-year contract with a rival corporation, the Essanay Film Manufacturing Company, for a salary of $1250 a week -- at that time one of the highest salaries in the world. The fourteen short Chaplin-Essanay comedies brought the film-maker instantaneous international acclaim of colossal proportions. In 1916 Chaplin demanded an even bigger salary: $10,000 a week plus a $150,000 bonus for signing the contract, this time with the Mutual Film Corporation. Chaplin's twelve short Mutual comedies are still recognized as classics of their type. 
Chaplin drew inspiration as an artist from situations that he initially found far from comic. Having been reduced to living on the London streets as a child, he turned this experience to his advantage at the age of fourteen by playing a streetwise character on stage. Chaplin also had an ability to use humour to confront afflictions that plagued him in real life. As an adult he drank little, because of what alcohol had done to his father, but gained critical acclaim for his portrayal as a comic drunk in music-hall. Embarrassed by having to wear ill-fitting clothes as a boy, Chaplin used this knowledge to costume a character that became a cinematic icon. Initially threatened by the film-making process, Chaplin quickly mastered this medium by satirizing it. This strategy of adapting personal experience into his art, and finding comedy in tragedy, worked so well for Chaplin that he was able to negotiate an unprecedented million-dollar contract, with First National Exhibitors' Circuit in 1917, to make eight comedies at his own pace. Faced with a new objective, the film-maker took nearly four years to complete his contract with First National. 
Besides being extremely popular with the general public of 1917, the comedian was now declared by the intelligentsia to be a genius in his mastery of slapstick and was embraced by them as one of their own. Chaplin's tramp was compared with such classical figures of low comedy as Harlequin and Shakespeare's Falstaff. Instead of taking solace from his accomplishments, Chaplin saw a new challenge. He now felt compelled to change the content of his slapstick despite its success with audiences, critics, and those profiting from his comedy within the film industry. The character Chaplin played in his earliest films was a venal, self-serving, anti-social outsider who victimized virtually everyone around him. It was this vulgar and violent 'tramp' whose comic energy initially captivated film audiences. But Chaplin was dissatisfied with the limitations of pure slapstick. The comedian wanted to make the tramp more sensitive by transforming him into a kind of Pierrot. 
Chaplin had already successfully incorporated the self-reflexive qualities of the music-hall into an approach for making his film comedies. He now looked to his background in theatre to explore how elements of tragedy and drama could be combined to produce films in keeping with what he thought should be expected from a serious artist. Chaplin experimented with mixing comedy and pathos in such shorts as 'The New Janitor' (Keystone, 1914), 'The Tramp' (Essanay, 1915), 'The Bank' (Essanay, 1915), and 'The Vagabond' (Mutual, 1916). None of these pictures was as successful in creating the type of 'tragi-comedy' the film-maker accomplished in his first independent feature, 'The Kid' (First National, 1921), one of Chaplin's most autobiographical works. 
In 'The Kid' an unmarried mother is forced to abandon her baby. The infant is discovered and subsequently raised by the tramp. When the authorities learn that the tramp is not the father of the little boy, played by Jackie Coogan, they attempt to place the child in an orphanage. The scene in which young Jackie is taken away and then reunited with the tramp is one of the most poignant in motion-picture history. Before this film some critics had questioned whether sentiment and slapstick could be combined without detracting from one another. 'The Kid' proved that Chaplin could get an audience both to laugh at the tramp's slapstick antics and to empathize with his suffering. Chaplin would incorporate pathos in all of the principal films that he made after leaving First National. 
Shortly after starting his First National contract, Chaplin concluded that Hollywood's producers were seeking ways to deprive artists such as himself of their creative freedom. To protect themselves Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks senior, and D. W. Griffith co-founded their own film distribution company, United Artists, in 1919. Chaplin's three partners had to provide United Artists with most of its product until the comedian finally finished his contract with First National in 1922. His first picture for United Artists was 'A Woman of Paris' (1923), for which he was director but did not star. A sophisticated drama rather than a comedy, 'A Woman of Paris' was well received by the critics and influenced the work of such major directors as Ernst Lubitsch and Erich von Stroheim. General audiences, however, expected Chaplin's films to be comedies featuring the little tramp. 'A Woman of Paris' did not do well at the box office. Chaplin therefore had to concentrate on making more comedies involving his famous character, now clearly portrayed as a 'tramp'. His next features distributed through United Artists -- 'The Gold Rush' (1925), 'The Circus' (1928), 'City Lights' (1931), and 'Modern Times' (1936) -- were commercially successful. While some critics have seen 'The Circus' as a somewhat lesser effort, the other three films have been recognized as undisputed classics since the time of their initial release. 
As the intervals between the releases of his new pictures lengthened, the public came to know Chaplin more as a figure in the news rather than as someone they saw on the screen. Not all of this attention was positive. Chaplin first courted controversy when critics complained about the vulgarity and violence found in his early Keystone and Essanay comedies of 1914 and 1915. While still not deemed acceptable with all members of the middle class, Chaplin was generally not criticized for objectionable material in the films he made from 1916 to 1936. A bigger issue in Britain during the First World War was the fact that he became a millionaire while millions of his generation were dying in the trenches. 
Though Chaplin films were immensely popular in Great Britain during the First World War, many of his countrymen never forgave the comedian for not serving. This also became an issue in America after the United States joined the conflict in April 1917. Chaplin's studio claimed that the prominent film star had attempted to enlist but failed his physical. The comedian sought to diminish this resentment somewhat by producing short films promoting the sale of liberty bonds for the war effort. He also appeared at liberty bond rallies with other stars, including Fairbanks and Pickford. While Chaplin's failure to serve in the military did not end his film career, his name would forever be associated with controversy after 1918. 
Chaplin's first two marriages to teenage women, to film actress Mildred Harris (1901-1944) on 23 October 1918 and to Lillita McMurray (Lita Grey) in 1924, were hastily embarked upon. The first ended in divorce in 1920. He was separated from his second wife in 1926, and divorced the following year. There was speculation about whether Chaplin actually married his third wife, the film actress Paulette Goddard (real name Pauline Levy), until it was revealed during their divorce of 1942 that the couple had married in 1936. In 1943 the 54-year-old Chaplin was involved in a much publicized paternity suit with a woman named Joan Barry, who was thirty years his junior. Two years later the court ordered that Chaplin pay Barry child-support even though blood tests proved that he was not the baby's father. Fortunately for the comedian, Chaplin's marriage on 16 June 1943 to Oona O'Neill (1925-1991), the eighteen-year-old daughter of playwright Eugene O'Neill, proved to be happy. The couple had eight children. Their eldest, Geraldine Chaplin, achieved international success as a film actress. 
Besides experiencing problems in his personal life, Chaplin faced a major professional dilemma with the coming of sound. Hollywood made the transition from silent films to talking pictures between 1927 and 1932. The majority of silent stars had appeared in their first sound film by 1929. Given the importance of mime to his little tramp, Chaplin continued making silent movies long after his colleagues had made the transition to talkies or were forced to retire. Chaplin did appreciate that the invention of the movie soundtrack now enabled him to control the accompanying music for his 'silent' movies. The film-maker wrote or collaborated on memorable scores for all of the motion pictures he released after 1928. Though deemed a commercial risk, Chaplin made 'City Lights' as a silent film in 1931, and it did well at the box office. Released in 1936, his 'Modern Times' was the last silent feature anyone produced until Mel Brooks's 'Silent Movie' in 1976. 'Modern Times' turned a profit, but Chaplin knew his next picture would have to be a talkie. 

'The Great Dictator' (1940) was not just the vehicle for Chaplin's talking film debut; it directly challenged a major international figure of the day. Charles Chaplin and Adolf Hitler were born the same year and a few days apart. During his rise to power, comments were made regarding the similarity between Hitler's moustache and that of the tramp. Chaplin loathed Hitler, his politics, and the manner in which he tried to get the masses to accept his lies through his misuse of the media. In the film Chaplin portrayed the despot Adenoid Hynkel, who resembled Hitler, and a Jewish barber who bore a likeness to both Hynkel and Chaplin's famous tramp. Reaction to the release of 'The Great Dictator' in the United States was guarded, since the majority of the country wished to stay out of the Second World War. After America declared war on Germany in 1941 'The Great Dictator' was still challenged by critics who claimed that the subject was too serious for this type of satire. Chaplin became embroiled in additional political controversy during the war, after advocating that the United States assist one of its allies of that time -- the Soviet Union -- on the eastern front. Right-wing elements in America cited his tactical argument for supporting Russia as proof that Charlie Chaplin was a communist. 
The immediate post-war period was difficult for Chaplin, both professionally and personally. His 1946 film 'Monsieur Verdoux' featured Chaplin as a middle-aged Bluebeard who marries and murders wealthy widows for their money. Attacked as unseemly by some American critics, the film did better abroad. The black comedy of 'Monsieur Verdoux', the Joan Barry paternity suit, and the charges that Chaplin was a communist made the comedian a very controversial figure in 'McCarthyist' America. In 1952 Chaplin took his family to Britain so they could attend the London premiere of his most recent film, 'Limelight', a sentimental tale about an ageing and forgotten former music-hall star at the time of the First World War. Prior to Chaplin making his trip abroad the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unexpectedly demanded that he pay $2 million in back taxes and the film-maker refused. Chaplin had never become an American citizen. While the family was sailing to Britain aboard the 'Queen Elizabeth', the United States attorney-general, James McGranery, announced that he was denying Chaplin a re-entry permit because the film-maker's association with communism made him an 'undesirable alien'. It is ironic that Chaplin, who became one of the most successful capitalists of the twentieth century through his portrayal of a tramp, left America because of accusations that he was a communist. 
Even when he was living outside its borders, Chaplin's reputation in the United States would haunt him. According to records released from the Public Record Office in July 2002, Anthony Eden's government wanted to honour the comedian with a knighthood in 1956 but refrained from doing so because of fear of retaliation from the United States. Chaplin's failure to become an American citizen, accusations by conservatives that he was either a communist or a communist sympathizer, and his problems with the IRS made the comedian unpopular with the United States government. Also, his marriages to two sixteen-year-old women and subsequent divorces and the Joan Barry paternity suit severely damaged Chaplin's reputation with the American public. When the Foreign Office's American department was asked about US reaction if Chaplin were to be knighted, its officials expressed objections. Relations between the United Kingdom and America were strained because of the Suez crisis, and these British officials were particularly sensitive about doing anything that would antagonize the United States. Consequently any thoughts about knighting the controversial comedian at this time were dropped. 
Although a figure associated with discord, Chaplin spent his final twenty-five years living happily in Switzerland with his wife, Oona, and their large family. He scored and re-released some of his silent films, wrote two autobiographical works, and directed his last two features: 'A King in New York' (United Artists, 1957) and 'A Countess from Hong Kong' (Universal, 1967). Meanwhile the political controversy associated with the comedian in the United States abated. Many Americans felt that Charlie Chaplin had been an innocent victim of the ideological witch-hunts that swept their country in the 1940s and 1950s. Hollywood, desiring to honour one of its most famous film artists and to re-release his movies, invited Chaplin to visit the United States in 1972 to accept a special Academy award. Chaplin films, unavailable for decades, received rave reviews. A year prior to his return to Hollywood, Charles Chaplin had once again been recommended for a knighthood. When asked for an endorsement Britain's ambassador to Washington, the earl of Cromer, responded by saying that Mr Chaplin was 'now regarded as an Anglo-American father figure' whose 'matrimonial and political conduct lie buried in the past'. On 4 March 1975 Queen Elizabeth II knighted the 86-year-old actor-director. Sir Charles Spencer Chaplin died at the age of eighty-eight surrounded by family on 25 December 1977, at his home, the Manoir de Ban, Corsier-sur-Vevey, Switzerland. He was buried on 27 December in the local cemetery at Vevey. 
In a bibliography published in the year of the comedian's death, Chaplin scholar Timothy J. Lyons identified 1500 books and articles written about this film-maker. During his life Chaplin the man competed with and was sometimes confused with 'Charlie, the tramp' in much of this literature. Ironically the corporeal Chaplin continued to make news, and compete with his famous shadow for the public's attention, when his remains were stolen and held for ransom on 1 March 1978. The kidnappers were caught and confessed to the authorities that they had buried the body in a cornfield about 20 kilometres from the site of original interment. The farmer who owned the field erected a wooden cross supporting a cane and a pair of old shoes to commemorate the spot after Chaplin's body was returned to Vevey cemetery. 
Interest in Chaplin's life and art continued after his death and reburial. During the 1970s silent-film historians David Gill and Kevin Brownlow discovered several hours of out-takes from Chaplin films made between 1916 and 1946. In 1980 they used this footage to produce a documentary series entitled 'Unknown Chaplin', which revealed important information about how the secretive film-maker made his classic pictures. Meanwhile the Chaplin family granted the film historian David Robinson access to the comedian's papers for his major study 'Chaplin: his Life and Art' (published 1985, rev. edn 2001). The film director Richard Attenborough also explored the comedian's life in his 1992 motion picture 'Chaplin', which earned Robert Downey junior an Academy award nomination as best actor for his portrayal of the principal character. Other inspired casting resulted in Geraldine Chaplin playing her own grandmother Hannah Chaplin. 
Chaplin biographies continued to be written at the end of the twentieth century, sometimes reflecting a political agenda or an eye for scandal in their focus. The critical reputation of Chaplin's 'Great Dictator' has grown since its initial release. Critics are more divided in their assessments of the quality of his later motion pictures. The claims that Chaplin was a great artist, that his classic silent films are timeless, and that his 'little tramp' is a true cinematic icon remain unchallenged. At the beginning of the twenty-first century Sir Charles Spencer Chaplin continues to be recognized as one of the most notable film-makers who ever lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 30918


Chapman, (Anthony) Colin Bruce (1928-1982), racing car designer and motor manufacturer, was born at Richmond, Surrey, on 19 May 1928, the only son of Stanley Frank Kennedy-Chapman, licensed caterer, of Muswell Hill, and his wife, (Lillian) Mary Bruce. Having been educated at the Stationers' School, Hornsey, he then graduated BSc at University College, London. For a technological buccaneer and the most innovative of formula 1 designers, who spent much of his life doing battle with authority, he made a surprisingly placid start to a turbulent professional life. Reading civil engineering because he thought it would be easier, he specialized in structural engineering. Combined with a lifelong interest in aeronautics, this stood him in good stead in producing cars well known for their lightness. 
Fast cars, flying, and competitiveness in everything he did were the mainsprings of Chapman's life. After gaining his private pilot's licence with his university air squadron he accepted a short service commission with the RAF. But cars were his first love and by 1948 the first Chapman car based on the Austin 7, known as the Lotus Mark 1, was completed. He soon discovered that his metier lay in cars for circuit racing (in which he excelled) rather than for trials, and in ingenious interpretation of the rules governing their construction. His budding Lotus so dominated the 1951 season of 750 formula racing that the regulations were changed to close the engine loophole he had exploited. The mould for twenty-five years of motor racing endeavour was set. Chapman would bring out some world-beating racing car only to have it eclipsed the following season when his rivals had caught up, copied, refined, and developed it while he had lost interest and moved on to his next design. His formula 1 cars won seventy-two grand prix, achieved eighty-eight pole positions and sixty-three fastest laps, took the constructors' championship seven times, were runners-up five times, and provided a seat for five world champion drivers. Only Ferrari approached this record. As with Enzo Ferrari's team, there were also the long lean periods, mainly because Chapman's full attention was elsewhere or because he was stubbornly pursuing an avant-garde design that would never be sanctioned. 
Ironically, Chapman's first grand prix victory, the 1960 Monaco grand prix, was achieved not by a works driver but by Stirling Moss, who was so impressed by the Lotus-Climax that he asked his sponsor, Rob Walker, to buy him one. But it was Jim Clark, the 1963 and 1965 world champion, who was to dominate the 1500 cc formula and establish Lotus as the marque to beat in the 3 litre formula before his tragic and untimely death on the Hockenheim track (1968). The 1965 Dutch grand prix found Chapman spending a night in the cells of Zandvoort police station after having felled an officious policeman, who had not seen his pass and ordered him off the track before the start of the race. This unfortunate incident, which received much publicity at the time, somehow symbolized Chapman's frequent clashes with the sport's governing body, the Federation Internationale Sporting Automobile: Chapman doing something which he knew he was perfectly entitled to do with authority trying to stop him. But the same year Clark won the Indianapolis 500, as well as the formula 1 title. 
The first year of the 3 litre formula belonged to the Brabham team with their stopgap but reliable Repco engine. But Chapman was waiting for the Ford-Cosworth DFV engine for his Lotus 49, which won first time out and went on to power another forty-seven Lotus victories. Chapman was shattered by Clark's death and when Mike Spence was killed in practice for the Indianapolis 500 soon after, he was almost ready to quit. Sadly there were to be yet more tragedies in Lotus cars to come. The talented Austrian Jochen Rindt, the sport's first posthumous world champion, was to die at Monza, as was Ronnie Peterson, of Sweden, one of the great drivers never to win the title. Despite these disasters, Lotus were able to attract top drivers and Emerson Fittipaldi won the drivers' championship in 1972. But only with the American veteran Mario Andretti could Chapman establish something of the rapport he had had with Jim Clark. 
In the Lotus 78, Andretti had an almost unfair advantage in his championship-winning year of 1978. Chapman had exploited the phenomenon of ground effect, shaping the undersides of his cars to generate down-force and enclosing them with side skirts. This was such a novel departure that other teams could not rebuild their cars in time that season but it was destined to be Chapman's last great year, with eight Lotus victories. While other teams refined their own ground-effect cars, Chapman moved on to his next revolutionary development, the type 88 twin-chassis car with the driver and essential components suspended in a kind of 'sprung cab'. This was too much and other teams threatened to withdraw from the 1981 Long Beach grand prix if the Lotus was allowed to race. The ban on the 88 soured Chapman and even his natural ebullience seemed crushed. For three years Lotus won no races as sponsorship and other problems mounted. Meanwhile, the Lotus road car business was in serious financial trouble. A world authority on the use of composite materials, pioneered in his formula 1 cars, Chapman had somehow found time to become entangled in the ill-fated project to build DeLorean sports cars in Northern Ireland. This unfortunate connection did his reputation no good, although nothing can detract from his record as, in Enzo Ferrari's words, a 'subtle visionary... able to produce ideas ahead of their time'. 
Inspirer of great loyalty as well as dislike, endearing or devious according to the viewpoint, Chapman left an indelible mark on the summit of motor racing. Of medium height, with penetrating blue eyes, his mechanics in the early days nicknamed him Chunky, but only behind his back. It was said the fortunes of Lotus could be gauged by whether his waistline was going through a thick or thin phase. Few people could have lived long at the pace Chapman set himself: racing driver, formula 1 designer and team manager, chairman of the Lotus car group, boat builder, aircraft pilot, and family man. He was appointed CBE in 1970 and other distinctions included RDI (1979), FRSA (1968), and a fellowship of University College, London. He married in 1954 Hazel Patricia, daughter of Victor Hayesmere Williams, a builder. They had two daughters and a son. Chapman's constitution could not stand up to the load of work and worry to which he subjected it. He died suddenly on 16 December 1982 of a heart attack, aged fifty-four, at East Carleton Manor, East Carleton, Norwich, the neo-colonial style mansion he had -- of course -- designed himself. 
Colin Dryden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30919


Chapman, Frederick Spencer (1907-1971), explorer and mountaineer, was born on 10 May 1907 at Kensington, London, the younger son and younger child of Frank Spencer Chapman, solicitor, of Oakwood Court, Kensington, and his wife, Winifred Ormond, who died within a month of the birth. She was the daughter of William Ormond, solicitor. Frank Spencer Chapman's business failed and he left for Canada to become a farmer when his younger son was two; he left his boys in the care of Ernest Dewick, an elderly clergyman, and his wife, Sophie. The boys lived with them near Carlisle and later at Lindale, where Frederick began to develop a lifelong interest in the creatures and plants of wild countryside. A young ordinand in the house took him up Helvellyn at the age of eight. When the Dewicks retired, the Chapman boys went to live with Sam Taylor, vicar of Flookburgh in Cartmel, and his wife, Ella, both of whom were a stalwart support during Frederick's subsequent turbulent career. Their father wrote to them regularly but in 1914 enlisted in the Canadian mounted rifles and was killed during the battle of the Somme in September 1916. 
In 1921 Chapman went to Sedbergh School, where he began to display his endurance and passion for exploration. He won a Kitchener scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge, and obtained third classes in both English part one (1928) and history part two (1929). At Cambridge he met Geoffrey Winthrop Young, the alpine mountaineer who held open house for young climbers and others. Chapman learned rock climbing on the walls and roofs of colleges, and was taken to the Alps by Lawrence Wager and Jack Longland. He became acquainted with young explorers, pre-eminently H. G. (Gino) Watkins, who invited him to join him on an expedition to Greenland. 
The British Arctic air route expedition (1930-31), which surveyed air routes with two Tiger Moths, gave Chapman an opportunity to display his toughness, particularly in the cleverly navigated rescue of Augustine Courtauld from the completely snowed-up meteorological station on the 10,000 foot Greenland ice-cap. Of all his expeditions, it was the one to which he contributed most. Chapman's 'Northern Lights' (1932) vividly recalls the enchantment and rigours of exploring, sledging, and keeping alive in the Arctic. In 1932-3 Watkins led another party to continue the Arctic air survey, but was drowned when seal-hunting in a kayak in the first few weeks. On his return Chapman, who had been one of the party, wrote 'Watkins' Last Expedition' (1934), which is full of fascinating vignettes of Inuit life and the party's success in living, like them, off the creatures of sea and land. 
Chapman then turned to teaching, and accepted a post at Aysgarth preparatory school. He found the change from his Greenland adventures difficult, although his reputation as an explorer was an asset in dealing with small boys, whom he took into the wilder country near the school and inspired with some of his own passion for natural history. Meanwhile, and for most of the rest of his life, he was in demand as an admirable lecturer on his Arctic and other adventures. Remarkable as these were, they lost nothing in the telling. But the mountains still called, and after two years he left Aysgarth in 1935 to join Marco Pallis's Himalayan expedition. This was perhaps not exactly right for him: he did not share Pallis's passion for Tibetan culture, and had hoped to be chosen for an Everest expedition, for which his mountaineering experience was too slight. He was, however, invited to join a government mission to Lhasa, capital of Tibet, which he thought a more exciting prospect than running a prep school. But this too proved not quite what he wanted. He found the Tibetans less approachable than his beloved Inuit. In 1937, however, when his time at Lhasa came to an end, he mounted an expedition with one English companion and only three Sherpas to Chomolhari, a striking and challenging 24,000 foot mountain on the southern borders of Tibet. His account of its ascent, with only one novice Sherpa porter, was doubted by some experienced mountaineers, but a later analysis in the 'Alpine Journal' gave him the credit for having succeeded against the odds and in wretched weather. Two books record this stage of his career: 'Lhasa: the Holy City' (1938) and 'Helvellyn to Himalaya' (1940), both reasonably successful but not reaching the standard of his earlier Greenland books. 
After Chomolhari, still uncertain whether a life of expeditions or of schoolmastering was to give him what he wanted, Chapman was introduced to Kurt Hahn, headmaster of Gordonstoun School, who in 1938 appointed him a housemaster. Gordonstoun and Hahn's educational beliefs suited Chapman well, and helped to shape ideas which he implemented later in Germany and South Africa. But he had completed only four terms there when war came, and as a territorial officer with the Seaforth Highlanders he joined up at once. He was soon given appropriate work, helping to train a mountain division and the first of the commandos in Scotland. He was then transferred to Australia. Chapman was posted to Singapore in September 1941, and when the first Japanese landings in Malaya came two months later he was sent to Kuala Lumpur 'expressly to organize and lead reconnaissance and operational parties behind the enemy lines'. He did this for nearly three years. He himself felt that he had missed the 'real war', and yet his record of endurance and resourcefulness and his ability to escape from the Japanese, who had put a price on his head, are almost unmatched in the history of the Second World War. When taken out by submarine in 1945 he returned to Colombo a justified hero. His story came later in the best of all his books, 'The Jungle is Neutral' (1948), which was an enormous success. Chapman had also earned a DSO (1944) and bar (1946). 
In 1946 Chapman married Faith Mary, the daughter of Major George Harrison Townson; they had three sons. He spent a year as first organizing secretary of the Outward Bound Trust. In 1948 he was appointed to build up a new boarding-school, for the British forces education service, the King Alfred School at Plon in West Germany. He had a free hand to appoint staff and develop the school as he wished. He made a success of the post, but resigned in 1952 to caravan across Africa with his wife and three small boys. The book which resulted, 'Lightest Africa' (1955), was not a success. 
From 1956 to 1962 Chapman was headmaster of the Anglican foundation of St Andrew's College, Grahamstown, South Africa. He was not really happy there, and resigned when South Africa became a republic in 1961. From 1962 to 1966 he was warden of the Pestalozzi children's village at Sedlescombe, but this was another job that did not suit him. He was rescued by an old friend of Special Operations Executive days, Professor Vernon Mallinson, of Reading University, who in 1966 offered him the wardenship of Wantage Hall, one of the university halls of residence. There he was contented and made a useful mark. Yet he became worried about his impending retirement and his health. He began to doubt what his life, with all its adventures and heroism and sheer indestructibility, amounted to. Despite his remarkable record, all his life he aspired towards greater fame than he felt he had actually achieved. He shot himself in his office in Reading on 8 August 1971. Among his awards were the Arctic medal (1931), the Gill memorial medal of the Royal Geographical Society (1941), the Mungo Park medal of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (1948), the 'Sunday Times' special award and gold medal (1949), and the Lawrence of Arabia memorial medal of the Royal Central Asian Society (1950). 
Jack Longland', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30920


Charnley, Sir John (1911-1982), orthopaedic surgeon, was born on 29 August 1911 in Bury, Lancashire, the only son and elder child of Arthur Walter Charnley, pharmacist, and his wife, Lily ('nee' Hodgson), a nurse. He was educated at Bury grammar school and Manchester University, where he graduated BSc in anatomy and physiology (1932) before entering his clinical studies. Three years later he gained his MB ChB and in 1936 he became FRCS. He held various surgical appointments at Manchester Royal Infirmary and at Salford Royal Hospital, and it was obvious that he had an outstanding future in surgery. He volunteered for service in the Royal Army Medical Corps in May 1940. After a spell as resident medical officer at the evacuation of Dunkirk he was graded as an orthopaedic surgeon and was posted to the Middle East as a major and officer in charge of no. 2 orthopaedic centre, Cairo. 
On demobilization Charnley returned to Manchester Royal Infirmary where he was appointed assistant orthopaedic surgeon and then consultant. In 1950 he published 'The Closed Treatment of Common Fractures', a unique analysis of manipulation in the treatment of fractures, which revealed Charnley's unusual talent for drawing on engineering concepts. This work was a challenge to his colleagues and destroyed many myths and rigidly held concepts. His mechanical ideas and skills were again seen in his development of simple and direct compression arthrodesis techniques for the knee, ankle, and even hip. This resulted in another monograph, 'Compression Arthrodesis' (1953). However, compression arthrodesis of the hip never became widely accepted. Recognizing this, Charnley began to work on the mobility of the hip in painful hip conditions due to arthritis. His discoveries were made possible by his outstanding ability in working with materials, his engineering techniques, and his skills at the lathe, which he utilized at his home in Hale. 
Charnley had seemed to be a confirmed bachelor and lived with his mother, until on a ski slope in Switzerland in 1957 he met Jill Margaret Heaver, daughter of James Cedric Heaver, an officer in customs and excise. Three months later they were married. They had a son and a daughter. 
In 1961 Charnley established a centre for hip surgery at Wrightington Hospital, Wigan, where he had been the visiting orthopaedic surgeon. There he pioneered one of the greatest contributions to world surgery for thousands of patients. At that time very little was known about the science of biological materials and lubrication, elasticity of tissues, or the acceptance of artificial materials within bone and joint tissues. All of these were critically studied to produce the Charnley prosthesis. The prototype, which utilized Teflon plastic, was a failure, but eventually a new polyethylene material became available. At the same time Charnley designed sterile-air operating enclosures, specialized hip instruments, and total body exhaust systems within impervious gowns, all to reduce infection. Over the years he published the successes, failures, and subsequent results of his procedures. His masterly report and monograph, 'Acrylic Cement in Orthopaedic Surgery', appeared in 1970. This was followed by 'Low Friction Arthroplasty of the Hip' in 1979. Orthopaedic surgeons had long been waiting for such a breakthrough, and began to flock to the hip centre in Wrightington from all over the world. Here they were welcomed and allowed to observe the master surgeon's complex operations and his techniques and methods to avoid complication and catastrophe. 
Charnley held honorary appointments at Manchester University, in the department of mechanical engineering, and at the Manchester Institute of Science and Technology. He was given many honours and awards, among them an honorary fellowship of the British Orthopaedic Association (1981) and the Lister medal of the Royal College of Surgeons (1975). He received the honorary DSc from the University of Leeds and Queen's University, Belfast (both 1978), and the honorary MD from Liverpool (1975) and Uppsala (1977). He was appointed CBE in 1970 and became the first orthopaedic fellow of the Royal Society in 1975. In 1972 Manchester University recognized their outstanding graduate by making him professor of orthopaedic surgery, a post he held until 1976. The citizens of Bury made him a freeman of the borough in 1974, and he was knighted in 1977. 
Charnley was a man of small stature, but had a strongly built physique, which expressed his dynamic, non-stop activity, both mental and physical. He was incisive in thought, work, and deed, and was driven not so much by compassion or ambition as by his 'single-minded determination to solve a problem' (Nisbet and Woodruff, 119). Charnley died in Manchester on 5 August 1982. 
R. B. Duthie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30921


Trench, Anthony Chenevix- (1919-1979), headmaster, was born at Kasauli in the Punjab, India, on 10 May 1919, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of Charles Godfrey Chenevix-Trench (1877-1964), revenue commissioner in the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Margaret May (1888-1981), daughter of John Holmes Blakesley, engineer, of The Avenue, Kew Gardens, London. 
The Chenevix-Trenches were of French Huguenot stock who settled in Ireland at the end of the seventeenth century from where they achieved considerable renown in ecclesiastical and military circles; none more so than Richard Trench who was appointed archbishop of Dublin in 1864. It was Anthony's father who broke with family tradition by opting for the Indian Civil Service, becoming a much revered figure among the inhabitants of Udaipur. His love of learning and sense of duty duly left their mark upon his children. Introduced to Herodotus at the age of six, Anthony Chenevix-Trench developed a great love for the classics, already evident at Highfield School in Liphook, Hampshire, where he was a pupil from 1927 to 1932. His ability to construct Greek sentences earned him the envy of his fellow pupil Ludovic Kennedy, the writer and broadcaster. 
In March 1932, three months before his thirteenth birthday, Chenevix-Trench followed in the footsteps of all three of his brothers by winning a scholarship to Shrewsbury School. Here he continued his effortless rise, gaining a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, aged sixteen. He was, according to his esteemed classics master, Jimmy Street, the best pupil he ever taught during his forty-four years at the school. He proceeded to Christ Church in 1937 and the plaudits continued. He gained a first class in classical honour moderations (1939) before the outbreak of the Second World War. 
In September 1939 Chenevix-Trench joined the Royal Artillery and was seconded to the 4th mountain battery, frontier force, Indian artillery 22nd mountain regiment. As a senior subaltern he struck up an excellent relationship with his Indian troops, facilitated by his quick mastery of Urdu, and distinguished himself in the retreat through Malaya against the advancing Japanese armies. One of 85,000 imperial troops to surrender at Singapore in February 1942 he was sent to work on the infamous Burma Railway in 1943. There, in the most brutal and degrading conditions imaginable, he proved a fount of inspiration to his fellow captives, translating A. E. Housman's 'Shropshire Lad' into Latin and entertaining them with a series of talks on Greek literature. 
On his release in 1945 Chenevix-Trench returned to Oxford and was runner-up in the Craven and Ireland scholarships in 1946 before obtaining a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1947), with alpha marks in every paper. In January 1948 he accepted an invitation to return to Shrewsbury and in no time established a reputation as a brilliantly inspiring teacher, instilling in his pupils a true appreciation of the ancient civilizations. During the vintage year of 1950-51 ten members of the Shrewsbury classical sixth gained open awards to Oxford or Cambridge. 
In 1951 Chenevix-Trench's old tutor, R. H. Dundas, inveigled him back to Christ Church as a classics don but, finding the experience of tutoring undergraduates a more remote and arid one than teaching slightly younger students, he lasted only a year. The housemastership of School House, Shrewsbury, unexpectedly became open and for Chenevix-Trench the opportunity of returning to his old house took precedence over a chance to become headmaster of Charterhouse. At Shrewsbury between 1952 and 1955 his gregarious informality, his deep understanding of boys, and his compassion for those in trouble won him many admirers, although the goodwill was tempered by his unhealthy addiction to corporal punishment, a trait later exposed by one of his former pupils, Paul Foot, in the satirical magazine 'Private Eye'. Why such an essentially humane person should on occasions abuse this standard punishment for the time has never been properly explained. What is irrefutable is that his continued dependence on beating when its legitimacy was increasingly being called into question severely undermined his credibility; a point all too readily illustrated by the furore caused by the publication in 1994 of 'Eton Renewed', a modern history of the college, which partially attributed Chenevix-Trench's demise there in 1970 to his predilection for beating. 
It was during his time at Shrewsbury that Chenevix-Trench married in 1953 Elizabeth Chalmers (1925-1991), a teacher, eldest daughter of Captain Stewart Dykes Spicer RN. A kind, hospitable person, she willingly supported him both at Shrewsbury and during his subsequent three headmasterships, enabling him to keep open house for all comers. They had twin daughters, and two sons. 
In 1955 Chenevix-Trench finally succumbed to the overtures of governing bodies up and down the country by becoming headmaster of Bradfield College, Berkshire, and there now followed the most fulfilling years of his career as he flourished in this arcadian idyll. Eschewing the traditional role of the headmaster as a distant autocrat, he continued to place the interests of the pupils first, teaching, tutoring, and befriending them whenever possible. His enthusiasm, his personal support, combined with his overriding commitment to high academic standards, galvanized the school into raising its sights and acquiring unprecedented prestige in educational circles. 
It was against this background of achievement at Bradfield, alongside his membership of the Robbins committee which in 1963 advocated the expansion of higher education, that Chenevix-Trench was appointed headmaster of Eton College as successor to Robert Birley in January 1964 with a view to pouring new wine into old bottles. For the Eton which Chenevix-Trench inherited had changed little in the twentieth century and now, in a less deferential age, the need to transform an elite based on birth to one based on merit was paramount. That much was done to accomplish this at Eton during the next seven years is a measure of his influence. On arrival he oversaw a major review of the curriculum, bringing it into the mainstream of GCE, A and O-level studies and achieving unprecedented success in open scholarships at Oxford and Cambridge. At the same time the arts were encouraged, the facilities upgraded, chapel reformed, social services begun, discipline relaxed, and horizons broadened. 'This is the modern Eton', enthused the 'Eton Chronicle', the influential college weekly periodical, in June 1970: 'A school which utilises its facilities to encourage self expression while by no means neglecting its duties as a trainer of the mind and preparer for national exams.' Other independent bodies returned similar verdicts. A BBC documentary in 1965 portrayed the college in a fairly flattering light and the press was supportive of his innovatory agenda. 
Despite these undoubted successes Chenevix-Trench's leadership attracted substantial criticism, particularly from those within the college hierarchy who felt that he lacked the 'gravitas' expected in an Eton headmaster. Apart from his diminutive stature (Eton headmasters, notwithstanding the renowned Dr John Keate, are traditionally imposing figures) and his dishevelled appearance, they particularly objected to his administrative laxity, and reluctance to follow a consistent line on discipline. On top of this his lack of physical stamina, the legacy of his wartime experiences, his weakness for alcohol, and his penchant for beating were further causes for concern. In March 1969 he was informed by the provost, Lord Caccia, that the academic year ending in July 1970 would be his last. His dismissal was well handled but the damage to his self-esteem was considerable. 
In September 1971 Chenevix-Trench became headmaster of Fettes College, Edinburgh, a school of similar size to Bradfield. Back in more familiar surroundings he was in his element and won much support for his reforms which helped usher in a more tranquil period in the school's history after the turbulence of the 1960s. Numbers increased from 420 to 530; girls in the sixth form, first introduced in 1970, became an established component; and a junior school was opened in 1973. It was only during his final years when he was dogged by ill health that his liberal tendencies (beating aside) became something of a liability. He died at his home, The Lodge, Fettes College, 2 Carrington Road, Edinburgh, on 21 June 1979, weeks before his retirement, from a severe internal haemorrhage in his intestine, related to nutritional deprivations in his wartime captivity. His remains were cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 25 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 30922


Cheshire, Geoffrey Chevalier (1886-1978), jurist, was born on 27 June 1886 at Hilderstone, Winnington, Hartford, Cheshire, the second son of Walter Christopher Cheshire, solicitor and registrar of Northwich county court, Cheshire, and his wife, Clara Hatt Cook. Educated at Denstone College and Merton College, Oxford (1905-10), he obtained first-class honours in jurisprudence in 1908 and a second class in the BCL degree in 1910. From 1909 to 1911 he lectured at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. In 1911 he was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn and returned to Merton as assistant lecturer in law. In 1912 he was elected to a fellowship at Exeter College, Oxford. 
In 1914 Cheshire obtained a commission in the Cheshire regiment, but on transfer to the Royal Flying Corps in 1916 he was assigned to the kite-balloon section, which involved him, for a few months, in sitting in a basket 1000 feet above the British lines and spotting German targets for the gunners. He was twice wounded. He married on 6 February 1915 (Burella) Primrose Eleanor (1889/90-1962), the younger daughter of Colonel Thomas Adam Anderson Barstow, of the Seaforth Highlanders. They had two sons, Group Captain (Geoffrey) Leonard Cheshire OM VC DSO DFC, founder of the Cheshire Homes, and Christopher, head of Shell in Spain; both sons also went to Merton College. 
After the war Cheshire returned to his teaching at Exeter College, where from 1919 to 1933 he also acted as bursar. He was an outstanding teacher and scholar. As law tutor he regularly had about thirty pupils, for whom he covered the whole range of the law examinations. As a lecturer he always drew large audiences, speaking in a clear gentle voice and with lucidity and directness. During that period he produced, in 1925, 'The Modern Law of Real Property', in which he prepared readers for the coming into force of the seven statutes which greatly modified English property law. In the book he traced the shifting policies underlying the law and the techniques employed in achieving them, and enunciated the law in its new more perspicuous and rational form. The book enjoyed an immediate and lasting success. In 1927 he undertook, with four colleagues, the task of reorganizing, for a nineteenth edition, 'Stephen's Commentaries on the Laws of England' (4 vols., 1928). His main personal contribution was an attempt to display the law of property as a single whole, instead of merely describing successively the separate laws of real and personal property. Unfortunately his synthesis, though it received a welcome from academic reviewers, was shipwrecked on the conservatism of the profession, and was abandoned in the next edition. More recent thinking suggests that he was right. 
In 1922 Cheshire added to his other offices that of All Souls lecturer in private international law and, in 1935, two years after relinquishing that appointment for that of All Souls reader in English law, he brought out the results of his work under the title 'Private International Law'. That part of English law was then the perfect antithesis to real property law, for it was still fluid and in course of development. Hence it offered the freest scope to the mere jurist; and Cheshire, like Saul among the prophets, entered a territory quite different from that to which he had been accustomed. This highly original book, thought by many to be his best work, was 'born a classic'. 
In 1944 Cheshire was elected Vinerian professor of English law, becoming thereby a fellow of All Souls College. In 1945, in collaboration with his former pupil C. H. S. Fifoot, he published 'The Law of Contract' with a companion 'Cases on the Law of Contract' (1946). 'Cheshire and Fifoot' was the first entirely new book on the subject to appear for many years. In spite of the critical temper pervading it, it has held the field and remains a stand-by not only of teachers and students but of the bench and bar. 
Cheshire retired prematurely from the chair in 1949, but continued for many years to lecture to bar students. He was also a member of several committees concerned with law reform. During the Second World War he served as a captain in the Home Guard, and he also served as a JP and presided over a juvenile court. 
In retirement Cheshire became deeply involved in his son Leonard's scheme for the support of terminal patients and was mainly responsible for drawing up the memorandum of association and articles of the Cheshire Homes Foundation. In consequence, in 1950, he abandoned his Berkshire home and moved to Laundry Cottage in the grounds of the first Cheshire Home, in Hampshire. 
Cheshire was tall, spare, and of athletic build. From the time when he represented Merton at football and tennis he played games actively and to the end he kept himself fit. He was very practical: he built his Berkshire house with the aid of an architect and a clerk of works but without a contractor. He was handy with machinery and drove his ageing car to an advanced age, in fact until the accident that caused his death. He was genial and had many friends of all ages. His dry wit made him excellent company, though he did not relish large groups or great occasions. 
He was, beyond doubt, the most eminent English academic lawyer of his generation, excelling as a lecturer, college tutor, and systematic writer, while also commanding the respect of the higher judiciary. In his three major books he introduced a new stage in the development of important branches of English law by raising their literary treatment to a higher level and subjecting them to reasoned criticism. The books have been described as intermediate between treatises and manuals. They are not exhaustive: they do not deal with every judicial decision or legislative provision relevant to the subject. But they do not merely state rules and general principles: they also allow scope for historical explanation, criticism, and, above all, the discovery and development of logical strands of doctrine. These qualities have not only commended them to teachers and students but have led both bench and bar to look to them for help in basing argument on principle. 
One of the secrets of Cheshire's success as a writer was that he did not find law easy. He wrestled with a problem in his own mind and then worked out the best way to convey the conclusion he had arrived at, subjecting it also to the reactions of his audiences and pupils. 'Cheshire', said Lord Edmund-Davies, 'contrived to be both clear and stylish, he transformed the 'look' of a page, he lightened the drudgery of learning' (Exeter College, 'Association Register', 13). Moreover, in the many editions of his books, for which he retained responsibility to an advanced age, he was always ready to change his mind when convinced by the arguments of others. He was indeed the least opinionated of legal writers. His famous 'trinity of books' retain a major influence in their respective fields; and it seems highly unlikely that Cheshire's feat of writing such major works on three completely different subjects will ever be repeated. 
Cheshire was awarded a DCL at Oxford in 1927, and in 1945 he was elected FBA and an honorary bencher of Lincoln's Inn. He became an honorary fellow of both Merton and Exeter colleges, and he received the honorary degree of LLD from London, Manchester, and Jadavpur universities. He was a member of the Institute of International Law from 1950 to 1965. On 11 July 1963 he married Dame Mary Kathleen Lloyd (1902-1972) ['see 'Cheshire, Dame Mary Kathleen], who had been director of the Women's Royal Naval Service from 1950 to 1954. She was the daughter of Aloysius Joseph Lloyd, master draper, of Channonrock, Hayling Island. She died on 3 April 1972. Cheshire himself died of bronchopneumonia, asthma, and ischaemic heart disease, on 27 October 1978 in the Royal Portsmouth Hospital, ten days after a car accident. 


@@@@@


doc= 30923


Chichester, Sir Francis Charles (1901-1972), navigator and sailor, was born on 17 September 1901 at Shirwell, Devon, the younger son (there were later two daughters) of Charles Chichester, vicar of Shirwell, seventh son of the eighth baronet, and his wife, Emily Annie, the daughter of Samuel Page, of Chitt's Hill, Wood Green, London. He was educated at the infants' school in Barnstaple, at preparatory schools in Ellerslie and Bournemouth, and at Marlborough College. He spent an unhappy childhood, left Marlborough at the age of seventeen, and emigrated in December 1919 to New Zealand with only ten sovereigns in his pocket. There he tried a variety of jobs until as a land agent and property developer he was able to earn a substantial income and to accumulate some capital. In 1923 he married Muriel Eileen, the daughter of M. L. Blakiston; they had two sons, the first stillborn, the second, George, who died in 1967. The marriage broke up within three years and in 1929 Muriel died. George was brought up by his New Zealand grandparents until Chichester's second marriage. 
Chichester became the hero of the British people and achieved worldwide fame when at the age of sixty-five he sailed solo around the world between August 1966 and May 1967, a distance of 29,600 miles in 226 days. Nearly forty years earlier he had established himself as a record-breaking pilot in small aircraft, and his feats as a navigator became well known. Indeed, navigation is the link between his exploits in both spheres. He would not have claimed to be either a natural pilot or a natural sailor, and it is in the technique of navigation that he made his immediate contribution to the development of aviation and later demonstrated his capabilities at sea. 
Together with his partner in the estate agency, Geoffrey Goodwin, Chichester formed an aviation company, and learned to fly at a New Zealand air force station. Having returned after ten years' absence to England, he took further flying lessons at Brooklands, bought a plane, a Gipsy I Moth, gained his A licence, made a preliminary tour of Europe, and then in 1929 set off for Australia. After nineteen days' solo flight and a variety of incidents, including twice damaging the plane, he landed at Sydney, New South Wales, to an uproarious welcome from thousands of people; he was only the second pilot successfully to accomplish this hazardous operation. 
Back in New Zealand, Chichester determined to be the first to fly solo from east to west across the Tasman Sea. This necessitated landing on two small islands, roughly equally spaced across the ocean, to refuel. To do so demanded absolutely accurate navigation. His method was to aim off the mark and, having reached the selected point, checked by a sun sight, to turn and sweep along the position line until he could see his target. He used a sextant, five-figure logarithmic tables, and a scribbling pad strapped to his knee, all in the very cramped space of a small cockpit. Having fitted floats to his Gipsy I Moth to enable him to land on the island lagoons, he made accurate landfalls at Norfolk Island, where he encountered engine trouble on take off, and Lord Howe Island, where his plane sank and had to be rebuilt, before reaching Jarvis Bay, south of Sydney. By his resourcefulness, skill, and determination he had triumphed. Continuing by stages what he now envisaged as a round-the-world tour, later in 1929 he crashed in Japan after hitting telephone wires at Katsuura, seriously injuring himself and writing off his plane. 
After returning to England, Chichester married in 1937 Sheila Mary, the daughter of Gerald Craven, of Belle Eau Park, Nottinghamshire, the son of Thomas Craven, of Kirklington Hall, Nottinghamshire; they had one son, Giles. The couple spent a year in New Zealand together and then returned to live permanently in England; Chichester took up a post as a navigation specialist with a firm of instrument makers. 
Frustrated during the first years of the Second World War by the failure of the RAF to make use of his navigational experience, Chichester was eventually appointed navigation officer at the Empire Flying School (1943-5). After the war he established his own publishing firm for maps and guides. He then took up ocean racing, first as a navigator and later, in 1958, with his own boat, 'Gipsy Moth II'. In 1958-9 he suffered from lung cancer, but he recovered and in 1960, with 'Gipsy Moth II', he won the first single-handed transatlantic race. In the same race two years later he knocked nearly seven days off his previous record but came second. 'Gipsy Moth IV' was built to circumnavigate the globe, which he successfully accomplished with one stop at Sydney. What had been denied him in the air he had been granted at sea. He failed in his subsequent attempt in 'Gipsy Moth V' to sail 4000 miles in twenty days, from Guinea Bissau across the Atlantic to San Juan del Norte in Nicaragua, but his time of twenty-two days established another record. The fourth single-handed transatlantic race in 1972 proved to be his last. Frail when he started, he became ill and returned to Plymouth, where he died shortly afterwards, on 26 August 1972. 
Chichester was appointed CBE in 1964 and KBE in 1967, when he reached Sydney halfway through his single-handed voyage round the world; the queen dubbed him with Sir Francis Drake's sword at Greenwich after his return. He received many other honours and awards. He recorded his exploits both in the air and at sea in a number of books, but his personality and his philosophy can best be summed up in his own answer to a question after his tumultuous welcome at Plymouth. Why did he do it? 'Because', he replied, 'it intensifies life'. 
Edward Heath', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30924


Chick, Dame Harriette (1875-1977), nutritionist, was born at 5 Newman Street, London, on 6 January 1875, the fifth child and third daughter of the eleven children (four boys and seven girls) of Samuel Chick, a prosperous lace merchant and property owner, and his wife, Emma Hooley, the daughter of a grocer and corn merchant, of Macclesfield, Cheshire. Her parents, both Methodists, brought up their large family strictly, with family prayers twice daily and a ban on such worldly pleasures as theatres and dancing. They sent their daughters to Notting Hill high school, which provided an excellent education (including science) for girls; five of them became university graduates, in botany, physics and chemistry, English, and medicine. 
Harriette Chick studied botany, chemistry, and physics at University College, London, graduating BSc in 1896. She then turned her attention to analytical chemistry and bacteriology, obtaining her DSc in 1904 partly by a study of green algae in polluted waters. With an 1851 Exhibition award she worked in the Hyginia Institute of Vienna, in Munich under Professor Max Gruber, a pioneer in bacteriology, and in Liverpool under Rubert Boyce. Charles Sherrington, professor of physiology in Liverpool, suggested she should apply for the Jenner memorial research studentship at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine near Chelsea Bridge, of which Charles Martin had become director in 1903. Her application was vigorously opposed by two members of the staff who implored the director not to appoint a woman, but she joined the institute in 1905. Chick then started to investigate the process of disinfection by chemicals and heat. The standard test for disinfectants, introduced by Samuel Rideal and J. T. Ainslie Walker in 1903, was unrealistic, as it was carried out in distilled water. The Chick-Martin test, which replaced it, added 3 per cent dried human faeces. This led Chick and Martin to carry out pioneer work on the nature of proteins, demonstrating that heat coagulation was an orderly process governed by established chemical laws. 
In 1915, following the outbreak of the First World War, Chick went to Elstree to assist in the urgent task of testing and bottling tetanus antitoxin for the army. She soon returned to Chelsea to supervise the preparation of agglutinating sera for the diagnosis of typhoid, paratyphoid, and dysentery, then prevalent in allied troops in Flanders and the Middle East. 
Chick and her colleagues also investigated the distribution of the anti-beriberi vitamin in food, at the request of Martin, who, while on active service with the Australian Army Medical Corps, had recognized beriberi among troops evacuated from Gallipoli. They also studied the distribution and stability in foods of the antiscorbutic vitamin. 
From 1918 to 1945 Chick was secretary of the Accessory Food Factors Committee of the Medical Research Committee (later Council) and the Lister Institute, making an important contribution to the committee's monograph 'The Present State of Knowledge Concerning Accessory Food Factors (Vitamins)' (1919; rev. 1924, 1932). From 1934 to 1937 she was secretary of the League of Nations health section committee on the physiological bases of nutrition. 
In 1919 the Accessory Food Factors Committee sent Chick and Elsie Dalyell from the Lister Institute to investigate the deficiencies in Vienna; a few months later Margaret Hume joined them. They found that scurvy, rickets, and xerophthalmia were prevalent in infants and young children, and osteomalacia in the elderly. The team confirmed the healing property of cod liver oil in rickets, and the discovery of K. Huldschinsky of Berlin that exposure to ultraviolet light also healed rickets. These clinical findings, published as 'Studies of Rickets in Vienna, 1919-22' (1924) convinced Clemens von Pirquet, director of the Universitats Kinderklinik, where much of the research was conducted, of the importance of diet in rickets and the error of his previous position, which viewed rickets as a disease of microbial origin. In Britain the publication helped to shift the scientific and medical consensus in favour of the vitamin theory of rickets of Edward Mellanby, and away from the hygienic theory of Diarmid Noel Paton. 
Back at the Lister Institute, Chick became head of a newly formed division of nutrition and began investigating the nutritional value of proteins. This work involved the purification of diets for rats and led to studies of the B vitamins, at a time when little was known about them. She became interested in pellagra and the relation of maize to this disease, and gave a series of lectures on it in the USA in 1932. When the Second World War started, the division of nutrition moved to Martin's house in Cambridge. Wartime work included studies of the nutritive value of bread, flour, and potatoes, using rats. After her retirement in 1945 Chick kept in contact with the Lister Institute as a member of its governing body, attending the annual general meeting in June 1975 some six months after her 100th birthday. 
Chick was a founder member of the Nutrition Society in 1941 and was elected an honorary member in 1949, and president in 1956-9. In 1974 the British Nutrition Foundation awarded her its annual prize, for which she prepared a lecture on her work in Vienna; shortly before her 100th birthday she gave a lively introduction, leaving the remainder to be read by A. M. Copping. She remained mentally and physically active until her death at the age of 102 in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 9 July 1977. Chick was appointed CBE in 1932 and DBE in 1949, and was awarded an honorary DSc by Manchester University in 1933. 
Harriette Chick was short in stature, neat in dress, lively, and interested in conversation. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 30925


Chorley, Robert Samuel Theodore, first Baron Chorley (1895-1978), lawyer and conservationist, was born on 29 May 1895 at Kendal, Westmorland, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of Richard Fisher Chorley, a solicitor, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Frost, farmer, of Hardingstone, Northampton. After attending Kendal School, Chorley proceeded to Queen's College, Oxford, obtaining a BA in 1916. During the First World War he served in the Foreign Office, the Ministry of Labour, and the Cheshire regiment. 
In 1920 Chorley was called to the bar (Inner Temple). Although he did some practice, mainly in the commercial field, he soon turned to law teaching and became tutor and lecturer at the Law Society School of Law. On 15 April 1925 he married Katharine Campbell (died 1986), the daughter of Edward Hopkinson MP DSc, of Alderley Edge, Cheshire. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Chorley's expertise in banking and commercial law, on which he wrote several books, led to his appointment to the Sir Ernest Cassel chair of commercial and industrial law at the London School of Economics, which he held from 1930 until 1946. During the Second World War he joined the Home Office and Ministry of Home Security (1940-41) and was appointed a deputy regional commissioner for civil defence (1942-4). In 1944 he became chairman of Westmorland quarter sessions, a post he held until 1968. 
The end of the war marked a significant stage in Chorley's career. He unsuccessfully contested the Northwich division as a Labour candidate in 1945. Afterwards he was created a peer in the same year and made lord-in-waiting, an office he held from 1946 to 1950. In that capacity and as chief spokesman for the government in the House of Lords on a number of subjects he played a full part in securing the passage of the huge legislative programme of the Labour government and as a result in 1946 he found it necessary to resign his chair. He was active as a member of government and other committees. 
Chorley was a man in the broad tradition of Victorian radicalism and shared fully in the belief in a progressive society to be brought about by universal education and a strong legislative programme. He envisaged a complete change of attitude towards the legal system. For him the human and social problems underlying the morass of technical law were the matters of real concern. He thus became persuaded that what was lacking in Britain was a legal journal of contemporary outlook encompassing the whole problem of law reform in its social and humane context. He was fond of saying that his most important achievement was the foundation and successful development of the 'Modern Law Review', of which he became the first general editor in 1937, and whose editorship he continued until 1971. This publication played a crucial role in the outlook of successive generations of lawyers who learned from its pages to appreciate that law was no arid field whose interest was confined to a narrow 'closed shop' of professionals, but something of immense concern to every citizen in the land, and that the law's development called for a legal profession imbued with the sense of a social task. 
For Chorley compassion was a sentiment not simply to be indulged in but something which must result in practical action. Thus it was the reform of the penal system which seized his imagination, and into which his long service at quarter sessions gave him a deep insight. It was therefore most fitting that in 1961 he was made a QC by the lord chancellor, Viscount Kilmuir, who so far departed from the general practice by offering silk to Chorley without previous application. Chorley was vice-president of the Howard League for Penal Reform from 1948, chairman of the Institute for the Study and Treatment of Delinquency (1950-56, president 1956-76), and president of the Haldane Society (1957-72) and of the National Council for the Abolition of the Death Penalty (1945-8). 
Above all Chorley had a deep attachment to and lifelong concern for the English countryside. As a native of Kendal he had a profound love for the Lake District and became involved in all the major battles to resist encroachments on that hallowed territory. Chorley served as president of the Fell Rock Climbing Club of the English Lake District (1935-7), as vice-chairman of the National Trust, and as honorary secretary for the Council for the Preservation of Rural England (1935-67). Lady Chorley shared these interests and her first book was called 'Hills and Highways' (1928). Three others followed, including 'Manchester Made Them' (1950), a perceptive study of the culture in which she grew up. She was also a keen rock climber. 
Those who knew Chorley only in his later years, when he presented a bent figure peering behind thick glasses, had some difficulty in envisaging him as a mighty man in the world of mountaineering, but in his younger years he was recognized as a leading mountaineer, and later became president of the British Mountaineering Council (1950-53) as well as a vice-president of the Alpine Club (1956-8). With all these accomplishments there was a warmth and geniality to his personality. Despite the difficulties he encountered in recognizing people visually, he had a wonderful and unfailing memory for all his innumerable circle of friends and acquaintances, and not least his students, especially those from overseas. In 1970 he became an honorary fellow of the London School of Economics. Chorley died in hospital in London on 27 January 1978 and was succeeded in the barony by his elder son, Roger Richard Edward ('b'. 1930). 
Lloyd of Hampstead', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30926


Christie, Dame Agatha Mary Clarissa (1890-1976), writer, was born on 15 September 1890 at Ashfield, Torquay, Devon, the last of the three children of a late marriage between Frederick Alvah Miller (1846-1901), an American of independent means, and Clarissa Margaret (Clara) Boehmer (1854-1926), his cousin from his father's second marriage. 
The Miller family and their servants lived comfortably and hospitably at Ashfield, a large villa with extensive gardens, an orchard, conservatories, a tennis court, and croquet lawn, surroundings that were to provide the backdrop to many of Agatha's later stories of easeful middle-class lives shockingly disrupted by murder. Agatha's brother and sister were sent away to school but her own formal education was minimal: dancing, singing, and piano classes, a few untaxing lessons when she was fourteen, various well-intentioned finishing schools in France. She taught herself from her father's library, stocked with complete editions of nineteenth-century novels, and sets of the 'Art Quarterly' and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. Self-contained and secretive, Agatha lived in imaginary worlds, her closest companions imaginary friends. 
When Agatha was eleven, her father died of heart disease. His affairs had been mishandled and Clara struggled to keep Ashfield. For Agatha's first season her mother took her to Cairo, less expensive than London but with dances, polo, the races, and potential suitors. Agatha was attractive and energetic, tall, with thick, long, blonde hair and a pleasant voice. She was, however, paralysingly shy. Her nervousness in public had led her to abandon thoughts of a career as a singer or a pianist. A cruel dancing partner told Clara that, although her daughter danced beautifully, she did not know how to talk. Instead, Agatha wrote: sentimental verse, stories about visions and seances, and a novel. The last was scrutinized by a kind neighbour, the writer Eden Philpotts, who sent it to Hughes Massie, his literary agent. Massie sent it back. 
Agatha was neither ambitious nor anxious about her future. When war came in 1914 she worked first with the Voluntary Aid Detachment in a local hospital and then 'In a Dispensary', the title of a poem she wrote at that time (published in 'The Road of Dreams', 1924). She was fascinated by the poisons: '
menace and murder and sudden death 

In these phials of green and blue! 

' Challenged by her sister Madge, Agatha now embarked on a detective story. Her plot was a riddle. 'The whole point', she explained in her 'Autobiography', 'was that it must be somebody obvious, but at the same time, for some reason, you would then find that it was not obvious, that he could not possibly have done it. But really of course he had' (Christie, 'Autobiography', 255). The structure of this story, accumulation of complication with a neat and surprising resolution, became her favourite device. Her detective was inspired by the refugees she saw in Torquay. Hercule Poirot was a retired Belgian police officer, clever, meticulous, and self-important. Rejected by two publishers, 'The Mysterious Affair at Styles' went on to John Lane at the Bodley Head, who acknowledged its receipt but, for the next two years, said no more. 
The typescript had been sent in under Agatha's new name, for in a rush on 24 December 1914, she had married Archibald Christie (1889-1962), a young officer in the Royal Flying Corps on his first leave. Archie's war was exciting; when it ended, he was, at twenty-nine, a colonel with decorations for bravery. He found it difficult to settle into his new job in the Air Ministry, but his wife's success was just beginning. The Bodley Head published her book in America in 1920 and in England in 1921 with an option on five more. Terms were meagre but Christie joyously applied herself to writing. By 1922 she had finished two more books and a set of Poirot stories. In that year, too, longing to travel, she decided to accompany Archie on a ten-month overseas mission to which he had been appointed secretary to drum up support for the forthcoming British Empire Exhibition. Leaving her small daughter and only child, Rosalind (1919-2004), Agatha set off, taking her typewriter, for the colonies. 
Stimulated by adventure, her popularity among readers at home and abroad, and the example of the independent-minded women she met on her travels, Agatha Christie was transformed. On her return she was encouraged by Hughes Massie's successor, Edmund Cork, her agent and friend, to move to a new publisher, Godfrey Collins, whose firm she never left. Collins's nephew, William (Billy) Collins, became her editor and, quickly, another mainstay. Her first book for Collins, published in 1926, was 'The Murder of Roger Ackroyd'. 
Here, while giving every clue, Christie triumphantly misled her readers. The trick caused a fuss but not a sensation; that came six months later, in December, when she disappeared. Miserable after her mother's death, exhausted by the strain of clearing Ashfield, and lonely -- Archie was preoccupied by his job in the City and by golf -- she grew increasingly distressed. When Archie revealed that he had fallen in love with Nancy Neele, a golfing partner, his wife broke down. Fleeing Styles, their ominously named house in Surrey, Christie made her way to Harrogate, registering herself as Miss Neele at the Hydropathic Hotel. Police hunted the country, attended by bloodhounds, amateur search parties, and clairvoyants. Colonel Christie was suspected of murder, Christie herself of seeking publicity. Ten days later she was identified by the hotel's bandsmen who, to their credit, accepted no inducement from the press to tell their story. 
Christie could not remember why or how she had come to Harrogate. She sought help from doctors, tried neurologists and even hypnosis, but never recovered her memory of that time. She was appalled by the attention, while those who knew her were amazed by the absurdity of the unceasing speculation about the motives for her flight. Sensibly, Christie tried to put the episode behind her. Her autobiography does not mention it but an oblique picture of the dissolution of the Christies' marriage may be found in 'Unfinished Portrait' (1933), one of six novels she wrote as Mary Westmacott. The Christies were divorced in 1928; from that time Agatha Christie, a devout Christian, no longer took communion. 
By 1930 Christie had resumed her work with renewed vigour, publishing in that year her first play, 'Black Coffee'; her first Mary Westmacott novel, 'Giant's Bread', and 'The Murder at the Vicarage', which introduced Miss Jane Marple. The shrewd, observant, unshockable maiden lady was 'the complete detective service in the home' (Christie, 'Autobiography', 433). 
There was an even greater step. On 11 September 1930 Christie married Max Mallowan (1904-1978), an archaeologist, whom she met in 1928 while visiting Leonard Woolley's excavations at Ur. Mallowan was fourteen years younger than Agatha. The partnership was a success. (The famous quip that the older the wife of an archaeologist, the more interesting she becomes to him, was not made by Agatha, who had better taste, but first appeared in the 'Gothenburg Trade and Fishing Journal'.) 
Agatha shared her husband's affection for the Near East. She accompanied him on expeditions, photographed, cleaned, and registered finds, supervised the cook, and thought out plots. 'Murder on the Orient Express' (1934) was based on a journey back to London in 1931; Katharine Woolley, Leonard Woolley's formidable wife, is portrayed in 'Murder in Mesopotamia' (1936); while 'Death on the Nile' (1937) draws on a voyage in 1933 on SS 'Karnak'. Agatha's book of affectionate reminiscence, 'Come Tell Me How You Live' (1946), describing the Mallowans' life in camp in Syria, was a homecoming present to Max at the end of the Second World War. 
Agatha Christie's production of books, plays, and short stories was uninterrupted. At least one novel a year appeared from the 1930s to the 1950s. She was never short of plots: an idea for a 'Dentist Murder... evidence of teeth', outlined in an exercise book, prompted thirteen variations. As a child, taxed with some household mystery, Agatha had declared, 'I don't like parting with information'. Now it was carefully dispensed. In her books she gave out her clues one by one, playing on commonplace assumptions -- that twins were identical, for instance -- drawing her readers inexorably towards the wrong solution, only to ambush them at the end. 
In these intriguing puzzles, Agatha deployed her characters like chessmen. From book to book she experimented, in some playing games with ambiguities of speech, elsewhere with memory, timing, or motive, with tricks of light, mirrors, and false identities. Like her sister Madge, whose play about the Tichborne case, 'The Claimant', ran in the West End in 1928, Agatha was fascinated by disguise. All her fiction is concerned with the tension between appearance and reality. 'At Bertram's Hotel' (1965) exemplifies this, itself becoming, ironically, an instance of mistaken identity, the setting being modelled not on Brown's Hotel in London, as many believe, but on Fleming's Hotel, a neighbouring establishment in Mayfair. 
Agatha caught speech exactly, as shown in a series of brilliant titles: 'The Mysterious Affair at Styles' (1921), 'Why Didn't they Ask Evans?' (1934), 'The Body in the Library' (1942), 'Mrs McGinty's Dead' (1952), '4.50 from Paddington' (1957). She is unerring in the timing, structure, and disposition of clues. Self-contained and self-controlled, she manipulates her readers. Like the pharmacist with whom she worked in 1915, who liked to keep a lump of curare in his pocket, she savoured the power that is derived from non-disclosure. Her people are archetypes, representative of their epoch, class, and, if they have one, profession. Their tastes, manners, and language are predictable; they act out their parts in a sequence of moves. In these intricately choreographed narratives every detail matters. Agatha was infuriated by publishers who, failing to understand this, sought to alter dialogue and description in deference to the supposed sensitivities of her readers. 
Unlike great writers, Agatha Christie was unable to depict the depth and complexity of human character and relationships. Readers of her detective stories must be satisfied by narratives that make a clear distinction between right and wrong, reflecting her own belief, discussed in 'Nemesis' (a 'late Marple' of 1971). Her fiction is cathartic: harmony is disturbed, evil surmounted, order restored. Her detectives are her standard-bearers, people like ourselves: Mr Parker Pyne, retired statistician; Mrs Ariadne Oliver, crime novelist; Monsieur Poirot, the Cartesian intellectual; Miss Marple, a fascinated village anthropologist. 
'Poirot is rather insufferable,' Agatha told Edmund Cork in 1938. Two years later she gave him his last case in 'Curtain', unpublished until 1975. She could not, she said, kill her 'chief source of income'. For much of her life Agatha's finances were precarious. Most of her money came from sales in the United States where, after much uncertainty, a series of judicial rulings in the late thirties and forties made her liable for large amounts of additional tax. In 1955 a company, Agatha Christie Ltd, was set up, giving her a regular income, and the establishment in 1957 of the Christie Copyrights Trust, to which many of her rights were assigned, enabled trustees to distribute capital for charitable purposes, with Agatha's consent. Her anxieties remained: litigation had been costly and assessments were still outstanding. In 1968, having been found liable for huge levies on assumed values of those few copyrights she had retained out of special affection, she agreed to the sale of a majority share of Agatha Christie Ltd to Booker Books, a subsidiary of the agricultural and industrial conglomerate Booker McConnell, to which the assets held by the Christie Copyrights Trust were also eventually transferred. After forty years' worry, she was clear but still in debt, the special assessments having obliged her to take a loan at a demanding rate of interest. 
Habit, the pleasure of achievement, but also anxiety about money and later a feeling of duty to the company that employed her, underlay Agatha's extraordinary assiduity. By the early 1970s she had published more than eighty crime novels, eleven books of short stories, fifteen plays, among them 'The Mousetrap', first produced in 1948, still running over fifty years later. She had been appointed CBE in 1956; in 1971, her eightieth year, she was made DBE. Dame Agatha's fame was worldwide. Guerrillas who had kidnapped the British ambassador to Uruguay in 1970 discussed Miss Marple with their captive; Poirot's 'little grey cells' were displayed on Nicaraguan postage stamps to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of Interpol in 1972. 
Success was pleasing, celebrity unwelcome. 'Writers should write', Agatha maintained, refusing interviews and invitations to open bazaars. She accepted the presidency of the Detection Club only when it was agreed that a co-president should be appointed to conduct the proceedings. She would not make radio or television broadcasts; strict conditions govern access to a surviving recording, made for the archives of the Imperial War Museum, of her reflections on her time with the Voluntary Aid Detachment during the First World War. She hated being photographed, being sensitive about her shape, enlarged by time, heredity, and her love of rich food -- she disliked alcohol but kept a taste for drinking cream. She was, however, pleased by the portrait, commissioned by her grandson, Mathew Prichard, from Oscar Kokoschka. His picture shows a very old woman, shrunken but dominating, with restless hands. In time, she came to resemble it. 'At any rate', she told Cork, 'I look like 'someone'.' 
It was a rare admission of vanity, for she remained modest to the end. Those who met Lady Mallowan -- Max was knighted in 1968 -- were astonished to discover afterwards that this was Agatha Christie. She lived quietly and privately, enjoying, as she had always done, books, music, flowers, her houses and their lovely gardens: Winterbrook House at Wallingford by the Thames and Greenway House on the River Dart in south Devon. Her Devon connection meant much to her and, self-educated, she was pleased to be made DLitt by the University of Exeter in 1961. 'Elephants Can Remember' (1972) was her last novel before her powers declined. Her plotting never ceased. In her final days she pounced when a visitor mentioned that tooth-powder was useful for cleaning decanters: a clever stratagem for a poisoner? 
Agatha Christie died on 12 January 1976 at Winterbrook, just after luncheon, and was buried four days later in the churchyard at Cholsey, nearby. A memorial service was held on 13 May at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
Agatha Christie's work remains surprisingly provocative. Some say her books are formulaic, her characters class-ridden, her style undemanding. 'Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?' asked the critic Edmund Wilson. Colin Watson dismissed Agatha Christie's world as 'Mayhem Parva', merely one long parochial Edwardian afternoon. Others, however, like Jacques Barzun, have seen her books as parables, deft, authoritative, and lasting. For her admirers, from Konrad Adenauer to Claude Chabrol, they exemplify the classical detective story, as described by W. H. Auden: cathartic fantasies, playing on the reader's unconscious feeling of guilt and desire for the restoration of a lost Eden. Agatha Christie's writing is certainly an inexhaustible resource, studied in universities from Trondheim to Tokyo. Close readers have analysed the grammar and structure of her prose; feminist scholars have investigated Miss Marple. Literary historians have traced the antecedents of Roger Ackroyd and the origins of Hercule Poirot, while archaeologists have celebrated Lady Mallowan's contribution to Near Eastern exploration. 
Fashions in crime fiction have changed, but Agatha Christie's popular following is undiminished. Her books, translated into more than 100 languages, have been taken up by readers introduced to her work by the television adaptations of the Poirot and Miss Marple stories, with David Suchet's and Joan Hickson's portrayals closely modelled on their literary originals. (Indeed, Christie herself had envisaged Hickson as being better suited to play the gentle but persistent Miss Marple than the overwhelming Dame Margaret Rutherford, chosen for the role by MGM in five earlier adaptations for the cinema.) Films, such as 'Death on the Nile' and 'Murder on the Orient Express', have had a wide audience, and audiotapes and compact discs offer readings of Christie's fiction. For the insatiable there have even been recordings of the music commissioned to accompany the television programmes. Admirers of her work have established internet discussion groups, including websites in Czech, Icelandic, and Portuguese, and a worldwide Agatha Christie Society, founded in 1993, organizes conferences and symposia. Professional promoters draw on her work for crossword puzzle books and travel guides, and self-promoters continue to find a market for theories about her disappearance in 1926. This last would have caused her most pain. More pleasing would have been the knowledge that her beloved south Devon would benefit from 'cultural tourists' attracted by her writing and her reputation and that the National Trust would continue to preserve Greenway and its gardens. 


@@@@@


doc= 30927


Christie, John Traill (1899-1980), headmaster and college head, was born at Chipping Ongar, Essex, on 19 October 1899, the fourth son (there were no daughters) of Charles Henry Fehler Christie JP, stockbroker and deputy lieutenant, and his wife, Margaret Eleanor, daughter of the Revd Charles Samuel Palmer, canon of Hereford. He was educated at Winchester College and (after a brief period in the Coldstream Guards, in which he was a second lieutenant in 1918) at Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained firsts in classical honour moderations (1920) and 'literae humaniores' (1922). His vocation had become clear before he took finals, and in that same year he accepted an invitation from W. W. Vaughan to teach classics to the upper bench at Rugby. 'I enjoy teaching more and more,' he wrote, 'I wouldn't be a don.' But he very soon became known as a fine teacher and scholar and in 1928 was persuaded to go back to Oxford as fellow and tutor in classics at Magdalen. 
In 1932 Christie was appointed headmaster of Repton, and in the following year he married Lucie Catherine (1901-1996), only daughter of Thomas Philip Le Fanu, commissioner of public works in Ireland, and a nephew of the Irish novelist J. S. Le Fanu. There were two daughters of the marriage. In 1937 he succeeded H. Costley-White as headmaster of Westminster. Two years later the life of the school was violently disturbed by the war. The government, and everyone else, was convinced that London would be bombed, and in 1938 plans were already being made for schools to be evacuated from the danger area. When the code signal 'Pied Piper' was sent out by the government, Christie led his staff and boys down to Sussex, where Lancing and Hurstpierpoint contrived to accommodate them. Nine months later, when a German invasion of the channel coast was expected, they had to move again. Christie eventually settled his flock in makeshift quarters in and near Bromyard, and there they stayed until the end of the war. To keep the school in good heart and true to its educational ideals demanded unusual powers of leadership, and the headmaster was never at less than full stretch. The return to London in 1945 brought fresh problems, for the school buildings had been severely damaged and in part destroyed in the air raids. In 1946, worn out at last by his unceasing labours, Christie went down with a severe illness and was out of action for some months. He spent three more strenuous years at Westminster, but in 1950 he welcomed the opportunity to return to Oxford as principal of Jesus College, succeeding his old friend Sir Frederick Ogilvie. 
It was not the Oxford Christie had known twenty years earlier. He watched ruefully the encroachment of administration on the time that surely belonged by rights to study and teaching. But he was a dutiful man, and only a recurrence of ill health stopped him from offering to shoulder the burden of the vice-chancellorship when his turn came in 1960. He retired in 1967. 
Christie's advice in educational matters was widely sought. He went to India with the commission on secondary education appointed by the Indian ministry of education (1952-3) and himself wrote the report, and in 1956 he undertook for the British Council an inspection of schools throughout South America to report on the suitability of the teachers sent out by the council. He served on the governing bodies of Rugby, Haileybury, Glenalmond, and Brecon, and was the first governor of the Dragon School at Oxford. 
Christie was an entertaining speaker and an impressive preacher, but he was, above all, a teacher. He excelled in poetry, especially, perhaps, Sophocles and Shakespeare, but he enjoyed all literature. He was a lifelong admirer and champion of Sir Walter Scott and was president of the Walter Scott Society in 1953. Messrs Collins engaged him to write the introductions to a new edition of the 'Waverley' novels launched by them in 1955, but only three volumes were published. 
Christie was a tall spare man with a normally serious, almost stern expression which was shaken easily into deep laughter. He was strong and active as a young man, something of a rock climber, and a redoubtable walker. He welcomed a companion but was happy to walk 'solus'. It was not everyone that could keep up with him. He died on 8 September 1980 at Sudbury. He was buried in the parish churchyard of Great Henny, Suffolk, where he and his wife had bought a country cottage many years earlier. 
A. L. P. Norrington', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30928


Christophers, Sir (Samuel) Rickard (1873-1978), protozoologist and tropical medicine specialist, was born on 27 November 1873 in Liverpool, the elder son and eldest of three children of Samuel Hunt Christophers and his wife, Mary Selina, daughter of William Rickard, a mining expert in Redruth, Cornwall. His father, also of Cornish extraction, was head statistician of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board. Christophers was educated at the Liverpool Institute and entered University College, Liverpool, as a medical student, at the age of sixteen. He was strongly influenced there by C. S. Sherrington. He qualified MB, ChB in 1896. 
Christophers was then appointed a medical officer on a steamer of the Booth Line bound for the upper reaches of the Amazon; he was probably inspired by the recently published 'Huit cents lieues sur l'Amazone' of Jules Verne (1881). His South American experience gave him a taste for the tropics which he never lost. On his return to England he was appointed a member of the joint malaria commission of the Royal Society and Colonial Office, a post he filled from 1898 to 1902. His senior colleague was J. W. W. Stephens and together they investigated malaria in the inhabitants of central and west Africa and later in India; they recommended measures for the control of the disease and, over fifty years later, Christophers formulated a definitive policy based on a lifetime's experience. 
In 1902 Christophers married Elise Emma (died 1963), daughter of Fitzroy Frederick Colin Sherman, a coffee planter in the Nilgiri hills, India, and his wife, Elise Blacas, daughter of the duc de Blacas, a French admiral. They had a son and a daughter. Also in 1902 Christophers joined the Indian Medical Service (IMS). He remained in the research branch for the next thirty years; this included service in Mesopotamia during the First World War. In the IMS he was appointed in turn director of the following research establishments: King Institute in Madras (1904), Central Malaria Bureau (1910), Central Research Institute of Kasauli (1920-32), and kala-azar commission (1924-5). India in those years was a magnet for malariologists and Christophers was the star figure in the constellation, which included John A. Sinton, S. P. James, Gordon Covell, H. E. Shortt, and their Indian fellow officers, M. K. Afridi and Jaswant Singh. The joint production by Christophers, Sinton, and Covell of successive editions of 'How to do a Malarial Survey' (1928), despite the simplicity of its title, was based on profound knowledge and became the Bible of malariologists of the era. 
Christophers left India with the rank of brevet colonel in 1932, and on his return to England he was made professor of malaria studies at the University of London in the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. In collaboration with J. D. Fulton, he worked on the biochemistry of the respiratory metabolism of 'Plasmodium knowlesi', a lethal parasite of rhesus monkeys, and on 'Trypanosoma rhodesiense', the cause of human sleeping sickness. In 1938 he left London and was given accommodation in the department of zoology in Cambridge. Here he reverted to his studies in entomology, probably his favourite subject, and in 1960 his magnum opus appeared, 'Aedes aegypti (L): the Yellow Fever Mosquito'. An earlier landmark was the issue in 1933 of Christopher's volume in 'The Fauna of British India' (vol. 4). At the age of ninety Christophers finally retired and spent his remaining years at Broadstone in Dorset. 
Christophers's life was devoted to research. His first studies on the effects of malaria on the inhabitants of the tropics had revealed the paradox that the greater the density of the infection, the less was its severity as a disease, and he showed that this was due to the operation of acquired and racial immunity. He unveiled the cause of the dreaded blackwater fever by demonstrating its relationship to the irregular consumption of quinine by patients chronically afflicted with malignant tertian malaria. In addition, he made notable contributions to the taxonomy of malaria and other parasites, and was greatly interested in the transmission of leishmaniasis (kala-azar), which he suspected was due to the bite of infected sandflies, Christophers was delighted when his friend H. E. Shortt confirmed the truth of this assumption. He worked for some years on the developmental stages in ticks of 'Babesia canis' (which causes a fatal disease in dogs), and tentatively described its sexual stages and zygotes; his theory had to wait almost eighty years for confirmation by electron microscopy. 
Christophers was shy and modest, imperturbable, patient, and kind. He was quiet but cheerful, and loved the open-air life -- the result of his years in the tropics. In this way, he survived until he was 104. Early in his career he had escaped unscathed from the yellow fever of the South American forests; then he had to face the very real threat of a 'white man's grave' in Sierra Leone, and eventually, by means of simple prophylaxis, he withstood the perils of malaria and blackwater fever in the Punjab, Assam, and elsewhere in the East. The latter half of his life was spent in England, where his iron constitution continued to preserve him from the rigours of civilization. 
Christophers's centenary was celebrated by the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, of which he had been president (1939-43), and the Royal Entomological Society of London. A year before his death, a symposium on the birth of medical entomology was dedicated to him. In the course of his life he accumulated many honours: he was honorary physician to George V from 1927 to 1930, and in 1931 he received a knighthood; he was appointed CIE in 1915 and OBE in 1918; he was elected FRS in 1926 and an honorary fellow of Downing College, Cambridge, in 1942. In addition to medals and prizes from British societies he was given honorary foreign membership of societies in the USA, Brazil, India, France, and Holland. Christophers died on 19 February 1978 at Broadstone, Dorset. 
Cyril Garnham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30929


Churchill, Clementine Ogilvy Spencer-, Baroness Spencer-Churchill (1885-1977), political wife, was born at 75 Grosvenor Street, London, on 1 April 1885, and was assumed to be the second among the four children (three daughters, one son) of Colonel Henry Montague Hozier (1838-1907) and his wife, Lady Henrietta Blanche Ogilvy (1852-1925), eldest daughter of David Graham Drummond Ogilvy, fifth earl of Airlie. Her presumed father, following a distinguished military career, was secretary to Lloyd's of London from 1874 to 1906. However, her mother was promiscuous, and in later life Clementine Churchill thought that Hozier had not been her father. Documentary evidence led Clementine's youngest daughter, Mary, to suspect that Clementine's father was Captain William ('Bay') Middleton (1846-1892), a cavalry officer with whom Lady Ogilvy had an affair ('The Times', 16 Aug 2002, 1). 
Clementine Hozier's early years were not easy: her parents separated in 1891 when she was nearly six, and thereafter her mother was very short of money, and migrated between rented houses and furnished rooms, mainly in England, but for short periods also in Dieppe and Paris. Educated mainly at home, Clementine attended Berkhamsted High School for Girls from 1901 to 1904. With a higher school certificate in French, German, and biology, she was intellectually flying high for a young woman at her social level, but although her headmistress encouraged the idea of university, her mother did not. Given her mother's financial and social circumstances Clementine was launched on the London social scene by her great-aunt, Lady St Helier. 'She soon became known for beauty, charm, and intelligence, and was much in demand' ('DNB'). She first met Winston Churchill (1874-1965) in 1904 at a ball in London, but his social awkwardness left a poor impression. Thereafter she was twice secretly engaged to Sidney Cornwallis Peel, the banker and barrister son of the first Viscount Peel; 'he was good to me and made my difficult rather arid life interesting', she recalled, 'but I couldn't care for him & I was not kind or even very grateful' (Soames, 312). In 1906 she became publicly engaged to a distinguished civil servant nearly twice her age, Lionel Earle (1866-1948), but then broke it off. 
In March 1908, at a dinner party given by Lady St Helier, Clementine Hozier was placed next to Winston Churchill. Entirely neglecting his other neighbour, Lady Lugard, he focused so closely on Clementine that a friendship resulted. It was not his first female friendship, but it developed fast: a short courtship, an engagement at Blenheim on 11 August publicly announced four days later, and marriage at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 12 September 1908. There were 1300 guests; Clementine was twenty-three, he nearly thirty-four and already a cabinet minister. Unable to bring money to the marriage, Clementine brought something much more valuable for a husband obsessed with political life: a shrewd political intelligence. She supplied balance at two levels: her more equable nature ensured that she moderated the depth of his depressions, and her good judgement helped to ward off political mistakes. 
A non-militant advocate of votes for women, Clementine Churchill held feminist views that were 'advanced' for her day, but then and for long afterwards women frequently combined belief in political rights with accepting traditional social roles which only later came to be seen as anti-feminist or pre-feminist. A separation of spheres between the sexes was taken for granted in well-to-do circles: the husband's career outside the home enabled him to 'support' a wife and family, while the wife pursued a supportive, unpaid, and largely private domestic role. Her role subdivided into four: backing up the husband, producing children, taking a major part in bringing them up, and engaging in the sort of voluntary work that grew naturally out of the domestic role. None of these roles was easy, conflicting obligations had to be balanced, and all entailed a complex interaction between male and female lives that required from women considerable tact and patience. Bringing off this fourfold combination was the goal to which most such women aspired. So while at one level the wife's career-pattern was a palimpsest of her husband's, at another level it diverged completely -- with contrasting preoccupations, priorities, and climacterics. 
In backing up her husband, Clementine Churchill could hardly be faulted, and when on social occasions she heard him or his policies unfairly criticized, she could be forthright in his defence, even to the extent of embarrassing her guests. 'Marriage was her vocation', said a newspaper leading article at her death ('The Times', 13 Dec 1977, 17). For this, a lifetime's careful stage-management was required, of both her own image and Winston's. For her youngest daughter, Mary Soames, Clementine's 'beautiful and 'soignee' appearance at all times, and the effect she usually gave of serenity, were artefacts of a long lifetime of self-control' ('Speaking for Themselves', xx), for her husband could all too often be egotistical, self-absorbed, and unintentionally selfish. In the last sentence of his 'My Early Life' (1930) he wrote that 'I married and lived happily ever afterwards'. A happy marriage it may have been in many respects for him, but Clementine assiduously concealed the fact that it was less so for her. She was by temperament a worrier, often about small things. With his volatile temperament, expensive tastes, and unpredictable career, he was for her anything but a secure anchor. Throughout her marriage she tried to curb his spending, and still more his taste for gambling. Rarely could she act upon his frequent injunction to 'cast care aside', and amid his many daring adventures she feared for his career and personal safety. 
Occasional rumours of 'affairs' on either side have no firm foundation. Indeed the marriage was perhaps unusual at this social level in combining sexuality with companionship. Throughout their married life, even if separated for only a few days, Clementine and Winston wrote spontaneous and informal letters to one another, intimately affectionate in tone, using their pet names Pug and Kat and reinforced with appropriate animal drawings. Her loyalty converted their marriage into a shared political adventure. An enthusiastic Liberal at a time of major Liberal reforming achievement, she at once threw herself enthusiastically into her husband's political life, criticizing drafts of his speeches and campaigning in his constituencies, where she won friends by her charm and her memory for faces. She would otherwise have been shut out of his lifetime's central preoccupation, but this was by no means her sole motive: she looked back upon this time as her happiest period. As she acknowledged in an affectionate wedding anniversary letter of 1919: 'you took me from the straitened little by-path I was treading and took me with you into the life and colour and jostle of the high-way' (Soames, 220). When Winston rejoined the Conservatives in 1924 after gradually drifting away from the Liberals, Clementine moved with him, but though she continued to work loyally for him in his constituency, she remained at heart a Liberal, her views sometimes robustly independent from his. 'You often tease me and call me 'pink'', she told him in March 1949, once more urging him to avoid Beaverbrook's company ('Speaking for Themselves', 551). 
So politically, as in other ways, Clementine had a mind of her own. Winston often sought her advice, though he by no means always followed it. Discreet, well-informed, and politically astute, she was adept at the pre-feminist woman's 'metier': confidante. When privy to many wartime secrets during the First World War she reciprocated with good advice. Sharing to the full Winston's anguish and near despair after the Dardanelles expedition, her letters to him at the front (November 1915 to March 1916) are touching in the mutual affection they reveal. On the one hand she wanted him safe at home to resume his longed-for political career, yet on the other hand she felt bound to advise him to stay away: with a longer absence, she thought significant political opinion would grow fonder. It was for her a torment, and yet with his career at its lowest point she kept his spirits up, and responded to his guidance in promoting his interests through social contacts within London's political elite. On the formation of the coalition government in 1915, for instance, she wrote in vain a strong (and unanswered) plea to Asquith for his retention at the Admiralty, and she assiduously reported political gossip back to Winston. Sometimes she regretted how his political priorities disturbed their life together. 'My Darling these grave public anxieties are very wearing -- ', she wrote in March 1916. 'When next I see you I hope there will be a little time for us both alone -- We are still young, but Time flies stealing love away & leaving only friendship which is very peaceful but not stimulating or warming. (Soames, 205)' Among the sadnesses of her marriage was his frequent sacrifice of chances to spend unhurried and undistracted leisure time with her.In her childbearing role Clementine Churchill seemed at first successful enough. There were five children: four girls -- Diana, 'the puppy-kitten' or 'PK' ('b'. 1909); Sarah, 'the mule' ('b'. 1914); Marigold, 'the duckadilly' ('b'. 1918); and Mary ('b'. 1922) -- and one boy, Randolph, 'the chumbolly' ('b'. 1911) ['see 'Churchill, Randolph Frederick Edward Spencer]. Yet there were difficulties here too, quite apart from the deliveries, which were painful and required convalescence. Clementine suffered a miscarriage in 1912, and on 18 June 1918, apparently without consulting Winston, she offered Marigold to her childless close friend Jean, Lady Hamilton. Her motive may have been sheer kindness to a friend distressed at her childlessness, but there may also have been a financial component: Churchill's finances were at an unusually low ebb at the time, and Clementine worried greatly about them. The offer was not taken up, and after a throat infection Marigold died in 1921 of septicaemia, her agonized mother giving at her deathbed 'a succession of wild shrieks, like an animal in mortal pain' (Soames, 230). 
Clementine Churchill's child-rearing role was complicated by her need to create a home not once but many times, for frequent changes of house and moves between family houses were built into the politician's career, not to mention the disruptions of two world wars, and unexpected fluctuations in income. Add to this the many distractions provided by women's special responsibility for personal relationships more generally: comforting aged relatives, organizing family holidays, and managing servants at a time of increasing scarcity. None the less 'warmth, vitality, and the free (and often noisy) expression of their mutual affection', wrote Soames, 'always constituted the prevailing atmosphere of Winston's and Clementine's family life' (Soames, 223); all the children had pet names, and Winston was keen to be closer to them than his parents had been to him. Clementine may have given too much attention to her husband by comparison with her children, who were often left in the care of others, so that her relations with them became rather formal. She had 'no real understanding of the childish mind or outlook', her daughter Mary recalled (Soames, 267), and in later life Clementine regretted this missed opportunity. Once after seeing Mary enjoying an afternoon with her children, she said 'I see you having such fun with your children and I missed out on that with all of mine' (Turner, 18). With her son, Randolph, she never established a close relationship. Winston, determined to be less distant from his son than his father had been from him, gave Randolph inflated ideas of himself. Clementine, initially affectionate, felt that she must provide a necessary corrective. Her response to the angry arguments Randolph tended to provoke with her was to go silent or retire altogether from the scene. When she inevitably became involved in Randolph's divorce from his wife, Pamela, in 1945, Clementine did not escape recriminations. 
Husband and children left Clementine Churchill little time for the good works that were conventional among women at her social level. During the First World War, however, she discovered in herself considerable organizational skills, and worked energetically to set up canteens for munition workers -- for which, in 1918, she was appointed CBE. She retreated from this role between the wars but resumed it with some effect after 1939. Winston had in effect the best of both worlds: he relished the companionship of his wife and the traditionalist male late-night and alcoholic sociability with cronies, whose influence his wife frequently condemned -- especially in the case of Beaverbrook, Birkenhead, and Brendan Bracken. Clementine, by contrast, lacked the comparable close and supportive female companionship which the world of separated spheres often encouraged. Outwardly friendly and confident, she could deploy great assets in her tact and charm, yet she gave her trust and friendship only slowly, and had little taste for pursuing social life for its own sake. 'All through her life Clementine missed chances with people', wrote Soames, 'because she was too shy, and could not bring herself to be a little more natural and carefree in her approach. Thus, in a life full of people, she knew much loneliness' (Soames, 285). 
For the rest of her life Clementine Churchill's four roles were balanced with outward success, but privately with some difficulty -- though the press reticence customary during her day ensured that her difficulties became apparent only later. Success in her roles was of more than merely domestic importance, for by the 1940s she had become a national role-model for women. Between the wars her energies went mainly into domestic and political life, and in this her priorities had emerged early: her husband came first, and their children, friends, and her own enjoyments competed for what was left. In backing up her husband she was unfailing, but Winston's extravagant tastes set up a tension with her role in managing the family. Without consulting her, but knowing she opposed the idea, he stirred her lasting resentment by purchasing Chartwell, near Westerham in Kent. It became their home for forty years, and the place where he preferred to be, but she was less fond of it, if only because she thought it cost more than they could afford. 
Furthermore, on top of running a London house and managing numerous servants, she had to organize on a small income food and generous entertainment for the stream of guests invited there. 'Again and again she suffered from feeling over-burdened by the demands life -- and Winston -- made upon her' (Soames, 284), with two houses to run, four high-spirited children, and a political and social role to play. Her disagreements with Winston were sometimes fierce enough to require the mutual exchange of conciliatory notes, even when they were together in the same house, and in the early 1930s she was privately talking of divorce. There was some political divergence, too. Her Liberalism rather surprisingly did not incline her towards devolution in India or towards the Munich settlement in the 1930s, so they remained together on those two big issues, but on the abdication they diverged strongly; she thought Baldwin had judged public opinion correctly, and saw how seriously Winston would damage his career by supporting Edward VIII. 
Clementine Churchill's childbearing role ceased with Mary's birth in 1922, and her child-rearing role steadily shrank thereafter, but she was more distant from her children than she need have been, especially from the elder ones, delegating not only their care but also the sharing of their company and pleasures to others. From 1932 her relations deteriorated seriously with Diana, whose first marriage in that year led to divorce after only three years. Randolph was for decades a recurrent embarrassment to both his parents. Sarah made an unsuitable marriage to Vic Oliver in 1936 against parental advice and was divorced in 1945. Yet too gloomy an impression should not be conveyed. Clementine Churchill had great vitality at this time and loved sports and games. Riding and hunting featured briefly in her early married life; she played tennis to tournament standard, and when over fifty she learned to ski. She also loved travelling, whereas Churchill preferred to paint, usually in the south of France. So during the 1930s she sometimes took long and interesting voyages without him -- to the East and West Indies, for example. It was the calm before the storm. 
Clementine Churchill's responsibility for her husband's well-being became specially important from 1940, when Winston became prime minister and leader of the coalition government in a national struggle for survival. It was an achievement of national and even international importance that with much personal strain but without subservience she made the marriage work. She was prepared to criticize her husband when others feared to do so. 'My darling Winston', she wrote in June 1940, reporting criticism widespread within his entourage, 'I must confess that I have noticed a deterioration in your manner; & you are not as kind as you used to be'; she went on to point out that 'you won't get the best results by irascibility & rudeness' (Soames, 325). She may have had more success here than when strongly opposing his assuming the Conservative Party leadership; she favoured his retaining as wartime prime minister a non-party status, and privately felt even less comfortable as a Conservative in later life than he did. 
Clementine's correspondence and social commitments now greatly increased, and she also accompanied Winston on tours of inspection and visits to bombed cities. Her turban-style headscarf became a sort of personal trademark, and she never lost in later life the outstanding beauty of her youth; her high personal standards and discipline ensured that in public and in private she presented an elegant, sometimes even regal, appearance. At the start of the war, however, tensions between care for her husband and for her family were acute, for the family was then causing serious difficulties. Randolph's drinking and gambling prompted much concern, Sarah's marriage to Vic Oliver was breaking up, and there were fears, unsubstantiated as it turned out, that Mary too would marry unsuitably. It was a worrying time for everyone, but for a woman in public life who had to provide (and be seen to provide) loyal, practical, and serene backing for a husband overloaded with cares the anxieties must have been formidable. 
And yet, in the Second World War as in the First, Clementine Churchill somehow found time to take on a philanthropic role. From 1939 she was conscientious in attending the house committee of the Fulmer Chase maternity hospital for wives of officers. In 1940 and at other times during the war she visited air-raid shelters in the London area, reporting directly and with some effect to the prime minister on what many Londoners were enduring. From 1941 to 1947 she was president of the YWCA Wartime Fund, taking a special interest in their hostels for service women; she continued her work after the war and chaired its national hostels committee from 1949 to 1952. Her involvement was by no means merely nominal, and her reports on visits were detailed, practical, and (when critical) constructive. Also in 1941 she embarked upon what became the most substantial public work she ever undertook when she became chairman of the Red Cross Aid to Russia Fund. Of the $9,000,000 collected in Britain to help the USSR, 'Mrs Churchill's Fund', as it was popularly known, raised $6,700,000. In March-May 1945, at the invitation of the Russian Red Cross, she visited Russia to inspect many of the institutions equipped or otherwise helped by her fund. She travelled widely in the Soviet Union, was received by Stalin, and was awarded the order of the Red Banner of Labour. As Winston told her in a telegram on 2 April, 'at the moment you are the one bright spot in Anglo-Russian relations' ('Speaking for Themselves', 521). At home, in recognition of her work for the Russian Fund and her other services, she was appointed GBE in the victory honours list. 
Clementine Churchill was now a public figure in her own right, much admired: in 1945 she received the freedom of Wanstead and Woodford, her husband's constituency, and she later received three honorary degrees. But the war years had been wearing, and her wish that Winston should retire from politics in 1945 was not granted. Thereafter her role in backing up her husband both in and out of office was peculiarly demanding. The relationship was in some ways easier when his abundant energies could be channelled into politics, and it became strained after his electoral defeat in 1945. As Clementine told Mary at the time 'in our misery we seem, instead of clinging to each other to be always having scenes... I'm finding life more than I can bear. He is so unhappy & that makes him very difficult' (Soames, 429). 
Clementine Churchill opposed her husband's resuming office in 1951, which once more imposed many demands upon her, especially during the coronation year of 1953. The unceasing need for reticence, tensions within the family, and Winston's frequent absences abroad all accentuated the loneliness which stemmed from her shyness. Throughout the Churchill government of 1951-5 her own health was poor; according to Soames she was at this time 'immensely touchy and difficult' ('Speaking for Themselves', 588). Life became less arduous for her after her husband left office in 1955, but her radical streak made her less enthusiastic than he for accepting hospitality from rich friends overseas. She had a particular reason for not sharing Winston's taste for staying in the south of France with Emery Reeves, whose household was managed by Wendy Russell, a former New York model. Noel Coward (who greatly admired Winston Churchill) recorded what he saw at a lunch there: 'there was this great man, historically one of the greatest our country has produced, domestically one of the silliest, absolutely obsessed with a senile passion for Wendy Russell. He followed her about the room with his brimming eyes and wobbled after her across the terrace, staggering like a vast baby of two who is just learning to walk. ('Coward Diaries', 323)' Winston and Clementine now often holidayed apart. 
Clementine Churchill's family role continued to present difficulties after 1945. There was trouble in 1949 with Sarah's second marriage -- to Antony Beauchamp -- which got into the press before her parents were informed; it took several weeks before Clementine could bring herself to resume friendly relations. This marriage also proved short-lived, with permanent separation in 1955, and Beauchamp's suicide in 1958; Sarah was by then suffering from chronic alcoholism, which in 1960 led her to a prison sentence. Diana's second marriage, to the Conservative politician Duncan Sandys, in 1935 ended with her breakdown, during which her resentment against her mother was made painfully manifest. Divorce followed in 1960, and Diana died in 1963 from a massive overdose of sleeping pills. In 1968 Randolph died from cirrhosis of the liver. 
Winston Churchill's health was now a constant source of worry; he had a mild heart attack in 1943 and a slight stroke in 1949. After his minor stroke in 1953, his health became a major concern, and in her eagerness to preserve his great reputation, Clementine dreaded his breaking down in public and having to bow out amid personal humiliation. By the early 1960s he was in marked decline, and because Clementine disliked being parted from him for long, her life too was closing in, and her good works had to be confined largely to causes more closely associated with her husband and his reputation. She was now the guardian of a national icon, and her fierce protectiveness of his image led her to take the initiative, some time in 1955 or 1956, in destroying the portrait by Graham Sutherland that he so hated. As her youngest daughter wrote, 'Winston was to be Clementine's life-work' (Soames, 266). There were also all the embarrassments involved in trying to get her husband to face realities. She 'had never before shirked an issue', writes Soames (ibid., 525), but 1962 saw the first occasion in their long life together when Clementine lacked the nerve to argue out with Winston a matter which she thought of vital importance: his need to retire from his Woodford seat before the general election of 1964. Fortunately tactful intermediaries prevailed. 
Clementine Churchill then had to face all the stress of Winston Churchill's death on 24 January 1965, followed by a highly public funeral. It was, however, a pleasure for her that she was in May 1965 created a life peer as the Baroness Spencer-Churchill of Chartwell. She surprised some by choosing to sit on the cross-benches, though her growing deafness precluded her taking a regular part in parliamentary life. She none the less retained a lively interest in public as well as family affairs, and despite bouts of illness led a pleasant life in what Soames described as her 'long and benign sunset' (Soames, 559). Three of her five children had predeceased her, but she established a good rapport with her grandchildren and was surrounded by affection and respect. She died of a heart attack on 12 December 1977 at her London home, 7 Princes Gate, Westminster. A service of thanksgiving for her life was held in Westminster Abbey on 24 January 1978. 
Clementine Churchill's advice to her husband was not invariably wise: she did not oppose his line on devolution in India in the early 1930s; in opposing his succession in 1940 to Neville Chamberlain as Conservative leader she did not allow sufficiently for the practical difficulties involved in his remaining a non-party 'national' leader; and she resisted him in 1953 when he thought 'the course of true love' should prevail in relations between Princess Margaret and Peter Townsend. None the less Winston Churchill would have been saved from many mistakes if he had listened to her more often: he would have been less resentful at losing cabinet office in 1915, backed off more quickly from a hard line on Ireland in 1921, trusted Baldwin's judgement during the abdication crisis in 1936, paid more heed to Attlee's complaints about his disorganized ways of handling the cabinet in the Second World War, and refrained from his ill-judged 'Gestapo' reference in the general election of 1945 to what a Labour government might do. He might also have preserved his reputation more securely if he had retired from public life in that year. 
It was regrettable that the first scholarly one-volume biography of her husband, Henry Pelling's 'Winston Churchill' (1974), assigned a wife of this calibre only walk-on parts, and that the huge official biography of Winston Churchill, a monument to the husband's achievements, buried the wife together with much else. The fine, unusually informative, affectionate but not uncritical biography by Mary Soames, which appeared in 1979, retrieved the situation. At last Clementine Churchill moved centre-stage -- never her role in life, but a role she fully deserved in afterlife. The biography is the more convincing for its willingness, when necessary, to criticize its subject, and was based on the correspondence between her parents. In 1988 Soames filled out the picture by publishing a substantial selection from it and in 2002 she brought out a revised and expanded edition of her biography. Interpretation from an informed outsider was, however, much needed; it was unfortunate that Joan Hardwick in her 'Clementine Churchill: the Private Life of a Public Figure' (1997) was refused permission to quote even published Churchill material, and was denied access to the Churchill papers at Churchill College, Cambridge. So Hardwick's biography adds little that is new, though it rightly emphasizes Clementine's efforts in later life to preserve a dignified public image of herself and her husband. This was indeed a challenge, given the problems with her children, with money, with health, and above all with a brilliant and genuinely fond but in many ways impossible husband. Yet precariously, and with much wear and tear, Clementine Churchill somehow prevailed. At the end of the day when Winston Churchill was buried, after watching the replay of his funeral on television, Clementine got up to go to bed. As she reached the door she paused, turned round, and said 'You know, Mary, it wasn't a funeral -- it was a Triumph' (Soames, 545). The triumph was hers too. 


@@@@@


doc= 30930


Churchill, Peter Morland (1909-1972), special operations officer, was born in Amsterdam on 14 January 1909, the eldest of four children (three sons and a daughter) of William Algernon Churchill, British consul there, who ten years later was consul-general in Milan, and his wife, Violet Myers. He was educated at Malvern School, in Switzerland, and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he got a pass degree and a half blue for ice hockey, a game he several times played for England. He was British pro-consul in Oran in 1933-4. 
In the autumn of 1940 Churchill was commissioned into the intelligence corps, and served with the independent French section of the Special Operations Executive (SOE); he became a captain in May 1942. He distinguished himself that spring in the tricky and dangerous task of ferrying other agents ashore on to the Mediterranean coast of France from submarines or small boats at night. He had been to France himself in January 1942, to carry messages and to find out who 'Carte' was. Carte turned out to be Andre Girard, a painter at Antibes who claimed to control a secret army over 200,000 strong. On 27-28 August Churchill was parachuted into France to establish liaison with this army. In his new role he was almost entirely ineffective, save that he organized the reception on the riviera of several more parties of agents. Carte's army turned out to be merely notional and soon after the German occupation of France on 11 November 1942 Girard's followers dispersed. Churchill retired to St Jorioz, a small resort near Annecy in Savoy, with his wireless operator Adolph Rabinovitch and his courier Odette Marie Celine Sansom ['see 'Hallowes, Odette Marie Celine (1912-1995)], wife of Roy Sansom (with whom she had three daughters) and daughter of Gaston Brailly. He returned to England by light aircraft for further orders on 23-24 March 1943. There he was told that Odette Sansom was engaged in dangerous talks with a supposed German colonel, and ordered to avoid her when he returned. However, she received him when he was parachuted back on 14-15 April, and on the following night her German acquaintance -- Sergeant H. Bleicher of the Abwehr -- arrested them both, finding him fast asleep. 
With more skill than truth, Churchill passed her off as his wife and himself as a cousin of the British prime minister. He survived two years' severe imprisonment, partly in Fresnes, partly in German concentration camps. After the war he was appointed to the DSO (1946) and awarded a French Croix de Guerre and Legion d'honneur. He married Odette Sansom, in 1947, and in her wake became something of a newspaper hero; she divorced him in 1955. He married second in 1956 Irene Mary ('Jane'), daughter of William E. Hoyle, sometime manager of the SPCK bookshop in Exeter; she survived him. He had no children. 
Churchill wrote three light-hearted books on his wartime adventures: 'Of their own Choice' (1952), 'Duel of Wits' (1953), and 'The Spirit in the Cage' (1954). He also wrote a novel, 'By Moonlight' (1958), on the Glieres Maquis which he had helped to arm; and a short travel guide, 'All about the French Riviera' (1960), concerning the area where he spent his closing years, as an estate agent. He lived at Le Rouret, about 12 miles west of Cannes, and died of cancer in Cannes on 1 May 1972. 
M. R. D. Foot', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30931


Citrine, Walter McLennan, first Baron Citrine (1887-1983), trade unionist and public servant, was born on 22 August 1887 in Liverpool, the second of three sons and third of five children of Alfred Citrine (1852-1937), seaman, of Liverpool, and his wife, Isabella ('b'. 1847), hospital nurse, daughter of George McLennan, of Arbroath. Citrine believed the family, originally called Cirtini, to have come from Italy. The name had been changed by the time of his father's marriage. Citrine left elementary school at twelve, and thereafter educated himself in subjects such as economics, accountancy, and socialism. His mastery of Gregg shorthand while a young trade union official served him particularly well in his later administrative career. 
Citrine was apprenticed as an electrician and worked on a number of sites in the Merseyside area. In 1914 he was elected as the first full-time district secretary of the Electrical Trades Union (ETU), and in 1918 he was appointed president (and from 1919 secretary) of the local Federation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Trades. In 1920 he moved to work in the ETU's Manchester headquarters, and in January 1924 became the assistant general secretary of the Trades Union Congress (TUC). In October 1925 Citrine was recalled from his first visit to Russia to become acting TUC general secretary following the death of Fred Bramley. It was in that capacity that he played a prominent role in the organization, and eventual calling off, of the general strike in May 1926. Writing notes during the meeting of the general council on 11 May 1926, Citrine recorded: 'I try to analyse my feelings, and find myself swinging first to one view and then to another' (Citrine, 'Men and Work', 196). He saw the strike as a struggle between unions, as well as for the cause of the unions and concluded that its chief result was that 'authority must be invested exclusively and entirely in the directing body' (that is, the general council) (ibid., 205). In September 1926 Citrine was confirmed in office, and remained TUC general secretary until he joined the National Coal Board in 1946. From 1947 to 1957 he was the chairman of the British Electricity Authority (from 1955 the Central Electricity Authority), and after retiring from that post he continued to serve as a part-time member of the Electricity Council and the Atomic Energy Authority (1958-62). 
Citrine's meteoric rise through the trade union movement was a tribute to both his administrative ability and his strong sense of the direction in which he wished the movement to develop. In his youth Citrine had been interested in socialist ideas, and had joined the Independent Labour Party in 1906. He was familiar with the writings of Karl Marx and the Webbs' 'Industrial Democracy' (1897). Beatrice Webb discerned Citrine's overweening ambition, but also his very real ability, noting in her diary 'He is loquacious, naively vain and very disputatious. Susan [Lawrence] says he is a goose. I think he is very ambitious' ('Diary', 4.127). 
While never wholly abandoning socialism, Citrine later came to believe that workers' interests could best be protected and improved within a capitalist system by the strength of their institutions: above all, the trade unions. As general secretary he distanced the unions from the Labour Party and worked for the centralization of trade union power in the TUC. His intention was not, as during the general strike, to coerce the government, but rather to make the unions reliable partners in negotiation with employers and the government of the day. Whereas the TUC general council had once been viewed as a 'general staff' for a labour movement engaged in conflict with government, Citrine presided over the TUC's transformation into an effective 'civil service' for its affiliated unions. 
Citrine saw the general strike as a turning point in the development of British trade unionism. His subsequent attempt to promote constructive relations with fair-minded employers resulted in the controversial Mond-Turner talks in 1928. The talks were inconclusive and Citrine's innovative ideas were not to be welcomed by government until the 1940s. In 1931 he played an important role in the break-up of the second Labour government, opposing the cabinet's plans for restoring financial confidence through cuts in welfare benefits. The ensuing Conservative-dominated National Government was unwilling to grant the TUC the independent role that Citrine sought. He was also at odds with its 'appeasement' of Nazi Germany, chairing the World Anti-Nazi Council and in December 1936 sharing a pro-rearmament platform with Winston Churchill at the Albert Hall. 
In the 1930s Citrine, alongside Ernest Bevin, gained a rare degree of mastery over the British trade union movement. Although the two men differed profoundly in character, and their personal relationship lacked warmth, they were in agreement on the major issues of the day such as rearmament and the need to exclude communist influence from the labour movement. Citrine's success rested not only on his own abilities, but also on the hard work of his loyal and professional staff at the TUC who ensured that he was always immaculately prepared for debates. Under Citrine the role of the TUC was defined for decades to come as a centre for policy formation and negotiation within the trade union movement. A major achievement was the drafting in 1939 of the 'Bridlington Rules' that prevented unions poaching members from their rivals. However, the confederal basis of the TUC, with power still resting with the individual unions, precluded the degree of centralization to which Citrine aspired. No subsequent general secretary matched Citrine's longevity of service, breadth of vision, or authority both as a trade union leader and public figure. 
Citrine hoped that, by acting responsibly, the trade unions would come to be perceived not merely as a sectional force in society, but as a valued member of the national community. On these grounds he accepted a knighthood in 1935 from the National Government, braving outraged condemnation from left-wing trade unionists. As far as was possible Citrine eschewed party politics throughout his career. While a loyal member of the Labour Party he was far from sectarian in his outlook and proud of his friendly relations with politicians such as Lord Beaverbrook and, even after the events of 1931, Ramsay MacDonald. Although he once stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate for Wallasey in 1918, he saw his duty as lying with the TUC and refused to embark on a political career. In 1930 he declined an offer of a peerage from Ramsay MacDonald and, according to his memoirs, turned down an offer to serve in Churchill's wartime coalition government. Citrine's main political adversaries were on the left, for whom he was a dogged and dangerous enemy. He saw the communists as politically motivated and a threat to trade union interests: the intellectuals on the Labour left wing, meanwhile, were in his eyes impractical and dangerous idealists. He was quick to turn to litigation in defence of his own reputation and that of the TUC, and won a series of court cases against the communists. 
Citrine saw the development of the TUC's international activity as an important aspect of his work, and his presidency of the International Federation of Trade Unions (1928-45) made him travel frequently to meetings at its offices in Berlin, and subsequently Paris. He was always an acute observer of politics and social conditions on his travels. He made numerous visits to the Soviet Union and the United States, and in 1940 was sent on a delegation to Finland during the 'winter war' with the Soviet Union. In 1938-39 he served on a royal commission investigating social and economic conditions in the West Indies following the recent disturbances there. His internationalism was a logical extension of his ideas on the domestic role of trade unions. He believed that unions could improve workers' conditions through international co-operation, but did not share the communists' conception of internationalism as a vehicle for political ideas and influence. This essentially syndical view resulted in the short-lived Anglo-French trade union committee in 1939-40, and the Anglo-Soviet committee of 1941-5 which was later expanded to include the American Confederation of Labour Organisations. In 1945 he became the founding president of the World Federation of Trade Unions which broke up, however, under the impact of the cold war soon after his departure from the TUC. 
Citrine's moment as a trade unionist came in the Second World War when, with Ernest Bevin at the Ministry of Labour, the TUC attained an unparalleled degree of influence and consultation. Following the war Citrine was seconded in 1946 to join the new National Coal Board where he had special responsibility for training, recruitment, and education, and was chairman of the welfare commission. Both this and his subsequent chairmanship of the British Electricity Authority (BEA) were political appointments by a Labour government eager to place nationalized industries in capable and sympathetic hands. The moves allowed him to extend his career and brought a substantially higher salary than he had been paid at the TUC. Above all, however, the BEA post allowed Citrine full range for his creative instincts with great powers at his disposal. His memoirs leave no doubt that this second career in public service was the happiest part of his working life. 
At the BEA Citrine successfully managed the transfer of 553 municipal and privately owned units to the new authority and its area boards, and rode out the difficult post-war period of power shortages. He identified with the electricity industry as closely as he had previously done with the TUC and ably used his accumulated political wisdom and contacts to win greater investment. As at the TUC he was well supported by a dedicated staff, especially his two deputy chairmen Sir Henry Self (former permanent secretary at the Ministry of Civil Aviation) and Sir John Hacking (who had had a long career in electricity production). By his retirement in 1957 British electrical output was two and a half times higher than its pre-war levels, electrification had been extended to many rural areas, and (with Citrine's enthusiastic support) work had started on power stations to produce atomic energy. Citrine also saw the chance to apply principles of enlightened management, and even 'industrial democracy', to the industry. He created an impressive system of consultation for the workforce, and presided over a general increase in pay and conditions. At the same time he could be a tough manager, in 1949 allowing the army to be used by the Labour government to crush an unofficial strike in London. 
Citrine was an inveterate note-taker and diarist, and these records formed the material for numerous published accounts of his foreign travels. The most significant of these was 'I Search for Truth in Russia' (1936). Here, Citrine's critical eye for the realities of life in the Soviet Union served to intensify the personal attacks made on him by his communist opponents. Within the labour movement, however, his most important publication was the 'ABC of Chairmanship' (1939) which formalized the lessons that Citrine had learned from a lifetime of bureaucratic practice. He published two volumes of autobiography. 'Men and Work' (1964) was a vital document on the inter-war labour movement and far more readable that its plodding sequel 'Two Careers' (1967). For the 'Dictionary of National Biography' he wrote the notices on Dame Caroline Haslett and Sir Arthur Pugh who, like himself, was a trade unionist knighted in 1935. 
Citrine was appointed KBE in 1935 and GBE in 1958. He became Baron Citrine, of Wembley, Middlesex, in July 1946. In 1940 he was admitted to the privy council. From 1939 to 1947 he was a visiting fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford, and in 1955 Manchester University awarded him an honorary LLD. In 1947 the ETU awarded him its gold badge, and in 1975 he received a similar award from the subsequently enlarged Electrical Electronic Telecommunication and Plumbing Union. On 28 March 1914 he married Dorothy Helen 
(Doris; 1892-1973)
, daughter of Edgar Slade, commercial traveller, of Pendleton, Manchester. They had two sons, the elder of whom, Norman Arthur ('b'. 1914), a solicitor, was the author of 'Trade Union Law' (1950). 
The best-known description of Citrine remains Beatrice Webb's somewhat patronizing account in her published 'Diary', in which she records meeting him soon after he had joined the TUC: 'Under forty years of age, tall, broad-shouldered, with the manners and clothes and way of speaking of a superior bank clerk... He is a non-smoker, non-drinker, small, slow eater, takes a daily cold bath, sleeps with his windows open -- altogether a hygienic puritan in daily life' (4.126-7). Although something of a martinet, Citrine could also display considerable personal charm. Surprisingly, given his upright personality and conventional views, he was interested in palmistry and claimed to have heeded such advice at critical moments in his career. He also enjoyed playing the cornet, reading and memorizing poetry, and collecting books. 
Citrine died on 22 January 1983 at Brixham Hospital, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 30932


Clark, Frederick Le Gros (1892-1977), social and industrial reformer, was born on 3 September 1892 in Chislet, Kent, the eldest in the family of three sons and one daughter of the Revd (Edward) Travers Clark, of Washfield, Tiverton, Devon, and his wife, Ethel May, daughter of Edward Clapton, a physician. Both grandfathers were on the staff of St Thomas's Hospital. One of his brothers, Sir Wilfrid Edward Le Gros Clark, was professor of anatomy in Oxford and London; the other brother, when chief secretary to the government of Sarawak, was killed during the Second World War. His sister worked for the Red Cross. From Blundell's School, Tiverton, he went to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1911 and graduated with a second class in classical honour moderations in 1913. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he joined the Middlesex regiment as a private: by the end of the war he was a lieutenant in the 3rd Hampshire regiment. On the last day of the war, as a result of an accident, he lost his right hand and eye. His left eye was so seriously damaged that he gradually became completely blind. In 1921 he married Ida Searle and, after her death, he married in 1952 Winifred Collier. There were no children. 
By 1941 Clark had published two novels and seventy short stories; some of these were collected in 'The Adventures of the Little Pig' (1937). But he never thought of writing as his profession. Because of his interest in the psychology of blindness, and his wish to help others to cope with it, he wrote some articles in the 'St Dunstan's Review' on his own experience and on how he organized his work and thoughts. His later thoughts on these matters were collected in 'Blinded in War' (1969). He wrote clearly and concisely, typing the first draft himself hastily and then rewriting extensively. He had a remarkable memory and trained it assiduously. He was proud of what independence he could manage. On coming into a house which he had already visited once or twice, he would ask if there had been any rearrangement: on being reassured, he would demonstrate his spatial memory by moving confidently and unguided. He enjoyed walking on country roads when traffic was sparse during the Second World War, guided only by his companion's voice. 
By 1930 Clark had found his vocation to be working on problems connected with welfare and nutrition. After two visits to the USSR he wrote (with L. N. Brinton) 'Men, Medicine and Food in the USSR' (1936). He was the prime mover in starting the Committee against Malnutrition, which called attention to the extent of malnutrition in Britain in the 1930s. In this work he had active encouragement from Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins and Sir John Boyd Orr. He was secretary of the Children's Nutrition Council and edited the 'Nutrition Bulletin' of the National Council for Health Education. 
In 'Feeding the Human Family' (1947) Clark gave a brief history of nutritional research, commented on the conflict between the commercial interest of food producers and our nutritional requirements, described the discussions which preceded the establishment of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), and discussed themes such as soil erosion which only later had general recognition. In 'Four Thousand Million Mouths' (which he edited with N. W. Pirie, 1951) a group of scientists argued that, by full application of existing knowledge, enough food for such a population could be produced. He was, briefly, a consultant to FAO on school feeding; earlier he had had a grant from the Leverhulme Trust for similar studies. 
Aided by grants from the Nuffield Foundation, Clark started a prolonged study of the part played by tradition and preconceptions, rather than incapacity, in fixing the age of retirement. Among his other publications on this subject were: 'Ageing in Industry' (with A. C. Dunne, 1955), 'Growing Old in a Mechanized World' (1960), and 'Women, Work and Age' (1962). Much of his work was given limited circulation in Nuffield Foundation reports. The general conclusion was that most workers accepted retirement at sixty-five unwillingly, largely because they feared that it would lead to physical and mental deterioration. 
Publications in braille covered little of the literature Clark consulted. He therefore needed co-operation from sighted people who understood what they were asked to read. This help was willingly given by his many friends, because of his friendly personality and shrewd and amusing comments. Politically he was to the left: a member of the Association of Scientific Workers and a committee member of Science for Peace. Those who knew him through science called him Bill, a nickname bestowed during the First World War because of a fancied resemblance to the cartoon character Old Bill. To those who knew him through St Dunstan's he was Clarkie. 
Clark took his Oxford MA in 1944 and was given an honorary DSc by Bristol University in 1972. He died in Cambridge on 22 September 1977 soon after becoming partly paralysed. 
N. W. Pirie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30933


Clark, Sir George Norman (1890-1979), historian, was born in Halifax, Yorkshire, on 27 February 1890, the second son in the family of three sons and two daughters of James Walker Clark CBE JP (1858-1936), draper, a leading citizen of Halifax and successful businessman, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Alderman S. T. Midgley JP, of Halifax. His family was a cultured one with strong intellectual interests: his elder brother, James, became professor of German at Glasgow University, and his sister Barbara Callow a leading expert on nutrition; his mother's sister had married the Dutch philologist A. J. Barnouw. Clark was educated at Bootham School, York, and later at Manchester grammar school, to prepare him for Cambridge University. It was to Oxford, however, that he went. In 1908 he was elected to a Brackenbury scholarship at Balliol College, and placed in the first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1911, and in modern history in 1912. Election to a prize fellowship at All Souls in 1912 enabled him to spend some time abroad perfecting his languages. A former member of the university Officers' Training Corps, which he joined after carefully rejecting pacifist views, he was commissioned when war broke out in the 1st battalion of the Post Office Rifles, wounded twice, and taken prisoner in May 1916, at Vimy Ridge. His years of captivity at Gutersloh and then at Krefeld were profitably spent learning languages, reading widely, and working on Netherlands history when on parole in The Hague with his aunt and uncle by marriage. 
On his return to Britain Clark was elected, in 1919, a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. On 21 June that year he married Barbara, daughter of William Brock Keen, chartered accountant, and the sister of a Balliol friend (William Allan Keen) killed in the war; they had a son and a daughter. Clark's appointment as editor of the 'English Historical Review' in 1920 recognized one of his outstanding skills; he was to resume this role, after resigning in 1926, from 1938 to 1939. He took a renewed interest in the Oxford Fabian Society, of which, before the war, he had been a member with G. D. H. Cole; he spoke at Labour meetings about the general strike in 1926, and was invited to stand as Labour candidate for Oxford. In his radical sympathies he was joined by his wife, who had worked actively for the Women's Trade Union League. In 1927 he became a university lecturer in modern history and was proctor in 1929-30. His steadily growing reputation as a historian led to his election in 1931 to the newly established Chichele professorship of economic history, tenable at All Souls. He remained there until, after the Munich crisis, he joined those working at Chatham House, where his specialized knowledge of the Low Countries could be profitably used. He returned to full-time academic life, however, in 1943, when he became regius professor of modern history at Cambridge, and a fellow of Trinity College. 
Clark's previous experience made him an excellent choice to edit the 'Oxford History of England', an ambitious and largely successful project. He wrote the first volume to be published, 'The Later Stuarts, 1660-1714' (1934), a work of remarkable scholarship, and continued to edit the series down to the last volume published in 1965. He later undertook to edit the 'New Cambridge Modern History', for the most part following the original scheme devised by Lord Acton, but also arranging for chapters on areas and subjects which had no place in the earlier work. He was also editor of the 'Home University Library of Modern Knowledge'. He was for some time a delegate of the Clarendon Press. 
Clark returned to Oxford in 1947 upon election as provost of Oriel, and soon became immersed again in university business. Outside Oxford he was also busy, as a trustee of the British Museum (1949-60), a member of the University Grants Committee (1951-8), and from 1954 to 1958 as president of the British Academy, of which he had been a fellow since 1936. A knighthood in 1953 marked recognition of his many services to learning and public life. His retirement in 1957 gave him more time for scholarship. He was delighted in 1960 to be invited to write 'A History of the Royal College of Physicians' (2 vols., 1964-6) and his election as honorary fellow of that college (1966) gave him particular pleasure. He remained a dedicated and disciplined worker until just before his death. 
As a historian Clark was workmanlike and lucid; his judgements were carefully balanced and judiciously set out, and he tried above all to be fair. He was not interested in flights of fancy; he preferred to stick closely to the evidence and, in the main, the questions he posed were down to earth rather than speculative, though conversation with him made it clear how deeply he thought about problems of all kinds. He could combine clear narrative with crisp comment to excellent effect. The finest of his books, 'The Seventeenth Century' (1929; rev. edn, 1947), displays another of his strengths: his capacity for comparative history, based on careful analysis and a sensitive awareness of cultural similarities and differences. This remarkable survey broke new ground, and nothing similar to it, or its equal in learning, was to appear for a quarter of a century. Clark's writings on Anglo-Dutch relations also remain valuable. His many invitations to deliver special lectures, and his many honorary degrees -- including DLitt from Oxford (1947) and Cambridge (1961) -- reflected his high reputation as a scholar. He had honorary fellowships at Balliol and Oriel (both 1957) and was re-elected to an All Souls fellowship in 1961. 
Clark never lost some of the characteristics of the reserved north-countryman. He had many friends, enjoyed social life, and was an excellent and witty conversationalist, but could appear somewhat aloof with mere acquaintances. Known as James or Jas to his intimates, he was G. N. to historians everywhere. Of medium height and sturdily built, he might well have been mistaken for one of his yeoman-farmer ancestors from the East Riding, or even for a Dutch businessman (some erroneously believed that he was partly Dutch). After starting life as a nonconformist, he became a member of the Church of England in 1936. But like others of his generation he owed much to the intellectual vigour and sturdy independence of his dissenting family background. Clark died in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 6 February 1979. 
Anne Whiteman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30934


Clark, Kenneth Mackenzie, Baron Clark (1903-1983), art patron and historian, was born at 32 Grosvenor Square, London, on 13 July 1903, the only child of Kenneth Mackenzie Clark and his wife, (Margaret) Alice, daughter of James McArthur of Manchester and formerly of Paisley, a cousin of her husband on his mother's side. The father was a wealthy Scottish industrialist, sportsman, gambler, and ultimately alcoholic. The wealth derived from the well-known family textile firm Clark of Paisley, and was to provide his son throughout his career with a buoyancy that was an essential factor in the maintenance of his independence. The Clarks lived at Sudbourne Hall, Suffolk, and at Ardnamurchan, Argyll. 
Clark was educated at Wixenford School and Winchester College, and won a scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, where he gained a second class in modern history in 1925. A first class had been expected, but his interests had already turned conclusively to the study of art. An inborn sensitivity of response to works of art, together with an insatiable appetite for them, allied to an acute, fastidious, and articulate intelligence, had developed from childhood on. He was a workmanlike draughtsman himself, and read widely and voraciously. His introduction to the severer disciplines of close scholarship and analytic connoisseurship were provided at Oxford by Charles F. Bell, keeper of fine art, among the superb drawings and prints of the Ashmolean Museum. In autumn 1925 Bell introduced Clark to the renowned art historian Bernard Berenson at the latter's house, I Tatti, in the hills above Florence. Berenson gave the young man lunch and afterwards asked him to come to assist him in the revision of his great corpus of Florentine drawings. 
There followed two years of concentrated practice and refinement of judgement of works of art together with Berenson in the library at I Tatti and in the great collections of Italy. Clark was, however, also discovering, in the course of completing his first full-length book, 'The Gothic Revival' (the rather unexpected subject suggested by Bell, published in 1928), the exhilaration of prose composition, an art which (he was to observe later) was to yield him as much pleasure in life as anything he ever did. 
In 1929 Clark was offered the enviable task of cataloguing the rich hoard of Leonardo da Vinci drawings at Windsor Castle. He also acted as joint organizer of an exhibition, which later became legendary, of Italian painting at the Royal Academy, involving masterpieces never seen before out of Italy. In 1931 his career took a decisive turn when he accepted Bell's former post, as keeper of the department of fine art at the Ashmolean, and became a full-time professional museum man. Less than three years later, at the unprecedently early age of thirty-one, he was appointed director of the National Gallery in London (1934-45), and shortly afterwards became also surveyor of the king's pictures (1934-44). 
On 10 January 1927 Clark had married Elizabeth Winifred 
(Jane; 1902/3-1976)
, daughter of Robert Macgregor Martin, a businessman of Dublin, and his wife, Emily Dickson, a medical doctor. Between 1934 and 1939, lodged in an almost palatial house in Portland Place, with his wife as president of the Incorporated Society of London Fashion Designers and a leading hostess, the Clarks in joint alliance became stars of London high society, intelligentsia, and fashion, from Mayfair to Windsor. This was a period he later dubbed 'the Great Clark Boom'. 
In the National Gallery Clark made a considerable contribution. Acquisitions during his directorship included such masterpieces as Rubens's 'Watering Place', Constable's 'Hadleigh Castle', Rembrandt's 'Saskia as Flora', Ingres's 'Mme Moitessier', and Poussin's 'Golden Calf'. He established a scientific department, and a carefully supervised programme of picture cleaning. In the art of administration, however, his touch failed with his senior staff, whom he alienated. Major crises occurred in 1937, culminating when -- against the united advice of his professional staff -- he persuaded the trustees to acquire four small minor Venetian school paintings and labelled them as Giorgiones. The subsequent controversy became public scandal, and contributed to a lingering mistrust of his integrity, especially among some fellow art historians, that was perhaps never quite dispelled. On the other hand, he fought off the reappointment of Lord Duveen as trustee, believing that a dealer's interests were irreconcilable with those of a trustee and that, although Duveen's natural charm and indeed generosity were compelling, they were matched by his natural duplicity. 
In 1939, at the outbreak of the Second World War, Clark was responsible for the evacuation of virtually the entire collection from London, ultimately into a cavern in the slate quarries of Manod in north Wales. In the emptied gallery he organized with Dame Myra Hess the very popular and morale-raising lunchtime music recitals that continued despite the blitz, and then a scheme by which he brought back one masterpiece each month for display. He also found time to serve in the Ministry of Information, first as director of the film division and then as controller of home publicity. Perpetually frustrated, however, by ministry bureaucracy, he resigned in 1941. 
Clark was meanwhile establishing himself in the activity in which his greatest talents were to find their most congenial and successful employment. His catalogue of the Windsor Leonardo drawings (1935) still holds an honourable place in the Leonardo literature, but was to be his last exercise in what he came to term 'plodding scholarship'. His monograph 'Leonardo da Vinci... his Development as an Artist' (1939) established itself at once as the best general introduction in English, and was widely acclaimed. In 1945, following the successful return of the collections to the National Gallery, he resigned as director, to devote himself to his now paramount interest in writing. Between 1946 and 1950 he was Slade professor of fine art at Oxford, developing an already highly accomplished lecturing technique. For a more popular audience, he became known as a broadcaster in such programmes as The Brains Trust. In the drab post-war years of austerity, a new public avid for the arts was emerging. 
Clark had bought works of art for himself since his schooldays, but his generous and imaginative activity as collector-patron was especially fruitful. Several artists, struggling in the 1930s and kept afloat by Clark, later became national and international figures, most notably Henry Moore, who like Graham Sutherland and John Piper were to become lifelong friends. In 1939-40 Clark had been involved with the setting up of the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts. This, the first step towards state support for the living arts, subsequently became the Arts Council. As the council's third chairman (1953-60), Clark underwent a frustrating experience. He felt little more than a figurehead, and his own commitment to the validity of state support of individual creative artists was ambivalent. His last appointment as a public administrator, as the first chairman of the Independent Television Authority (1954-7), was more rewarding. The concept of commercial television, in rivalry with the BBC, was controversial, and so too was Clark's appointment, though his claim that he was subsequently booed at the Athenaeum is disputed. The prime task was to ensure the quality, balance, and political impartiality achieved by the licensed programme contractors. Almost at once Clark had to fight off an attempt by the government to use the new channels for its advantage. Clark was not averse to an injection of 'vulgar vitality', but managed to preserve a news service under the direct control of the authority rather than of the contractors. Though not reappointed in 1957, he had exercised a constructive and beneficent influence on the development of the British version of the most powerful instrument of mass communication yet known to mankind. 
Clark's finest books, mostly allied to lecture series, were now behind him: 'Piero della Francesca' (1951), 'The Nude' (1956), from the Mellon lectures in Washington in 1953, and 'Rembrandt and the Italian Renaissance' (1966), from the Wrightsman lectures in New York. He was now to emerge as an outstanding writer and performer for television. In 1966 the programme series 'Civilisation' was mooted with the BBC and finally broadcast in 1969. Its success in English-speaking countries, and beyond, was spectacular and unparalleled; he became as celebrated as a film star, known to a wider audience personally than even John Ruskin had been a century before. Ruskin had been the greatest single influence on his mind since his schooldays, and he aspired to being Ruskin's heir in spreading the gospel of art, though with little of Ruskin's social, political, and moral involvement. His style too was very different; the prose in which the message was delivered was coolly lucid and elegantly lapidary but never rhapsodic. 'Civilisation' was avowedly a very personal, selective interpretation and illustration of the title's grandiose theme. Although in it he ranged widely, with great erudition, in time and space, his conceptions generally were conditioned by Mediterranean values. The areas in the study of art -- psychological and philosophical, sociological, iconographical, scientific -- that challenged some of his most remarkable contemporaries, were generally not for him, though he acknowledged, for example, the influence of Felix (Aby) Warburg. Though he recognized the achievement of Mondrian, and even of Jackson Pollock, he did not respond generally to abstract art, and his primary concern was to arouse response in individual human beings to individual works of art, essentially by accounting for his own response. If he was in a sense old-fashioned, with a sensibility prone (though not in his prose) to tears and visionary flashes, he made art accessible to a whole generation as no other English-speaking writer was able to do. 
Despite his proven qualities as a lecturer, that Clark was able to succeed so well in the demandingly personal medium of television appearances was to many unexpected. He proved able to achieve that most difficult balance on screen between the presenter's own presence and the object that he is presenting, never obscuring the object by his own brilliance. Though, in the interests of style, there might be 'an occasional sacrifice of the whole truth in the interests of economy', he did not talk down to his audience. Yet in private life, while often charming and entertaining, and imaginatively generous to younger students, for many he remained aloof and arrogant, and, even to some of his closest friends, elusive behind an impenetrable urbanity. Probably he was most relaxed in self-revelation only with a few gifted women, in particular, in the earlier days of his marriage, with his first wife. His loyalty to her in the later distress of her prolonged decline from health due to alcoholism caused his friends both admiration and embarrassment. His two autobiographical volumes are elegantly and subtly polished, at times very moving, often very funny, ironical, entertaining, and perceptive, if somewhat distanced, as if about someone else. There is modesty but little searching self-examination. 
Clark was of medium height, slender, and elegantly tailored, then thickening somewhat in later life and becoming more relaxed in dress. His head was handsomely browed and aquiline, although in repose his features could too easily (and not necessarily accurately) convey the impression that he was looking down his nose. He was much honoured, being made a KCB in 1938, FBA in 1949, CH in 1959, and receiving a life peerage in 1969, and the Order of Merit in 1976. He was chancellor of York University from 1969 to 1979, and a trustee of the British Museum. Honorary degrees, fellowships, and distinctions were conferred on him by universities and academies in Britain, America, France, Spain, Italy, Sweden, Austria, and Finland, but the honour he cherished most was his appointment to the Conseil Artistique des Musees Nationaux, Paris. 
Clark's first wife died in 1976; they had a son and a twin son and daughter. The elder son, Alan Clark, became a military historian and Conservative politician. On 24 November 1977 Clark married Nolwen Louise Marie Alixe ('b'. 1921/2), former wife of Edward Rice, cattle and sheep farmer, and daughter of Frederic, comte de Janze; she survived him. Clark died in Hythe Surgical Clinic, North Road, Hythe, Kent, on 21 May 1983. At the close of a crowded memorial service in St James's, Piccadilly, most of the congregation were startled to hear that in the last days of his life he had been received into the Roman Catholic church. 


@@@@@


doc= 30935


Clark, Sir Wilfrid Edward Le Gros (1895-1971), anatomist, was born in Hemel Hempstead on 5 June 1895, the youngest of three sons and third of the four children of the Revd (Edward) Travers Clark, of Washfield, near Tiverton, and his wife, Ethel May, daughter of Edward Clapton, physician. His eldest brother was Frederick Le Gros Clark. After the death of his mother when he was eight years old he became a delicate child, developing a bad stammer, which he overcame in later life with the help of psychoanalysis. He attended Blundell's School in Tiverton, and in 1912 entered the medical school of St Thomas's Hospital, on whose consultant staff both his grandfathers had served with distinction. His paternal grandfather (Frederick Le Gros Clark) had also been president of the Royal College of Surgeons. Qualifying MRCS, LRCP in 1916, Clark immediately joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and served in France from the beginning of 1918. He was demobilized in 1919 and, having passed the FRCS examination, was appointed a year later principal medical officer in Sarawak, a post which he filled for three years. In addition to discharging his medical duties, he was able to cultivate a deep-seated interest in natural history. He got on well with the indigenous population and, because of his success in treating ulcerous yaws, was made a fellow member of the Sea Dyaks, whose tattoo marks he bore on his shoulders. In 1923 he married Freda Constance (died 1963), daughter of Frederick Giddey, shipping agent; they had two daughters. 
In 1924 Clark left Borneo to become head of the department of anatomy at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, first as university reader and then from 1927 to 1929 as professor. In 1930 he succeeded to the chair of anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital medical school. Four years later he was appointed Dr Lee's professor of anatomy in Oxford, a post he occupied until his retirement in 1962. 
Clark's scientific work reflected the main interests of the anatomical profession during the 1920s and 1930s, and in particular the relationship of humans to other primates. In Borneo he collected specimens of the spectral tarsier ('Tarsius') and the tree shrew ('Tupaia' and 'Ptilocercus'), two creatures whose evolutionary affinities were at the time much disputed. His specimens of 'Tarsius' were studied anatomically by H. H. Woollard, and it is generally accepted that this creature represents a surviving group of the primitive mammals of the Eocene period from which all other primates evolved. Clark made a corresponding study of the tree shrew, which he also regarded as a primitive primate. His investigations of the structure of its brain marked the beginning of a long series of valuable studies of the central nervous pathways of the visual and other senses. 
In 1934 Clark published his first book on the subject of human evolution, 'Early Forerunners of Man', essentially a compilation of existing knowledge of the anatomy of living and fossil primates. After a visit to South Africa in 1946 he became persuaded that the australopithecines, the ape-like fossils which had been unearthed in that country during the 1920s and 1930s, were in the direct line of human descent. He expounded his views on the subject in some six short books, as well as in a popular British Museum handbook 'History of the Primates' (1949). 
Clark played a part in the exposure of the Piltdown forgery, to which his attention was drawn by J. S. Weiner; with Weiner and K. P. Oakley, he published the results of this inquiry in the 'Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History)' (1953). He also wrote numerous papers for scientific journals, two general books on the structure and tissues of the body, and an autobiographical memoir, 'Chant of Pleasant Exploration' (1968). He was elected FRS in 1935, knighted in 1955, received several honorary degrees, and was an honorary member of various foreign academies. He was president in 1950 of the International Anatomical Congress, in 1952-3 of the Anatomical Society, and in 1961 of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He became an honorary fellow of Hertford College, Oxford, in 1962. Clark's first wife died in 1963, and in 1964 he married Violet, widow of Leonard Foster Browne, psychiatrist, and daughter of the Revd Richard Bott, vicar of Newlands, Keswick. 
Clark was a complex and contradictory character. To many he showed kindness and generosity; to some he was a kind of father figure; to others he appeared cold, reserved, and changeable. He wanted to be admired, and it rankled when some whose esteem he sought, denied it (Zuckerman, 225). Clark died on 28 June 1971, while staying with friends in Burton Bradstock in Dorset. 
S. Zuckerman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30936


Clark, William Donaldson (1916-1985), journalist and international civil servant, was born at Bellister Castle, near Haltwhistle, Northumberland, on 28 July 1916, the fifth son and sixth and youngest child of John McClare Clark, land agent, and his wife, Marion, daughter of Daniel Noel Jackson, physician, of Hexham. His father was sixty-two when he was born and his mother died when he was seven months old. Though his father wrote to him every week and his family was close-knit, his perception of his father as remote undoubtedly left some emotional scars. Clark attributed to it his competitiveness with his brothers and a degree of insecurity. He was educated at Oundle School, where he was head of school, and won a major scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford. His university career encompassed a half-blue for athletics and was crowned with a first-class honours degree in modern history (1938) and the prestigious Gibbs prize. A Commonwealth scholarship took him in 1938, as a fellow and lecturer in humanities, to the University of Chicago, where his lifelong affection for the United States was nurtured and some enduring transatlantic friendships formed. Bertrand Russell, who was an early influence on him, arrived in Chicago on the same day. 
Knee trouble, which saddled Clark with a serious limp in later life, ruled him out of military service and in 1941 he began three years with the British information services in Chicago followed by an appointment as press attache at the embassy in Washington (1945-6). After the war he returned to England as London editor of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1946-9), but the job did not allow full rein to his talents, which were better displayed as diplomatic correspondent of 'The Observer' (1950-55) and as the first British television interviewer to put a cabinet minister on television. 
At 'The Observer', F. David L. Astor, under whose aegis he joined the paper in 1950, became another major influence and Clark's concern for developing countries took root when, at the 1950 Colombo conference, Ernest Bevin outlined to him a vision of a British Commonwealth devoted to economic development. It was to become Clark's mission in life, but not before an unhappy interlude as press secretary to Sir Anthony Eden at 10 Downing Street, which culminated in his resignation because of the Suez crisis in 1956. 
Always attracted by power, Clark was flattered by Eden's offer and persuaded himself that their political incompatibility would prove no bar to a successful relationship. In retrospect it was a bad mistake, and it was a bitter blow, when after little more than a year, appalled by the invasion of Egypt and the attempts to browbeat the BBC and other media into supporting it, he decided that he must resign. He kept his letter to the prime minister brief, but to Sir Norman Brook, the secretary to the cabinet, he undertook to remain silent and make no demonstration on leaving. In 1966 he published a novel, 'Number 10', which became a successful play; but his diary of the Suez period was first published in his posthumous memoirs, 'From Three Worlds' (1986), thirty years after the event. 
Clark could not return to his old job but Astor asked him to go to India and Africa for 'The Observer' and he decided to devote himself to the north-south divide. After two years editing 'The week' for the paper, he left in 1960 to set up and run, as its director, the Overseas Development Institute, which quickly established a reputation for benevolent realism in a field where both attributes were rare. It was a good time, but he accepted readily when, in 1968, he was invited to return to Washington to become director of information and public affairs at the World Bank. Arriving on the same day as the bank's new president, Robert S. McNamara, he struck up an immediate rapport with him. 
Clark believed the cataclysm of world poverty to be just as threatening as the nuclear holocaust and his twelve years at the World Bank, during which he rose, in 1974, to be vice-president, external relations, were the most fulfilling of his life. With McNamara he travelled to over eighty countries, arguing that 'third-world' poverty was an obscene tragedy and a threat to the future of all mankind, and urging the richer nations, in their own interest, to help developing nations help themselves. His admiration for his chief was reciprocated. McNamara said of him: 'He came to the World Bank with more experience in the politics of aid than almost anyone else in the international community. He was invaluable to a newly arrived chief executive much in need of the guidance of someone who already knew so well so many of the personalities and places with whom we were to deal in the years ahead... He was an indispensable colleague. (private information, 1990)' When he left the World Bank in 1980, Clark succeeded, as president of the International Institute for Environment and Development, another friend, Barbara Ward, with whom he had played an important part in the setting up of the Pearson and Brandt commissions. He also became an independent director of 'The Observer'. 
Clark's personality, sometimes exotic dress sense, willingness to laugh at himself, and unpatronizing generosity made him a memorable friend. He was told he had incurable cancer of the liver on All Hallows' eve in 1984, not long after the publication of his book 'Cataclysm', which forecast the collapse of the world economy due to the refusal of developing countries to pay their debts. He faced death stoically, saying his illness enabled him to prove he was as brave as his brothers who had fought in the Second World War. Sustained by his many friends, the need to complete his memoirs, the wish to design his own tombstone, and the news of an honorary fellowship at Oriel, he was determined to die at home. He had shared The Mill in the Oxfordshire village of Cuxham for twenty-five years with his friend and associate, David Harvey, and he died there on 27 June 1985, and was buried in the churchyard nearby. He was unmarried. 
Nicholas Herbert', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30937


Clarke, Dudley Wrangel (1899-1974), army officer, was born in Johannesburg on 27 April 1899, the elder son and eldest of four children of Sir Ernest Michael Clarke, businessman, of Oxted, Surrey, and his wife, Madeline Sidonia Louisa, daughter of Edward Bennett Gardiner, general manager of the Standard Bank of South Africa and later of Carse Grange, Errol. He was educated at Charterhouse School from 1912 to 1915, and in May 1916 entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. In November 1916 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Field Artillery (RFA) and went as conducting officer to France. On his return to England he joined the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) and in October 1917 he was posted to the School of Military Aeronautics, Reading, where he flew DH6s and Avro monoplanes. From April 1918 he served with the RFC in Egypt until returning to Britain in January 1919. He was promoted lieutenant (aeroplanes) in July 1919, but two months later transferred back to the RFA. 
In November 1919 Clarke was posted to Mesopotamia. While on leave in 1922 he went on the grand tour, and when war between Britain and Turkey threatened he reported to the British commander in Constantinople, who employed him on special missions. In 1924 (again on leave) he spent two months as 'Morning Post' correspondent covering the Riff rebellion in Morocco. In 1926 he became adjutant to the Territorial Army and in 1927 adjutant to the 98th Surrey and Sussex yeomanry. He joined the Transjordan force in 1930. He qualified for the Staff College, Camberley, at his fourth attempt thanks to the 1932 Middle East command course for Staff College candidates where (in his words) 'the whole thing became plain and simple' as a result of instruction by B. L. Montgomery. In 1932 he was captain in the 18th battery, 3rd field brigade. He attended the Staff College in 1933-4, visiting Germany and Italy, the college exercise having been changed from the Far East to a European war in alliance with France. He was posted at his own request to Aden in 1935 and served in Palestine in 1936-8. Having been promoted major in 1938, he became a deputy assistant military secretary in the War Office and lieutenant-colonel in the following year. 
In 'Seven Assignments' (1948) Clarke described his early tasks in the Second World War, the principal ones being: reconnoitring a route from Mombasa to reinforce Egypt lest the Mediterranean be closed; two assignments to Norway in April 1940; visiting a neutral country to ensure its continued neutrality; and, most important, the creation of the commandos. On 4 June 1940 the prime minister approved a scheme for small raiding forces put forward by Clarke which his experience of guerrilla warfare in Palestine well qualified him to implement. He recruited volunteers mainly from the 'independent companies' which had served in Norway under Colin Gubbins; and a mere three weeks after their formation 200 commandos raided the coast between Boulogne and Berck. Clarke accompanied them but was ordered not to go ashore. 
In the late summer of 1940 Clarke was posted to the staff of Sir A. P. Wavell in the Middle East, where he set up 'A' Force, the deception organization. It played a vital part in allied victories in spite of the fact that large-scale deception was a new element in strategy and that Clarke's plans were at first hindered by Wavell's insistence on absolute secrecy. To his colleagues he was a meticulous professional endowed with great energy, and above all with the imagination needed to see into the minds of the enemy intelligence staffs and to induce them to advise their high command to do what best suited the allies. The misleading clues he scattered round the Mediterranean theatre led the enemy to overestimate allied strength there by nearly a quarter of a million men and tied down troops which otherwise might have been used to resist the allied invasion of Normandy. He thus blazed a trail successfully followed by the sister organizations of Colonel John Bevan in London and Lieutenant-Colonel R. Peter Fleming in the Far East. Like them he suffered the fate of men engaged in secret work: their contribution is unnoticed except by a few 'in the know' whose vow of secrecy prevents them from paying tribute even long after the event. Besides, Clarke resisted the temptation to commit to paper his secret wartime experiences for financial gain. Earl Alexander of Tunis believed that Clarke had done as much to win the war as any other single officer, a view substantiated by the official history of 'A' Force. 
Clarke, promoted colonel in 1942 and brigadier in 1943, retired from the army in 1947. From 1948 to 1952 he was head of public opinion research in the Conservative central office, and was for a time a director of Securicor Ltd. He was appointed OBE in 1942, CBE in 1943, and CB in 1945, and he was awarded the American Legion of Merit. He died in London on 7 May 1974. He was unmarried. 
Charles Cruickshank', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30938


Clarke, Sir Richard William Barnes (1910-1975), journalist and civil servant, was born in Heanor, Derbyshire, on 13 August 1910, the second child and only son of William Thomas Clarke, chemistry master of the grammar school in Heanor, and his wife, Helen Barnes, also a schoolteacher. Clarke, known throughout his life to his family and friends as Otto, was educated at Christ's Hospital, Horsham, and at Clare College, Cambridge, where he read mathematics and was posted sixth wrangler in 1931; he finally switched to economics in his fourth year and received a second class in part two of the economics tripos in 1932. Then, at the nadir of the depression, came the arduous search for a job. A brief spell (1932-3) with the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association was followed by six years at the 'Financial News', later amalgamated with the 'Financial Times', where his most lasting achievement was to devise the ordinary share index -- still, as the FT index, the principal measure of its kind. On the outbreak of the Second World War he moved successively through the ministries of Information, Economic Warfare, Supply, and Production, and spent a vital year (1942-3) in Washington in the combined production and resources board. 
Clarke's main career as a civil servant can be said to have begun when, in 1945, he joined the Treasury, where he remained for the next twenty-one years. During this time two periods stand out as those in which his contribution was outstanding and of lasting importance. The first was between 1946 and 1952, when he chaired the official programmes committee, the group saddled with the task of wrestling with the management of what became and remained for many years Britain's central economic problem, the chronic tendency to deficit of the United Kingdom's balance of payments. As chairman of the programmes committee he dominated a large group of senior and sophisticated officials, drawn from all government departments, in the preparation for ministers of a unique series of reports. No one who was a member of that body will forget his methods of working, his ability to draft papers while presiding as chairman, his fluency and command of facts and figures. His work on the planning of both the United Kingdom and the whole European response to the Marshall plan, which constituted the key to the salvation of western Europe after the war, was unequalled. 
The second of the two periods was the eight years from 1958 to Clarke's departure from the Treasury in 1966. During this time, while holding a number of jobs, which culminated in 1962 with his appointment as second permanent secretary in charge of the public sector group, he more or less single-handedly succeeded in securing the adoption of an entirely new approach to control and management of public expenditure; this was known as PESC, an acronym for the public expenditure survey committee, the inter-departmental instrument employed for administering the new system. It was Clarke who formulated the central ideas contained in the 1961 report of the committee of inquiry into Treasury control of public expenditure chaired by Lord Plowden, which he himself largely drafted. This advocated taking a view of the public sector as a whole -- embracing central government, local government, and the public corporations -- and the need to look at its progress over time against a background of the development of the national economy. These were seemingly simple ideas but new and indeed revolutionary in their implications. The control system that Clarke advocated and pioneered must be regarded as the principal monument by which he will be remembered. 
Clarke always took the architectonic rather than the piecemeal approach to his responsibilities. Thus he regarded the new Ministry of Technology, of which he was permanent secretary from 1966 to 1970 (having been for a short while previously permanent secretary in the Ministry of Aviation) and which expanded greatly in size and scope while he was its official head, as a model for the group of super-departments that he saw as the principal instruments of executive government in the future. This prediction has been only partially fulfilled. Some departments have survived but others, including the Ministry of Technology itself, have disintegrated, their component parts absorbed elsewhere. It could be that Clarke underestimated the difficulties, political, administrative, and indeed human, of holding together such vast conglomerates. 
Clarke married on 25 November 1938, in the United States, Joan Edith Barrington Simeon. The marriage was dissolved on 16 November 1945, and in 1950 he married Brenda Pile, daughter of W. J. Skinner of Frosterley, Bishop Auckland. She had represented the Ministry of Transport in the heroic days of the programmes committee and the marriage was outstandingly happy; they had three sons. 
Clarke was a man of many parts. He was a first-class chess player and a leading figure in the higher management of British chess. Physically commanding, intellectually pre-eminent, a strong character of decided and passionately held views, he was ruthless in argument and impatient with those who did not share his own convictions and approach to the matter in hand. Clarke's exceptional numeracy also led him to a low opinion of colleagues whose mental arithmetic did not go beyond their twelve-times table. His own writings, particularly in reports to ministers, were interspersed with figures, always relevant, employed to devastating effect in conjunction with a staccato style, the sentences coming at the reader like a succession of pistol shots. 
Clarke was appointed OBE in 1944, CB in 1951, and KCB in 1964. Following his retirement from the civil service in 1971 he accepted directorships in a number of large companies, both in industry and finance, where all testified to his deep concern, his detailed knowledge and understanding, and his qualities of judgement. 
Not surprisingly for one of his literary talents Clarke's published work was extensive. He wrote numerous articles in learned journals; his more substantial works included 'The Socialisation of Iron and Steel' (1936), under the pseudonym Ingot, 'The Economic Effort of War' (1940), 'The Management of the Public Sector of the National Economy' (the Stamp memorial lecture, 1964), 'New Trends in Government' (1971), and 'Public Expenditure, Management and Control' (1978), a posthumously published work meticulously edited by his friend and colleague Sir Alexander Cairncross, which provided fascinating insights into the deeper recesses of the governmental machine. 
Clarke died in University College Hospital, London, on 21 June 1975 and was cremated at Golders Green three days later. He was survived by his wife. 
Samuel Goldman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30939


Clay, Sir Charles Travis (1885-1978), antiquary and librarian, was born on 30 July 1885 at Rastrick House, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the younger son (there were no daughters) of John William Clay (died 1918), historian and genealogist, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Colonel Henry Pilleau, of the Royal Army Medical Corps and an artist, who descended from the family of Peze Pilleau, the Huguenot silversmith. He was educated at Harrow School and Balliol College, Oxford, where he won a mathematical scholarship in 1904. He gained only a second class in mathematical moderations in 1905, but was allowed to keep his scholarship and read history. In this subject he was guided mainly by H. W. C. Davis and A. L. Smith. The former coached Clay in the special subject he had chosen -- medieval land tenure -- and gave him the interest in charter material which he later developed with distinction. He obtained a first class in modern history in 1908. 
In March 1909 Clay became assistant private secretary to the earl of Crewe, then colonial secretary, and stayed with him after Lord Crewe became secretary of state for India and leader of the House of Lords. In 1913 he married Violet (died 1972), second daughter of William Snowdon Robson, Lord Robson, lord of appeal. They had three daughters, of whom the eldest, Rachel Maxwell- Hyslop, became a noted archaeologist. In the summer of 1914 Clay was appointed assistant librarian to the House of Lords. But less than a year later he was commissioned in the Royal Devon yeomanry and went to France, where he was twice mentioned in dispatches. He attained the rank of major. His elder brother was killed in 1918. 
In 1922 Clay was appointed librarian to the house and began a distinguished tenure of office lasting thirty-four years, until he retired in 1956. He possessed the ideal temperament and intellect for this post. His remarkably accurate memory and his immense knowledge of literature and history -- invariably imparted to peers with great courtesy -- were highly valued by the house. He was recognized as an authority on peerage history and was frequently consulted when peerage cases came before the house. While librarian he compiled five articles for volumes 8 and 10 of 'The Complete Peerage', of which he was a trustee for many years. In 1952 he was appointed a member of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art, on which he served for thirteen years. Clay's wide knowledge of art, in particular Italian painting, was valued by that committee. 
But it is as one of the most distinguished editors of medieval charters Britain has produced that Clay will be remembered. His work on medieval documents had begun in October 1908, when H. W. C. Davis gave him advice on collecting material from the Public Record Office for a volume of 'Placita coram rege 'or' de banco' (published 1911) for the Yorkshire Archaeological Society (of which he was to be a member for seventy years and president from 1953 to 1956). He drew constant inspiration from his father, J. W. Clay, who is remembered as the editor of the 'Visitation of Yorkshire' by Sir William Dugdale. In 1922 Clay was invited to continue a series of 'Yorkshire Deeds' and during the next eighteen years he edited five volumes calendaring and annotating deeds to the death of Elizabeth I. In 1932 he was invited by the Yorkshire Archaeological Society to continue the series of 'Early Yorkshire Charters' begun by William Farrer. In Clay's first two volumes, on the honour of Richmond, his precision in the dating of the charters immediately set a new standard of editing, only surpassed by Clay himself in volume 8 (1950), covering the honour of Warenne, which prompted Sir Frank Stenton to write that it was 'for the moment the last number in the finest series of Charters now appearing anywhere in the world' ('PBA', 326-7). Clay's 'Early Yorkshire Charters', in ten volumes published between 1935 and 1965, is regarded as a masterpiece and in Sir Richard Southern's opinion is a work of 'all but impeccable scholarship' (ibid., 327). A bibliography of his works and an appreciation of Clay by Professor Christopher Brooke accompanied his last published work, 'Notes on the Family of Clere', a privately printed volume presented to the author on his ninetieth birthday in 1975. 
Clay had a mind of crystal clarity which he retained to the end of his life. Although somewhat reserved in manner, he was a delightful and stimulating friend to anyone who shared his interests, and he took particular pleasure in helping younger historians. The range of his interests can be gauged by the many societies to which he belonged. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries for sixty-five years and vice-president in 1934-8; and honorary vice-president of the Royal Historical Society. He was a member of the Huguenot Society and the Harleian Society, for both of which he edited a volume. Membership of the Roxburghe Club, to which he presented a fine facsimile of a thirteenth-century York psalter, gave him pleasure for thirty-seven years. His chief outdoor interest was cricket; his record of attendance at the Eton and Harrow match at Lord's was probably unique. 
Clay received an honorary doctorate from Leeds University in 1943. He was appointed CB in 1944 and knighted in 1957. In 1950 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. Clay died at Oxford on 31 January 1978. 
C. S. A. Dobson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30940


Clayton, Philip Thomas Byard (1885-1972), Church of England clergyman and founder of the Toc H movement, was born on 12 December 1885 at Maryborough, Queensland, Australia, the third son and sixth and youngest child of Reginald Byard Buchanan Clayton, manager of a sugar plantation, and his wife, who was also his first cousin, Isobel Byard Sheppard. In 1886 the family returned to England and Reginald Clayton started an agency in the City for the export and import of goods to and from Australia. Philip Clayton was educated at St Paul's School and, as Squire scholar, at Exeter College, Oxford. He obtained a third class in classical honour moderations in 1907 and a first in theology in 1909. He then went to live in the deanery of Westminster and read with the dean, J. Armitage Robinson. In 1910 he was made deacon and in 1911 was ordained priest in Guildford by E. S. Talbot, bishop of Winchester. 
Clayton began his clerical career in 1910 in the parish of St Mary, Portsea, where Cyril Garbett, later archbishop of York, was vicar. He volunteered as an army chaplain when war broke out and worked in hospitals in France. The senior chaplain of the 6th division, Neville Talbot (son of the bishop of Winchester and later bishop of Pretoria), was looking for someone to establish a rest-house for the troops in the bottleneck on the way to and from the Ypres salient. He interested his friend Clayton in the idea and together they found an empty mansion at Poperinghe and transformed it into Talbot House, named thus in memory of Neville Talbot's brother, who had been killed in action a few months previously. Thousands of men used the house, which had a canteen, recreation and writing room, library, chaplain's room, and chapel, and which became known as TH, or Toc H in Morse signallers' language. Clayton, always known as Tubby, used it as a base for visiting men in the front line. He was given a roving commission with the 14th East Ham heavy battery in 1916. Tirelessly energetic, his magnetic personality became known and loved by thousands behind and in the front line. He was awarded the MC in 1917. 
On his return to England after the war Clayton established an ordination school at the former Knutsford prison, from which 435 priests were eventually ordained, and where he himself was chaplain and tutor. He also established a Talbot House in London in 1920 and began the Toc H movement, which had forty branches by 1922, the year in which it became an association incorporated by royal charter. The premisses of the movement were fellowship, service, fair-mindedness, and the kingdom of God. 
To collect funds Clayton went on a Canadian tour in 1921. In 1923 the archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, gave him All Hallows by the Tower as a living to redeem as the spiritual centre of Toc H. It became Toc H's guild church, and he remained its vicar until 1963. In 1923 a lamp, which was to become its symbol, was lit for the movement by the prince of Wales in the Albert Hall. From that year onwards Clayton embarked on world tours for fund-raising. The movement prospered and eventually numbered a thousand branches in Britain, hundreds overseas, and a women's association of similar strength. Clayton was appointed CH in 1933. 
In 1934 Clayton undertook a strenuous tour of the Rhodesias and South Africa which led to a nervous breakdown. He recovered during a year spent in India at Belgaum with his brother Sir Hugh Clayton. For a few months in 1935 he was chaplain on the 'Codrington' and then the 'Beagle', stationed at Malta. Early in 1936 he returned to England and to work at All Hallows and the Tower Hill Improvement Trust, which he had launched ten years before. 
In the early years of the Second World War, Clayton was with the Royal Navy in the Orkneys, establishing Toc H clubs around Scapa Flow. In 1940 All Hallows was destroyed by a bomb and he was given the chaplaincy of Anglo-Saxon Petroleum's tanker fleet, which took him to various parts of America. In 1943 he sailed to Gibraltar in a small naval craft and thence went on a tour of Karachi, Abadan, Tehran, Basrah, Baghdad, and Haifa, returning to Gibraltar late in 1944. The next year discussions began on reviving All Hallows; Clayton was active in raising funds, undertaking an exhausting tour of Canada and the USA, which resulted in the Americans sending the Winant volunteers to help rebuild the church, which was rededicated in 1957. From 1958 onwards he was connected with the voyages of Sir Francis Chichester, three of whose yachts he personally blessed. 
A man of enormous sympathy and courage, never sparing himself, convinced that his work was God-ordained, Clayton was unaware of time or his own appearance. He was frequently late for appointments, causing much distress and anxiety to his aides-de-camp and to those who awaited his arrival. He was an imaginative and original speaker with a retentive memory and a sense of humour which made him excellent company. His voice had a deep growling resonance and his eyes were mischievous. His way with people of all ages and circumstances was renowned, but he was rarely at ease with women. Despite his thousands of admirers and disciples he was a deeply lonely man with very few close friends. His constant companion was his dog. 
Clayton received the degree of DD (Lambeth) in 1954. He died at his home on Tower Hill on 15 December 1972. He was unmarried. 
C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 30956


William Alexander Roy Collins (1900-1976) became chairman and presided at St James's Place. He was educated at Harrow School and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he distinguished himself more as a sportsman than as a 'litterateur', obtaining a third-class degree in modern history in 1922. His brother Ian, who for his war service was appointed OBE and chevalier of the Legion d'honneur, and received the Croix de Guerre, became vice-chairman, and made a speciality of bibles, prayer books, and stationery, while his cousin William Hope Collins (Godfrey's son, born on 5 September 1903) took charge of the printing works. 
The return of peace saw a number of promising additions to the Collins list: H. J. Massingham ('The Wisdom of the Fields') and John Moore (the 'Brensham' trilogy) -- evidence of people's longing to recapture the innocence of the pre-war countryside -- Neville Cardus ('Autobiography'), Christopher Sykes ('Four Studies in Loyalty'), Ivor Brown ('Shakespeare'), and Milton Waldman, who published his 'Elizabeth and Essex' and joined the firm as literary adviser. They flourished alongside war stories, for which an apparently insatiable public appetite was developing. Gerald Hanley's 'Monsoon Victory' and Bernard Fergusson's 'Beyond the Chindwin' had been published during the war, but they were eclipsed after 1945 by Roy Farran's 'Winged Dagger', Desmond Young's 'Rommel', Paul Brickhill's 'Reach for the Sky', and 'The Great Escape'. 'The Wooden Horse', by Eric Williams, which outstripped them all and sold half a million copies, had been first published as 'Goon on the Block' by another publisher, was acquired by Collins after it failed, and was substantially rewritten by Waldman. 
On 14 December 1949 the directors floated the first public issue of shares in the company's history, over-subscribed four times within a few minutes (this led eventually to the acquisition of a controlling interest by News International and the cessation of family interest in the firm). By now Collins employed some 2500 people in Glasgow alone, and it was calculated that the printing presses could together produce at least 15,000 copies of a 256-page book per hour. Throughout the 1950s Collins was either first or second in the annual count of new books and new editions published; their total in 1960, when they again came first, was 576 titles. 
In 1950 appeared the first of many beautifully illustrated books on the ballet, brought to Collins by the editor Mark Bonham Carter and printed away from Glasgow by photogravure. This was 'Baron at the Ballet' (Baron was a celebrated photographer, and Arnold Haskell contributed an introduction); 60,000 copies were sold in twelve years. A new 'packager', Rainbird McLean, sought out Collins in 1951 for a sumptuous new edition of Robert Thornton's 'Temple of Flora'; Sacheverell Sitwell's equally sumptuous 'Fine Bird Books' (1953) and 'Great Flower Books' (1956) followed from the same stable. Further, more modest Rainbird McLean titles were published from time to time. 
Billy Collins took a particular interest in natural history and wildlife. The flourishing 'New Naturalist Library' may have been largely his creation, and R. S. R. Fitter's 'Collins Pocket Guide to British Birds', published in 1953 (and followed a year later by 'A Field Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe'), sold 100,000 copies in the next ten years and presaged a long list of nature books and field guides to wildlife the world over. 
In 1953 Collins bought the publishing house of Geoffrey Bles Ltd, which had been founded in 1923. With Vicki Baum's 'Grand Hotel' (1930) and books of popular piety by C. S. Lewis and J. B. Phillips, the firm had enjoyed occasional success; ironically, it proved to be seriously under-capitalized when its best-sellers, Lewis's children's stories in the 'Narnia' series, arrived in the early 1950s. Bles was allowed autonomy, but its list dwindled and stopped altogether in 1974. 
Most significant of all in that hectic year of 1953 was the launch of Fontana Books, the firm's own paperback imprint. Collins had taken a one-quarter share in the Reprint Society book club on its foundation in 1939, and Pan Books (of which Collins owned a one-third share) was established as its independent paperback subsidiary in 1944. Until the early 1950s Collins had been content to lease paperback rights in their books to Pan and their only rivals, Penguin Books, but by 1953 the paperback market was expanding and it was clear that the house should take advantage of the riches of its backlist. The rights in many books were brought back to Collins as their leases expired, and the first batch of Fontana paperbacks included titles by Armstrong, Williams, Bryant, Christie, Cheyney, Spring, Balchin, and Hammond Innes, a very successful writer who published all his thrillers with Collins. 
In 1955 Collins bought another small publishing house, the Harvill Press, created in 1946 by two Catholics, Manya Harari and Marjorie Villiers. Their aim had been to rebuild the bridges, destroyed during the war, between peoples of different nationalities and religions. Their eclectic list included translations from the European languages, and through the critic and translator Max Hayward Harvill became particularly well known for Russian literature, usually by dissidents. They found an ally at St James's Place in Billy's wife Priscilla Marian, 'nee' Lloyd (1901-1990), whom he had married some twenty years earlier, on 14 October 1924. Known as Pierre to her friends, she had converted to Catholicism and was building one of the leading British religious lists. The Collins imprint on protestant works satisfied her adviser Ronald Gregor Smith and the shade of Dr Chalmers, and the Harvill imprint widened the ecumenical spectrum. Fontana enjoyed enormous success with its religious list, launched in 1957 with a range of authors from Phillips and Lewis to Georges Bernanos ('The Carmelites') and the 'Confessions' of St Augustine. 
In 1955 Collins published 'H.M.S. 'Ulysses'', the first of many thrillers by Alastair MacLean. In 1956 came the firm's last substantial British acquisition, the fashionable Hatchards bookshop in Piccadilly, London; again its management enjoyed reasonable autonomy, though Billy Collins was always very keen to see his new books in the window. Rose Macaulay's last novel, 'The Towers of Trebizond', was published this year to critical acclaim, as were 'Naught for your Comfort' by Father Trevor Huddleston, and 'The Fortress', an account of his wartime experiences by a Collins editor, Raleigh Trevelyan. But this was nothing beside the massive success of Boris Pasternak's 'Doctor Zhivago', published in 1958 -- an 'annus mirabilis' -- under a joint Collins-Harvill imprint: the first printing of 25,000 copies sold out in four days. In that same year came 'The Memoirs of Field-Marshal Montgomery', with a first printing of 135,000 copies; the 'Collins Guide to English Parish Churches', edited by John Betjeman with illustrations by John Piper; the 'Autobiography' of St Theresa of Lisieux, translated by Ronald Knox; books by Sybille Bedford and Roy Jenkins, both new to the list; and 'The King's War', the second volume of C. V. Wedgwood's account of the English civil war ('The King's Peace' had been published in 1955). 
The following year saw the publication of 'The Phenomenon of Man' by the mystical Pierre Teilhard de Chardin. This was widely reviewed but perhaps less widely understood (although the author was a Catholic priest, his books appeared under the Collins imprint because, it was said, Harari and Villiers found them more obscure than transcendental). A prolonged strike in the printing trades during the summer severely curtailed output, yet Collins's profits rose by $100,000. 
In 1960 came two new books under the Collins-Harvill imprint: Giuseppe di Lampedusa's 'The Leopard', one of the century's great novels, and 'Born Free: a Lioness of Two Worlds' by Joy Adamson, the account of how an African game warden and his wife raised a motherless lion club, taught it to hunt for itself, and set it free. Sales of 'Born Free' totalled 135,000 after six months, 230,000 after twelve months. This year also saw the completion of the highly important 'Statistical Account of Scotland' and the launch of the 'Fontana Library', a remarkably ambitious and wide-ranging series of what were then called 'egg-head paperbacks', for which the rights in almost all the titles were acquired from other publishers, though a few such as Lord Acton's 'Lectures on Modern History' were out of copyright. That the 'Fontana Library' soon spawned a sub-series 'Theology and Philosophy' was due to Pierre Collins's urge to publish, for example, Karl Barth, Paul Tillich, Father Martin D'Arcy, and Helen Waddell. No fewer than ten Fontana religious titles featured in the autumn 1961 list, together with 'The Correspondence between Richard Strauss and Hugo von Hofmannsthal' and 'The Non-Existent Knight', the second book by Italo Calvino to be published by Collins. The children's department in London published the first six (including Dr Seuss's 'The Cat in the Hat') of a series initiated by Random House in New York, the 'Beginner Books', destined to print many million copies in hard covers and later in paperback. The profit on the year rose to $800,000. 
In 1962, Collins and Macmillan bought Heinemann's share in Pan Books to become joint owners of Pan -- a shrewd move, as Pan were larger than Fontana and second only to Penguin in British paperback publishing. Later in the year the book trade staged its successful defence of the net book agreement (to the great relief of booksellers around the country), and Collins opened a new million-pound six-storey warehouse capable of dispatching 100,000 books per day. Maurice Collis, Compton Mackenzie, Michael Frayn, Norman Lewis, and Philip Ziegler joined the list; Ross Macdonald joined the 'Crime Club'; Jean Renoir wrote 'Renoir, my Father'; and Harvill published a new translation of Pascal's 'Pensees'. In November came an illustrated translation of Goethe's 'Italian Journey' by W. H. Auden and Elizabeth Mayer, printed by Mardersteig at the Stamperia Valdonega. 
The 'Companion Guides' were launched in 1963 under the general editorship of Vincent Cronin: the first titles dealt with Paris, the south of France, and the Greek islands, and some twenty further titles followed. Sybille Bedford's second novel, 'A Favourite of the Gods', was published seven years after her first, the acclaimed 'A Legacy'. Lord Beaverbrook joined the list with 'The Decline and Fall of Lloyd George', and the film-maker Elia Kazan with his first novel, 'America America'. Fontana issued the first ever paperback 'Bible', the plain text of the 'Revised Standard Version'. By now paperbacks were booming in Britain, with 10,000 titles in print. The same year saw the first title in a new series of paperback originals, the 'Fontana History of Europe': Geoffrey Elton's 'Reformation Europe'. 
The mid- to late 1960s saw the Collins list expanding to include important titles such as Roy Jenkins's 'Asquith' (1964), Soren Kierkegaard's 'Journals of his Last Years' (1964), and Max Mallowan's 'Nimrud and its Remains' (1966), an account of his principal Mesopotamian excavation. Nigel Nicolson also edited for Collins at this time the first of three volumes of his father Harold's 'Diaries and Letters' (1966), covering the years 1930-39. Bryant launched his two-volume English social history with 'The Medieval Foundation' (1966). Malcolm Muggeridge, Edward Crankshaw, and Gerald Durrell joined the ranks of Collins authors, and the Harvill Press continued to publish translations of writers such as Julio Cortazar and Mikhail Bulgakov. Harvill's interest in Russian books in particular was to continue into the 1970s, with books by Sinyavsky and Sakharov, as well as Solzhenitsyn's 'The Gulag Archipelago' (1974). Fontana also flourished, with the publication in 1967 of the 'Fontana English Dictionary' ('including the new terminology of the space age'), Iris Murdoch's 'Sartre' (1967), and the attainment of 6 million sales of religious titles. 
William Hope Collins, Billy Collins's cousin in charge of the factory, died on 21 August 1967. After his death the printing operation moved to another former Blackie factory at Westerhill; warehousing and the Glasgow publishing offices followed over the next ten years, and the Cathedral Street premises were sold to the University of Strathclyde. 
Despite these changes, the company continued to flourish. The first volume of William Barclay's new translation of the 'New Testament' appeared in 1968. Carlos Baker's life of Ernest Hemingway was followed in 1970 by a major coup for Collins, the novelist's previously unpublished 'Islands in the Stream'. The year 1970 also saw the appearance of 'Master and Commander', the first of the 'Jack Aubrey' series of novels about the navy in Napoleonic times written by Patrick O'Brian. The book was at first largely unnoticed by the book trade on either side of the Atlantic, but Collins's faith in the writer resulted in a steadily growing readership as successive books in the series were published. At the same time, 'Fontana Modern Masters' was launched under the general editorship of Frank Kermode, with lives of Camus, Fanon, Guevara, Levi-Strauss, and Marcuse. Herman Wouk's 'The Winds of War' was a popular success for Collins in 1971 -- its first printing of 100,000 copies sold well. The first volume of Malcolm Muggeridge's autobiography appeared in 1972, along with biographies of Sybil Thorndike and Rose Macaulay, and novels by Peter Levi, Julian Symons, and Catherine Gaskin. 
In 1974 Collins acquired the American World Publishing Company, which proved a costly disappointment. Nevertheless, sales of such important titles as 'The Common Bible' ('published with the blessing of the Protestant, Catholic, and Orthodox churches'), and 'The Good News Bible' (1976), demonstrated the sound footing of the company. 'The Good News Bible' was one of the best-sellers of the year -- it had been co-published with the bible societies, and the first printing totalled 1 million copies. The autumn list of 1976 published from St James's Place alone included twelve other religious titles, thirty fiction, fifteen 'Crime Club', twenty-seven non-fiction titles, and fifty Fontanas (including an original title by Noam Chomsky, 'Reflections on Language'). Collins, now printing 60 million books per year, had indeed come a long way since 1819. 
Sir William Alexander Roy Collins died at his home, Hayle Farm House, Horsmonden, Kent, on 21 September 1976 and was buried at Horsmonden church. He had been appointed CBE in 1966 and knighted in 1970. He had two sons, William, known as Jan ('b'. 10 June 1929), and Mark ('b'. 3 June 1935), and two daughters, Deborah ('b'. 30 May 1926) and Sarah (1933-1967). All worked for the firm for a time, Jan in Glasgow (where he remained after succeeding his father as chairman) and the others at St James's Place. Sarah built up a highly successful foreign rights department. The secret of Billy Collins's success as one of the twentieth century's greatest publishers lay in three outstanding qualities, all of which were also evident in his predecessors. His larger-than-life enthusiasm was infectious, bringing in new authors (some of whom were irresistibly tempted away from their previous publishers), flattering booksellers across the Commonwealth, harrying literary editors into reviewing his books, above all selling his books to his own sales team and making sure that their saleability was fully appreciated by every representative within reach. Almost all Collins's geese were swans. He was obsessive over detail, and he drove his colleagues and himself very hard: for many years he started the day by opening the post, he approved every book jacket, Fontana cover design, and national media advertisement. Essential additional strength came from his wife, Pierre, whose eye for good writers and successful books confirmed his taste and extended his horizons. On Friday evenings Billy and Pierre rushed down to the country (first Northamptonshire, later Kent) where weekends were vigorously occupied in farming, hunting, gardening, and above all reading manuscripts. These strengths were offset, his critics maintained, by an impatient lack of purely intellectual or cultural concern, a mischievous but transparent interest in setting senior colleagues against each other, and an occasional insensitivity to others' feelings which a privileged upbringing and a powerful ambition would account for. He could be brisk, terminating discussion with a clinching 'isn't it' which was not to be interpreted as an invitation to further argument, but he was invariably courteous, and his was a kind heart. 
Jan Collins became non-executive chairman in 1979 and sold his shares in the firm to Rupert Murdoch in 1981. The firm was sold to News Corporation in January 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 31454


Julian Edward Alfred Mond, third Baron Melchett (1925-1973), industrialist, the son of Henry Ludwig Mond, was born in London on 9 January 1925. He was educated at Eton College and, although ready to go to Oxford, chose instead to go straight into the Fleet Air Arm in 1942, first in the lower deck and then commissioned, becoming senior pilot in his squadron. After training in Canada and South Africa he served in the Atlantic and on the Russian convoys. During his time in the Fleet Air Arm he took a correspondence course in farming which prepared him for what he was long to consider his most important activity. He founded a farming company (British Field Products Ltd) which specialized in grass-drying and animal feed-stuffs. On 26 April 1947 he married Sonia Elizabeth, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel R. H. Graham, Royal Army Medical Corps. They had one son and two daughters. He and his wife lived between a mews house in London and a farm, Courtyard, Ringstead, Hunstanton, in Norfolk. 
In 1947 Julian Mond joined the merchant bankers M. Samuel & Co. and by 1960 had become a significant influence in the financial world. He was an adviser to the export credits guarantee department and the British Transport Docks Board, and was on the council of administration of the Malta Dockyard. He became a director of the Guardian Assurance Company and of the Anglo-American Shipping Co. Ltd. In 1965 M. Samuel & Co. merged with Philip Hill, Higginson, and Erlanger Ltd, and Melchett (he had inherited the title in 1949) became director in charge of the banking and overseas departments. It was not an entirely easy life because tensions developed from time to time between the two components of the merged company. In his early forties he had thus acquired over a dozen directorships and was on the council of the Confederation of British Industry and the National Economic Development Council. 
British Field Products expanded in size and variety and Melchett persuaded Guardian Assurance to become a major shareholder. In 1964 the company acquired Weasenham Farm, with more than 14,000 acres of Norfolk farmland. During the same period he was a member of the British Transport Docks Board, which gave him a valuable insight into the operation of a nationalized industry. This extra work was to a great extent a relaxation. He made certain of being able to get home to the Norfolk countryside by flying there in his own single-engined plane after office hours. He rode and sailed and in the summer took family holidays in Majorca where he had built a villa. 
In April 1966 his career took a new turn. The prime minister, Harold Wilson, asked Melchett to be chairman of the committee to plan the nationalization of the British steel industry. He took this on in spite of misgivings about government intervention in the conduct of the affairs of any new industrial organization. From 1967 until his death he was chairman of what was eventually called the British Steel Corporation. The task was enormous: the bringing together of fourteen major iron and steel companies and other smaller ones employing more than a quarter of a million workers with a variety of traditions, methods, and loyalties. Among many innovations which helped harmonious progress was his introduction of worker-directorships -- members of trade unions being appointed to boards. 
Melchett's leadership survived the change of government in June 1970. The new prime minister, Edward Heath, and his cabinet accepted Melchett's plans for a massive modernization and its funding. By 1973 he had clearly established himself as an international influence in this leading industry, and was even being proposed for election as the next president of the International Iron and Steel Institute. He was much respected for his hard work and for his open manner. It was clear that the load needed to be eased and he was supported by the appointment as chief executive and deputy chairman of Dr H. M. Finniston. However, some of his colleagues on the board of British Steel differed from him and looked to an eventual return to separation of functions and to private ownership. Melchett had accepted appointment as non-executive director of Orion Bank in 1972, and his future seemed to be undecided. In 1973 he went on holiday to the villa in Majorca, where he died of a heart attack in June 1973. He was buried in the family mausoleum at Finchley. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey. He was succeeded by his son, Peter Robert Mond. 
Four generations of the Mond family, German in origin, but British by choice and further descent, played a powerful role in the development of the chemical and metallurgical industries of the United Kingdom and of other countries. Ludwig Mond saw the possibilities of exploiting the advances in alkali manufacture made possible by contemporary discovery. His appreciation of the markets led him to make his home in England. One son advanced Ludwig Mond's scientific discoveries and applied them to industry, but devoted much of his energy in later life to historical scholarship. His other son, who entered parliament, became a minister, and was raised to the peerage, led in the creation of a great international industry (Imperial Chemical Industries). A grandson showed a family gift for high finance and politics, a gift exhibited so fully by a great-grandson that he was invited to head the establishment of the first great nationalized industry (the British Steel Corporation). Thus over four generations, science, as the backbone of industry, played its part in the forefront of Mond family life, first in the expansion of manufacture and then as the basis for enterprise in the worlds of finance and politics, a clear example of one of the main trends in twentieth-century history. On his deathbed Ludwig said he hoped Henry would make himself necessary. Alfred adapted these words for the motto in the Melchett coat of arms: 'Make yourself necessary'. The four generations of Monds described here did just that. 


@@@@@


doc= 32179


Canning, Hubert George de Burgh, second marquess of Clanricarde (1832-1916), landlord in Ireland, was born on 30 November 1832, the younger son of Ulick John de Burgh, first marquess and fourteenth earl of Clanricarde (1802-1874), and his wife, Lady Harriet, the only daughter of George Canning. He was on poor terms with his father and identified with his mother's family. Later there were unfounded rumours that his biological father was a Russian nobleman. Educated at Harrow School, he entered the diplomatic service in 1852, and was for ten years attache at Turin, retiring in 1863 after inheriting (in 1862) the fortune of his maternal uncle, Earl Canning, whose surname he assumed. His financial position had previously been extremely precarious, which is said to have been the cause of his lifelong miserliness. In 1867 the death of his elder brother made him heir to the marquessate. He succeeded his brother as Liberal MP for co. Galway (1867-71). The home rule victory in the by-election after his resignation marked the decline of landlord influence; he later denounced his tenants' 'disloyalty' to his father in 1871. 
After his father's death in 1874, Clanricarde lived in rented rooms in London, never visiting his east Galway estates. He lived frugally, apart from the acquisition of an art collection, and allegedly engaged in money lending. In later life he enjoyed ice-skating. Although his estates were not highly rented he saw them as his absolute property, and denied that the tenants had any moral right to object to the contract by which they held them. With the rise of land agitation after the bad harvests of 1879, this unyielding attitude, coupled with his unsociable personality and his position as the stereotypical absentee landlord whose relationship with his tenants was merely that of rent-receiver, made him a major target; his financial resources enabled him to resist effectively. His obduracy brought him into conflict even with some of his land agents; he is alleged to have told one: 'If my tenants think they can intimidate me by shooting you, they are very much mistaken'. 
In 1886 the Clanricarde estates became a major battleground for the Plan of Campaign, whereby tenants demanded rent reductions and, if refused, paid the reduced rent to their representatives. Of 1159 tenants 186 were evicted after organized resistance, and 'emergency men' placed in vacant holdings; boycotting and agrarian violence followed. Several tenant leaders and sympathizers were imprisoned. Even unionists saw Clanricarde as a political liability. One request for troops to assist with evictions was refused, and chief secretary A. J. Balfour privately advocated the compulsory purchase of his estates. (This was rejected by the cabinet as interference with property rights.) 
Even after the collapse of the Plan, Clanricarde refused any compromise and opposed the policy of land purchase promoted by successive governments. The east Galway area remained a centre of unrest. His eviction of a Loughrea shopkeeper for political activities led to the passage of the 1907 'Town Tenants' Act', and Clanricarde made a rare speech in the House of Lords against the 1907 'Evicted Tenants' Act'. The 1909 'Birrell Land Act' allowed the compulsory purchase of his estate and reinstatement of evicted tenants, but as he used every legal expedient to resist, not until July 1915 did the land court finally convey the estate to the congested districts board. 
Clanricarde died at his home, 13 Hanover Square, London, on 12 April 1916 and was buried in London; some time previously he was evicted from The Albany due to refusal to pay an increased rent. Although heterosexual he never married. His marquessate became extinct; his cousin the marquess of Sligo inherited the earldom of Clanricarde, while his fortune was bequeathed to his great-nephew Lord Lascelles (later earl of Harewood). 


@@@@@


doc= 32180


Burkitt, Francis Crawford (1864-1935), biblical scholar, was born in London on 3 September 1864, the only child of Crawford Burkitt and his wife, Fanny Elizabeth Coward. Burkitt's grandfather had migrated to London from Sudbury in Suffolk, and founded the business which his father carried on so successfully that the son had no need to make a living for himself. This grandfather married a sister of the philanthropist William Crawford, whose unworldliness and reforming spirit were seen again in some measure in his great-nephew. 
Burkitt was sent to a day school near his home. In 1878 he went to Harrow School, on the modern side, and in 1883 entered Trinity College, Cambridge, of which he was elected a scholar in 1885. He graduated as a wrangler in part one of the mathematical tripos of 1886, but he turned at once from mathematics to the theological tripos. This involved a course of scientific study of the 'Old' and the 'New Testament' and the early history of Christian thought and institutions, which gave him a good foundation for his later work in the domain of the beginnings of Christianity. He won several university prizes, the second Tyrwhitt scholarship (1889), and in 1888 was placed in the first class in part two of the tripos. 
Burkitt married Amy Persis, daughter of William Parry, rector of Fitz, Shropshire, and granddaughter of Sir Edward Barnes, also in 1888. They settled down in Cambridge and had one son, the archaeologist Miles Burkitt. It was not until 1903 that he held any academic office -- a university lecturership in palaeography previously held by James Rendel Harris -- and it was not until after the promulgation of the university statutes of 1926 that he was elected a fellow of Trinity, although he had been Norrisian professor of divinity (combined with the Hulsean professorship in 1934) since 1905. So he had his whole time at his own disposal and he set to work to study other oriental languages, Syriac in particular. It was as a Syriac scholar that he first became widely known, especially in connection with the textual criticism of the gospels. He was the first to recognize the importance of the Syriac palimpsest of the four gospels in the convent of St Catherine on Mount Sinai and was one of the party that transcribed it in 1893. The two-volume edition of the old Syriac gospels which he published in 1904 with the title 'Evangelion da-Mepharreshe: the Curetonian version of the four gospels, with the readings of the Sinai palimpsest and the early Syriac patristic evidence edited, collected and arranged' has proved indispensable to students of the Syriac versions of the 'New Testament'. 
Burkitt also contributed to 'Old Testament' scholarship. His article 'Text and versions' in the 'Encyclopaedia Biblica' (1903) was a masterly survey. He lived through the years when the new literary and historical criticism of the 'Old Testament' was fighting its way, and was active in expounding its main results. But it was in the critical study of the 'New Testament' that his own chief contributions were made. In this sphere Burkitt was, for English students at least, one of the pioneers, especially by his book 'The Gospel History and its Transmission' (1906), but scarcely less so by his acceptance of the teaching of Johannes Weiss as to the meaning of 'the kingdom of God' in the message of Jesus. Burkitt made himself at once the champion in England of the 'eschatological', 'apocalyptic', interpretation of the aims and teaching of Jesus. It was mainly at his instigation also that Albert Schweitzer's great book 'Von Reimarus zu Wrede' (1906) was translated by William Montgomery and was made known to English readers under the title 'The Quest of the Historical Jesus' (1910). 
In addition Burkitt took a lead in showing the inadequacy of the liberal protestant ideas of the nineteenth century as regards Jesus and his gospel, and recalled students to the fact that Jesus shared the apocalyptic conceptions current among some religious Jews in his time and to acknowledging that his teaching never envisaged a future for human society such as was later realized. Burkitt's mastery of the conditions of the transition from the reformed religion of Israel to the Jewish-Christian conditions of the first century AD was shown in his Schweich lectures for 1913, 'Jewish and Christian Apocalypses' (1914). 
In common with other students Burkitt held that the Christ of the Catholic creeds and institutions was the product of epigenesis, in the course of which the historical figure had been transformed. But he was convinced that really scientific criticism applied to the gospels revealed a historical person with a 'substratum' of his actual doings and sayings adequate to account for the origin and the later developments of the Christian church. So he found the new school of 'form criticism' unacceptable as leaving one of the greatest of historical phenomena -- the rise of Christianity -- in the air, without foundation in events and happenings in actual human experience ('Jesus Christ: an Historical Outline', 1932). 
Burkitt made valuable contributions also to Franciscan studies (notably in his essay, 'The study of the sources of the life of St Francis', in the volume 'St Francis of Assisi' edited by Walter Seton in 1926), and to the history and significance of Christian worship in 'Eucharist and Sacrifice' (1921) and in volume 3 (1930) of 'The Christian Religion: its Origin and Progress', edited by J. F. Bethune-Baker, as well as in numerous articles on special points. His books on Manicheism and gnosticism, 'The Religion of the Manichees' (1925) and 'Church and Gnosis' (1932), were fresh and original surveys of well-worn themes. 
A list of Burkitt's published writings (books, pamphlets, and articles in various magazines) occupies ten pages of small print in the 'Journal of Theological Studies' for October 1935. Such a list shows the wide range of Burkitt's learning. All his writings bore the mark of a mind of unusual acumen as well as equipment. Burkitt received honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh and Dublin (1907), St Andrews and Breslau (1911), Oxford (1927), and Durham (1934). He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1905. 
Burkitt's was a vivid and attractive personality, full of interests other than those of the mere scholar -- an eager fisherman and occasional gardener, a skilled pianist and musician (with Bach as his standard of perfection), a player of patience and other such games, and a rapid solver of the crossword puzzles in 'The Times'. In addition, he was a practising member of the Church of England of the modernist school, and regularly read the lessons at a liberal evangelical church near his home. 
Burkitt remained alert and active in retirement, but died suddenly at his home in Cambridge, 1 West Road, on 11 May 1935. 
J. F. Bethune-Baker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32181


Burn, Robert (1829-1904), classical scholar and archaeologist, was born at Kynnersley, Shropshire, on 22 October 1829, the second son of Andrew Burn (1790/91-1874), rector of Kynnersley, and his second wife, Mary Harris. He entered Shrewsbury School under B. H. Kennedy in 1843 and Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1849. He had remarkable skill in the writing of Latin hexameter verse. He was senior classic in 1852, and took a second class in natural science in 1853. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1854, and spent the rest of his life at Cambridge. He was ordained deacon in 1860 and priest in 1862. For many years he lectured on classical subjects; from 1856 to 1872 he was a tutor of Trinity, and discharged the duties of that office with conspicuous success. He vacated his fellowship on his marriage in 1873 to Augusta Sophia, daughter of Frederick J. Prescott, examiner of army accounts at the War Office and a descendant of Oliver Cromwell. Re-elected a fellow of Trinity in 1874, he was also praelector in Roman archaeology from 1873 to 1885. 
Burn, who frequently visited Rome and its neighbourhood during his vacations, was one of the first Englishmen to study the archaeology of the city and the Campagna, and he published several works dealing with it, including 'Rome and the Campagna' (1871); 'Old Rome' (1880); 'Roman Literature in Relation to Roman Art' (1888); and 'Ancient Rome and its Neighbourhood' (1895). In 1881 he was president of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society. He received an honorary degree from Glasgow University in 1883. 
A member of the Alpine Club from 1860 to 1867, Burn was a distinguished athlete in his youth and a good real tennis player up to middle age. He was one of the first captains of the Cambridge University rifle corps, and he was among the committee of Trinity men who drew up the Cambridge University rules for football in 1863. During the last twenty years of his life he was an invalid confined to a bath chair. He died on 30 April 1904 at his home at St Chad's, Cambridgeshire, and was buried in St Giles's cemetery at Cambridge. There is a brass to his memory in the ante-chapel of Trinity College. 


@@@@@


doc= 32182


Murdoch, John Burn- (1852-1909), army officer, was born at Edinburgh on 17 June 1852, the eldest son of William Burn-Murdoch (1822-1878), MD Edinburgh, second son of John Burn-Murdoch (1793-1862) of Gartincaber, Perthshire. His mother was Jessie Cecilia, daughter of William Mack. The father's younger brother, James M'Gibbon Burn-Murdoch, was father of Colonel John Francis Burn-Murdoch, a distinguished cavalry officer. Educated at the Edinburgh Academy, at Nice for a year, and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Burn-Murdoch entered the Royal Engineers on 2 May 1872. He served in the Anglo-Afghan War of 1878-80, and was at the engagement of Charasia on 6 October 1879 and the operations round Kabul in December 1879, including the storming of the Asmai heights, when he was severely wounded while employed in blowing up one of the Afghan forts. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
Burn-Murdoch took part in the 1882 Egyptian campaign with the contingent from India under Major-General Herbert Taylor Macpherson. The engineers were commanded by Sir James Browne, known as Buster Browne (1839-1896), and Burn-Murdoch and William Gustavus Nicholson were the two field engineers. On reaching Bombay with his companions on 6 August, Burn-Murdoch aided Browne in preparing all the requisite material, and arrived at Suez, where they repaired the roads, local canals, and railways. From Isma'iliyyah they reached Qassasin on 11 September, and were present at the battle of Tell al-Kebir on the 13th. Immediately afterwards Burn-Murdoch, with the Indian force, pushed on for some 30 miles to Zaqaziq, and took a foremost part in seizing the railway there; General Browne sent a captured train back under Burn-Murdoch to help bring in the 72nd regiment, 6 miles off. The brilliant seizure of Zaqaziq, in which Burn-Murdoch did useful service, deprived the rebels of command of the railway and facilitated the capture of Cairo. He was mentioned in dispatches and received the Mejidiye (fifth class). 
Burn-Murdoch was promoted captain on 2 May 1884, major on 6 August 1891, and lieutenant-colonel on 1 March 1900. Meanwhile he served in India in the state railways, and in 1893 became commanding engineer of state railways and subsequently was chief engineer of the Southern Mahratta Railway. He married in August 1889 Maud (died 1893), widow of William Forster; they had no children (his wife already had three sons and a daughter). Burn-Murdoch retired on an Indian pension on 28 May 1900 and died at Bridge of Leith Cottage, Doune, Perthshire, on 30 January 1909. He was buried in Old Kilmadock burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 32183


Burnand, Sir Francis Cowley (1836-1917), playwright and humorist, was born in Mortimer Street, London, on 29 November 1836, the only son of Francis Burnand, a London stockbroker of protestant Savoyard descent, and his first wife, Emma Cowley, who died eight days after her son's birth. Young Frank was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1854 to 1858, where he wrote plays, acted in them under the name of Tom Pierce, and founded the Cambridge Amateur Dramatic Club described in his 'Personal Reminiscences of the A.D.C.' (1880). He submitted drawings to 'Punch', one or two of which were published after revision by one of the artists on its staff. Burnand began to prepare first for law and then for the Anglican ministry, but in 1858 he converted to Roman Catholicism under the influence of John Henry Newman's 'Doctrine of Development'. His infuriated father cut him adrift, and after a brief career as a barrister Burnand turned to the stage. For a short time he was an amateur actor and later managed a theatre; he sold the burlesques he had written for the Cambridge Amateur Dramatic Club to a theatrical publisher. On 31 March 1860 he married an actress, Cecilia Victoria Ranoe (1841-1870), daughter of James Ranoe, a clerk; the couple had five sons and two daughters. In 1874 he married her sister Rosina (also an actress), the widow of Paysan Jones, in a ceremony on the continent, such marriages being illegal in England at that time. They had two sons and four daughters. 
In the 1860s Burnand became a comic journalist. He edited 'The Glow-Worm', a transient periodical, joined the staff of 'Fun', and, when its proprietor rejected his 1863 proposal for 'Mokeanna', a parodistic serial, he took it to the more receptive 'Punch'. With its success, he severed his connection with 'Fun' and became in due course a staff writer for 'Punch' and in 1880 its editor. His predecessor, Tom Taylor, had allowed the paper to become heavy, but Burnand's rackety leadership brightened it. His own series, 'Happy Thoughts', begun in 1866, gave a catchword to the language and initiated a new style of narrative in which the speaker is perpetually the comic victim of some minor crisis or small disaster. His greatest editorial coup along these lines, however, was his publication of 'The Diary of a Nobody' (1888) by George and Weedon Grossmith, still in print more than a hundred years later. Burnand, who declared himself hostile to no man's religion, banned 'Punch's' earlier sharp attacks on Catholicism, though he proved unable to remove antisemitic jokes. His own style became increasingly prolix and anecdotal, devoted to more and more far-fetched, sometimes almost unintelligible, puns. 
Meanwhile, Burnand was concurrently pursuing the profession of comic playwright, occasionally collaborating with Montagu Williams in the 1860s. In 1865 he and a theatre musician, Frank Musgrave, produced the first attempt at English 'opera buffe': 'Windsor Castle'. For the most part, however, his dramatic output consisted of burlesques, extravaganzas, and farces, with some librettos, comedies, and a few serious plays. Characteristic titles included 'Helen, or, Taken from the Greek' (1866) and 'Fowl Play, or, A Story of Chicken Hazard' (1868). Word play rioted in his dramatis personae and texts; for example, Whiskitoddikos appears as a high priest in 'Ixion Rewheel'd' (1874), and 'The Rise and Fall of Richard III, or, A New Front to an Old Dicky' (1868) contains the lines: '
I can look back on several ginny-rations, 

... my ancestors, they never fought 

With greater spirit than at A-gin-court. 

' Burnand's real superiority, however, lay in his invention of absurdly funny 'stage business'. Unfortunately he had little sense of form, his dramatic structures being loosely supplied by the works he parodied or adapted. For example, his best burlesques, 'The Latest Edition of Black-Eyed Susan' (1866) and 'Dora and Diplunacy' (1878) were based on very popular serious plays. Egotistically he asserted that he merely imitated Shakespeare in appropriating sources. His best comedy, 'The Colonel' (1881), was a farcical adaptation of Morris Barnett's 'The Serious Family', itself taken from 'Le mari a la campagne', both satirizing religious mania. He turned the subject to the aesthetic movement, which 'Punch' was then heavily attacking, and pitted a fake professor of 'aesthetics' against a practical American colonel. The play ran for 550 performances, continued in the provinces for years, and was performed privately before Queen Victoria. 
As a librettist Burnand had one lasting success in 'Cox and Box', with music by Arthur Sullivan, first given by amateurs (1866, 1867) and then professionally at the Gallery of Illustration, London (1869). Still performed in the twentieth century, this musical triumveretta was based on John Maddison Morton's farce 'Box and Cox' (1847). In 1867 Burnand and Sullivan also collaborated on the moderately successful 'The Contrabandista' and in 1870 on 'The Miller and his Men', a Christmas extravaganza for amateurs. These early works convinced Burnand that he, not W. S. Gilbert, should have been Sullivan's librettist. His jealousy led to antagonistic reviews of Gilbert in 'Punch', but when at last Burnand revised 'The Contrabandista' for Sullivan to set as 'The Chieftain' in 1894, it ran for only ninety-seven performances despite first-night enthusiasm and 'Punch's' adulatory review. His last libretto, 'His Majesty' (1897), a collaboration, with music by Sir Alexander Mackenzie, was a failure. His work on 'Punch', rather than his dramatic output, earned him a knighthood in 1902. By that time he had lost interest in practical editorship and left it to a deputy. An attempt had been made to replace him as early as 1891, but he was not forced into unwilling retirement until 1906. After a winter of bronchitis he died unexpectedly at his home, 18 Royal Crescent, Ramsgate, Kent, on 21 April 1917, and on 25 April he was buried in the cemetery attached to St Augustine's Abbey church there. He was survived by his second wife, who died in 1924. 


@@@@@


doc= 32184


Burne, Sir Owen Tudor (1837-1909), army officer and administrator in India, was born at Plymouth on 12 April 1837, the eleventh of the nineteen children of the Revd Henry Thomas Burne (1799-1865), and his wife, Knightley Goodman (1805-1878), daughter of Captain Marriott, Royal Horse Guards. In 1835 his father had converted from the Church of England to the Holy Catholic Apostolic church, founded by Edward Irving, in which faith his children were brought up. His eldest brother was Colonel Henry Burne, and another brother, Douglas, was manager of the Bank of Bengal. 
Burne was educated at home by his father, and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was commissioned in the 20th (East Devonshire) regiment (later the Lancashire Fusiliers) on 15 May 1855, and served for several months at its depot at Parkhurst on the Isle of Wight before joining his regiment in the Crimea, in charge of a draft of 200 recruits, on 3 April 1856, following the cessation of hostilities. In June he returned home, and after a year at Aldershot, on 5 August 1857, embarked for India to assist in suppressing the uprising there. After it landed at Calcutta, in November 1857, his regiment was sent to Oudh to deal with mutinous Sepoys gathered between Benares and Lucknow. As Burne had learnt Hindustani aboard ship, he was given a staff appointment as brigade major to Brigadier Evelegh, commanding a brigade in the 4th infantry division (Brigadier Franks). Burne first saw action on 19 February 1858 at Chanda, near Sultanpur in Oudh, where several artillery pieces were captured from the enemy; after several difficult engagements, on 4 March his division joined Sir Colin Campbell's army besieging Lucknow, which was held in strength by the rebels. His brigade was initially deployed under heavy fire in outworks near the Dilkusha palace on the outskirts of the city, where it was exposed to a heavy fire. For a feat of gallantry on 11 March, when Burne carried out a dangerous reconnaissance mission to discover the whereabouts of units deployed on the flanks of his brigade and during which he rallied some shaken Nepalese troops, he was unsuccessfully recommended for promotion and for the Victoria Cross. When the 4th division attacked the 'kaisarbagh' and 'imambara', the keys of the enemy's position, on 14 March, Burne was brigade major of the attacking column, and was one of the first to enter the gate of the heavily defended 'kaisarbagh'. Until Lucknow fell on 21 March Burne participated in the heavy fighting in the city. On 10 April 1858 he was promoted lieutenant and served with Evelegh's brigade, engaged in clearing the country near Lucknow of rebels in spite of widespread outbreaks of cholera and the intense heat. Burne later rejoined as adjutant the 20th regiment, which now formed part of Sir John Campbell's field force operating in northern Oudh. He served in 1859 as a staff officer with Brigadier Holdich's column in the final operations in Oudh under Sir James Hope Grant's command. Burne was mentioned in dispatches on several occasions, received the medal with clasp for Lucknow, and was later promoted captain (9 August 1864) and brevet major (January 1865) for his services in the uprising. 
Burne's efficiency as adjutant while the 20th (East Devonshire) regiment was stationed at Goudah greatly impressed Sir Hugh Rose, the commander-in-chief in India, when he inspected the regiment on 14 December 1860. Despite his low rank Burne was unexpectedly appointed Rose's military secretary the following spring. Although this appointment was later confirmed in England, as a result of friction between the duke of Cambridge, the commander-in-chief there, and Rose over the choice of such a junior officer, Burne resigned his post at the end of 1862; he was instead appointed Rose's private secretary. He occupied this post during the debate about reconstruction of the Indian army following the uprising of 1857, and participated in various consultations between Rose and Lord Canning. During these deliberations Burne demonstrated his administrative ability and detailed knowledge of the military profession. Burne accompanied Rose when he returned to England at the end of his tenure as commander-in-chief in India, and then to his new command in Ireland where he became one of his aides-de-camp. For his assistance in suppressing the 1867 Fenian conspiracy Burne received the thanks of the government. On 20 November 1867 he married Evelyne, daughter of Francis William Browne, fourth baron of Kilmaine; the couple had three sons and two daughters. His first wife died on 22 April 1878 and on 9 August 1883 he married Lady Agnes Charlotte Douglas, youngest daughter of the nineteenth earl of Morton. 
Burne returned to India in December 1868 as private secretary to Lord Mayo, the newly appointed viceroy, with whom he enjoyed a close friendship and whose political views he shared. Burne was with Mayo during a visit to the Andaman Islands when on 6 February 1872 the viceroy was assassinated by an Afridi convict. He briefly remained at Calcutta as private secretary to Lord Napier and Ettrick, governor of Madras, who temporarily acted as viceroy, but departed for England when Lord Northbrook arrived in May 1872. 
On 1 June 1872 Burne was created a CSI and early in August he visited Queen Victoria at Osborne on the Isle of Wight, to give a personal report on the exact details of Mayo's death. Also in August he was appointed to the new post of political aide-de-camp to the duke of Argyll, secretary of state for India. His duties included overseeing all visiting Indian dignitaries and embassies and advising the India Office generally on its dealings with the Indian people. In the summer of 1873 he assisted Sir Henry Rawlinson in entertaining the shah of Persia during his visit to England. In April 1874 Burne was appointed assistant secretary to the foreign department of the India Office, which was generally responsible for overseeing British India's external relations, both in Asia and in Europe. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 16 July, and in October succeeded Sir John Kaye as secretary and head of the foreign department. In this capacity he wielded considerable personal influence, and he closely consulted with the marquess of Salisbury, secretary of state for India, on central Asian and Afghan questions. 
Burne returned to India in April 1876, and served for two years as private secretary to Lord Lytton, the new viceroy. The successful ceremonial proclamation of Queen Victoria as empress of India at the imperial assemblage at Delhi on 1 January 1877 was in large part due to Burne's work, although he was primarily interested in Afghan and central Asian policy. A year later, on 1 January 1878, Burne was created a CIE. He returned to England shortly afterwards as his wife was ill. Lytton wrote to him: 'You have done for me, and been to me, all that one man could have done or been.' Burne returned once again to the India Office in February and was promoted KCSI in July 1879; shortly afterwards he reached the rank of colonel. From 1879 he regularly contributed to 'The Times', as well as writing several magazine articles and books on British India. In 1880 Burne helped negotiate a highly satisfactory settlement for the Indian exchequer with the nawab nazim of Bengal, and supervised the affairs of Maharaja Duleep Singh. Burne joined the Council of India -- an advisory body to the secretary of state composed of men with extensive experience of the subcontinent -- in December 1876, and was promoted major-general in 1886. In 1894 he retired from the army, although he continued to work, and served as vice-president of the Council of India in 1895 and 1896. He finally retired from this post on 31 December 1896, when he was also made a GCIE. 
Following his retirement, Burne was busily occupied in various philanthropic, mercantile, and other public work, acting as chairman of the council of the Society of Arts (1896-7) and as a member of the advisory committee of the Board of Trade (1903). He died after a long illness at his home, 132 Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale, London, on 3 February 1909. He was buried with military honours six days later at the priory church, Christchurch, Hampshire. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32185


Burnell, Charles Desborough (1876-1969), oarsman, was born at Notting Hill, London, on 13 January 1876, the only child of George Edward Burnell, stockbroker, of Notting Hill, and his wife, Harriet Desborough. He was educated at Eton College and Magdalen College, Oxford, before becoming senior partner in the stockbroking firm of Wise and Burnell. A giant of a man, he showed exceptional promise as a schoolboy oarsman and won the ladies' plate at Henley royal regatta in 1894; at Oxford he was a member of four consecutive winning crews in the Oxford-Cambridge boat race from 1895 to 1898. In 1896 conditions for the race were appalling and Oxford, having lost the toss, chose to tuck in behind Cambridge rather than attempt to race alongside them on the outside of the Hammersmith bend. Though they were at one time a length and a half behind, they overlapped at Barnes Bridge and then, forcing Cambridge out into the rougher water, won by two-fifths of a length, at that time the closest finish in the history of the race except for the 1877 dead heat. 
Burnell won the Grand Challenge Cup each year from 1898 to 1901, rowing for his college in 1899 and for Leander on the other occasions. In all but the last of those four years he also won the stewards' challenge cup, the premier prize for coxless fours. Still in Leander colours, he won the Cork international eights in 1902 and 1903. He was persuaded to come out of retirement to join the Leander eight which represented Great Britain in the 1908 Olympic regatta at Henley-on-Thames; the eight beat Belgium in the final to win the gold medal -- a feat equalled by Burnell's son Richard Desborough [Dickie] Burnell (1917-1995) ['see under 'Bushnell, Bertram Harold Thomas (1921-2010)], also at Henley, in the 1948 Olympics. Don (as Burnell was called by rowing men) used to say that in the fully forward position he rubbed the outside of his shoulders against the inside of his knees, an extraordinary illustration of how widely styles differ. Steve Fairbairn, the ultimate advocate of the unorthodox, once described Burnell as the best oarsman he had ever seen. 
After the First World War, in 1919 Burnell was elected a steward of the royal regatta; he joined the committee of management the following year and umpired at the regatta for over forty years. He umpired the university boat race from 1927 to 1930 and was president of Leander and of the Henley Rowing Club: he held the latter office until his death. 
Burnell joined the London rifle brigade as a territorial in 1894 and retired with the rank of major in 1913. After rejoining the army on the outbreak of war, as a captain, he commanded a company in France and was wounded at the second battle of Ypres and on other occasions. He commanded the 1st battalion of the regiment between 1917 and 1919, was twice mentioned in dispatches, and appointed DSO (1919) for services in France and Flanders. During the Second World War he served as a major in the upper Thames patrol of the Home Guard. He played a major part in local government, initially as vice-chairman of Walton and Weybridge urban district council and for over thirty years as chairman of the Wokingham rural district council. He became a JP in 1934 and was deputy lieutenant of the county of Berkshire in 1936. He was appointed OBE in 1954 for services in Berkshire. 
Burnell married in 1903 Jessie Backhouse (1877-1966), daughter of Dr Frederick Thomas Hulke. They had two sons and two daughters. One daughter, Mary Balding, was appointed MBE in 1978. One of Burnell's grandsons (Peter, the son of Richard) gained an Oxford blue in 1962. The family was only the fourth to have had a father, son, and grandson row in the university boat race, all for Oxford. A special parade was held in the Guildhall, London, in 1964 'to mark the seventieth anniversary of his entry into the London rifle brigade and as a token of the universal esteem in which he is held'. Burnell died at Blewbury, Berkshire, on 3 October 1969. 
Desmond Hill', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32186


Burnet, John (1863-1928), Greek scholar, was born at Edinburgh on 9 December 1863, the eldest child of John Burnet, advocate, and his wife, Jessie, daughter of Dr James Cleghorn Kay RN. He was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, and was also for a few months at a school near Geneva. In October 1880 he matriculated at the University of Edinburgh, where he pursued the study of Latin and Greek, and began that of Sanskrit. He won there the Vans Dunlop scholarship in classics, and a little later the first open classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford. After paying a short visit to Paris, where he attended lectures at the Sorbonne and the College de France, Burnet went into residence at Oxford in October 1883. There, besides being placed in the first class in classical moderations (1884) and in 'literae humaniores' (1887), he won the Taylorian scholarship in French (1885) and was 'proxime accessit' for the Boden scholarship in Sanskrit. While he was an undergraduate he preferred to follow his own lines of study, even at the risk of leaving considerable gaps in the conventional programme of preparation for the final examinations. Like many of his contemporaries he was specially influenced by Richard Lewis Nettleship, but he showed no particular interest in philosophy. 
Burnet's first attempt to win a fellowship was not successful, and he left Oxford in 1887 in order to become private assistant to Lewis Campbell, professor of Greek at the University of St Andrews. With his work there under Campbell began his lifelong concern with the philosophy of Plato. Campbell was a pioneer in the attempt to determine, largely upon 'stylometric' considerations, the chronological order of the Platonic dialogues, and Burnet became convinced not only of the rightness of Campbell's methods, but of the correctness in the main of the results attained by them. After five months at St Andrews he made a brief trial of teaching at Harrow School (1888), but did not find the work congenial. Fortunately, he was soon after elected to a prize fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, and entered into residence there in 1889. The leisure which the position gave him was employed in increasing his knowledge of Aristotle, partly under the guidance of Ingram Bywater, and in planning a commentary on the 'Nicomachean Ethics', which he did not complete until considerably later (1899). 
After some temporary teaching posts at the universities of Edinburgh and St Andrews in 1890 and 1891, Burnet was elected professor of Greek at the latter university in 1891 upon the resignation of Campbell, and occupied the chair there until he resigned it in 1926. He married in 1894 Mary, daughter of John Farmer, organist at Harrow and at Balliol College; they had one daughter. He lived and worked at St Andrews until his death. From the time of a grave illness in 1923 his health grew worse in spite of occasional rallies. In 1926 he was able to fulfil an engagement to deliver the Sather lectures in classical literature in the University of California (published in 1928 under the title 'Platonism'); but the summer heat of Chicago, where he also lectured, exhausted his strength, and on his return to St Andrews he was unable to continue his work as professor. He died at St Andrews on 26 May 1928; he was survived by his wife. 
During the whole tenure of his chair Burnet proved himself an exceptionally inspiring and successful teacher by his striking personality and his command of his whole subject, winning the affectionate admiration of generations of his students. He took a large part in the work of university administration. He had a wide knowledge of the systems of higher education in other countries, and held clear and firm views upon the proper methods of its organization. He occupied several important posts upon educational committees and boards, and was active in promoting the popularization of humanistic culture in Scotland through the Classical Association of Scotland, which he helped to found. His services to education were not diminished by his occasional failures to secure the adoption of some of the policies which he advocated. 
To the world of scholarship in the narrower sense Burnet's greatest contribution was his critical edition, in the 'Oxford Classical Texts' series, of the whole text of the works of Plato (1900-08; rev. 1905-13); this superseded all previous editions. It was based on a wide foundation of the manuscript evidence, and guided by a close knowledge of Platonic vocabulary, idiom, and style. Burnet's judgements on disputed points were sober and sane, and the text was fairly conservative. More detailed work on the textual transmission has, however, revealed some shortcomings in the edition, not all of which can legitimately be counted against him. His commentaries on the 'Phaedo' (1911), 'Euthyphro', 'Apology', and 'Crito' (1924) were models of conciseness and lucidity, full of original observations upon Platonic usages. He designed a new 'Lexicon Platonicum', but although he laboured at it, did not proceed far in its construction. His commentary on Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics' contained much that was fresh and enlightening, but his work on Aristotle, of whose philosophy he never acquired the same wide and intimate knowledge as he had of Plato's, perhaps scarcely reaches the same level as his work on Plato. 
In his 'Early Greek Philosophy' (1892; rev. edn, 1908; 4th edn, 1945) Burnet did not carry his detailed study down beyond Aristotle, and indeed he gave no systematic account of the philosophy of Aristotle. On the other hand, he several times revised and restated his views on the pre-Socratics, withdrawing some of his more venturesome speculations, but repeating his general results in a form which won the acceptance of most scholars. In his account of these thinkers he keeps steadily in view and vividly expresses the historic background of their lives and thoughts. For the English reader he superseded previous accounts, and effectively removed the misleading veil which had been cast over them by Hegel and the Hegelians. He utilized the contributions to this work of correction and interpretation made by Tannery, Baeumker, and Diels, but his agreement with them is the result of his own independent investigation of the evidence. 
Burnet's 'Greek Philosophy: Part I, Thales to Plato' (1914) adds to a summary statement of his views on these early cosmological thinkers an equally original account of the sophists, Socrates, and Democritus. But its most valuable part is its masterly account of the life, character, and whole philosophy of Plato. It is brilliantly written, and was in its day incomparably the best treatment in English of its subject. Burnet accepts as trustworthy evidence for the career and thought of Plato most of the letters, and assumes as now ascertained facts the dates of composition of most of the dialogues. In his account of the development of Plato's thought he draws a firm line between a Socratic period and a later period in which Plato is expounding his own philosophy; and he attributes to Plato a consciousness and acknowledgement of his passage from discipleship to independence. But his view of the historical Socrates as the source of fundamental Platonic doctrines concerning 'separate forms' and 'recollection' has been challenged. He regards Plato as in his later works criticizing his master's teaching on physics, theory of knowledge, metaphysics, and politics. 
Burnet's title to the fame which his work enjoys both at home and abroad rests securely upon his inspiring force as a teacher, upon his edition of the text of Plato, upon his classic and convincing account of the beginnings of Greek science and philosophy, upon his minute acquaintance with and vivid sense of the niceties of Platonic vocabulary and idiom, upon his long and deeply meditated presentation of the philosophy of Plato, whom he admired and loved above all writers and thinkers, and upon the freshness of view and the distinction of style which mark all his writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 32187


Burnet, Sir John James (1857-1938), architect, was born in Glasgow on 31 March 1857, the youngest of the three sons of John Burnet (1814-1901), a successful architect, and his formidable wife, Elizabeth Hay Bennet. He was educated at the Western Academy, Glasgow, and at Blair Lodge. In 1874 he joined the atelier of Jean-Louis Pascal in Paris and in 1875 was the first of several Glasgow architects to enrol at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts. He gained the Diplome du Gouvernement in 1877 and toured Italy thereafter. On his return he won the competition for the Glasgow Institute of Fine Art with a sophisticated design combining 'Greek with modern French Renaissance'. It demonstrated the absolute mastery of plan and elevation, the precise stonecutting, and the love of sculpture which were to distinguish almost all his work. 
In 1882 Burnet's father took him into partnership. Four years later another Pascal 'eleve', John Archibald Campbell (1859-1909), rejoined them, and the firm became Burnet, Son, and Campbell: the work of the two younger partners was to remain indistinguishable until Campbell set up on his own in 1897. The major works of these earlier years were all very Beaux-Arts in style: the Clyde Navigation Trust (1883-6), the Athenaeum (1886), Charing Cross Mansions (1891), all in Glasgow, and the Edinburgh International Exhibition of 1886. But in 1891 at Glasgow's Athenaeum Theatre Burnet began introducing the American elevator building types which were to be copied by others throughout central Glasgow, and moved into a Norman Shaw type of neo-baroque. American and Shaw influences had already been in evidence in his domestic work, notably at Kilneiss, Moniaive, Dumfriesshire (1884), and Corrienessan, Loch Ard, Perthshire (1887). 
Burnet's Gothic work was also of exceptional quality: his tall first-pointed Barony Church, Glasgow (1886-99), was among the finest of the period. More innovative, however, were the low-profiled, rather American churches with broad unbuttressed towers, sweeping roofs, and mixed late Gothic and Romanesque motifs first introduced at St Molio's, Shiskine, Arran, in 1886, the finest of which was the Gardner Memorial at Brechin, Forfarshire, built ten years later. In the same period Burnet designed several buildings at Glasgow University and the associated Western Infirmary, mostly in a Scottish Renaissance idiom, for which he was rewarded with the honorary degree of LLD in 1910. In 1913 the university commissioned its tall and magnificent chapel, built as its war memorial in 1923-7. 
In 1896 Burnet made the first of several visits to the United States of America (where his brother-in-law James Marwick had useful connections in Illinois and New York), primarily to study laboratory and hospital design. It quickly had wider consequences: his reconstruction of his father's Savings Bank, Glasgow (1898), continuing a programme of aggrandizement begun with the superb banking hall of 1894, reflected his acquaintance with Charles Follen McKim; but his subsequent seven-storey commercial blocks, Atlantic Chambers and Waterloo Chambers (both 1899) and the McGeoch warehouse (1904-6), all in Glasgow, were pioneer buildings of their kind in Britain and demonstrated a wider range of influences, particularly those of Daniel Burnham and Louis Sullivan. These were followed by two Edinburgh department stores, the Civil Service and Professional Supply (1903-7) and Forsyths (1906-10), the latter of which was the first Scottish building to be fully steel-framed. All of these were vigorously neo-baroque in style, with deeply shadowed eaves galleries. They launched the careers of a number of important sculptors, notably George Frampton, Albert Hodge, Phyllis Archibald, William Reid Dick, and Archibald Dawson. 
Burnet's domestic commissions of the late 1880s, 1890s, and early 1900s were mostly terraced houses, principally in his University Gardens, Glasgow (from 1887), or remodellings of existing houses, notably Carronvale, Larbert, Stirlingshire (1897), and Finlaystone, Port Glasgow, Renfrewshire (1898-1903), both with sumptuous interiors. The three large houses he built completely anew -- Garmoyle, Dumbarton, and Baronald, Lanark (both 1889-90), and Fairnilee, Selkirk (1904-6) -- were in an innovative early seventeenth-century Scottish manner: Garmoyle anticipated Lorimer in its arts and crafts masonry. At the Marine Hotel, Elie, Fife (1903), however, an asymmetrically gabled Anglo-American arts and crafts idiom was adopted. At Duart, Mull, Argyll (1911-16), the ancient fortress was re-roofed and skilfully adapted within its existing profile for Sir Fitzroy MacLean. 
In 1903-4 the office of works and the trustees of the British Museum selected Burnet to design the Edward VII galleries. Burnet's scheme adopted the Ionic order of Sir Robert Smirke's colonnades but reflected contemporary French and American Beaux-Arts ideas. His giant colonnade of twenty attached columns stretched between pylons demonstrated every possible 'subtlety of varying diameter, intercolumniation, and inclination of verticals' to achieve absolute refinement and repose (W. H. Godfrey, quoted in J. Mordaunt Crook, 'The British Museum', 1972, 214). Within, the stair was unmatched for its scale and originality. The completion of the galleries in 1914 brought Burnet a knighthood and the bronze medal of the Paris Salon, followed by the gold in 1922; the Royal Institute of British Architects conferred on him its royal gold medal in 1923. In parallel with this cascade of honours Burnet, who had been an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy since 1893, was elected Royal Scottish Academician in 1914, associate of the Royal Academy in 1921, and Royal Academician in 1925. 
To build the Edward VII galleries Burnet had established a London office in 1905, taking with him Thomas Smith Tait and recruiting a trusted former assistant, the classical scholar David Theodore Fyfe. The Glasgow office continued separately, from 1909 in partnership with the Paris-trained Norman Aitken Dick (1883-1948). The major London commissions of the pre-war years were the baroque General Accident Building, Aldwych (1909-11), and the classical modern Kodak Building, Kingsway (1910-11), in the latter of which Tait had a hand, and which set the pattern for a great many inter-war commercial buildings. Kodak showed the influence of the American architect Albert Kahn, even more strongly reflected in Glasgow at the Wallace Scott Tailoring Institute of 1913-22. 
Tait was taken into partnership after the war. Together Burnet and Tait did much work for the Imperial War Graves Commission in the Middle East, notably at Port Taufiq, Cape Helles, Gallipoli, and Jerusalem. In London they designed the very American Adelaide House, London Bridge (1921-5), the modern French classical Vigo House, Regent Street (1920-25), and the more conservatively Corinthian Lloyds Bank, Cornhill (1925-7), and Unilever House (1929-32). Burnet exercised tighter design control in Glasgow, notably at the city's war memorial, the university's zoology building (1923), and the giant American palazzo of the North British and Mercantile Company (1925-7). In 1926 he was appointed to the original international jury for the League of Nations Building: he voted for the Roman architect Giuseppe Vago. The second jury (1927-9) voted for the design by Burnet's friend and mentor at Pascal's, Henri-Paul Nenot, but appointed him in association with Vago and two other prize-winners, Carlo Broggi and Camille Lefevre; Nenot consulted with Burnet on the radically revised design which resulted from this complex arrangement. 
In person Burnet was a courteous Frenchified Scot with a firm belief in the Beaux-Arts 'essentials' and 'classics', and his international outlook was reflected in numerous corresponding memberships. The last decades of his life, and that of his wife, Jean Watt (1864-1949), the daughter of Sir James David Marwick, whom he had married on 18 February 1886, were somewhat difficult. Although possessed of great charm, Lady Burnet was a hypochondriac, and the couple had no children. Burnet suffered acutely from eczema and had to wear a skull-cap and gloves. War, perfectionism, a major theft of sums held on behalf of contractors, and a structural error (the last two both in the Glasgow office) had seriously damaged his finances when ill health obliged him to retire in 1930. Thereafter he moved to Woodhall Cottage, Woodhall Road, Colinton, Edinburgh, where he died on 2 July 1938. He was cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 5 July 1938. His wife survived him. A bronze bust of Burnet by Sir William Reid Dick is in the possession of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 32188


Burnett, Sir Charles Stuart (1882-1945), air force officer, was born at Brown's Valley, Minnesota, United States of America, on 3 April 1882, the second of the four sons of John Alexander Burnett (1852-1935), a landowner, of Kemnay, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Charlotte Susan, 'nee' Gordon (died 1925). Admiral Sir Robert Lindsay Burnett was his younger brother. After attending Bedford School, at the age of seventeen Burnett enlisted to fight in the South African War, claiming to be a year older than he was. He joined the 8th company of the imperial yeomanry, from which he was discharged in 1901 to enable him to take a commission in the Highland light infantry. He was then employed with the imperial yeomanry once more, before secondment in 1904 to the West African Frontier Force; he fought in Northern Nigeria, and was twice mentioned in dispatches. In October 1907 he was promoted lieutenant, but resigned his commission in 1909 to run a small retail business in Portuguese Guinea. This venture was not particularly successful, and Burnett entered government service in 1911, serving as the assistant resident in Northern Nigeria. 
On the outbreak of the First World War Burnett rejoined the army, but not with his old regiment, choosing instead to become a member of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC). He qualified as a pilot in November 1914, and before his first posting married, on 30 November, Sybil Maud Pack-Beresford ('b'. 1882/3), whose previous marriage had been dissolved; she was the daughter of John Bell, an ironmaster of Saltburn, Yorkshire. Burnett was sent to 17 squadron in the Middle East, and in February 1915 became a flight commander. Command of a squadron followed in April 1916, this time with 12 squadron in France. Promotion to temporary lieutenant-colonel in October 1917 saw Burnett take command of the RFC's fifth wing in Palestine. Burnett was appointed to the Distinguished Service Order following the capture of Jerusalem in December 1917, and was made a CBE in 1919. He was offered, and accepted, a permanent commission as a wing commander in the Royal Air Force. 
In 1920 Burnett commanded the RAF in Iraq, then returned to the United Kingdom the following year for a variety of appointments, beginning as station commander, with the rank of group captain, at RAF Leuchars. A spell at the Air Ministry as deputy director of operations and intelligence was followed by command of the Central Flying School for two years from January 1927. Once this posting was completed, Burnett returned to Iraq for another two years' duty, this time as the senior staff officer in the country, leading a return flight from Basrah to Muscat, in flying boats, in May 1929. In January 1931 he was again in the United Kingdom to take up the position of director of operations and intelligence at the Air Ministry, at the same time becoming deputy chief of the air staff. Promotion to air vice-marshal followed in July 1931, but his time in Britain was relatively brief, since in November 1932 he was sent to become air officer commanding, British forces in Iraq. The period was marked by the need to suppress various tribal incursions near Kuwait, during the course of which Burnett was wounded. He returned to Britain in 1935, taking command of the Inland Area. A major reorganization of the RAF in 1936 saw the Inland Area become Training Command: Burnett was promoted air marshal in January 1936 and became air officer commanding-in-chief in May 1936, when he received a knighthood (KCB). As the threat from Hitler's Germany increased, the demands placed upon Training Command were notable. Burnett was posted out of that key position in July 1939, when he was made inspector-general of the RAF. 
By the outbreak of war Burnett's health had declined, and he was due for retirement; this was postponed as a result of events in Australia. The Australian prime minister, Robert Menzies, decided that a British officer should take over as chief of the air staff of the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). After some discussions with the British government, it was agreed to appoint Burnett to this post, in the rank of air chief marshal. The decision to appoint a British officer ahead of an Australian one was particularly controversial, and this did not help Burnett's cause. Many members of the RAAF were openly resentful of his appointment, and Burnett's actions while in post were the source of some controversy later. 
Burnett saw his prime task as being to increase the ability of the RAAF to provide aircrew to the RAF. He sought to do this through the medium of the empire air training scheme. The scheme was enormously successful in producing trained aircrew, but proved controversial. Many Australians felt that the scheme would undermine their nation's identity. Burnett was not persuaded, however, taking the view that victory in Europe demanded the exploitation of the whole British empire; as a result, he set about creating a structure that would produce 50,000 men by March 1943. The focus on Europe meant that the RAAF was lacking in numbers when facing the threat of invasion by the Japanese. 
This situation did little to commend Burnett to the newly appointed Australian minister for air, A. S. Drakeford, and their relationship was particularly stormy. Burnett's proposed major organizational changes to the RAAF, most notably the abolition of the RAAF's air board, proved to be too much for the Australian government, and Burnett was replaced in May 1942 as the threat from the Japanese increased. Despite the criticisms levelled against him, Burnett had overseen an enormous expansion in the strength of the RAAF -- the service had just 3489 men before the start of the war, while by the time of Burnett's departure there were nearly 80,000 service personnel. This achievement has been largely overshadowed by the controversial nature of Burnett's tenure. Not only was he imposed upon the RAAF when it appeared that equally capable Australian alternatives existed, but Burnett's focus upon the empire air training scheme has added to the generally ambivalent -- and sometimes hostile -- attitude towards him in histories of the RAAF. 
After his departure, Burnett was placed on the retired list, as had been planned, but in 1943 he was recalled to duty as the commandant of the Air Training Corps. He continued to serve the air force, even though his health was declining. On 9 April 1945 he died of coronary thrombosis while in the Princess Mary Hospital at Halton Camp, Wendover, Buckinghamshire. He was survived by his wife and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 32189


Burnett, Sir Robert Lindsay (1887-1959), naval officer, was born at Old Deer, Aberdeenshire, on 22 July 1887, the fourth son of John Alexander Burnett, of Kemnay, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Charlotte Susan, daughter of Arthur Forbes Gordon, of Rayne, Aberdeenshire. Sir Charles Stuart Burnett, air chief marshal, was an elder brother. At the early age of seven he announced his intention of joining the navy, and after education at Bedford School and Eastman's he entered the 'Britannia' in 1903. His academic progress was undistinguished, but he showed great promise as an all-round athlete, and after reaching the rank of lieutenant in 1910 he qualified as a physical training instructor. In the ensuing eight years he served mainly in small ships, saw action in the Heligoland bight and at the Dogger Bank engagement, gained his first command (a torpedo boat) in 1915, and subsequently went on to command destroyers with the Grand Fleet until 1918. In 1915 he married Ethel Constance, the daughter of R. H. Shaw. They had no children. 
With subsequently only one break of two years in command of a sloop on the South Africa station, Burnett was continually employed until 1928 in physical training appointments, being promoted commander in 1923 while acting as secretary to the Sports Control Board. He did much in this period towards reorganizing the physical training branch of the navy. He himself also won the sabre championship at the royal tournament and became a qualified referee for association and rugby football, hockey, water polo, and boxing. In addition, he developed his admirable bent as a producer of amateur theatricals. 
Burnett gained his second selective promotion, to captain, in December 1930 at the conclusion of a successful commission as executive officer of the 'Rodney'. In the ensuing eleven years in that rank he commanded a destroyer flotilla on the China station, did two years as the director of physical training and sports, commanded the cruiser flagship of the South African squadron, and finally was appointed commodore of the royal naval barracks at Chatham in 1939, where he had the arduous task of mobilizing the personnel of the east country manning port for war. 
Although Burnett himself had more than once in his time as a captain expressed surprise at his progressive promotions, his superiors fully appreciated his zeal, energy, and ability, and after only eighteen months at Chatham he was specially promoted to the acting rank of rear-admiral in November 1940 (confirmed two months later) on appointment as flag officer of the Home Fleet mine-laying squadron engaged on the hazardous task of laying the deep minefield in northern waters. On completion of this task in 1942 he became flag officer, Home Fleet destroyer flotillas, and a year later flag officer, 10th cruiser squadron, continuing in this appointment on promotion to vice-admiral (1943) until he left the fleet in mid-1944 to become the commander-in-chief, south Atlantic, responsible for the security of the sea route round the Cape. 
It was especially during those fateful years of 1941 to 1944, when a hard-pressed Royal Navy faced its greatest challenge, that Burnett rendered outstanding service and played a leading part in the saga of the Arctic convoys, when the enemy could choose its own time and place at which to bring superior force to bear upon the lifeline to Russia. These circumstances called for the physical endurance, capable leadership, and readiness to fight back whatever the odds which Burnett notably possessed. His indomitable spirit and simple philosophy of immediate aggressive tactics inspired others and gained for him the trust and loyalty of those who served under him in the course of these exhausting operations to reach north Russia and return. 
There were occasions on which Burnett's determination was particularly put to the test. In September 1942 he fought a convoy of forty ships through in the face of four days of sustained submarine and massed air attack for a loss of thirteen merchantmen, and then saw the returning empty convoy back. On new year's eve 1942, in the Barents Sea, his covering force of two cruisers finally managed to reach another convoy with such an offensive impact that the greatly superior enemy surface force retired in disorder and the merchant ships reached port unscathed. On Boxing day a year later, off North Cape, again in midwinter, he so skilfully handled his covering force of three cruisers that the 'Scharnhorst' was twice forced to turn back from the convoy without achieving any success, and was finally delivered up to destruction by the commander-in-chief's flagship. 
Burnett was promoted admiral in 1946 and in the following year took up his last appointment, the Plymouth command, which he held for three years, being placed on the retired list in May 1950. He was subsequently chairman of the White Fish Authority for four years. 
Throughout his service Burnett was sustained by a firm religious belief from which he got much help and comfort, and he expected others to try to measure up to his own high moral standards and example of officer-like behaviour and appearance. He loved the navy, was easily moved to emotion, and was a first-class speaker in a manner which carried conviction. He died suddenly at 116 Pall Mall, Westminster, London, on 2 July 1959, his wife surviving him. 
During his career he was successively appointed OBE (1925), CB (1942), to the DSO (1943), KBE (1944), KCB and CStJ (1945), and GBE (1950). He received an honorary LLD from Aberdeen (1944) and high orders from the Soviet Union, Greece, and the Netherlands. 
A. W. Clarke', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32190


Stuart, Sir John Theodosius Burnett- (1875-1958), army officer, was born in Cirencester on 14 March 1875, the eldest of the four sons of Eustace Robertson Burnett-Stuart, a soldier, of Dens and Crichie, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Carlotta Jane, daughter of J. Lambert of Cottingham, Yorkshire. He was educated at Repton School and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was commissioned in the rifle brigade in 1895 and served with the Tochi field force on the north-west frontier of India (1897-8). He subsequently served in the South African War (1899-1902), where he was mentioned in dispatches and was awarded the DSO. Promoted captain, Burnett-Stuart served with the 4th battalion of his regiment in Egypt. He graduated from the staff college in 1904 and was posted to the War Office in the directorate of military operations. In the same year he married Nina, only daughter of Major A. A. C. Hibbert Nelson; they had one son and two daughters. In 1910 he was seconded to the New Zealand military forces as director of organization but two years later returned to Britain as instructor GSO2 at Staff College, Camberley. 
During the First World War, Jock Stuart, the name by which Burnett-Stuart was familiarly known, held several staff appointments. He was promoted brigadier-general and made brigadier-general, general staff, of 7th corps under Sir Thomas Snow in February 1916. In the final two years of the war Burnett-Stuart gained a reputation as a talented military strategist and a progressive. In the battle of Cambrai in November 1917 the 7th corps was on the flank of the main attack and played no part in the assault. Burnett-Stuart warned that a German counter-offensive was being mounted, but his warnings were ignored. Thus the German counterstroke penetrated deep into the sector held by the 7th corps, but was eventually halted. A month later Burnett-Stuart was promoted major-general and made deputy adjutant-general at general headquarters, a post he held until the end of the war. Before the war ended he demonstrated his vision of a modern fighting force by supporting the army's director of training, Major-General Sir Charles Bonham-Carter, in his drive to ensure that British soldiers were physically fit enough to take part in a modern war. 
In 1920 Burnett-Stuart was sent to India to command the Madras district and was in charge of suppressing the Malabar rising of 1921. Two years later he returned to Britain to be director of military operations and intelligence in the War Office. In 1926 he was given command of the 3rd division in the southern command, with A. P. (later Earl) Wavell as his GSO1. The following year Burnett-Stuart was appointed director of the first experimental mechanized force, which was assembled on Salisbury Plain. He pointed out that the infantry would not be capable of keeping pace with the rest of the force in battle unless they were mounted in armoured cross-country vehicles. During the First World War Burnett-Stuart had been sceptical about the use of tanks, but during the early 1920s he changed his mind. He urged the War Office to allow the appointment of men with modern mechanical expertise to assist him. He wanted 'enthusiastic experts and visionaries' ('DNB') to aid him. One such was Colonel J. F. C. Fuller, chosen to command the new force, who was the outstanding advocate of the need for a highly mobile, mechanized army. However, after exercises in 1928, a decision was taken to disband the armoured force in order to concentrate on the mechanization of infantry and cavalry units. 
From 1931 to 1934 Burnett-Stuart commanded the British troops in Egypt and there began to advocate the possible use of mechanized forces in desert warfare. He was promoted general in 1934 and returned to the southern command (holding that post until April 1938). He was horrified to find how bad the condition of the army was on his return from Egypt: 'the ranks are more depleted than ever, the equipment and armament practically unchanged' (Bond, 53). At this time he became the outstanding advocate of a policy of 'limited liability' towards a military commitment to the continent, and was scornful of the capacity of a British expeditionary force to play an effective role in a European war. The proper purpose of the army, he argued, was to guard the empire and form an imperial reserve. Burnett-Stuart 'boldly and perhaps recklessly as far as his own career was concerned, disseminated these views among his fellow-officers'. He also made them public in several letters to 'The Times' in November 1938 (Bond, 216). 
In 1936 Burnett-Stuart was considered as a successor to Sir Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd as chief of the Imperial General Staff, but he had clashed too often with the latter and was passed over. Although his military career finally stalled, Burnett-Stuart was a colourful figure. In 1936 he admitted that he did not enjoy peacetime soldiering very much: 'what I really like is poetry and shooting partridges, and heraldry, and dry fly fishing' (Bond, 53). In a perceptive but critical assessment published in 1971, B. H. Liddell Hart noted that he was 'a man of sparkling mind, lively imagination, and long if variable vision. He had an impish turn of mind, which handicapped his career but which, together with his informality of manner, made him beloved by his subordinates' ('DNB'). Burnett-Stuart was appointed CB (1917), KCB (1932), and GCB (1937), CMG (1916) and KBE (1923). He died at his home, Avington Park near Winchester, on 6 October 1958, and was buried there on 11 October 1958. Recent studies have demonstrated that, although a fine soldier and a perceptive advocate of the use of armoured forces, Burnett-Stuart possessed a curious mixture of progressive and reactionary traits. He was undoubtedly frustrated by the conservatism of senior officers and the scaling down of Britain's military capability. The paradox was that although he and Liddell Hart 'were prophetically perceptive in pressing for a highly mobile, mechanised Army', they nevertheless 'opposed the European commitment which alone could have justified the creation of such an elite force' (Bond, 338). 


@@@@@


doc= 32191


Burney, Sir (Charles) Dennistoun, second baronet (1888-1968), marine and aeronautical engineer, was born in Bermuda on 28 December 1888, the only son among the three children of Sir Cecil Burney, first baronet (1858-1929), later admiral, and second in command of the Grand Fleet at Jutland, and his wife, Lucinda Marion, second daughter of George Richards Burnett, of London. He received a formal naval education, starting his training at the 'Britannia' in 1903, and joining the battleship 'Exmouth' as midshipman in early 1905. 
Burney joined the destroyer 'Afridi' in 1909, and soon afterwards the 'Crusader', used for experimental work by the anti-submarine committee, of which his father was the first president. Burney became very interested in the experiments then in progress for destroying this, then novel, craft by towing explosive charges. He was also quick to see the potential of another recent invention, the aeroplane, as a means of spotting submarines, and this sparked off his interest in aeronautics. In September 1911 he went on half pay so that he could continue his researches at the Bristol aviation works of Sir George White. His work there was interrupted by appointments to the battleship 'Venerable' and the cruiser 'Black Prince', but in each ship he remained only long enough to apply for half pay and return to Bristol. In August 1912 he commenced a one-year gunnery course, and on its completion the Admiralty allowed him to continue his anti-submarine work and seaplane construction. At this time Burney made the far-reaching suggestion that aircraft fitted with wireless for hunting and attacking submarines should be carried by ships. For this purpose, he and F. S. Barnwell developed at Bristol a seaplane which the Admiralty afforded facilities for trials at Burney's expense, but the outbreak of the First World War halted this work. Seaplanes were indeed used during the war for tracking down submarines. They were fitted with hydrophones (a form of underwater microphone), which allowed them to listen for submerged submarines underway. However, these flimsy craft could be used only in calm weather. 
When the First World War broke out, Burney was given command of the destroyer 'Velox', but soon afterwards he joined the 'Vernon', the Portsmouth torpedo school, where up to that time much of the navy's scientific research and development had taken place. At 'Vernon' he was primarily responsible for the development of the explosive paravane. He was able to make good use of his knowledge of aircraft design, as this device, towed astern, was essentially a small underwater aeroplane, consisting of a torpedo-shaped body fitted with fins and a rudder to keep it at any depth. He described its basic uses in a secret patent taken out in 1915. These included destroying submarines on impact, and cutting the moorings of underwater mines by means of serrated cutters attached to the nose, allowing the mines to be destroyed on the surface. Trials with this device started in the spring of 1915, and in June Burney was appointed to organize a new paravane department at 'Vernon'. In the following year he took out another ten patents dealing with paravanes and associated gear, such as davits and towing cables. In 1920 the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors gave Burney the main credit for this invention, but recommended that, as he had received some $350,000 for patent rights for its use by merchant vessels and abroad, no further payments should be made to him. He had received no payment for the navy's wartime use of this device, but he had been rewarded in the 1917 birthday honours by his appointment as CMG, an honour rarely given to a lieutenant. In 1920 Burney retired from the navy as a lieutenant-commander, and on reaching the age of forty, he was promoted on the retired list to commander. In 1921 he married Gladys, the younger daughter of George Henry High, of Chicago; they had a son. Burney succeeded his father in the baronetcy in 1929. 
After the war, Burney took out a series of patents relating to precast concrete as a building material, and he joined Vickers Ltd as a consultant. He realized that the new developments in aviation held both economic and political implications. Communications in the British empire would be greatly improved by a comprehensive system of air travel: airships to operate the main trunk routes over the oceans; large flying boats for the eastern routes, serving Egypt, India, and the Far East, feeding the trunk routes; and smaller land planes for shorter routes, feeding the flying boats. These ideas were set out in his 'The World, the Air and the Future' (1929), and to further them he entered parliament as a Unionist member for Uxbridge in 1922, and held his seat until 1929. Burney was keen to start his airship service using the German Zeppelins surrendered to Britain at the cessation of hostilities, but these were found to be too corroded. After lengthy negotiations with Vickers and the government, Burney formed the Airship Guarantee Company, appointing Barnes Wallis as chief designer in 1923, and soon after Nevil Shute Norway, who became a novelist, as chief calculator. An order for a new airship, the R.100, was placed with Burney's firm, but the government decided that competition was healthy and put together its own design team at the Air Ministry (consisting mainly of members already discarded by Burney for his board on the advice of Barnes Wallis), to develop the R.101 at the Royal Airship Works at Cardington. This resulted in an unhealthy race between the two projects that eventually ended with the crashing of the R.101 on 5 October 1930 at Beauvais in France, killing forty-eight of the fifty-four people on board, including Lord Thomson, the secretary of state for air who had instituted this project, and the design team. This destroyed the British rigid airship programme for all time. The R.100, which had made a successful acceptance flight to Canada and back in July-August 1930, on which both Burney and Nevil Shute Norway were present, was dismantled in 1931, its valuable remains crushed by a steamroller. 
In the late 1920s Burney designed a streamlined rear-engined saloon car, the prototype of which is in the Montagu motor car museum at Beaulieu. Its novel features were the subject of a number of patents taken out in 1929-33, and included independent suspension and hydraulic brakes. It was supplied with either a six-cylinder Crossley or an eight-cylinder Beverley Barnes engine. The prince of Wales bought one, but at $1500 it was not an economic proposition and very few were sold. In 1933 this unconventional design was taken up by Crossley but they, too, could not make it a commercial success. 
During the Second World War Burney was employed by the War Office on secret experimental work, the scope of which can be surmised by a large number of patents that began to appear in the early 1950s relating to, among other matters, aerial gliding bombs and marine torpedoes with gyroscopically controlled aerofoils, gun-fired rocket projectiles, and a non-recoil gun. After the war, he became interested in improving fishing trawlers. He designed a catamaran trawler, apparatus to facilitate trawling and landing the catch, an otter or 'porpoise' (a kind of paravane) incorporating sonar to detect fish shoals, and plants for freezing fish either on board or ashore. In all, Burney took out more than one hundred patents during the period from 1915 to 1962. Among these were six with Barnes Wallis and one with Wallis and Nevil Shute Norway on aspects of airship design. In 1947, acting for British iron and steel interests, he secured a concession in Northern Rhodesia for iron and coal prospecting, and consequently maintained two homes: one in Rhodesia and the other in Bermuda. 
Burney could be a difficult taskmaster and his relations with his colleagues were sometimes uneasy. One of them described him as 'a man of whom one could believe that no situation could be so awful as actually to daunt him' (private information). He died on 11 November 1968 in Hamilton, Bermuda. His son, Cecil Dennistoun Burney (1923-2002), succeeded to the title. 
W. D. Hackmann', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32192


Burney, Sir Cecil, first baronet (1858-1929), naval officer, was born in Jersey on 15 May 1858, the second son of Captain Charles Burney RN, for many years superintendent of Greenwich Hospital school, and his wife, Catherine Elizabeth, daughter of Charles Jones, of La Ferriere, Jersey. He was educated at the Royal Naval Academy, Gosport, and entered the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in July 1871. He went to sea as a midshipman in October 1873, served for three years in the flagships of the Pacific and American stations, and was promoted sub-lieutenant in October 1877. The next three years were spent in educational courses and in short appointments in the troop ship 'Serapis' and in the royal yacht, from which he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant. He then joined the corvette 'Carysfort', one of the vessels of Lord Clanwilliam's detached squadron, which was afterwards merged into the Mediterranean Fleet during the Egyptian campaign of 1882. This gave Burney an opportunity of war service ashore, and he was in charge of a Gatling gun at the actions of Tell al-Mahuta and Qassasin in August 1882. In the same year he accompanied the mission led by Charles Warren across the desert in order to capture the Arabs who had seized and murdered Professor Edward Henry Palmer, Captain William John Gill, and Lieutenant Harold Charrington; he also took part in the operations against Osman Digna near Suakin in 1884. 
Burney next spent two years in the gunnery schools at Portsmouth and Devonport. Then followed over five and a half years' service as gunnery lieutenant in the North American, reserve, and channel squadrons. On promotion to commander in January 1893 he was appointed to the 'Hawke' and served in the Mediterranean for three years; and in 1896 he went to Portland in command of the boys' training establishment in the 'Boscawen' and 'Minotaur' for three and a half years until September 1899. He was promoted captain in January 1898. After commanding the 'Hawke' in the naval manoeuvres of 1900, he commissioned the 'Sappho' for service on the south-east coast of America, but was soon transferred to the Cape station during the South African War. His ship struck the Durban bar when in the charge of a pilot on 3 May 1901, and Burney had to bring her home. In May 1902 he became flag-captain to Rear-Admiral Atkinson-Willes in the Home Fleet, and remained with him and his successor, Rear-Admiral Poe, until June 1904. He then spent a year (1904-5) in command of the ex-Chilean battleship 'Triumph' in the Channel Fleet. His successful work in training boys at Portland led to his appointment in July 1905 to the 'Impregnable' as inspecting captain of all boys' training ships, a post that he held until his promotion to flag rank in 1909. He thus spent, in all, six years in supervising the training of boys. 
Burney's first appointment to flag rank was in the Plymouth division of the Home Fleet for one year. From February 1911, when he took command of the 5th cruiser squadron, he was continuously on full pay for nine years. At the end of 1911 he took command of the Atlantic Fleet, with the acting rank of vice-admiral; he transferred to the 3rd battle squadron in 1912, shortly before reaching confirmed vice-admiral's rank. This squadron was on special service in the Mediterranean, and the disturbances that arose in Montenegro and Albania at the close of the second Balkan war led to the dispatch, arranged by the British foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, of an international naval force to Antivari on the Montenegrin coast in April 1913. Burney's squadron was sent in order to secure that an Englishman should be senior officer of the combined fleet. Burney took command and handled the highly delicate and difficult situation, in which his firm manner and rugged mien stood him in good stead, with great ability, and he received a special commendation both from the Foreign Office and from the Admiralty. He had to secure unanimity of action between the naval forces of the five powers represented, as well as resolve the differences between the turbulent Balkan states ashore. He established a pacific blockade of the coast during April and May of 1913, and then from May to November commanded the international force occupying Scutari, which the Montenegrins had captured, until the trouble was finally settled by the conclusion of peace. He was created KCB in the summer of 1913, and on the termination of the Scutari affair he was gazetted KCMG. 
On his return to England at the end of 1913 Burney took over the command of the Second and Third fleets, then in partial reserve, and the early part of 1914 was occupied in preparing for the test mobilization of that summer. On the outbreak of the First World War in August these fleets were organized as the Channel Fleet, with the duty of protecting the channel from enemy raids. In December 1914 Burney went to the 1st battle squadron of the Grand Fleet, as second in command under Lord Jellicoe. At the battle of Jutland (31 May 1916) his squadron was the rear of the line, and was more heavily engaged than the rest of the battleships of the main fleet. His flagship, the 'Marlborough', was torpedoed, and during the night he transferred his flag to the 'Revenge'. He was promoted admiral a few days after the battle of Jutland, and was made GCMG for his services in the action. Jellicoe had complete confidence in Burney, but that confidence was not shared by many other flag-officers, who were apprehensive that Burney might succeed to command of the Grand Fleet. He was regarded as overcautious, lacking in initiative, and burdened by ill health. 
In November 1916, when Jellicoe was appointed first sea lord, Burney joined the Board of Admiralty as second sea lord. However, the prime minister, Lloyd George, and Sir Eric Geddes, who became first lord in July 1917, grew anxious to replace him by a younger, and in their opinion more efficient, man. Consequently, and despite Jellicoe's effort to keep him, when the board was reorganized the following September, Burney was relieved. Shortly afterwards he was appointed commander-in-chief, coast of Scotland at Rosyth; there he remained until appointed in March 1919 to be commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. A year later, owing to prolonged ill health, he was relieved of the command at his own request. He was promoted admiral of the fleet in the following November, created a baronet for his war services in January 1921, and promoted to GCB in 1922. He died at his home, Upham House, Upham, Hampshire, on 5 June 1929. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery five days later. 
Burney married in 1884 Lucinda Marion (died 1944), second daughter of George Richards Burnett, of London; they had one son and two daughters. His son, Commander Charles Dennistoun Burney RN (1888-1968), who succeeded to the baronetcy, invented during the First World War the paravane, a device for protecting ships against mines, and subsequently was a major supporter of projects for the commercial development of airships. His daughter Sybil Katherine Neville-Rolfe (1885-1955) was founder of the Eugenics Society. 
Burney was a fine seaman of the old school, with a deep sense of loyalty to his chiefs. In handling ships and fleets he had the natural ease and confidence of a born sailor. A man of powerful physique, in his early days he excelled in boxing and feats of strength. Although of somewhat austere demeanour, his patent sincerity won him the complete confidence and affection of many who served under him throughout his long sea service. There were others, particularly his fellow flag-officers, who tended to regard him as lacking in the qualities of personality and initiative necessary for the highest command, and as a trusted second in command to Jellicoe Burney probably reached the peak of his potential. 


@@@@@


doc= 32193


Burns, (James) Dawson (1828-1909), temperance reformer, born at Southwark in London, on 22 January 1828, was the younger son of Jabez Burns, DD (1805-1876), Baptist minister of New Church Street Chapel, Marylebone, for forty-one years, and a popular religious writer and temperance advocate. His mother was Jane, the daughter of George and Ann Dawson of Keighley. 
In 1839 Burns took the pledge and addressed the young members of his father's congregation in New Church Street. During his teenage years he wrote 'A Plea for Youths' Temperance Societies', held a public discussion, and contributed articles to the 'Weekly Temperance Journal' and the 'National Temperance Advocate'. In February 1845 he became assistant secretary to the National Temperance Society, and a year later joint secretary, besides managing its monthly organ, the 'Temperance Chronicle'. He was official reporter of the world's convention held in August 1846, in which his father took a prominent part. 
From September 1847 to 1850 Burns studied at the General Baptist College, which was then at Leicester, and in September 1851 became pastor of the Baptist chapel at Salford. In 1853 he helped Nathaniel Card, a Quaker, to found in Manchester the United Kingdom Alliance with a view to influencing the licensing laws. He was in London in March 1853 as metropolitan superintendent, and was enrolled the sixth member on 1 June 1853. 
Burns lived in north London, where he worked energetically for the cause and exercised considerable influence on policy. From March 1856 he wrote a 'London Letter' for the weekly 'Alliance News' and published numerous books and pamphlets. He was made an honorary MA of Bates College, Maine, in 1869 and afterwards DD. He edited 'Graham's Annual Temperance Guide' from 1867 to 1876. At his father's death in 1876 he took over the pastorate of New Church Street Chapel, where he had lately assisted, but resigned it in 1881 to devote himself entirely to temperance work. 
Burns represented the Baptist New Connexion at the centennial conference in America in 1880, acted as secretary to the Temperance Hospital opened in 1881, and was president of the Association of General Baptists held at Norwich in the same year. He was active in promoting temperance legislation, holding that the law should protect the public and not the liquor trade. In a series of annual letters to 'The Times' (1886-1909), on the national drink bill, he showed a notable grasp of facts and statistics. 
Burns was also a director of the Liberator Building Society, which his brother-in-law, Jabez Balfour, founded in 1868 and of which Balfour was chairman. Owing to disapproval of the increase of directors' fees, Burns resigned before the society's failure in October 1892. Subsequently Balfour and other directors were convicted of fraud and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. Because of this embarrassment the United Kingdom Alliance asked Burns to resign as metropolitan superintendent. When he refused, the post was discontinued. 
On 22 December 1853 Burns married Cecile, the only daughter of James and Clara Lucas Balfour. His wife died at Battersea on 27 March 1897; of his five sons and a daughter, only two sons survived him. He wrote memoirs of his wife (1878) and of his third son (1886), 


@@@@@


doc= 32194


Burns, John Elliott (1858-1943), labour leader and politician, was born in South Lambeth, London, on 20 October 1858, the sixteenth child of Alexander Burns, a Scottish fitter, and Barbara Smith. He left St Mary's national school when he was about ten and after a series of short-term jobs was apprenticed as an engineer. 
Burns spent his childhood in relative poverty. Apparently deserted by his father, his mother took in washing and the family moved to a basement dwelling in Battersea. Despite his brief schooling Burns attended night classes and became an avid consumer of radical literature. A useful boxer, he was a pugnacious and combative individual, and insubordination twice resulted in the cancellation of his indentures by irate employers before he finally completed his apprenticeship at Mowlems, a major London contractor. There he came under the influence of Victor Delahaye, an exiled former communard and member of a French Marxist group, committed to the view that in the absence of effective physical force and organization, the working class could throw off capitalism only through the ballot box. In 1878 Burns had his first encounter with the law when he was arrested for holding a political meeting on Clapham Common in defiance of a police prohibition. More than a year spent working for the Niger Company in west Africa further strengthened his belief in the exploitative nature of imperialism and capitalism. It was there, too, that he read Mill's 'Political Economy', the book which, he said, converted him to socialism. 
On his return to England in 1881 Burns settled in Battersea, London. In July 1882 he married (Martha) Charlotte Gale (1861-1936), daughter of a Battersea shipwright. They had one son, Edgar ('b'. 1895). Burns threw himself energetically into the radical movement. His impeccably proletarian origins and popular interests (he enjoyed cricket and played football for Wandsworth Clarence Rovers) made him a welcome recruit for the Democratic Federation (later the Social Democratic Federation, or SDF), a Marxist organization with a predominantly middle-class leadership. So, too, did his remarkable gift for public speaking which enabled the federation to use him as 'a sort of giant gramophone' (Burgess, xiv). By 1884 his dynamic and colourful oratory -- it was Burns who on a later occasion described the Thames as 'liquid history' (Hughes, 283) -- had earned him a place on the party's executive. When the federation split over strategy, he stood firmly with the advocates of parliamentary action, opposing William Morris, who broke away to form the Socialist League. In 1885 Burns unsuccessfully contested Nottingham West in the general election, but his 598 votes dwarfed the total of 59 cast for the two SDF candidates in other constituencies. Furthermore, they were secured without any of the finance offered by the tory party in the hope of dividing the anti-Conservative vote. Throughout his public life Burns had the highest standards of personal integrity and was scathing of all who did not, whatever their social standing. 
In the course of 1886 Burns was arrested and charged with sedition and conspiracy following his involvement in an SDF unemployment march that deteriorated into a riot. As 'the man with the red flag' he conducted his own defence so ably that he was discharged. Early in the following year he was again arrested when, in company with the radical MP, R. B. Cunninghame Graham, he led the crowd's attack against the police cordon set up to enforce a ban on public meetings in Trafalgar Square. He received a six-week sentence. The language Burns used at this time was often cited later as evidence of his revolutionary aspirations, but he was sometimes tempted into excesses because he so revelled in his ability to inspire adulation in a crowd, and many of his words were subsequently taken out of context. Fundamentally, he never wavered in his conviction that social change was the priority, the method of achieving it a secondary consideration. Even before his imprisonment he had shown signs of disenchantment with the SDF's chronic internecine bickering and its desire to engage in class warfare in the House of Commons, rather than seeking some tangible benefits for ordinary people. In 1889 Burns's popularity and record as a Labour militant enabled him to win one of the two Battersea seats on the newly established London county council. 
Barely had the new council begun its work when Burns's attention was diverted to the London dock strike. Although the dock gates had long been a favourite stamping ground he did not initiate the strike, and many other leading labour figures, especially Tom Mann and Ben Tillett, were prominently involved. Even so, the short, powerfully built, and bearded figure of Burns, sporting a straw boater for ease of identification, eclipsed them all. While he negotiated skilfully with intractable employers and organized picket lines tirelessly, Burns's major contribution was his oratory which sustained the strikers with its vision of 'the full round orb of the docker's tanner' (Smith and Nash, 147). The long-drawn-out stoppage and its successful outcome made Burns an internationally known figure. Everywhere his support was coveted to boost the ensuing surge of trade union organization and in 1890 he was elected to the parliamentary committee of the TUC. Burns's moderation in conducting the dock strike earned it considerable sympathy from the wider public and did much to dispel the militant reputation he had acquired in 1886 and 1887 -- so much so that Battersea Liberals solicited his parliamentary candidature. 
Burns's election prospects were considerably enhanced by his performance in the London county council where for two or three years he was a dominant figure. He was an assiduous worker, diligently attending the numerous committees on which he served, visiting many of the council's projects, talking to technical experts, and generally bringing the force of his powerful personality to bear on behalf of municipal enterprise and improvement. In particular, he led the campaign which resulted in council work going only to those contractors who observed trade union rates and conditions. Eventually and with help from other Progressives, notably John Benn, he masterminded the establishment of the council's own works department, demanding of it the same rigorous standards of behaviour and performance he had required of private firms. Later he was instrumental in steering through the House of Commons the legislation that gave London its municipal steamboat service. From the middle 1890s until he finally left the council in 1907, however, Burns's influence diminished somewhat. This was partly because the growing hold of party politics made it difficult for him to preserve the freedom of action which he cherished, partly because in 1892 he was elected as MP for Battersea, winning the seat by 5616 votes to 4057. 
At Westminster Burns generally eschewed larger political issues and concentrated on matters close to his heart, such as working conditions, corruption, public amenities, and the eight-hour day. As had happened in the London county council, these interests inevitably drew him into informal co-operation with the radical wing of the Liberal Party but Burns insisted on his independence. He rejected offers of Liberal financial support in his constituency, relying instead on the salary provided by his own Battersea Labour League. While he emerged as the natural leader of the small group of Labour MPs in the Commons, he was profoundly suspicious of attempts to turn this into anything more structured. This brought him into conflict with Keir Hardie, a leading force behind the establishment of the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1893. Beatrice Webb oversimplified this clash in attributing it to Burns's immense egotism. Reared in the secular tradition of metropolitan radicalism, Burns could never come to terms with Hardie's more mystical version of socialism, couched as it was in terms of the 'New Testament'. He also found irritating Hardie's penchant for parliamentary histrionics and his indifference to procedure. Above all, Burns had reaped handsome dividends in the county council by remaining free of party commitments and co-operating widely for the advancement of specific causes. He did not, therefore, share Hardie's view that within a broad progressive alliance, Labour should have a separately organized political identity. Fearing that the ILP was merely a northern version of the SDF and would divert Labour into narrow sectarianism and a political dead end, Burns supported -- though contrary to received opinion he did not initiate -- moves to emasculate its influence in the TUC. Although he attended the foundation conference of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC) in 1900 he declined to lend his support to an organization that demanded allegiance to a party programme exclusively geared towards the interests of a specific class. He maintained this position in the face of Hardie's several later attempts to win him over. 
Once the major trade unions began to turn to the LRC in the aftermath of the Taff Vale judgment which threatened to expose their funds to legal action, Burns became increasingly isolated within the broader labour movement, even though his own Battersea base remained secure. At the same time his opposition to British involvement in the South African War reinforced his links with the radical wing of the Liberal Party, though he held aloof from the formal anti-war movement, once again preferring to conduct an independent campaign. Burns was also a convinced free-trader and when Joseph Chamberlain launched his tariff reform campaign in 1903 Liberal leaders appreciated the political advantage of having on their platforms a genuine working man who was not afraid to attack Chamberlain as a 'fiscal pervert' ('The Times', 3 Jan 1906). When Campbell-Bannerman formed his administration in 1905 Burns was offered the presidency of the Local Government Board, the first working man to achieve cabinet rank. 
Burns's acceptance of office has often been portrayed as the first in a long line of betrayals by Labour politicians. Yet Burns had long resisted the notion of an independent working-class party. The flexibility and independence of action that he preferred could be maintained in a Liberal government where the onus for legislative initiatives lay with individual ministers, not a party manifesto. His position was vindicated almost immediately after the general election of 1906 returned the Liberals to power with a huge majority. Faced with a hostile Labour Party reaction to his own 'Trades Disputes Bill', Campbell-Bannerman threw over the views of most legal experts, a royal commission, and his own senior cabinet colleagues by announcing that it would be amended to confer on union funds total immunity from legal action. It seems probable that the major influence behind this sudden volte-face was Burns. He had long been Campbell-Bannerman's unofficial adviser on trade union affairs, and had previously introduced the TUC's own bill granting total immunity. 
It has been generally concluded that Burns's eight years at the Local Government Board were barren. Behind this judgement lies the view, originally propagated by Beatrice Webb, that Burns's civil servants played on his personal vanity, flattering him into becoming an ineffective and reactionary minister. Burns's vanity is not in doubt: when Campbell-Bannerman offered him the Local Government Board, Burns is alleged to have replied that the prime minister had never done a more popular thing. But Mrs Webb's views were heavily influenced by the fact that Burns was the rock on which her ambitious plans for restructuring the poor law foundered. He had long believed that poverty and its related problems were the combined outcome of individual failure and an inadequate social environment. This was reinforced by a strong streak of puritanism which expressed itself in his opposition to smoking, drinking, and gambling. He was not flattered either into holding an inquiry into the administration of the Poplar poor-law union in 1906. Rather he was disturbed by the possibility that public money might have been dispensed in a corrupt way. In similar fashion, his hostility to the Webbs' plans for the poor law owed less to the conservatism of the Local Government Board than to his own fear of undermining individuality by regimentalizing pauperism. 
Other aspects of Burns's character were important in determining his performance at the board, however. His insistence on being personally involved in relatively trivial matters often caused him to lose sight of the president's strategic role. What had just about been possible in London was not practical on a national scale. He lacked many constructive ideas of his own, most obviously in the area of unemployment policy. Intellectual limitations forced him, as the wife of one colleague remarked, to spend most of his official life struggling with 'things he did not fully understand and bluffing to hide the fact' (Masterman, 205). In this regard he was not helped by the operational deficiencies of a department enmeshed in red tape. More particularly, the absence of a statistical section hampered the development of a programme to deal with unemployment, while the poor law section was wedded to the principles of 1834. As the Cinderella of Whitehall, the Local Government Board did not attract high quality civil servants. Burns's parliamentary draftsman was particularly incompetent and must bear much of the blame for the failure of at least two important legislative measures concerning rating and the municipal milk supply to reach the statute book. Burns's diaries (now in the British Library) indicate his frustration with this situation, though ultimately he seems to have given up his struggle to introduce a more dynamic ethos. He came to tolerate the problems because neither his pride nor his conviction that he was somehow called to represent the people would allow him to admit defeat and give up his office. 
The one significant piece of legislation Burns did oversee, the 'Housing and Town Planning Act' of 1909, was a major achievement, introducing for the first time the principle of municipally owned housing and conferring wide planning powers on local authorities. In general, however, Burns found the legislative process tedious and he preferred to implement change through administrative means. Even the Webbs conceded that he did much to humanize the operation of the poor law. Equally significant in his attempts to improve the general social environment were the compulsory notification of pauper tuberculosis and his crusade against infant mortality. This administrative record has been largely overlooked, although it helps to explain why Burns was retained in the cabinet when H. H. Asquith replaced Campbell-Bannerman as prime minister in 1908. It also lay behind his transfer to the Board of Trade on 12 February 1914. After the stream of radical legislation produced by its previous heads, Churchill and Lloyd George, its paramount requirement was for an administratively competent president. 
On broader political issues Burns was never as significant a figure within the cabinet as his diary entries suggest. He was consistently opposed to high military expenditure, took a dim view of colleagues like Lloyd George who appeared to flout his own high standards of public behaviour, and was unswervingly loyal to Asquith. However, that support did not survive the outbreak of war in 1914. Despite his stand against the South African War, Burns was not a principled pacifist and as a confirmed home-ruler had advocated strong action against the Ulster Unionists. But he was essentially a little Englander and when it became clear on 2 August 1914 that Britain was committed to support France in the event of a conflict with Germany, he resigned from the government, rejecting Asquith's last minute plea to remain. 
This was the effective end of Burns's political career although he did not leave the House of Commons until 1918. There was no obvious political home for him in post-war Britain. He had forfeited the support of the Asquithian Liberals through his anti-war stance and he would not consider supporting Lloyd George, for whom he had a deep antipathy. But neither could Burns, despite a few fanciful entries in his diary, contemplate a return as a Labour candidate, for his stewardship of the Local Government Board, particularly his handling of unemployment and the Poplar poor-law inquiry, had closed that particular door. Any lingering inclination to return was finally extinguished by the sudden death in 1922 of Edgar, the son on whom he doted. Thereafter, supported by a Carnegie pension worth about $1000 a year, Burns retreated from public life, browsing in bookshops, emerging occasionally to receive academic or civic honours and -- more frequently -- to watch cricket or to attend to his one remaining public duty as a trustee of the Strathcona leper colony. 
By the end of 1941 Burns was practically bedridden, as a result of a combination of old age which had finally conquered his robust health, and of a nearby bomb blast which had thrown him heavily to the ground. He died of heart failure and senile arteriosclerosis at the Bolingbroke Hospital in Wandsworth on 24 January 1943, and was buried in St Mary's church cemetery, Battersea. He left an estate valued at $15,137 3's'. 7died 


@@@@@


doc= 32195


Burnside, William (1852-1927), mathematician, was born at 7 Howley Place, Paddington, Middlesex, on 2 July 1852, the elder son of William Burnside, merchant, of that address, and his wife, Emma Knight. His father was of Scottish ancestry; his grandfather had settled in London, and was a partner in the bookselling firm of Seeley and Burnside. 
Left an orphan at the age of six, Burnside was educated at Christ's Hospital -- then situated in Newgate Street -- and achieved distinction in both the grammar school and the mathematical school. He won a mathematical scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge, and began residence there in October 1871. In his day, all able mathematical students in the university were prepared for the tripos by private coaches, and Burnside's was W. H. Besant, one of the few rivals of the well-known Edward John Routh. In April 1873 Burnside migrated to Pembroke College. In the mathematical tripos of 1875 he was bracketed second wrangler with George Chrystal (1851-1911); in the immediately subsequent examination for the Smith's prizes, Burnside was first and Chrystal second. 
Burnside was elected a fellow of Pembroke and appointed a lecturer at the college in 1875; he continued to be a fellow until 1886. College teaching at that time had slight influence upon the most capable students. However, in addition to the usual college courses, Burnside also lectured on hydrodynamics, a subject then developing into importance. He took a few private pupils and examined occasionally for the tripos, but it soon became apparent that he was devoting himself to mathematical studies beyond the organized range of the tripos. 
As an undergraduate, Burnside had proved an expert oar. After leaving Cambridge his main recreation was found in fishing during holidays in Scotland, and in this also he developed marked skill. Through all his years his lithe frame retained an unusual power of physical endurance. In 1885 he was appointed professor of mathematics at the Royal Naval College at Greenwich, and the rest of his teaching life was spent in that post. 
On 25 December 1886 Burnside married Alexandrina Urquhart ('b'. 1854/5), of Poolewe in the county of Ross, Scotland. His wife's father, Kenneth Urquhart, was a crofter. The couple had two sons and two daughters. Burnside retired in 1919. His old college at one time invited him to return as tutor and, on the death in 1903 of Sir George Gabriel Stokes, Pembroke invited him to return as master. Both invitations were declined, mainly because (outside his teaching) the administrative and social details of official duty were irksome to his temperament. 
At Greenwich Burnside worked in three areas, being concerned with ballistics, for gunnery and torpedo officers, with mechanics and heat, for engineer officers, and with dynamics (especially hydrodynamics), for naval constructors. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1893, served on the council of the society from 1901 to 1903, and was awarded a royal medal in 1904. He was president of the London Mathematical Society from 1906 to 1908, having received its De Morgan medal in 1899. In 1900 he was elected an honorary fellow of Pembroke College. He received the honorary degrees of ScD from Dublin University and of LLD from Edinburgh University. 
Burnside is remembered for his original contributions to mathematics. He published over one hundred and fifty papers. His book, the 'Theory of Groups' (1897), is now an acknowledged classic and did much to establish group theory as a subject in its own right and with its own methods. He left a long manuscript of the 'Theory of Probability', which was published in 1928, after his death. His range of subjects, mainly in pure mathematics (although applied mathematics had been the Cambridge vogue of his earlier years), was extensive. As a writer he was clear and definite in argument, lucid and terse in exposition. Each of his papers dealt with a definite issue: nothing was elaborated beyond a main result, and subsidiary developments were avoided. He wrote on hydrodynamics and on potential theory, combining the established methods with the new analysis based on the use of complex variables. Several papers were devoted to elliptic functions and several to differential geometry, at a time when the subject was receiving little attention in England. He passed from the automorphic functions and their groups of transformations, where he was one of the first to understand Poincare's ideas which had opened up the area of geometrical function theory, to the general theory of discontinuous groups of finite order: on this subject he produced some fifty papers, each of them containing some definite contribution to the theory, and marked by clarity and terseness. 
The outbreak of war in 1914 slowed down Burnside's output of papers: the end of hostilities found him interested in the theory of mathematical probability, and he continued to produce fresh investigations. Ultimately failing health interfered with creative work, but it did not cramp active interest, and he was able to draft an exposition of his views on this subject. 
Burnside died at Cotleigh, West Wickham, Kent, on 21 August 1927, and was buried in the churchyard there. His wife survived him. In 2005 a lecture theatre at the University of Greenwich was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32196


Burrell, Sir William (1861-1958), art collector, was born at 3 Scotis Street, Glasgow, on 9 July 1861, the third son of William Burrell (1832-1885), a shipowner, and his wife, Isabella Duncan Guthrie (died 1912), and grandson of George Burrell, the founder of the shipping firm later known as Burrell & Son, which Burrell joined when he was fifteen. He was educated at a boarding-school at St Andrews. In 1877 one of the firm's ships salvaged Cleopatra's Needle, which had been lost in the Bay of Biscay on its passage to England. For many years Burrell managed the family business in conjunction with his eldest brother, and the firm greatly prospered under his vigorous direction; it reached its peak activity in 1915, when it owned thirty ships all of over 4000 gross tonnage. Burrell, however, determined to devote the remainder of his long life to art, and by 1917 almost the entire fleet had been sold. 
Burrell's interest in art had shown itself, he used to recall, as a boy when, to his father's annoyance, he had used his pocket money to buy not a cricket bat but a picture. Realizing that it was not very good he later sold it to buy a better one. By 1901 he already owned a considerable collection, not only of pictures (including works by Gericault, Daumier, and Manet), but of tapestries, stained glass, Iranian carpets, furniture, metalwork, and carvings in wood and ivory. In that year he lent over 160 works of art to the International Exhibition in Glasgow, for which he was an active committee member. Also in 1901 Burrell married Constance Mary Lockhart (died 1961), daughter of James Lockhart Mitchell, merchant; they had one daughter. 
At this time Burrell's interests were by no means confined to shipping and art. He served in the corporation of Glasgow as a representative of the tenth ward (1899-1906) and became convener of a sub-committee on uninhabitable houses, back lands, and underground dwellings -- retiring, it is said, because the policy of slum clearance he advocated was not followed. Until 1906 he also acted as consul at Glasgow for Austria-Hungary. 
In 1916 Burrell acquired Hutton Castle near Berwick upon Tweed, previously the home of Lord Tweedmouth, who had largely rebuilt and added to the ancient castle. Burrell made further additions to the structure and entirely remodelled the interior. He and his wife lived there from about 1926, by which time the castle was sumptuously furnished throughout with works of art, many of which were built into the fabric of the rooms. As the collection continued to grow, it soon outstripped the accommodation available in the castle and for many years much of it was widely dispersed on loan to many different art galleries, museums, and cathedrals, including the national galleries of Scotland, England, and Wales. In 1925 Burrell presented over sixty paintings and drawings to the Glasgow Art Gallery, and for several years a large number of his pictures were on loan to the Tate Gallery. Donations were also made to other galleries. 
In 1944 Burrell presented to the city of Glasgow a great art collection to which he added lavishly every year until the end of his life. This diverse collection contained works of art of ancient civilizations, including Sumer, Egypt, Greece, and Rome; oriental art of the Far and Near East including Chinese pottery, bronzes, and jades, and Iranian carpets, pottery, and metalwork; European art of the medieval and post-medieval periods including tapestries, stained glass, furniture, stone, wood, and ivory carvings, embroideries and lace, pottery, arms and armour, glassware, treen, silver and metalware; and between 700 and 800 paintings, drawings, and engravings, chiefly by European artists of the fifteenth to the nineteenth centuries. The collection also included the largest single assemblage of works (132) by Joseph Crawhall (1861-1913), a large number of drawings by Phil May, and a quantity of Japanese prints. 
Burrell's most abiding interest probably centred in the art of the later Middle Ages and Renaissance. The collection of Franco-Flemish, German, Swiss, and English tapestries of the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries has been considered the finest of its kind; that of English, French, German, Dutch, and Swiss stained and painted glass of the twelfth to seventeenth centuries is even more extensive and hardly less remarkable. Largest of all is the collection of Chinese pottery and porcelain which comprises a magnificent range of wares dating from the earliest known neolithic vessels to the brilliantly enamelled vessels and figures of the reign of Kangxi (1662-1722). The furniture, silver, and needlework is chiefly English of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
Beginning in 1911 the twenty-eight notebooks in which Burrell recorded his acquisitions and payments continue in unbroken sequence until a few months prior to his death. They show that for almost half a century he was spending on average at least $20,000 a year on acquiring works of art. After 6 April 1944, when the collection as it then stood became the property of Glasgow, he continued to acquire on an equally grand or even grander scale. The year 1948, when he spent over $60,000, probably represents his highest expenditure in any one year, except for 1936 when he spent almost $80,000. 
To his great gift to Glasgow Burrell added $450,000. This was to build a new museum for housing the collection in an area of the Scottish countryside not less than 16 miles from the centre of the city and within 4 miles of Killearn. This condition proved difficult to honour, and apart from the selections on permanent or changing display in the municipal art gallery and museum at Kelvingrove, the collection remained in store. The tapestries and other textiles could not at first be exhibited in Glasgow being susceptible to damage from polluted air. But in 1966 Pollok House and Estate on the southern outskirts of the city were presented to Glasgow, and a museum was built to house Burrell's collection on the estate. The project finally came to fruition with the opening of the award-winning building, designed by Barry Gasson, John Meunier, and Brit Andreson, in 1983. 
Burrell was reserved by temperament, and in the midst of the beautiful objects which filled his home he led a comparatively frugal existence. Starting as a private collector, he became during thirty or more years a collector for posterity rather than for himself. Yet in spite of its size he always preserved a keen intellectual and artistic interest in his collection, about which he had read widely and for whose details his memory was excellent. By nature he was clearly attracted by vigour of form and colour rather than by elegance, so the collection is rich in works of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries but deficient in those of the eighteenth. Numbering about 8000 objects, the collection was probably one of the largest ever assembled by one man, and certainly the largest given to a municipality. 
For many years Burrell was a trustee of the Tate Gallery and from 1923 to 1946 of the National Gallery of Scotland. He was knighted in 1927 for his services to art; he received the freedom of the city of Glasgow in 1944, and the St Mungo prize in 1946. He died at Hutton Castle on 29 March 1958, and was buried in early April at Largs cemetery, Ayrshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32197


Burroughs, Sir Frederick William Traill- (1831-1905), army officer, was born at Fatehgarh, India, on 1 February 1831, the eldest of the seven children of Major-General Frederick William Burroughs (1806-1879) of the Bengal army. His grandfather, Sir William Burroughs of Castle Bagshaw, co. Cavan, was advocate-general of Bengal under Marquess Cornwallis. His mother, Caroline (1807-1863), only daughter of Captain Charles Adolphus Marie de Peyron of the Bengal light cavalry, was granddaughter of Charles Adrien de Peyron, who was killed in a duel in Paris in 1777 by the comte de la Marck. 
Burroughs spent the first nine years of his life in India. After education at Kensington grammar school, at Blackheath proprietary school, and at Hofwyl in Switzerland, he was commissioned ensign in the 93rd highlanders on 31 March 1848. Promoted lieutenant on 23rd September 1851, he became captain on 10 November 1854 and major on 20 July 1858. On his twenty-first birthday, in 1852, Burroughs succeeded to the Scottish estates of his uncle, George William Traill (1792-1847), a civil servant in Bengal who became British commissioner in Kumaon, of Viera, Orkney, and assumed the surname of Traill-Burroughs. He served with the 93rd under Sir Colin Campbell throughout the Crimean War, and was at the battle of the Alma and at Balaklava, when he commanded the left centre company of his regiment, the 'thin red line'. Traill-Burroughs took part in the expedition to Kerch and Yenikale, the siege and fall of Sevastopol, and assaults of 18 June and 8 September. He was awarded the Mejidiye (fifth class). 
During the Indian mutiny Traill-Burroughs was engaged again under Campbell, now Lord Clyde, in the fighting before the relief of Lucknow and in the storming of the 'sikandarabagh' and of the Shah Najaf mosque (both outer defences of Lucknow). He was the first through the breach at the 'sikandarabagh', and with some dozen men overpowered the gate guard. For this action, in which he received a slight wound, he was recommended for, though not awarded, the Victoria Cross. For his conduct at the battle of Cawnpore on 6 December, and the pursuit to Serai Ghat at the action of Khudaganj, the storming of the Begfam Kuthi, and the siege and capture of Lucknow, he was mentioned in dispatches, and received a brevet majority (29 July 1858). The wounds he received during the mutiny campaign disabled him for two years, and it was not until 1860 that he rejoined his regiment. In 1862 he succeeded to the temporary command of the 93rd highlanders, which had lost two commanding officers from cholera. 
Traill-Burroughs accompanied the Yusufzai field force, under Sir Neville Chamberlain, in the campaign against the Hindustani fanatics and other groups on the north-west frontier in December 1863, commanded the 93rd in the action at Ambela, and was mentioned in dispatches (1864). 
Promoted lieutenant-colonel on 10 August 1864, Traill-Burroughs became full colonel on 10 August 1869. He returned to Britain with his regiment early in 1870. On 4 June 1870 he married Eliza D'Oyly (1850-1908), youngest daughter of Colonel William Geddes, Bengal horse artillery, JP and deputy lieutenant of Midlothian (died 1879), and Emma, daughter of Edward D'Oyly of Zion Hill, Yorkshire; they had no children. Retiring from the command of the 93rd highlanders in 1873, he was promoted major-general on 16 March 1880 and lieutenant-general (retired list) on 1 July 1881. He commanded the Orkney volunteer artillery, 1873-80. In 1904 he was transferred from the colonelcy of the Royal Warwickshire regiment, which he had held since 1897, to that of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. He was appointed CB on 24 May 1873 and KCB in 1904. 
Burroughs owned about 12,000 acres; his seat was on the island of Rousay, Orkney, at Trumland House, which he built in 1876. He was vice-lieutenant of Orkney and Shetland. As a result of conflicts with his crofter tenants he 'had the reputation of being the worst of the nineteenth century Orkney lairds' (Thomson, 1). The estates he had inherited were encumbered with debt, which was added to by borrowing to make further land purchases and by taking on the debts of his spendthrift father. The crofters were subjected to threefold rent increases, only partly attributable to investments in agricultural improvement, and these became a source of contention after 1879, when farming went into depression. Burroughs became notorious for evicting two of his tenants who, in 1883, gave evidence to the royal commission appointed by Gladstone and chaired by Francis Napier to investigate the conditions of crofters in the highlands and islands of Scotland. Burroughs himself gave evidence to the commission. An active member of the Liberty and Property Defence League, he attacked the legislation introduced by Gladstone's government in 1886 to give crofters security of tenure and to establish a permanent commission to fix fair rents, writing on the subject in the 'National Review' (November 1891). A combative figure, he was at the centre of a public controversy that roused public opinion against him, though by the late 1890s he had recovered some of his influence on Orkney. He died at 61 St George's Road, London, on 9 April 1905 and was buried at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32198


Burrows, Christine Mary Elizabeth (1872-1959), educationist and college head, was born at New Street, Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, on 4 January 1872. She was the only and posthumous child of Henry Parker Burrows (1833-1871), a partner in Langton Burrows Breweries, Maidenhead, and his wife, Esther Elizabeth Burrows (1847-1935), daughter of William Bliss, a mill owner of Chipping Norton. Her childhood was spent in her grandfather's house among her Bliss relatives. After attending a small private school, she went in 1887 to Cheltenham Ladies' College, under Dorothea Beale, with a music scholarship. In 1891 she entered Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, to read history but her studies were interrupted in 1893 when she was summoned to join and assist her mother who had just been appointed as principal of the newly founded St Hilda's Hall in Oxford. 
Despite the demands of her own studies (which she continued as a registered home student), Christine Burrows took on heavy administrative and social duties while giving guidance to her mother (who had no knowledge of Oxford traditions) and to the small community of her fellow students. In 1894 she gained a second class in history and then remained at St Hilda's as history tutor in addition to her other responsibilities. In 1895 she became vice-principal. It was largely due to her ability, both as teacher and administrator, that St Hilda's was before long accepted on equal terms among the other women's foundations. In 1910 she succeeded her mother as principal, and directed the fortunes of St Hilda's through a period of steady growth and distinction -- set back by the First World War but sharing in the general enfranchisement of women that followed. At school and college she had come under the influence of pioneers in women's education and notable men teachers who gave time to set the movement on its way; many of them remained her friends and she enlisted their support for St Hilda's, a hall she had helped create and shape. 
In July 1919, however, Christine Burrows resigned from St Hilda's in order to live with her mother whose health was giving cause for concern. But in 1921 she resumed her career when she was appointed as principal of the Society of Oxford Home Students, a post which could be combined with residence in her own home with her mother. To this new and exacting work she gave the utmost of her mature powers. The Home Students was a non-resident society for women; students lived in their own homes or with hostesses in private houses. It was characteristic of her concern for detail and for good working relationships that she had visited all sixty hostesses before she took up office in 1921 and, as student numbers grew, she visited and interviewed every new hostess. 
Perhaps the most striking features of Burrows's principalship were her clear interest in study and teaching and her pastoral care of students. The building of a strong tutorial staff at the Home Students owed much to her experience and initiative. With their admission to the university in 1920 (Burrows was made an MA by decree in 1921), women became subject to the disciplinary code of the university proctors. If this discipline was sometimes irksome to high-spirited post-war home students, its acceptance was assured by the kindness and good sense with which she administered it. The eight years of her second principalship were not as creative as those at St Hilda's. It was not pioneer work which was needed but the capacity to adapt and consolidate. She did, however, steer the Home Students in a direction which would eventually lead to its becoming a residential college, incorporated as St Anne's College in 1952. 
In 1929 Christine Burrows resigned from the Home Students to spend her time with her mother whose health was deteriorating. She continued to live in Oxford for the last thirty years of her life, quietly devoting herself to movements for developing women's powers and usefulness. She was a firm champion of women's rights. In 1908 she had joined a march in London supporting the suffrage movement; in the 1930s she was a member of the archbishops' committee on the place of women in the church and, although she signed its report, she did not alter her opinion that the ordination of women to the priesthood was right and would come in time. 
Christine Burrows contributed an article on St Hilda's College to the 'Victoria county history' of Oxfordshire (vol. 3, 1954). A longer history of the college remained as an early draft when her eyesight failed. She was a slight, wiry woman with dark hair. In some ways she always seemed older than her age because she had inherited many of her mother's Victorian manners. She died on 10 September 1959 at St Luke's Home, Linton Road, Oxford. After a funeral service at St Giles' Church, Oxford, on 14 September, her body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 32199


Burrows, Montagu (1819-1905), historian and university administrator, born at Hadley, Middlesex, on 27 October 1819, was the third son of Lieutenant-General Montagu Burrows (1775-1848) and his wife, Mary Anne Pafford, eldest daughter of Joseph Larcom, captain RN, and sister of Sir Thomas Aiskew Larcom. After attending Kingsmills' Boys' School, Southampton, Burrows entered the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, as a cadet in August 1832. Two years later, in October 1834, at the age of fifteen, he joined the 'Andromache' as a midshipman, and in 1842 he passed through the college as a mate. During his period of active service (1834-46) he was decorated for his part in the bombardment of Acre, in November 1840, which brought Mehmet Ali, the rebellious pasha of Egypt, to terms, and he served under Henry Ducie Chads in suppressing piracy in the Straits Settlements and slave-trading on the west coast of Africa. 
In November 1846 Burrows was appointed gunnery lieutenant on the training ship 'Excellent', and, in 1852, he became commander. Immediately on his promotion he decided to study at Oxford. On 13 September 1849, he had married Mary Anna, third daughter of Sir James Whalley Smythe Gardiner, third baronet, of Roche Court, Fareham, and he therefore entered Magdalen Hall, one of the few societies that admitted married men at that time, in 1853. In Michaelmas term 1856 he was placed in the first class of 'literae humaniores', and after little more than four months' further reading and extensive private tuition took a first class in the newly created honour school of law and modern history (Easter term 1857). After graduating Burrows engaged with much success in private teaching, mainly in law and modern history. In 1860 he published 'Pass and Class', a useful handbook to all the Oxford schools (3rd edn, 1866). In 1862 he became a retired post captain, and gave up the navy, believing that his short-sightedness and slight deafness would have interfered seriously with his effectiveness as a ship's captain. 
At Oxford, Burrows was always active in both church and political affairs. A devout, though moderate, churchman, he was a member of the English Church Union, acting as chairman of the Oxford branch until 1866. He was secretary to the Oxford branch of the Universities' Mission to Central Africa on its foundation in 1859, and acted as joint secretary of the church congress, which held its second meeting at Oxford in 1862. During the same year he materially assisted in the building of the church of Sts Philip and James in north Oxford. Later he actively fought the cause of church denominational schools in Oxford, was for many years president of the Church Schools Managers and Teachers Association, and had much to do with the establishment of the Oxford diocesan conference. He was a member of the committee that founded Keble College in 1870. He wrote regularly for 'The Guardian', and founded two short-lived papers, the 'Church and State Review' (1861) and 'The Churchman' (1866), which he hoped would form a firmer platform for his views. Burrows's political affiliation was once described as 'militant conservative'. He was a perennially active campaigner for the tory cause in Oxford. 
In 1862 Burrows was elected to the Chichele professorship of modern history, which had been founded by the royal commission of 1852. His election was a surprise to himself and others. Stubbs, Freeman, and A. J. Froude, all established historians, were among the candidates. But his candidature was warmly supported by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, and apparently by Gladstone, who was still burgess for the University of Oxford. The school of law and modern history, founded on 23 April 1850, was relatively new and still not firmly established. None of the other more formidable candidates had had any experience of teaching, and in the developing academic context Burrows's reputation as a teacher and as the author of 'Pass and Class' carried weight. In his new role, he was effective in helping to develop a pragmatic reassessment of the role of history in higher education, and the basis upon which it should be taught and studied. In his inaugural lecture on 30 October 1862, he argued that the Oxford practice of studying history in the manner of Greats, through commentary on set texts, was rendered anachronistic by the great explosion of historical research. He suggested that the real value of studying history lay not in 'mere acquaintance with a multitude of facts', but in comparing, contrasting, and weighing evidence, which developed a critical habit of mind. Burrows's views were instrumental in generating support for the examination statute of 1864, which enabled students in Oxford to read for the final school of law and modern history directly after moderations without first having to read for the final school of 'literae humaniores', and also for the hebdomadal council revisions of 1869, which separated law from modern history. By 1900 the school of modern history, of which Burrows was chairman between 1889 and 1893, was the largest of the Oxford schools. 
Elected a fellow of All Souls in 1870, Burrows wrote and edited fifteen books, published six sets of his lectures, and contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. His published work falls into four main classes: first, general history, arising from his teaching and written predominantly for an undergraduate audience ('History of the Foreign Policy of Great Britain', 1895); second, naval history ('Cinque Ports', 1888); third, antiquarian studies ('The Worthies of All Souls', 1874); and fourth, ecclesiastical polemic ('Parliament and the Church of England', 1875). Although never regarded as an outstanding historian, Burrows did study original sources, and was created 'officier de l'instruction publique' by the French government for his work on the Gascon rolls. Burrows served on the Oxford extension committee which led to the foundation of the society of non-collegiate students in 1868. Owing to increasing deafness, he transferred his professorial work to a deputy in the summer of 1900. He remained active in university, college, and city affairs until his death on 10 July 1905 at his home, 9 Norham Gardens, Oxford. His wife died soon after, on 3 June 1906. Of their six children, three sons survived their father: the eldest, Edward Henry Burrows ('b'. 1851), was inspector of schools until his death in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 32200


Burt, Thomas (1837-1922), trade union leader and politician, was born on 12 November 1837 at Murton Row near North Shields, the elder of two sons of Peter Burt, coal-miner, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of Thomas Weatherburn, colliery engineman. He had twin sisters who died in infancy and a brother who predeceased him at the age of thirty-three. Burt's father moved to the Durham coalfield with his family in 1844 after being victimized for taking part in trade union activities. Burt received little formal education, but became an avid reader during his late teenage years, and attributed much of the learning that he did acquire to the interest shown in him by his maternal grandfather. 
Burt began work underground at the age of ten, first as a trapper and then as a pony driver, and worked in a number of local collieries before returning with his family to Northumberland, where he was a hewer at various collieries around Cramlingon and Choppington. He became involved in trade unionism from the age of about sixteen, was victimized, and joined the Northumberland and Durham Mutual Confidence Association when it was founded in 1863. He became delegate for Choppington, moved the resolution that led to the secession of Northumberland from the association in 1865, and was elected full-time secretary and agent of the new Northumberland Miners' Mutual Confident Association, remaining secretary until 1905 and agent until 1913. 
These were the years that saw the formation and growth of county mining unions, the foundation of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, and the adoption (and abandonment) of the system of tying wages to selling-price sliding scales, but Burt remained firmly wedded to the principles of industrial co-operation and class harmony which he had advocated since the beginning of his career. It was his adherence to these principles that explains Burt's refusal to join the Labour Party, and helps to explain the strained relations that developed between the Northumberland Miners' Mutual Confident Association and the Miners' Federation of Great Britain: Burt and his colleagues, unlike the leaders of the federation, continued to believe that the sliding scale, or some form of arbitration or conciliation, provided the best way of dealing with the north-east coalfield's particular sensitivity to changing market conditions. 
In 1873 Burt was adopted as the Liberal candidate for Morpeth, and in the following year he was returned as MP, retaining the seat for forty-four years until his retirement in 1918, by which time he had become the 'father of the House'. Like other radicals, Burt supported issues such as Irish home rule, household suffrage, the reform of trade union law, and the disestablishment of the Church of England. He was a member of several parliamentary committees and commissions (including the royal commission on accidents in mines, 1879-86, the royal commission on mining royalties, 1890-91, and the royal commission on labour, 1891-4); he was parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade between 1892 and 1895; and he was made a privy councillor in 1906. His career 'illustrates better than [that of] almost any other labour leader the phenomenon of the Liberal-Labour alliance in the closing decades of the nineteenth century' (Bing and Saville, 61). 
Unlike many other miners' leaders, Burt was physically frail, and he was described, by supporters and opponents alike, as meek, gentle, and pacific. He turned down several opportunities to augment his income, but received an annuity under the will of his friend Andrew Carnegie, who died in 1919. He married his cousin, Mary Weatherburn, in 1860 and they had four sons and four daughters. He described his wife, who predeceased him, as a 'daughter of the people', who was 'in complete sympathy with my public work, and throughout what was destined to be a long, happy married life... proved in every sense a brave and loving helpmate' (Burt, 139). Burt died at his home, 20 Burdon Terrace, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 12 April 1922, having been bedridden for three years, and was buried in Jesmond cemetery, Newcastle, on 19 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 32201


Burton, Sir Montague Maurice (1885-1952), clothing manufacturer and retailer, was born on 15 August 1885 in the town of Kurkel, Kovno province, Russia (now Lithuania), the only son of Chaim Judah Osinsky ('b'. 1825), bookseller, and his wife, Rachel Elky Osinsky. Of Jewish parentage, he was raised as Meshe David Osinsky by an uncle. He entered a Kovno 'yeshiva' in his early teens, with the apparent intention of becoming a rabbi, but in 1900 emigrated to England thus escaping the escalating Russian pogroms. 
The earliest details of Burton's life in England reveal him trading from a small ready-made clothing shop at Chesterfield, Derbyshire, in 1904, using the adopted name of Morris (occasionally Maurice) Burton. A second shop was opened in 1908 at Mansfield by which time Burton, who had settled on the forenames Montague Maurice, had also acquired a small clothing factory in Leeds. In March of 1909 he married Sophia Amelia (1887-1957), daughter of Maurice Marks, a Worksop furniture dealer. They set up home in Sheffield and had one daughter, Barbara, and three sons, Stanley and twins Raymond ['see below'] and Arnold. 
In the following years Burton oversaw the rapid development of his business despite prolonged periods of ill health. Concentrating on the provision of affordable bespoke clothing for the working man, he added shops in industrial towns such as Sheffield, Manchester, and Leeds, opening a total of fourteen branches by 1914. The firm also acquired additional factory capacity in Leeds, which became the new base for the head office, and by 1917 when it adopted limited liability status the business was employing about 400 workers. Burton was exempted from military service, as a result both of his continuing poor health and of his work as a wartime contractor supplying military uniforms. Indeed, the extraordinary pressures placed on the firm by the demand for uniforms and subsequently for demobilization clothing provided a considerable stimulus to business and revealed Burton's particular ability to co-ordinate the manufacturing and retailing functions of his company. 
On the retail side, the number of shops increased rapidly during the inter-war years from 40 in 1919 to more than 250 in 1927, reaching a pre-war peak of 595 in 1939. With the exception of Eire (and an abortive attempt to establish the chain in Denmark), the United Kingdom remained the sole focus for retail development. The chain of shops had spread to north-east England by 1914, the first London branch was opened in 1916, and similar developments soon followed in Belfast and Dublin ('c'.1918) and Edinburgh (1922). Growth on this scale needed considerable capital and required Burton to convert his business into a public company in March 1929. The company went public as 'Montague Burton, The Tailor of Taste, Ltd' with an authorized capital of $4 million. By 1931 the level of representation in large towns throughout the United Kingdom was such that attention was turned instead to the construction of branches in smaller centres. 
The success of the rapid and extensive shop development of the inter-war period confirmed Burton's views on the emergence of an increasingly homogeneous market for multiple bespoke clothing. More particularly, such developments also reflected his belief in the value of retail property as a business asset and his acumen in the property market. As a consequence Montague Burton Ltd entered the post-war years with a considerable and extremely valuable property portfolio which included the offices, restaurants, billiard halls, and the like which were developed above the shop space. Peacetime witnessed a slow increase in the number of Burton branches and the acquisition in 1946 of the department store retailers Peter Robinson Ltd and Stagg and Russell Ltd. The purchase of these stores in the West End of London and the subsequent development of similar outlets in Bristol, Gloucester, and Cheltenham signalled a limited expansion into women's fashion retailing but remained insignificant in comparison to the firm's traditional trade at the time of Burton's death in 1952. 
Burton sought to maintain the symbiotic relationship between production and distribution during the inter-war years by greatly expanding productive capacity. Most significant was the acquisition and massive redevelopment of a clothing factory at Hudson Road, Leeds, which began in 1922. By 1925, nine years before completion of the final stage of development, the company could rightly claim that Hudson Road was the largest clothing factory in Europe. Employing 10,500 people at its peak, Hudson Road enabled Burton to realize his principles on industrial co-operation and employee welfare in an industry frequently vilified for the inhumane treatment of its workers. Emphasis was placed on staff welfare from the outset with the construction of a large, modern staff canteen and employee rest-room. By 1934 these had been augmented with the provision of a doctor's surgery and medical clinic, dental and ophthalmic surgeries, and a sun-ray clinic. In addition, the firm provided facilities for various sporting activities, sponsored operatic and drama societies, and encouraged the establishment of sick benefit and holiday saving clubs. 
Similar facilities and initiatives were provided in three other new smaller clothing factories opened during the later 1930s as the company continued to expand its productive capacity in order to meet the demand emanating from the still rapidly growing chain of shops. Wartime saw the acquisition of a button factory in Kent, but most activity was concentrated on the production of as much as one-quarter of the armed services' requirement for uniforms. Further expansion of manufacturing capacity occurred during the final years of the 1940s when the relaxation of development controls permitted the construction of two new factories in Yorkshire and Lancashire. This period also witnessed backward integration into cloth production. 
Throughout his career Montague Burton remained a committed and vocal advocate of collective bargaining and arbitration in industry, and willingly dealt with his employees' chosen representatives. He thought that low wages were a false economy, and maintained from 1921 that his employees received the highest wages in the tailoring trade in Europe. Burton also insisted on working conditions of the highest possible standard. In consequence, the company suffered only two strikes during his lifetime, the first in 1927, the second while he was abroad in 1936, and it was generally recognized for its enlightened attitude toward employee welfare. By way of contrast, however, Burton remained highly autocratic in his dealings with senior management and, like many entrepreneurial founders of large businesses, was highly reluctant to delegate responsibility. He was directly responsible for most of the major policy decisions throughout his long career as founder and subsequently chairman of the company. This control was exercised most resolutely in relation to the firm's real estate department which he ran in an almost secretive fashion from the library at his home in Kent Road, Harrogate. Burton personally co-ordinated many property transactions and dealt directly with his firm's property agents in London. He conducted his business with a 'steely' personality and with great self-assurance. 
The tenacity of Burton's management style stood in sharp contrast to his otherwise retiring and self-effacing personality. Noted for his private generosity, Burton was something of a loner, shunning personal publicity and limiting his own contact with people. A keen advocate of temperance, he displayed simple tastes and disliked ostentation. He claimed to live his life at 60 miles an hour, and maintained a gruelling work schedule, holding office as non-executive director of four other companies, as well as serving as vice-president of the Multiple Shops Federation. 
Playing golf provided Burton with a regular form of relaxation, combining his passions for fresh air and exercise, and he enjoyed playing bridge with members of his family. Interested in scholarship, Burton was also a voracious reader of the classics, an occasional literary critic, a sponsor of several prizes in the arts and literature, and a member of the PEN club. He considered himself a modernist by temperament. He also wrote in some detail on topics related to his long-held interests in travel, industrial co-operation, and the international order. 
Burton acted as chairman of the Industrial Welfare Society's delegation to the United States and Canada in 1930 and made frequent fact-finding visits to retail and manufacturing firms in North America between the wars and after. He visited Russian factory plants in 1935 and was chosen as Leeds chamber of commerce's delegate to attend the Federation of Commonwealth and British Empire Chambers of Commerce meeting at Wellington, New Zealand, in 1936. He went round the world four times in total, recording his travels between 1933 and 1936 in two volumes of published diaries entitled 'Globe Girdling' (1935, 1937). 
These diaries reveal Burton's immense pride in his Jewish ancestry and his optimism for Palestine despite the worsening international situation. A generous supporter of educational and charitable institutions there, he was particularly gratified with the success of the new Hebrew University which he endowed with fifty scholarships. An acquaintance of Chaim Weizmann and close friend of Selig Brodetsky, president of the Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland from 1948, Burton also provided financial and practical support to numerous Jewish educational and charitable institutions in Britain. He was honorary life president of the Jewish congregation in Harrogate, vice-president of the Jewish Peace Society, and a popular representative of the Leeds Zionist Central Council. 
Burton's wider concerns for international and industrial harmony were summarized in his book 'The Middle Path' (1943). Reflecting many of his liberal inclinations, this book advocates arbitration in both industrial and international affairs. It builds on his long-held opinions of the need for a world federation with the power and authority to decide and implement international political decisions, and reflects on the importance of free and fair trade and industry. Burton also provided practical and financial support to initiatives designed to bolster international understanding. This included the establishment of branches of the League of Nations at his factories and the endowment of chairs of international relations at universities in Jerusalem, Oxford, Edinburgh, and London, and of lectureships at Nottingham and Leeds. Similarly, his interest in industrial relations was reflected in the establishment of chairs at the universities of Leeds, Cardiff, and Cambridge. Burton was knighted in 1931 in acknowledgement of his efforts to further industrial relations and international peace and received an honorary doctorate from the University of Leeds in 1944. 
Although a justice of the peace in Leeds from 1924, Burton largely eschewed calls for his greater involvement in public life, declining an invitation to be lord mayor of Leeds in 1930. He preferred instead to concentrate his time and energy on his business and private interests and also expressed a wish to spend more time with his daughter and three sons, believing that the pressures of his early career had deprived him of some of the pleasures of fatherhood. None the less, Montague Burton continued to play a pivotal role in the development of the company he founded, devoting the greater part of his time to its management until his death on 21 September 1952 at the Great Northern Hotel, Leeds. A funeral was held at Harrogate synagogue, on 24 September. He was buried at Gildersome cemetery, Leeds, but in 1964 was reinterred at Stonefall Jewish cemetery, Harrogate. 
Burton's son, Raymond Montague Burton (1917-2011), businessman and philanthropist, was born at 173 Chapeltown Road, Leeds, on 3 November 1917. He was educated at Clifton College, followed by Trinity College, Cambridge, and Harvard University, where he took an MBA. During the Second World War he joined the Royal Artillery, serving in India and Ceylon, and rising to the rank of major. After the war he, together with his brothers Stanley and Arnold, joined the family firm as a director. He initially took charge of the property portfolio. On 17 June 1946 he married Pamela Nancy Flatau (1917-2002), whose sister, Barbara, married Arnold Burton. They had two daughters, Harriet and Jane. Following their father's death in 1952 he and his brothers agreed to take over the smaller tailoring firm of Jackson the Tailor, in order to allow Lionel Jacobson, Jackson's founder and chairman, to become chairman of Burton's. 
In 1955 Raymond Burton moved to London to become chairman of Peter Robinson, the women's fashion store which his father had acquired in 1946, and which he expanded considerably. In 1964 he launched the Topshop brand, aimed at fashionable younger women, initially within Peter Robinson stores. He launched Topman in 1970, and the first standalone Topshop in 1974. He also oversaw the acquisition of the womenswear chains Evans in 1971 and Dorothy Perkins in 1979. He retired as joint chairman (with his brother Arnold) and president of the Burton Group (as Burton & Burton had become in 1969) in 1981. The group subsequently changed its name to Arcadia in 1997 and was acquired by the entrepreneur Philip Green in 2002. 
Meanwhile Raymond Burton devoted himself to philanthropic pursuits. Among the recipients of his philanthropy were the University of York (which named a new library for humanities research after him in 2003; a noted and discerning collector, he also donated an extensive collection of books and manuscripts relating to the history of Yorkshire), the York Civic Trust, and the Ryedale music festival. He was also chairman and president of the Jewish Museum, London, which had been founded in 1932, and which for many years was based in a single room in an office block in Bloomsbury. In 1988 he acquired a listed building in Albert Street, Camden Town, for the museum, and subsequently enabled it to triple in size by supporting the acquisition of an adjoining former piano factory; he was guest of honour at the opening of the extended premises in 2010. He was appointed CBE for his charitable work in 1995. He had homes in London and Yorkshire, and was a regular worshipper at the West London Synagogue and a vice-president of the Movement for Reform Judaism. Following the death of his first wife he married Diana Emory Stuttaford, a widow from Cape Town (daughter of Harry Emory Chubb, of the Chubb family of locksmiths and safe manufacturers) on 13 June 2005. In his younger days he was a keen rally driver, with his brother Arnold; in his eighties he drove an MG sports car. He died on 5 February 2011 and was survived by his second wife, Diana, and the two daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32202


Bury, John Bagnell (1861-1927), classical scholar and historian, was born in co. Monaghan, Ireland, on 16 October 1861. His father, the Revd Edward John Bury, curate of Monaghan, subsequently rector of Clontibert and canon of Clogher, had married Anna Rogers of Monaghan, 'a very clever woman and a great reader' ('DNB'). Edward Bury was a sound classicist, and introduced his son to Greek and Latin at a precocious age: John began Latin at four, and as a youth his command of Greek was such that Professor Robert Yelverton Tyrrell was unable to disconcert him during an examination in Greek grammar. 
After attending Monaghan diocesan school and Foyle College, Londonderry, Bury entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1878 and in 1879 came first in examinations for classical scholarships. In 1880 he spent six months in Germany at Gottingen, studying Sanskrit, Syriac, and Hebrew; in the same year he visited Italy for the first time, and won the Bishop Berkeley medal for Greek, a distinction of which he remained proud. In 1881, while still an undergraduate, he collaborated with Professor John Pentland Mahaffy in editing Euripides' 'Hippolytus'; in his introduction Mahaffy gave Bury the main credit for 'sifting the materials and composing the notes', whereas 'the critical suggestions, the illustrations and the opinions propounded' were a joint effort. In 1882 he graduated with a double first, taking first place in classics and fourth in mental and moral philosophy; his especially distinguished answers in classics earned him a large gold medal and a studentship of $700. He now embarked on a campaign, which lasted three years, to secure a fellowship at Trinity: in the 1883 examinations he obtained third prize; he spent the autumn of 1883 in Leipzig, working for the 1884 examinations when he was awarded the Madden prize for classics; his labours were rewarded in the 1885 diet when he became a fellow. As he confessed to a friend, Nathaniel Wedd of King's College, Cambridge, he had worked 'to the extreme limit of his powers' (Baynes, 3). The publication in 'Hermathena' of emendations on Pindar, Euripides, Sophocles, Diogenes Laertius, Hesychius, Sappho, Catullus, Cicero's letters to Atticus, and Plautus reflects the breadth of his reading. In September 1885 Bury married his second cousin, Jane, daughter of John Carleton Bury, physician of Mitchelstown, co. Cork; they spent their honeymoon in north Italy, where they visited Ravenna, but an epidemic prevented a planned visit to Greece. The marriage produced one son, Edward Basil, born in 1891. 
Bury's intellectual interests were always wide. Philosophy was part of his undergraduate studies, and he remained under the influence of his preferred master, Hegel. Music inspired him with its ability to transcend the constraints of time and space, but poetry was an even greater interest and pleasure. Swinburne was one favourite, even if he came to feel that the poet's romanticism was an obstacle to recovering the cheerful spirit ('euphrosyne') of the ancient Greeks. In 1882 he delivered a paper on Browning's philosophy to the Browning Society in London, which attracted the poet's attention; Bury presented Browning as a writer who helped his readers make the transition from the world of experience to the realm of eternal truths, and who recognized the universality of the individual. He addressed the society again in 1886. One result of this devotion to poetry, in combination with his linguistic skills and lively sense of humour, is the sequence of translations into Greek and Latin verse, published in the magazine 'Kottabos' between 1888 and 1895 (Bury himself was editor from 1888 to 1891). He regarded verse composition as a training in the virtue of words, whose disappearance from British scholarship would be a sad day. A similar approval for the educational virtues of useless learning informed his reaction to the retention of compulsory Greek at Cambridge in 1891: universities should not be converted into utility institutions for technical, commercial, or other training -- transferable skills and graduate employability did not concern him. 
Bury's commitment to interpreting classical texts produced numerous publications, of which the most substantial are editions of Pindar's 'Nemean Odes' (1890) and 'Isthmian Odes' (1892). In spite of his philological skills, these editions did not have a major impact since much of Bury's commentary was devoted to the ingenious tracing of verbal responsions within the poems as an attempt to recover the texture of Pindar's poetry. Critical reaction to the 'Nemean Odes' forced him to adopt a much more defensive position in the 'Isthmian Odes'; thereafter, even though he asserted that he would confront the objectors, he abandoned his projected edition of the rest of Pindar. The editions, however, remain interesting since they reveal Bury's conception of the essential spirit of ancient Greece: he was attracted by Pindar as a poet whose celebration of the victories of great men of old would not tempt readers to modernizing interpretations; Pindar reflected the authentic quality of the Hellenic spirit through his depiction of the bright place in which his heroes lived. Bury's evocation of the life of the Aeginetan elite is more readable than his intricate literary theory. 
Bury's enduring claim to fame is as a historian of the late Roman and Byzantine empires, though the epithet Byzantine would have been anathema, and his involvement with these topics is manifest in publications in 1888: he reviewed de Boor's edition of Theophylact and Sotiriadis' study of John of Antioch, and wrote his first article devoted to a Byzantine topic, on Theophylact Simocatta's chronology; he also demonstrated his familiarity with Gibbonian rhetoric by composing a stylistic parody devoted to the theme of home rule. These preliminaries scarcely suggested the magnitude of his achievement in the following year, when he published a long article on the emperors of the eleventh century, based on the narrative of Michael Psellus, as well as his first major work, 'A history of the later Roman empire from Arcadius to Irene (A.D.' 395 to A.D. 800), an accouno volumes, over 1100 pages. For Bury, eastern Roman history was a phase of Hellenic history, and so the 'History' stresses continuities from the classical world: 'No 'Byzantine Empire' ever began to exist; the Roman Empire did not come to an end until 1453' ('A History of the Later Roman Empire', v). But his lack of sympathy with Christianity entailed that one of the major forces shaping the development of the eastern Roman empire received inadequate attention, and his preference for the deeds of the great, evinced in his editions of Pindar, ensured that there would be little attention to social history: Bury missed the value of hagiography for illuminating the lives of lesser individuals, and thereby for achieving a fuller understanding of the development of those societies to whose constitutional and institutional continuities he was devoted. However, the 1889 'History' at once established his international reputation: Henry Tozer, writing to congratulate him, stated, 'I have good hopes that your graphic manner of presenting your subject, and your agreeable style, will do much towards awakening a general interest in the history of the Eastern Empire' (Baynes, 6). The expectations may have been too sanguine, but the assessment of Bury's literary qualities is accurate. 
In 1893 Bury was elected professor of modern history at Trinity, a post which he was allowed to retain even after appointment as regius professor of Greek in 1898. In 1902 he received an honorary Doctor of Letters from Oxford and was appointed regius professor of modern history at Cambridge, the position which he occupied until his death. He was elected to a fellowship at King's, where he was pleased to find colleagues who shared his anti-clerical views. His inaugural lecture was devoted to the independence of history as a scientific discipline; history was not to be the servant of literature, a source of background information about a sequence of 'great works'; nor was it the educator of public figures, even though this view had been proclaimed by his two favourite Greek historians, Thucydides and Polybius. Rather, history deserved to be studied because of its value to human life, since the present can only be understood through reference to the past. The lecture's message was the triumph of rational investigation, a belief propounded in his earliest publications when he had attacked the superstitions and orthodoxy of 'maw-filled, crop-full Christians' ('Browning Society Papers', 1, 1882, 261). Study of history offered mankind a chance to advance through the progress of knowledge, but, for history to supplant the institutionalized power of centuries of religious restraint, it would need to be conducted with exceptional rigour, hence the need for scientific history. By emancipating itself from the literary approach to historical evidence advocated by Jowett in the nineteenth century, history could proclaim its independence and, though remaining a humanist discipline, attain to the precision and objective truth with which the sciences were currently credited. 
Bury's inaugural attracted such attention that numerous latecomers could not find space in the hall, but he did not have a great impact on undergraduates. He disliked the constraints of the Cambridge historical tripos, which focused on set books: instead he proposed a system of open-book examinations. If in this respect Bury anticipated academic developments by almost a century, other aspects of his professorial service are now less favoured: he had a healthy contempt for university bureaucracies, and declined to sacrifice the time and thought demanded by administrative duties. On the other hand, he did encourage those interested in research, being generous with time and advice: the young Norman Baynes and Stephen Runciman both benefited from the intimidating stimulation of such contacts. Professor Fay of Toronto commented that 'a talk with Bury was almost like being present at the making of history' (Baynes, 51). 
During the 1890s Bury continued to publish on classical topics. In 1893 there appeared his 'History of the Roman empire from its foundation to the death of Marcus Aurelius (27 B.C.'-A.D. 180), a work coned by the publisher John Murray. Bury had a low opinion of Romans: 'Their intelligence was solid and commonplace, moving rigidly on old lines; they were incapable of striking a new vein or of conceiving a new idea' (Baynes, 15). He was a Hellenist, and this preference is evident in the preparations which attended his other major contribution to the history of the classical world, the 'History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great' (1900). Bury travelled extensively in Greece in 1895: Mr Bosanquet, who accompanied his tour of the classical sites of central Greece, commented that Bury was: 'a delightful companion with his mind full of everything in history and literature that bore upon the places we visited. He knew just what he wanted to see or verify on each site and carried the classical authorities in his head and quoted them with wonderful precision. He had a thought-out programme and adhered to it with placid obstinacy. (Baynes, 20-1)' Bury's good humour rendered tolerable a tour undertaken in bad weather through a region where facilities were often rudimentary and banditry an alleged threat. After this trip he published a series of articles which demonstrated his ability to fuse his critical mastery of textual evidence and familiarity with Greek geography. The 'History of Greece' has stood the test of time far better than its Roman counterpart, and, as revised by Russell Meiggs, is still widely used as a text book for first-year undergraduates: if it fails to impart a notion of the diverse development of Greek societies and cultures, its clear exposition of a series of historical problems still makes a useful introduction to the principles of studying ancient history. 
At the same time, however, Bury was even more active in later periods of Hellenic history, namely the later Roman empire and Byzantium. Between 1896 and 1900 he brought out a seven-volume edition of Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall', providing the great work of another rationalist anti-clerical writer with a scholarly apparatus of notes and appendices which discussed the views adopted in the text and presented contemporary scholarship. He also wrote a series of articles on historical problems, especially from the sixth century: his study of the Nika riot ('Journal of Hellenic Studies', 1897) remains the fullest analysis of the complex sources for this incident, and displays his sympathetic knowledge of the chronicle of John Malalas on whose text he had worked in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. In 1905 he published 'The Life of St. Patrick and his Place in History', whose scholarly basis had been established in numerous detailed studies published in the preceding four years. For Bury, Patrick was part of his study of the late Roman world, where the influence of Christianity served to spread Roman practices beyond the empire's frontiers; this classical approach to Patrick, coupled with his distaste for Christianity, meant that Bury, despite his precise scholarship, ignored the Irish dimension to the construction of Patrick and so failed to comprehend his inspirational power. 
Patrick could be seen as a distraction from Byzantium, to which he had only devoted brief notes or reviews during these years, but Bury returned to his main theme in 1906 with an article, 'The treatise De administrando imperio', in the 'Byzantinische Zeitschrift'. His interest in the writings of Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus is already evident in his 1889 'History' and in appendices to Gibbon, while in 1898 he had promised a new edition of these in the series 'Byzantine Texts' which he was co-ordinating. He did not embark on this labour, and parts of Constantine's writings still require a modern edition, but this interest produced his most enduring scholarship: in 1907 Bury published 'The ceremonial book of Constantine Porphyrogennetos' ('EngHR'); this article was followed in 1910 by 'The Constitution of the Later Roman Empire' (publication of the 1909 Creighton lecture) and in 1911 by 'The imperial administrative system in the ninth century, with a revised text of the Kleterologion of Philotheos'. This last was identified by Norman Baynes as 'probably the greatest single piece of pure scholarship that he ever produced: it would be difficult to praise this masterpiece too highly' (Baynes, 34), a judgement which remains true. It exploited Bury's talents as masterly philologist, sensitive elucidator of administrative structures, and devotee of the history of eastern Rome; it is essential reading for those interested in the structures of the middle Byzantine world, but also repays consultation by those concerned with other periods of eastern Roman history, since Bury was alert to the changes in institutional hierarchies over the centuries. 
Bury's other major Byzantine work of this period, 'A history of the eastern Roman empire from the fall of Irene to the accession of Basil I (A.D.' 802-867) (1912), continued the story of the Hellenic Roman world from his 1889 volumes; this could be praised as 'a revelation of the method of the scientific historian', though this rigorous approach has resulted in 'a collection of monographs rather than a history' (Baynes, 35), a work which lacks an artistic unity. Even during this period of late Roman preoccupation, Bury continued to publish notes on classical texts and in 1908 delivered a course of lectures at Harvard entitled 'The ancient Greek historians'; in reality a series of historiographical essays, these were published in the following year. His historical range was revealed by a contribution on Russia 1462-1682 to the 'Cambridge Modern History', as well as a projected biography of Catherine II. 
In 1910 Bury began to experience health problems, whose seriousness was disguised from all but a small circle of friends by his own determination and the support of his wife; he never fully recovered from eye trouble which afflicted him in the winter of 1910-11, and thereafter there were periods when he was unable to read. Ill health perhaps spurred him to produce a historiographical testament, the 'History of the Freedom of Thought', which expounded most explicitly the rationalist beliefs that had always spurred his approach to historical study. It charted the progress of mankind from the freedom of the Greeks, through the servility of the middle ages, to the emancipation of the modern period. In this work, composed 'with fire and force', Bury was concerned with the grand theme, and hostile reviewers, especially those alienated by his animosity to the church as an agent of repression, found plenty of scope for criticism on details. His rationalist views on the nature of history were further expounded in the 'History of the Idea of Progress' (1920), which developed some of the themes of his inaugural lecture. But it is appropriate that Bury's last major composition was devoted to east Rome, the 'History of the later Roman empire from the death of Theodosius I to the death of Justinian (A.D.' 395 to A.D. 565) (1923), 10s in two volumes; the period covered is less than half that of his 1889 'History', and the treatment is necessarily much denser. Equally appropriate for the philhellene is his commitment in his last years to the 'Cambridge Ancient History', of which he was editor-in-chief and to whose earlier volumes he contributed numerous chapters on classical Greek history and literature. From 1918 Bury spent every winter in Rome for his health, and it was there, at the Hotel Ludovisi, that he died on 1 June 1927. 
Bury's assessment of Thucydides in his 'Ancient Greek Historians' (1909) is applicable to his own achievements as a historian: he was not concerned to entertain but to establish a record whose truth would ensure its permanent utility; accuracy was of prime importance. As a scientific historian Bury rigorously excluded his own personality and opinions from his writings; events should be followed rather than moulded to fit an artistic plan; chance played a key role in determining the course of history so that it was misleading to search for general causes for grand sequences of events, especially in the remote past. One example of the avoidance of personal judgements is his refusal to portray any major character from later Roman history, although he admitted the relevance of personal qualities and motivations in the historical process: even for Justinian, who dominates the second volume of the 1923 'History', Bury contented himself with providing readers with materials to form their own character assessment while not committing himself. To the last he was a classical philologist who had converted to History. As a result many of his works fragment into collections of articles: particular issues are dispassionately dealt with in meticulous detail, but the place of each discussion in the wider work is overlooked. However, the fact that the best of these monographs are still required reading for specialists is testimony to the importance of Bury's historical scholarship. If his objectivity and precision suggest a dry personality, this was belied by his lively wit and happy conviviality, which endured even through his long battle against illness. His boyish good looks remained famous, and Bury seems to have delighted in exploiting them to surprise the unwary: Norman Baynes, on first encountering the distinguished professor, mistook him for a fellow undergraduate. 


@@@@@


doc= 32203


Bushell, Stephen Wootton (1844-1908), physician and art historian, born on 28 July 1844 at Woodnesborough, near Sandwich, Kent, was the third son of William Bushell, a farmer, and his wife, Sarah Frances Wootton. After education at Tunbridge Wells School and at Grange Court, Chigwell, he studied medicine at Guy's Hospital, and in 1866 graduated MB of the University of London, where he won several scholarships and gold medals. He was appointed house surgeon at Guy's Hospital in 1866 and in the following year became resident medical officer to Bethlem Royal Hospital. In 1868 he went to Peking (Beijing), as physician to the British legation there. Bushell married on 26 November 1874 Florence Jane ('b'. 1851/2), daughter of Robert Mathews, a surgeon; they had one son. 
Bushell became a considerable connoisseur of Chinese art, architecture, books, and coins. He studied the Chinese language and Chinese literature, and in the early 1870s travelled through the country with the photographer John Thomson, collaborating with him to produce a collection of photographs of Peking architecture and artefacts which is now in the Oriental Museum at the University of Durham. He also bought Chinese ceramics for A. W. Franks, the director of the British Museum, who presented his collection to the British Museum in 1876. In 1882-3 Bushell bought for the South Kensington Museum (later the Victoria and Albert Museum). His purchases for Franks and for South Kensington became the nuclei of both museums' Chinese collections. Bushell retired from his post, owing to ill health, in 1900. The services which he rendered to the Zongli yamen and other Chinese government departments had received formal acknowledgement in 1894, and in 1897 he had been made a CMG. 
After returning to England, Bushell devoted himself to writing on Chinese art and archaeology, and quickly won recognition as the leading authority of his day on Chinese ceramics. Bringing to the subject both his scientific training and his experience as a connoisseur, as well as an adequate grasp of the Chinese language, he was able to study, and in many cases publish in translation, classic Chinese works on arts and handicrafts. These publications included 'Porcelain of Different Dynasties' (1908), a reproduction with translation of a sixteenth-century Chinese collector's album with coloured illustrations (the original by Xiang Yuanpian was destroyed by fire in 1887, and the illustrations, taken from a copy, are therefore of questionable value); Bushell had in 1886 published a translation of the text of this album in the 'Journal of the Peking Oriental Society'. His 'Chinese Pottery and Porcelain' (published posthumously in 1910) was a translation of the classic 'Tao shuo' ('Speaking of pottery'), and ranked in significance with Stanilaus Julien's translation of 'Jingdezhen tao lu' (1856). 'Jade in China' (1906), an illustrated catalogue of the Heber Reginald Bishop collection (now in the Metropolitan Museum, New York) also included translations of 'Yu shuo' ('Discussion of jade') by Tang Rongzuo, and 'Yuzuo tu' ('Illustrations of the manufacture of jade') by Li Shichuan. Other works by Bushell include 'Oriental Ceramic Art', a description of the W. T. Waters collection in Baltimore, published in ten richly illustrated volumes in 1897, followed by a separate edition in 1899, and a catalogue of the J. Pierpont Morgan collection of Chinese porcelain in the Metropolitan Museum of New York, which he prepared with W. M. Laffan in 1907. He also wrote 'Chinese Art' (1904), a general introduction to the field, and edited Cosmo Monkhouse's book 'Chinese Porcelain' (1901). 
Bushell died on 19 September 1908 at his house, Ravensholt, Mount Park, Northolt. He was survived by his wife and son. As a contemporary observer of late nineteenth-century Chinese art, he was outstanding; his accounts of the kilns at Jingdezhen of that period are invaluable, and his catalogues are still important reference works on the later Qing porcelains. His translations may not be unquestioned, but they offered models for the scholarly handling of his subject. Bushell's own collection of Chinese artefacts was probably inherited by his family: in 1975 a granddaughter, Dorothy Bushell, presented a gift of twenty-five pieces to the Victoria and Albert Museum; the remainder of her collection was donated to the National Trust and is held at Beningbrough Hall, Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32204


Busk, Rachel Harriette (1831-1907), folklorist, was born at 22 Cumberland Street, London, the youngest of the five daughters of Hans Busk the elder (1772-1862), scholar and poet, and his wife, Maria (1788-1840), daughter of Joseph Green. An elder sister of Rachel's was Mrs Julia Clara Byrne (1819-1894), wife of the editor of 'The Times' and the 'Morning Post', and Hans Busk the younger (1815-1882) was the elder of her two brothers. Rachel Busk was educated by her father, and from an early age she spent much time in foreign travel, becoming an excellent linguist. Brought up as a protestant, she joined the Roman Catholic church in 1858, an enthusiastic convert of H. E. Manning (later second archbishop of Westminster), and her example was later followed by her four sisters. 
Rachel Busk lived much at Rome from 1862 onwards, and gained an intimate knowledge of the city and of society there in the days of papal independence. Among her wide circle of friends was Cardinal Giacchino Pecci, afterwards Pope Leo XIII. She contributed a series of letters on Roman politics and society to the 'Westminster Gazette' (a weekly Roman Catholic paper that ran from February 1859 until April 1879); some of these were reprinted in 1870 in a volume entitled 'Contemporary annals of Rome: notes political, archaeological and social, with a preface by Monsignor Capel'. Her reports covered Garibaldi's invasion of Rome, and the calling of the general council (known as the First Vatican Council, 1869-70), including an account of Manning's attendance. 
Travelling in outlying parts of Italy, Spain, and Austria, Rachel Busk became an authority on folklore, collecting thousands of folk tales and songs by word of mouth. She published anonymously 'Patranas, or, Spanish Stories' (1870); 'Household Stories from the Land of Hofer, or, Popular Myths of Tirol' (1871); and 'Sagas from the Far East: Kalmouk and Mongol Tales' (1873). Under her own name she published 'The Folk-Lore of Rome' (1874); 'The Valleys of Tirol' (1874); and 'The Folk-Songs of Italy' (1887), a well-edited selection, giving a specimen from each province with a line-for-line translation and notes. 
The London home shared by Rachel Busk with her sister Julia Pitt Byrne was known for its hospitality, and in 1898 she edited and published material for further volumes of Julia Pitt Byrne's 'Gossip of the Century', giving these the title 'Social Hours with Celebrities', fittingly called by her 'a chronicle of slight incidents'. They contained many reminiscences, autobiographical and biographical. Portraits included one of Nicholas Wiseman (first archbishop of Westminster), who, Rachel Busk claimed, had based the published version of his London lectures on the notes she had taken at his request. Among others of interest were such notable Catholic figures as Charles Waterton, Mrs Fitzherbert, Charles Lavigerie, and Theobald Mathew. Hilaire Belloc dedicated his 'The Path to Rome' to her in 1902. 
Rachel Busk maintained a worldwide correspondence with fellow folklorists, horticulturists, and archaeologists. She died at her residence in Members' Mansions, Victoria Street, Westminster, on 1 March 1907, and was buried in the family vault at Frant, near Tunbridge Wells. 


@@@@@


doc= 32205


Butcher, Samuel Henry (1850-1910), classical scholar, was born in Dublin on 16 April 1850. His father, Samuel Butcher (1811-1876), was then professor of ecclesiastical history at Trinity College. His mother was Mary, 'nee' Leahy, from a Kerry family. His early years were spent in Dublin, or at Ballymoney, co. Cork, where his father held a college living, and after 1866, when his father became bishop of Meath, at Ardbraccan, near Navan. His only brother, John George Butcher (1851-1935), became a KC, Conservative MP for the city of York, and Baron Danesfort. The eldest of his four sisters, Elizabeth (1849-1908), became Lady Monteagle. Butcher was educated at home until the age of fourteen, then at Marlborough College. His progress was rapid: in 1865 he won a senior scholarship. He also won many prizes for Latin and Greek composition, and ultimately became senior prefect. Later he acknowledged his debt to the teaching of George Granville Bradley, then headmaster. He was a fair cricketer, and football captain. In 1869 he won a classics open scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, and began residence that autumn. His undergraduate career was an unbroken success. In 1870 he won the Bell scholarship, in 1871 the Waddington scholarship, in 1871 and 1872 the Powis medal. In 1873 he graduated senior classic, and was awarded a chancellor's medal. As an undergraduate he was the centre of a brilliant group of friends, and a member of the exclusive society, the Apostles. In 1874 he was elected fellow of Trinity. 
After graduating Butcher was an assistant master at Eton (1873-4). He then returned to Cambridge, as lecturer in classics at Trinity. There he might have remained, but for his engagement in 1875. Under the statutes, a fellowship was forfeited by marriage. Dr Bradley, master of University College, Oxford, offered him a tutorship there with a 'married' fellowship attached. He therefore moved to Oxford, and in 1876 married Rose Julia (died 1902), youngest daughter of Richard Chenevix Trench, archbishop of Dublin; the couple had no children. At Oxford his teaching rapidly made its mark. His scholarship, brilliant and solid, his enthusiasm, his interest in the matter as well as the language of his authors, made his lectures attractive and profitable. Among his pupils were J. W. Mackail, Cecil Spring-Rice, and others who later won distinction, and to whom he was friend as well as teacher. A university commission was appointed in 1877, and Butcher gained acquaintance with academic problems which was later useful to him. He actively supported female education, and was honorary secretary to the council of the Association for the Higher Education of Women at Oxford (1879-82). He also began to distinguish himself as an author. In 1879 he published, with Andrew Lang, a translation of the 'Odyssey' which was considered the most successful prose reproduction yet. In the same year Butcher published a small book on Demosthenes, giving the political context and the rhetorical methods of the orator. 
These works, and his growing reputation as a scholar and teacher, gained Butcher, in 1882, the chair of Greek at Edinburgh University. He met at first some opposition as a non-Scot; but his charm and teaching ability soon overcame all obstacles. Popular among his students, with whom he was closer than was usual in Scottish universities, he soon gained a leading position in the senatus. In 1889 the 'Scottish Universities Bill' became law; and a royal commission was nominated to draw up new statutes and reform the Scottish university system. Its chairman was Lord Kinnear, and Butcher was chosen to represent the professors. The work of the commission, an executive not advisory body, was difficult and onerous. The commissioners had to draw up for all the four Scottish universities not only statutes but ordinances or regulations, and the constitutions of the universities had to be harmonized and, so far as possible, made identical. This laborious task lasted nearly eleven years, during which the commission held 251 meetings. Its general report was not issued until April 1900. It was generally recognized by the commissioners and by the academic body that Butcher's experience, industry, and tact were of great value in achieving a beneficent, far-reaching reform. 
Meanwhile Butcher took an active part in Edinburgh society; and his house, with his wife's conversational powers, became a brilliant social centre. Among his closest friends were Professor and Mrs W. Sellar. In 1891 Butcher published a volume of essays and addresses, 'Some Aspects of the Greek Genius', on the nature of the Greek mind. The most notable essay was that on Aristotle's conception of fine art and poetry, the germ from which grew Butcher's most important work, 'Aristotle's Theory of Poetry and Fine Art' (1895). 
At Edinburgh, Butcher was first drawn into politics. Of liberal views but strong conservative instincts, during the Irish home-rule controversy, he took a leading role in organizing the Unionist Party in Edinburgh. When, with Gladstone's return to power in 1892, the home-rule threat reappeared, he actively promoted the election of his friend Lord Wolmer (later second earl of Selborne) for West Edinburgh. 
In 1902 Rose Butcher died after a brief illness. This loosened his ties to Edinburgh; and, having held his professorship long enough for a pension, Butcher resigned in 1903. A. J. Balfour presided at his farewell dinner in January 1904. He moved to London, residing the rest of his life at 6 Tavistock Square. In 1904 he lectured at Harvard and elsewhere in the United States, and published 'Harvard Lectures on Greek Subjects' (1904), a sort of sequel to 'Some Aspects of the Greek Genius'. He worked on a critical edition of Demosthenes' speeches, two volumes of which were published (1903, 1907), and in improving successive editions of the 'Poetics'. 
Before leaving Edinburgh, Butcher had been appointed to the royal commission on university education in Ireland (1901), of which Lord Robertson was chairman. In its discussions Butcher took a prominent part. Believing in the justice of the Roman Catholic demands, he aimed at satisfying the Catholic authorities without infringing the independence of Trinity College. He therefore aided the chairman in excluding it from the discussion, while doing his utmost to elicit the exact views of Catholic witnesses as to the extent of ecclesiastical control which they considered advisable. He also tried to secure the attendance of the Maynooth students in the new university. When in 1903 the report appeared, it was accompanied by eight 'reservations'; and the chairman himself dissented. The report produced no result. 
Another royal commission was appointed on the same subject in June 1906. Sir Edward Fry was chairman. Butcher was the only person who served on both royal commissions. This time, Trinity College was expressly included, and its financial and other conditions were carefully examined; but in their report (January 1907) the commissioners declared that, in their opinion, it was impossible to make that foundation available for the higher education of Catholics. They therefore recommended the establishment in Dublin of a separate college. When Augustine Birrell's bill for the creation of a new university was introduced in parliament (31 March 1908), Butcher opposed the granting of indefinite powers of affiliation to the senate, but in vain. Although the scheme differed in many ways from what he wanted, he accepted membership of the senate of the new university, and took an active part in its proceedings. 
In 1906, on the death of his old friend Sir Richard Jebb, Butcher became Conservative MP for Cambridge University. His first speech was on the 'Irish University Bill'; an impassioned appeal to substitute for the existing royal university a real teaching university where the Catholic Irish layman could obtain the education he desired. Butcher seldom spoke in the Commons, and mostly on educational and Irish questions. In addition to his classical works, he published speeches on Ireland. 
In 1903 Butcher had been a principal founder of the English Classical Association. He was chairman of its council from then on, and president in 1907. He was instrumental in bringing about, through the association, a reform of Latin pronunciation. He was also the first president of the Irish Classical Association. He was a prominent member of the Hellenic Society and the committee for the British School at Athens. He opposed the abolition of compulsory Greek at the older universities, but was willing to make concessions for students specializing in other subjects. When the British Academy was founded in 1902, he was one of its original fellows, and became president in 1909. In July 1908 he was appointed a British Museum trustee, and six months later a member of its standing committee. He was continually consulted on educational questions and appointments. He received honorary degrees from Oxford, Dublin, St Andrews, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester, and Harvard. He was a corresponding member of the American Academy. In 1910 he received the Greek order of the Redeemer. He was an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, and Trinity College, Cambridge. 
Of middle height, well but rather slightly built, Butcher was considered handsome. His eyes were large, of a deep brown, and very brilliant. His hair was black and abundant, later slightly grizzled. His conversation was fluent, vivacious, and energetic, but playful as well as vigorous, argumentative on occasion, but never overbearing. Generous to others, he was capable of fiery indignation against public or private wrongs. He had a strong sense of humour, delighting especially in the wit of his countrymen. 
Butcher's varied labours eventually harmed his health. Although naturally somewhat delicate, he generally appeared healthy. He spent the summer vacation of 1910 at Danesfort, near Killarney, on a little property inherited from his father, where he loved to spend his holidays. In October he had an attack of internal haemorrhage, which led to suffusion of blood on the brain. He died in a nursing home, 7 Mandeville Place, Marylebone, London, on 29 December 1910, and was buried in the Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, beside his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32206


Butler, Arthur Gray (1831-1909), headmaster, born at Gayton rectory, Northamptonshire, on 19 August 1831, was the third son of George Butler, dean of Peterborough, and his wife, Sarah Maria, eldest daughter of John Gray of Wembley Park, Middlesex. After attending Eagle House at Hammersmith, he entered Rugby School under A. C. Tait in August 1844. In a novel 'The Three Friends' (1900), Butler later described school life there, recording friendships between Matthew Arnold, A. H. Clough, and Theodore Walrond, and the effect produced on his Rugby contemporaries by the early poems of Tennyson. At school and college he was distinguished in both work and games, and Butler's Leap at Rugby commemorates a youthful athletic feat. 
In March 1850 Butler was admitted as a scholar of University College, Oxford. At Oxford he was an original member of the Essay Club founded in 1852 by his friend G. J. Goschen, and was president of the union in 1853. In the same year he won the Ireland scholarship, and graduated BA with a first class in the final classical school. He was elected a fellow of Oriel in 1856, proceeding MA in the following year. Like his brothers, George Butler and Henry Montagu Butler, he became a schoolmaster, returning to Rugby in 1858 as assistant master under Frederick Temple. He was ordained deacon in 1861 and priest in 1862. 
On the reconstitution of Haileybury College in 1862 Butler was appointed the first headmaster. In September the school took over the buildings of the East India Company's college near Hertford, which had been founded in 1805 for the training of its civil servants. Haileybury had no endowment, and from the outset Butler was hampered by inconvenient buildings and lack of modern appliances. Nevertheless he set himself to infuse into the school something of the strenuous vitality of the Rugby system, appointing Rugby men as masters and introducing the Rugby football game, which was made compulsory. He himself served as chaplain. He provided racquet and fives courts. He encouraged the growth of corporate spirit in the dormitories, with which he replaced the existing study bedrooms, and maintained the continuity of associations by naming the various houses after prominent Anglo-Indian civilians. Pupil numbers rose rapidly in a few years from 54 to 360. Butler's attractive personality, his enthusiasm, his eloquence, and thoroughness exercised a considerable influence over boys and masters. He was a stimulating classical teacher, and had the faculty of throwing new light on familiar passages. A nervous breakdown caused by overwork compelled his resignation in December 1867. He had by then raised Haileybury to a recognized place among the leading English public schools. 
On resuming work in 1874 Butler served as chaplain of the Royal Indian Civil Engineering College at Coopers Hill near Egham. Returning to Oxford in 1875, he settled down to the more congenial duties of dean and tutor of Oriel, where his pupils included Cecil Rhodes. On 4 April 1877 he married Harriet Jessie, who was twenty years his junior, daughter of Michael Pakenham Edgeworth and niece of Maria Edgeworth. Re-election to his fellowship in October 1877 confirmed his place among the first generation of married dons at Oxford. He was disappointed to be passed over for the provostship in 1882; an anti-clerical sentiment among the governing body favoured D. B. Monro, a layman. After resigning his official position at Oriel in 1895 he maintained close relations with his college and was elected to an honorary fellowship in 1907. It was partly owing to his suggestions that both Oriel and Oxford benefited by the will of Cecil Rhodes. 
Although not a productive scholar in the narrow academic sense, Butler cherished strong literary instincts, which found expression mainly in verse. He published two dramas, 'Charles I' (1874; 2nd edn, 1907) and 'Harold' (1892; 2nd edn, 1906), and two volumes of poetry entitled 'The Choice of Achilles' (1900) and 'Hodge and the Land' (1907). The latter reflected a long-standing interest in land reform. A broad-churchman in religion, and a lifelong friend of A. P. Stanley, Butler was a liberal in politics, though, like his friends from the Essay Club, Goschen and G. C. Brodrick, his opposition to Irish home rule led him into Liberal Unionism. In Oxford he was a supporter of women's education, and of social causes such as the housing of the poor. He and his wife were active in the Oxford Cottage Improvement Society. 
Butler died at GlenFinnan, Belgrave Road, Torquay on 16 January 1909, and was buried in Holywell cemetery, Oxford. He left one son, Harold Edgeworth Butler (1878-1951), professor of Latin at London University, and three daughters, Olive Harriet Edgeworth Butler (1879-1951), warden of Lady Margaret Hall Settlement in Lambeth; Ruth Florence Butler (1881-1982), tutor in history and vice-principal of the Society of Oxford Home Students; and (Christina) Violet Butler (1884-1982), tutor in economics to the Society of Oxford Home Students. 


@@@@@


doc= 32207


Butler, Arthur John (1844-1910), Italian scholar and mountaineer, born at Putney, Surrey, on 21 June 1844, was the eldest of the six children of William John Butler (1818-1894), at that time curate of Puttenham, near Guildford, Surrey, but best-known as the dean of Lincoln, and Emma Barnett (died 1894), daughter of George Henry Barnett, banker, of Glympton Park, Woodstock, Oxfordshire. Through both parents he was connected with Stratford Canning, first cousin of George Canning -- Stratford being his mother's maternal grandfather, and his father's great-great-uncle (by marriage). 
After a childhood at Wantage, Berkshire, affectionately dominated by parents of strong if differing characters, both devoted pioneers of the Tractarian movement, Arthur took a scholarship to St Andrew's College, Bradfield, in 1853. At Easter 1857 he proceeded to Eton College, and subsequently to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a scholarship. He won the Bell university scholarship in 1864, and graduated eighth classic in the tripos of 1867, and as a junior optime in mathematics. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1869. In the following year he reluctantly left Cambridge on accepting a post as examiner under the Board of Education. On 6 April 1875 he married Mary Caroline Humphry, daughter of William Gilson Humphry, vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields. Butler worked in the education office, Whitehall, until 1887, when an invitation to become salaried partner in the publishing firm of Rivington tempted him from a routine which had never been congenial. After the amalgamation of Messrs Rivington with the firm of Longman he transferred his services to Messrs Cassell & Co. as their chief editor. In 1894 he relinquished business, and was appointed an assistant commissioner on secondary education. Subsequently from 1899 until his death he was engaged at the Public Record Office in editing calendars of foreign state papers from 1577 onwards: he published four volumes between 1901 and 1909. In 1898 he became professor of Italian language and literature at University College, London, and likewise filled that office until his death. 
Butler was an accomplished scholar. His most important work was his contribution to the study of Dante. He was the first Englishman to replace the old dilettante enjoyment of the 'Divine Comedy' by exact and disciplined study, and to treat it as scholars treated a Greek or Latin classic. His 'Purgatory of Dante', a prose translation with notes, appeared in 1880; his 'Paradise' in 1885; his 'Hell' in 1892. In 1890 he edited the Italian text. In 1893 he published a 'Companion to Dante', a translation of Scartazzini's work, and in 1895 a small book, 'Dante: his Times and his Work'. 'The Forerunners of Dante' (1910), an annotated selection from the Italian poets before 1300, was finished a few days before his death. 
Butler also devoted much leisure to translating French and German works. Among others, he published the 'Memoirs of Baron de Marbot' (1892); 'Select Essays of Sainte-Beuve' (1895); 'Memoirs of Baron Thiebault' (1896); and 'The History of Mankind', from Professor Friedrich Ratzel's work (1896). He also edited the English version of 'Bismarck: the Man and the Statesman' (1898). At the same time, for thirty-five years Butler wrote for 'The Athenaeum', and was an occasional contributor to magazines on his favourite topics: Dante, mountaineering, Eton, and the Napoleonic campaigns. However, much of his most characteristic writing was spent in fugitive contributions to the press, which were always trenchant, original, and humorous, and exhibited an unusual blend of inborn churchmanship with an outspoken and militant liberalism. 
From his school days Butler was also a mountaineer, delighting in alpine expeditions off the beaten track. In 1886, when he became a member of the Alpine Club, he brought to it an intimate knowledge -- beyond challenge by any mountaineer in Europe -- of the Otzthal alps, which he first attacked in 1874, and revisited many times, up to 1890, with an ardour that was almost a passion. Butler became the editor of the 'Alpine Journal' in 1890, and supervised it until the end of 1893 (vols. 15 and 16). He delighted in the dinners of the Alpine Dining Club. He was a member of the band of Sunday Tramps that Leslie Stephen organized in 1882, ranking number ten on the original list. Butler died at his home, Wood End, Weybridge, on 26 February 1910, survived by his wife, one son, and six daughters, and was buried at Wantage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32208


Butler, Edward Joseph Aloysius (1858-1934), abbot of Downside and scholar, was born in Dublin on 6 May 1858, the only child of Edward Butler (died 1902), barrister, and his wife, Mary Cruise (died 1897). His father had been professor of mathematics in Newman's recently established Catholic University in Dublin. Educated at Downside near Bath in Somerset from 1869 to 1875, Butler entered the Benedictine noviciate at Belmont Priory, Hereford, in 1876, taking in religion the name of Cuthbert. There he acquired his lifelong attachment to the spiritual teaching of Augustine Baker and the ascetical practice of manual labour. 
In 1880 Butler returned to Downside, where the young Aidan Gasquet was prior, and the liturgical scholar Edmund Bishop -- like Butler himself, a virtual autodidact -- was a frequent visitor. Butler was ordained priest in 1884 and taught in the school, but his principal interest was the contemporary movement to win traditional monastic autonomy for Downside and the other houses of the English Benedictine congregation. The congregation was at that time a highly centralized body, and the monasteries were viewed principally as 'feeders', providing priests for the numerous Benedictine parishes. The movement's objective was in large part achieved in 1900, when the monasteries became abbeys, and their independent liturgical and intellectual life began to flower. 
Meanwhile, in 1896, Butler was sent to Cambridge as the first superior of Benet House, where Downside monks could study at the university, under the auspices of Christ's College. There he edited the 'Lausiac History of Palladius' (1898, 1904). After returning to Downside as sub-prior in 1904, he was elected abbot in 1906. Re-elected in 1914 he was also abbot president of the congregation from 1914 to 1921. He published a critical edition of the rule of St Benedict in 1912 and in 1919 published his most respected work, 'Benedictine Monachism', which combines judicious scholarship with many reflections on his own experience. He also published the more controverted 'Western Mysticism' (1922). 
In the same year Butler resigned the abbacy on a matter of monastic principle: it seems that he failed to win the community's support for his proposal that no monk should be liable under obedience to serve in the outlying Benedictine parishes. Thereafter he lived at Ealing Priory, writing 'The Life and Times of Bishop Ullathorne' (2 vols., 1926) and 'The Vatican Council' (2 vols., 1930), which is drawn almost entirely from Ullathorne's letters, a narrative that is detailed, fair-minded, and free of all party spirit. He died suddenly of heart failure at Clapham on Easter day, 1 April 1934, and was buried at Downside. 
By temperament Butler was a scholar rather than an administrator, and impressed everyone he encountered with his intellectual honesty and sincere piety. As abbot, though he held strongly that a monastery should be a family, he was not himself gifted with the necessary fatherly qualities. Some have also criticized him for allowing the development of Downside School to endanger the monastic observance he restored. But as a teacher and practitioner of a sane and balanced monasticism, it would be hard to find his equal, and his written works on this subject have not dated. Butler received the honorary degree of doctor of letters from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 32209


Butler, Elizabeth Southerden, Lady Butler (1846-1933), military painter, was born on 3 November 1846 at Villa Claremont, Lausanne, Switzerland, the elder daughter of Thomas James Thompson (1812-1881) and his second wife, Christiana Weller (1825-1910). Unusually, her education and that of her sister, the poet and essayist Alice Meynell (1847-1922), was not entrusted to a governess but was undertaken by her father, a man of independent means and artistic leanings. After spending much of her childhood in Italy, she began receiving professional art training in 1862 and entered the Female School of Art, South Kensington, London, in 1866; she supplemented her studies there with attendance at a private 'undraped female' life class which enabled her to draw figures with confidence in her later work as a battle painter. In 1869 the family moved to Florence and converted to Roman Catholicism. Her first notable work, 'The Magnificat' (1872; St Wilfrid's Church, Ventnor), was of a religious subject. 
On a visit to Paris in 1870 Elizabeth Thompson found her true metier when she encountered the new, more realistic portrayal of battle being pioneered by painters such as Edouard Detaille and Jean Louis Ernest Meissonier. Her first successful Royal Academy submission, 'Missing' (exh. 1873) -- a scene of the suffering of ordinary soldiers in the aftermath of a battle in the Franco-Prussian War -- was an exercise in this manner. The next year, the lessons she had learned in France were applied to a British military subject, 'Calling the Roll after an Engagement, Crimea' (exh. RA, 1874; Royal Collection). 'The Roll Call', as it quickly became known, proved to be one of the most popular paintings of the nineteenth century: at the academy, a policeman had to be stationed in front of it for its protection. The painting was subsequently taken on a highly successful solo tour of a number of provincial cities, and engravings of the work and carte-de-visite photographs of the artist -- looking young and pretty, completely contrary to what the public would expect a successful battle painter to be like -- were sold by the thousand. 
During the next few years Elizabeth Thompson exhibited a series of scenes from the Crimean and Napoleonic wars, which were similar in character and composition to 'The Roll Call' with individualized but anonymous soldiers arranged across the canvas and the minutiae of dress and equipment recorded with the utmost accuracy. These works, 'The 28th Regiment at Quatre Bras' (exh. RA, 1875; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne), 'Balaclava' (exh. Fine Art Society, London, 1876; Manchester City Galleries), and 'The Return from Inkerman' (exh. Fine Art Society, London, 1877; Ferens Art Gallery, Hull) were also immensely popular. Much was made of the unprecedented sympathy for the suffering and heroism of the ordinary British soldier which they seemed to display, a quality which was deemed especially remarkable because she had never witnessed war at first hand, but explicable in view of her sex; she was a 'Florence Nightingale of the brush' as someone commented. Nevertheless, with hindsight one can see that these works also benefited from the interest in the plight of the less fortunate in society, which was a feature of contemporary art in the 1870s. 
In 1879 the success of these works brought Thompson within two votes of election as associate of the Royal Academy, the nearest any woman came to receiving such an honour in the nineteenth century. However, this proved to be the summit of her career. She never again stood for election at the academy, perhaps sensing that the reformist climate of the 1870s, which had seen the academy almost countenance a female associate member, had passed. Subsequently, only 'Scotland for Ever!' (exh. Egyptian Hall, Piccadilly, London, 1881; Leeds City Art Gallery), today her best-known painting, enjoyed the kind of acclaim her previous work had received. An important reason for this sudden slump in her popularity was undoubtedly her marriage on 11 June 1877 to an up-and-coming army officer, Sir William Francis Butler (1838-1910). This brought in its train the duties of child-rearing (she had five children) and the requirement to travel to distant parts of the globe. It also encouraged her to continue with her bleak, untriumphalist approach when tackling subjects drawn from contemporary colonial wars at a time when public taste was for scenes of imperial conquest. Because of his Catholic Irish background William Butler became increasingly critical of Britain's 'imperial mission' and appears to have encouraged her to refrain from glorying in the defeat of ill-equipped native troops in works such as 'The Defence of Rorke's Drift, January 22nd, 1879' (exh. RA, 1880); Royal Collection) and ''After the Battle': arrival of Lord Wolseley and staff at the bridge of Tel-el-Kebir at the close of action' (exh. RA, 1885; priv. coll.). By contrast, rival battle painters such as Richard Caton Woodville, Charles Fripp, and William Barnes Wollen -- all of whom had learned from her successes of the mid-1870s -- felt no qualms about catering to popular taste. 
Although Lady Butler continued to paint until 1929 her work was largely ignored -- except for a period in the 1890s when she enjoyed something of a revival with Napoleonic subjects such as 'Dawn of Waterloo: the 'Reveille' in the Bivouac of the Scots Greys on the Morning of Battle' (exh. Royal Academy, 1895; priv. coll.) and ''Steady the Drums and Fifes!': the 57th (Die-Hards) Drawn up under Fire on the Ridge at Albuera' (exh. RA, 1897; the Queen's regiment, Canterbury). It was not that the character of her work had fundamentally changed, for she continued to celebrate the stoicism of the ordinary British soldier in adversity and danger just as she had half a century before. It was more that as a response to the conditions of modern warfare, particularly those of the First World War, her kind of battle painting now seemed old-fashioned and inappropriate. She died at her residence, Gormanston Castle, co. Meath, Ireland, on 2 October 1933. 
Lady Butler has a dual claim to fame. She pioneered a new, more realistic depiction of warfare in British painting, one which was to prove immensely influential at the end of the nineteenth century. And she briefly enjoyed critical and popular success of such magnitude that, for a while, it seemed a new era for women artists in Britain was about to dawn. 


@@@@@


doc= 32210


Butler, Frank Hedges (1855-1928), motorist and aviator, was born in London on 17 December 1855, the fifth son of James Butler, wine merchant, of Hollywood, Wimbledon Park, and his wife, Frances Mary, eldest daughter of William Hedges. He was educated at private schools at Brighton and Upper Clapton to 1870 and, after travelling in Europe, Africa, and South America, entered the family business of Hedges and Butler (founded in 1667), Regent Street, London, in which he became a partner in 1882. He married in 1880 Ada (died 1905), daughter of Joseph Bartholomew Tickle, wool broker, of London and Sydney, and with her had two daughters, Vera (later Vera Nicholl), who shared many of his motoring and ballooning adventures, and Frances, who died in infancy. 
Hedges Butler was one of the first people in Britain to own a motor car. He acquired a Benz car in 1897, joined the Automobile Club de France, and then was appointed first honorary treasurer of the newly formed Automobile Club of Great Britain, a post which he held until 1902. With the Hon. Charles Stewart Rolls, he helped to organize races from 1898. It was the shortcomings of a motor car, and the consequent abandonment of a motor tour in Scotland in September 1901, which led Hedges Butler to turn his attention to the air. A balloon ascent was suggested instead of the tour, and Butler, his daughter, and Rolls went up in a balloon, the 'City of York', from the Crystal Palace, with Stanley Spencer in control. While in the air over London, he suggested the formation of an aero club as a branch of the Automobile Club. The Aero Club of the United Kingdom was registered at Somerset House in October 1901, and the first balloon ascent organized by the club took place on 15 November. 
The club (which in 1910 became the Royal Aero Club) brought together inventors and recreational balloonists, and supplied them with a ground at Shell Beach, Isle of Sheppey, suitable for their experiments. Hedges Butler also took a keen interest in the beginnings of powered flight, and in 1908, when the American inventor Wilbur Wright arrived in France to demonstrate his aeroplane, Butler was one of the first two Englishmen to fly as passenger with him. 
By 1907 Hedges Butler had completed one hundred balloon ascents, including a solo flight which established a record for distance in Britain (1902), and what was then the world's longest cross-channel balloon voyage (London to Caen, 1905). 
As a result of the successful flights by Wilbur Wright in France in 1908, the Aero Club undertook the training of aeroplane pilots, to whom, from 1910 onwards, it issued its certificates; these were recognized by the government when it was decided to establish the Royal Flying Corps. The Aero Club, inspired by Hedges Butler, in fact played an all-important part in fostering the early development of flying in England. Hedges Butler's concern with the air diminished in no way his interest in travel. In the course of his business he often visited the wine-producing regions of Europe -- including Champagne in 1914-18, even when fighting was only a few miles away -- but these journeys only stimulated his enthusiasm, and with great enjoyment he moved widely about the world. He had been elected FRGS in 1877. 
Hedges Butler had still other interests. He was a violinist of merit, and in 1894 founded the Imperial Institute Orchestral Society, in which he played one of the first violins. He was a man of hospitable nature with a gift for friendship, who enjoyed splendid health, as well as ample means to indulge his many enthusiasms. He died in a nursing home at 29 Wimpole Street, London, on 27 November 1928 and was buried in Norwood cemetery three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 32211


Butler, Sir (George) Geoffrey Gilbert (1887-1929), historian and politician, was born at 55 Harrington Gardens, Kensington, London, on 15 August 1887, the ninth son of Spencer Perceval Butler, conveyancing counsel of Lincoln's Inn, and his wife, Mary Kendall. He belonged to a distinguished academic family: he was a nephew of Henry Montagu Butler, George Butler (1819-1890), and Arthur Gray Butler. Sir Montagu Sherard Dawes Butler and Sir (Spencer) Harcourt Butler were his brothers. Educated at Clifton College, where he later became a school governor, Butler matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1906, taking first class in both parts of the historical tripos, and was elected to a major college scholarship in his third year. He won the chancellor's medal for English verse, edited the 'Cambridge Review', and was president of the union in his fourth year. In June 1910 he was offered a fellowship at two colleges simultaneously. He chose that at Corpus Christi College where, as college lecturer and director of studies in history, he 'set out to make the teaching of that subject a vital factor in the college as a whole' (Bury, 241). In 1912 he became librarian, taking charge of the college's inestimable collection of manuscripts and incunabula created by Matthew Parker at the dissolution of the monasteries. 
In 1913 Butler published an edition of the Edmondes papers and in 1914 a series of lectures, 'The Tory Tradition'. He was, however, first and foremost a historian of international relations and of modern diplomatic history. According to his friend Sir William Spens, 'He regarded a European war in the near future as highly probable... [and] he did his best to ensure that the undergraduates of his college should have some idea of what war would mean' ('DNB'). When the First World War broke out he was prevented by disability from military service. In the spring of 1915 he went to the Foreign Office, where he joined the news department, which was at the forefront in presenting the British perspective to the new media of foreign neutrals, especially to the United States. Here he had the advantage of knowing America, for in 1913 and 1914 he had been a visiting lecturer at the University of Pennsylvania. In 1916 he returned to lecture at the same university, and while there he married, on 17 November 1916, Elizabeth Levering Jones ('b'. 1892), eldest daughter of Joseph Levering Jones, a corporate lawyer of Philadelphia. They had no children. In 1917 he returned to America as part of the foreign secretary Arthur Balfour's mission. He remained in New York until 1919 as director of the British bureau of information, a post in which he fostered Anglo-American relations and for which he was made KBE (1919). 
Butler returned to Cambridge in 1919, and was soon afterwards appointed praelector in diplomatic history at Corpus. He devoted himself to three things: 'to his duties as librarian of Corpus, and in particular to rearranging and cataloguing the incunabula and making the manuscripts more accessible; to his historical teaching; and to promoting conservative principles, as he understood these, among the undergraduates of the university' ('DNB'). During these post-war years Butler published a number of books: 'Studies in Statecraft' (1920); 'Guide to an Exhibition of Historical Authorities of British History' (1920), derived from the college manuscript collection; 'A Handbook to the League of Nations' (1925); and in 1928 'The Development of International Law', written in conjunction with one of his former pupils. The first-named expounded to a wider audience his views on international relations and international law, particularly on the developing League of Nations. In it he argued strongly that the league should move cautiously and not to try to do too much before it had established its influence and authority. 
A convinced Conservative, Butler saw that the coming of representative democracy at the end of the First World War had transformed the British parliamentary system, and realized that in order to meet these new challenges his party had to embrace a reformist platform. An obituarist described him as a 'Conservative of the new school' (Bury, 242). Within the university Butler tried to ensure the political education of like-minded undergraduates by developing the then new Cambridge University Conservative Association (CUCA) into 'a regular school for young Conservatives of ever growing value to the party' (Bury, 242). At the general election of 1923 he was returned as the Conservative MP (burgess) for the university. His talents were quickly recognized, and in 1925 he joined the Conservative ministry as parliamentary private secretary to Sir Samuel Hoare, the secretary of state for air. Butler introduced Hoare to his college, which quickly became his intellectual base. Butler's skills were also put to use in a number of other ways. He was a member of a Home Office committee on legal aid and a prominent member of the 1927 Donoughmore commission, which investigated the constitution of Ceylon. During these years Butler served on the council of the Royal Historical Society, as a syndic of the Cambridge University Press, and as secretary of the university's newly created board of research studies. His government and university duties came together with the formation of the Cambridge University air squadron, the first ever at a British university and one that trained many of the fighter pilots who later distinguished themselves in the Second World War. 
Butler's health failed in the late 1920s, and after a business trip to the United States he died of cancer of the liver and of the stomach at 21 Bentinck Street, Marylebone, London, on 2 May 1929. He was commemorated by Corpus Christi College through several benefactions, and what was then the new students' library was named after him. Family members presented the college with his portrait together with a tankard with his chancellor's medal inset. 


@@@@@


doc= 32212


Butler, Sir Harold Beresford (1883-1951), civil servant, was born in Oxford on 6 October 1883, the elder son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Alfred Joshua Butler (1850-1936), fellow and bursar of Brasenose College and a noted Coptic scholar, and his wife, Constance Mary Heywood, a granddaughter of Marcus G. Beresford, archbishop of Armagh. He was a scholar of Eton College and a Brackenbury scholar and Jenkyns exhibitioner of Balliol College, Oxford, where he was captain of the hockey eleven. After obtaining a first class in 'literae humaniores' he was elected a fellow of All Souls College in 1905. 
Butler's early ambition was to enter the Foreign Office and after a year at All Souls he went to Germany and France, where he obtained a knowledge of the countries and their languages which later proved of great value to him. There were, however, no vacancies in the Foreign Office and he entered the Local Government Board in 1907, transferring to the Home Office in the following year. 
In 1910 he married Olive Augusta Newenham, daughter of Samuel Abraham Walker Waters, assistant inspector-general of the Royal Irish Constabulary, of Stillorgan, co. Dublin. They had one daughter and two sons. Their younger son was the historian Rohan D'Olier Butler. 
Butler had his first experience of international work as secretary to the British delegation to the conference on aerial navigation in 1910. Although he was a captain in the Inns of Court Officers' Training Corps, he was refused permission to join the forces on the outbreak of war in 1914. His section of the Home Office, concerned with blockade measures, was ultimately merged with the corresponding section of the Foreign Office as the foreign trade department, of which he became secretary in 1916. A year later he was transferred to the newly created Ministry of Labour at the insistence of the parliamentary secretary and fellow Etonian, W. C. Bridgeman. His role was to inject some administrative expertise, denied to the ministry by the political appointment of two trade unionists as minister and permanent secretary, and to develop a long-term industrial strategy. For two years he exerted a radical influence, about which he was later wistful (Butler, 134, 145). He recruited committed Labour sympathizers to compile weekly reports for the war cabinet, to counter its relative ignorance of industrial matters, and to encourage industrial self-government, particularly through the spread of Whitley councils and trade (wages) boards. His commitment to 'home rule for industry' placed him at odds with the centralizing bias of existing labour administrators such as William Beveridge. 'No system of bureaucratic control', he argued, could succeed in Britain because of people's innate belief in 'their competence to manage their own affairs' and the effective resolution of problems being dependent on the genuine commitment of those involved (Lowe, 67-8). These were the firmly held views which guided him as he moved from the national to the international stage. 
In 1918, with Edward Phelan and in a somewhat more tense relationship with Malcolm Delevingne, Butler drafted a programme for the labour section of the Versailles peace conference. It was adopted and he was appointed secretary to the organizing committee and then the secretary-general of the first labour conference, held in Washington in 1919. Here the constitution of the International Labour Organization was agreed, based on Butler's novel principle of equal representation for government, employers, and workers. The conference faced serious difficulties as it had neither independent staff nor funding and the American government, having failed to ratify the peace treaty, was unable to participate. Its eventual success was largely due to Butler's diplomatic and administrative skill. He narrowly failed, however, to be elected the provisional director because there were obvious objections to men of the same nationality holding the senior posts in both the League of Nations (of which Sir Eric Drummond was the first secretary-general) and the International Labour Office. Instead he was appointed deputy director of the office, based in Geneva, under Albert Thomas, with particular responsibility for administration and finance. He was able to build up an efficient international staff and to counteract any tendency to over-centralization. 
Butler succeeded Thomas as director in 1932 in the depths of the depression which made international co-operation increasingly difficult. His term of office demonstrated his commitment to international co-operation, although he was realistic about the possibilities for change. He showed himself to be a man of vision, but not a visionary: a Conservative with strong Labour sympathies and a man of deep-rooted principle. 
Butler's first practical concern was to induce America to join the organization, which it did in 1934. Believing that the centre of gravity in the world was shifting away from Europe, he sent his staff to give technical advice to overseas governments, established an overseas section of the office, and in 1934 induced the conference to enlarge the governing body so that seven non-European countries were among the sixteen governments represented. He initiated regional conferences in the belief that many problems were of regional rather than universal significance. Throughout his term of office he also insisted that attention be paid to the economic conditions which lay behind the social problems. 
In 1938 Butler resigned under pressure from the French government (Alcock, 155) and shortly afterwards accepted the post of first warden of Nuffield College, Oxford. There he had time only to lay plans, as on the outbreak of war he was appointed southern regional commissioner for civil defence and, after returning to the college in January 1942, he went to Washington, DC, in May of that year as head of the British information service. He resigned from the wardenship in June 1943, having helped to initiate the Social Reconstruction Survey, directed by G. D. H. Cole, to inform the planning of the transition from peace to war. He remained in Washington until his retirement in 1946, after which he was prominent in the movement for closer European co-operation. He was appointed CB in 1919 and KCMG in 1946. 
During the Second World War Butler wrote the first of his three books, 'The Lost Peace' (1941), on the inter-war years. This was followed in 1947 by 'Peace or Power' and in 1950 by 'Confident Morning', the first volume of an uncompleted autobiography. He died at the Dunedin Nursing Home, Bath Road, Reading on 26 March 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 32213


Butler, Henry Montagu (1833-1918), college head, was born at Gayton, Northamptonshire, on 2 July 1833. Ninth child of Dr George Butler (1774-1853), headmaster of Harrow School and dean of Peterborough, and his wife, Sarah Maria, daughter of John Gray of Wembley Park, Middlesex, he was the grandson of Revd Weeden Butler the elder. His brother George Butler (1819-1890), canon of Winchester, married the social reformer Josephine Butler (1828-1906). Educated at Olney School, Olney, Eagle House School, Hammersmith, and Harrow School (1846-51) under Dr C. J. Vaughan, Butler was a high achiever, becoming head of school and Gregory scholar. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1851, where he excelled, winning the Battie prize (1853) and Porson prize (1854). President of the Union Society, scholar of the college, Bell university scholar, senior classic, BA and fellow in 1855, and DD in 1865, Butler was assistant tutor at Trinity in 1855-6 and 1858-9, spending the year between touring the Far East. Between 1856 and 1858 he was private secretary to William Francis Cowper at the Board of Health; secretary to the 1857 royal commission on the National Gallery; curate at Great St Mary's, Cambridge; and ordained a deacon in 1859. 
Aged twenty-six, following the unexpected resignation of Dr Vaughan, Butler was appointed headmaster of Harrow School, and remained there for twenty-six years. Over thirty published testimonials praised his suitability to be the first Old Harrovian headmaster. A traditionalist, sensitive to the entrenched views of able, long-established staff, yet aware of the need to modernize, he adopted a patient, pragmatic approach. Butler made some important curricular reforms: in science, influenced by his brother-in-law, Francis Galton, and in music, by appointing John Farmer, who inaugurated the famous Harrow songs. Butler selected other distinguished staff, including Reginald Bosworth Smith and Frederick William Farrar. Noted for the variety, morality, and thoroughness of his teaching, Butler established good relationships with boys and staff, taking a personal interest in their welfare. He initiated new building at Harrow, notably the Vaughan Library, established in 1861, which later included a stained-glass memorial window to his first wife. Butler appealed to Old Harrovians for funds to build a sanatorium, and extended the headmaster's house and the cricket fields. He gave lengthy evidence to the 1864 Clarendon commission into public schools, which recognized improvements at Harrow under himself and Vaughan. He piloted the school through a difficult period after the commissioners' controversial recommendation that governors should have more say in the curriculum. The demands of school management led to serious illness in 1881. His wife, Georgina, died in 1883, and when offered the deanery of Gloucester in 1885 he accepted. However, he never settled, remaining only fifteen months, but he did manage to introduce popular music into cathedral services to appeal to the general public. When the opportunity arose to become master of Trinity in 1886 he was delighted. 
As master, Butler presided rather than ruled over deans, tutors, and fellows in an increasingly lay society. Noted for his conciliatory skills and stature as the public face of Trinity, his pre-eminence was such that he became vice-chancellor of the university in 1889/90. Butler was an Apostle, a member of the select Cambridge debating society dominated by Harrow and Trinity intelligentsia, of which he was president in 1865. 
As at Harrow, Butler's meticulous memory and attention to detail ensured impeccable organization of college functions. His sense of history was strong; he added considerably to Trinity memorabilia but was disappointed when his plan to extend the Wren Library was rejected and a simpler annexe built instead. Although Butler always strove for moderation and unity, beneath a mild exterior he could be firm and resolute, adopting an independent approach to outside interference. At Harrow he frequently preferred his colleagues' views to those of the governors; in 1861 he married without consulting the governing body. Not afraid openly to criticize colleagues, he castigated Bertrand Russell's condemnation of the First World War as a dereliction of duty, Russell being relieved of his lecturership in 1916. Butler himself sometimes took personal criticism badly, becoming depressed when he was unable to convince others of his opinions. On his eightieth birthday, however, his Trinity colleagues praised his charm, dignity, style, and good humour. A warm, sympathetic, and loyal friend and employer, Butler could be disarmingly self-deprecating. At Harrow he confessed to deficiencies in mathematics and natural sciences; at Trinity he agreed he was not as academically pre-eminent as his predecessors. 
Butler was Christian rather than sectarian, and at Cambridge became a practical link between different denominations. A Liberal, he advocated national schooling to tackle the problem of deprivation. Influenced in his youth by F. D. Maurice, he was committed to the cause of working-class education and helped establish a working men's college in Cambridge; he supported the university extension scheme and, as 'ex officio' manager of Roxeth national school, promoted scholarships for elementary school boys. He founded the Harrow Mission in 1882, bringing aid to a poor area of west London, and advised the 1895 Bryce commission on secondary education that poor students should receive financial help. With the aid of his second wife, Agnata, who was placed by examiners above the senior classic at Cambridge in 1887, Butler supported degrees for women and was a member of Girton College council. Criticized as a shallow popularist who favoured his friends, his unswerving self-confidence was seen by some as vanity. A caricature in 'The Granta' (1889) depicted Butler as very aware of his own goodness -- and the failings of others. Although he campaigned to foster modern languages at both school and university, Butler was criticized for allowing classical composition to predominate. He was essentially a teacher, not an educationist. 
On 19 December 1861 Butler married Georgina Isabella (died 1883), daughter of Edward Francis Elliot of Madras and granddaughter of Hugh Elliot (1752-1830), minister at the court of Frederick the Great. Georgina died in December 1883. On 9 August 1888, a few months after he had met her at a performance of a Greek play, Butler married Agnata Frances ['see 'Butler, Agnata Frances (1867-1931)], daughter of the historian Sir James Henry Ramsay, bt (1832-1925) of Bamff, the classical scholar, and his first wife, Elizabeth Mary Charlotte. There were two sons and three daughters from the first marriage, three sons from the second. Butler had a wide social circle, with Alfred Tennyson, Matthew Arnold, Charles Kingsley, John Ruskin, A. E. Housman, and G. O. Trevelyan among his friends. With a phenomenal memory and wit, he was a popular after-dinner speaker. Tall and slender as a young man, he was talented at cricket, football, and boxing, but restricted from playing through poor health. He loved Italy, enjoyed mountaineering, and belonged to an alpine club; in later life he enjoyed walking in the Cambridge countryside. Strongly opposed to smoking, regarding it as unseemly, later portraits show him as a benign elder statesman. Although feeble in his final years, his mind remained active. 
Butler excelled at classics, writing and translating Latin and Greek poetry and memorial epitaphs. He was a passionate composer of sermons, which were highly praised as eloquent and uplifting. An excellent letter writer, his correspondence with people of various persuasions revealed many interests, but his publications were meagre. His chief works included volumes of school and university sermons, 'Chatham as an Orator' (1912), 'Some Leisure Hours of a Long Life' (1914), and 'Ten Great and Good Men' (1909), which he acknowledged was light reading. Butler was honorary chaplain to the queen (1875-7); examining chaplain to archbishops Tait and Benson (1879-83); select preacher at Oxford (1877, 1878, 1882, 1899); select preacher at Cambridge (1879, 1885, 1887, 1889, 1890, 1895-8, 1903, 1906, 1913); prebendary of Holborn in St Paul's Cathedral (1882-5); honorary canon of Ely (1897); and governor of Harrow (1901). 
Following a short bronchial attack, Butler died at Trinity lodge, Cambridge, on 14 January 1918. The archbishop of Canterbury officiated at his funeral at Trinity, and A. E. Housman composed a Latin inscription for the commemorative brass in the ante-chapel. Among the condolences was one from George V. He was buried at Harrow School on 17 January, survived by his wife. The first son from his second marriage, Sir James Ramsay Montagu Butler (1889-1975), historian, lived his life in Trinity and was his father's biographer. Sir Nevile Montagu Butler (1893-1973), diplomatist, was another of his sons from this marriage. H. M. Butler was thus a central figure of Noel Annan's 'intellectual aristocracy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32214


Butler, Josephine Elizabeth (1828-1906), social reformer and women's activist, born on 13 April 1828 at Milfield Hill, Glendale, Northumberland, was the fourth daughter and seventh child of John Grey (1785-1868) and Hannah Eliza, 'nee' Annett (died 1860). She was unusual among nineteenth-century feminists in having family ties to the whig aristocracy: Lord Grey, the whig prime minister during the passage of the 'Reform Act' of 1832, was her father's cousin. Except for two years at a school in Newcastle, Josephine was educated at home. As a young girl, she participated in county society events: she and her sister Harriet were belles at the hunt and county balls of Northumberland. Despite her gentry connections, Butler always distanced herself from fashionable society, preferring to identify herself as a member of the provincial middle classes. 'Democratic in all her instincts', she preferred the company of honest working men to members of the 'refined 'better' classes': 'my sympathies are wholly with the non-privileged, even when they drop every 'h'' (Bell, 105). 
Beautiful and histrionic, meticulously dressed and coiffed, Butler was adored by men and women alike. A charismatic leader and gifted speaker, she could inspire intense personal loyalty among her co-workers. When Mary Priestman and her friend Mary Estlin went to hear Butler in Bristol in 1870, they waited 'amidst silence for the speaker'. A few minutes later, the door opened and Butler entered, 'slight and graceful -- almost young & very beautiful'. 'As she moved to the table she raised her eyes with such a look of inexpressible sadness, as if the weight of the world's sin & sorrows rested on her innocent head. A woman Christ to save us from our despair was the involuntary thought that came into my head & has never left it. (Butler collection, n.d.)' Men also responded to Butler's magnetic appeal. 'She bore the marks of a sad and terrible consecration', wrote Canon Henry Scott Holland. 'She had a magnetic influence over the spirit, and she laid on us the compulsion of a call to the service of the broken and wounded' (Fawcett, 442). Even men who disagreed with her responded to her personal charisma. After her testimony before the royal commission of 1871, one member of the committee, Peter Rylands, was moved to remark, 'I am not accustomed to religious phraseology, but I cannot give you an idea of the effect produced except by saying that the spirit of God was there' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 114). 
Butler credited her family with endowing her with a lifelong commitment to humanitarian reform, republican values, and vital Christianity. Religion was central to the Grey family life. From her mother, a descendant of Huguenot silk weavers, Josephine was imbued with a devout religiosity, free of any allegiance to a particular sect or creed. From her father, an agricultural reformer and anti-slavery advocate, she gained a love of justice and social compassion as well as a horror of slavery and arbitrary power. Along with republicanism, humanitarianism, and an abiding concern for individual liberty, Josephine also inherited her father's sense of national destiny, his evangelical belief that the English 'seem to be a people distinguished in the plan of Providence... to accomplish God's great designs upon the Earth' (J. Butler, 'John Grey', 27-8). 
By the time she was eighteen, Josephine Grey had suffered an intense religious crisis, precisely because she could not yet envisage those 'great designs'. 'Haunted' by stories of suffering and poverty, she sought answers to her 'soul's trouble' and a solution to its 'dark questioning' (Caine, 162, 163). Josephine Grey resolved this religious doubt through a conversion that left her with a mystical sense of calling, and a fervent belief in the efficacy of prayer and in her power to communicate directly with God. Her sense of divine mission, formed in her youth and ultimately finding its political cause two decades later, made her, in the words of one commentator, 'constitutionally unable to separate theory from practice' (Uglow, 149). For her, Christian understanding implied action, whether it be at the level of personal philanthropy or national political agitation. Like a number of other Christian feminists, Butler endeavoured to implement a feminist political theology that would erode divisions between a secular public and a privatized spirituality. In her later political campaigns, she presented herself as a spiritual campaigner empowered by God to fight injustice: she 'had often thought of this saying that God and one woman make a majority' (ibid., 151). 
Besides her mother, two other female relatives were important influences in Josephine's life. Her aunt, Margaretta Grey, was a strong-minded feminist in the Enlightenment tradition. She also formed strong attachments with all her sisters, but particularly with her sister Harriet, who later married a Swiss banker and settled in Naples. Through her father, sister, and future husband, she subsequently gained an entree into republican circles throughout western Europe. 
In 1852 Josephine Grey married George Butler (1819-1890), a university teacher and Anglican clergyman. They both shared a broad Christianity, a cultural attachment to Italy, as well as a strong commitment to liberal reforms. George Butler encouraged his wife in her public work, and he would suffer set-backs in his own career on account of his wife's notoriety. Although she became the leader of a campaign widely characterized as the 'revolt of the women', Butler gave special credit to the support of her husband and sons: 'It seems strange that I should have been engaged in taking up the cudgel against men when my father, brothers, and sons have all been so good' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 121). 
The Butlers first lived in Oxford, where George Butler was appointed examiner to the university and where their three sons were born. Josephine Butler remembered the Oxford of the 1850s as a narrow and misogynist community of celibate men, 'with little or no leaven of family life', women's colleges, and domestic sociability (Caine, 165). As a young wife, Josephine Butler was deeply offended by the open acceptance of the double standard by the gentlemen of the university. She listened in silent anger to the denunciation of Mrs Gaskell's 'Ruth' (a novel in which the heroine is seduced and abandoned) by the masculine company who assembled at her home in the evenings. 'A moral sin in a woman was spoken of as immensely worse than in a man; there was no comparison to be found between them. A pure woman, it was reiterated, should be absolutely ignorant of a certain class of ills in the world, albeit those evils bore with murderous cruelty on other women.' Inwardly furious at the audacity and arrogance of one young man who 'seriously declared that he would not allow his own mother to read such a book', she 'resolved to hold [her] peace', and to speak 'little with men, but much with God' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 87, 88). With the support of her husband, she began to seek out 'ruined' women and welcome them into her home. Her rescue work extended to one young mother, seduced and abandoned by an Oxford don, who was in Newgate for the murder of her baby. 
The Butlers' stay in Oxford was cut short by Josephine Butler's respiratory illness; a lesion on her lung had been diagnosed when she was eighteen, and the Butlers were now warned that the climate of Oxford might be fatal to her health. Josephine would suffer physical and nervous breakdowns of this sort throughout her long life. To escape the Oxford damp, George Butler accepted the post of vice-principal at Cheltenham College in 1857. Their daughter Eva was born in Cheltenham. In these new surroundings, they continued to take a lively interest in international liberal causes. Although their support for Garibaldi was well received, their support for the cause of American abolition was not. When the American Civil War broke out in 1861 the Butlers, who supported the Union cause, found themselves socially ostracized. This was Mrs Butler's first experience of political support for an unpopular cause: 'The feeling of isolation... was often painful... but the discipline was useful' (Petrie, 44). 
The accidental death of her daughter Eva in 1864 was a 'turning point' in Josephine Butler's life. When the Butlers moved to Liverpool in 1864, she 'became possessed with an irresistible urge to go forth and find some pain keener than my own, to meet with people more unhappy than myself' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 116). 'It was not difficult to find misery in Liverpool', she wrote of her early social work there (ibid.). In 1866 she began to work among the women of the Liverpool workhouse in the 'oakum shed', a women's vagrant ward and bridewell. Here she practised her transformative skills on the 'wretched, draggled, ignorant outcasts of the casual ward, persuading them to fall down on their knees and pray to Jesus' (Walkowitz, 'City', 88). 
From the workhouse, gaols, and streets of Liverpool, Mrs Butler brought poor 'ruined' young women, friendless, all physically worn out from their hard lives, to be nursed by her in her home. Her widowed sister helped her in this 'work without a name that came upon us' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 116). She had the help of Mrs Cropper, a Quaker and a pioneer 'in the advocacy and practice of the modern methods of kindness in rescue work', who had recently established a family 'home' in Liverpool (ibid.). A few months later, with financial support from a number of Liverpool merchants, she established a small envelope factory as an industrial home for friendless girls. 
During the late 1860s Butler became increasingly involved in the campaign for women's rights. She was one of the signatories of the petition for women's suffrage presented to parliament by John Stuart Mill in 1866. From 1867 to 1873 she served as president of the North of England Council for Promoting the Higher Education of Women. In 1868 she petitioned Cambridge to provide special examinations for women. She also joined the Married Women's Property Committee in 1868, remaining on the committee until the passage of the 'Married Women's Property Act' of 1882. In 1868 she published her first pamphlet, 'The Education and Employment of Women', the first of ninety books and pamphlets she would publish over the next forty years, in which she pleaded for the higher education of women and the removal of legal and customary restrictions on their employment. 'Economics', she wrote, 'lie at the very root of practical morality' (Caine, 179). 
In 1869 Josephine Butler edited a collection of essays entitled 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture'. Her introduction to the volume constituted her most comprehensive, theoretical statement about the woman question. In this essay, she endeavoured to reconcile a series of beliefs and commitments, most notably liberalism and Christianity; sex equality and sexual difference; and an evolutionary theory of historical development and Christian eschatology. Butler's introduction also constituted her first public effort to integrate the discussion of prostitution and the double standard into a general discussion of the condition of women. 
Butler's introduction to 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture' (1869) upholds a liberal ideal of companionate marriage and sex equality. It also details the detrimental effects of women's economic dependence on men and their need for public and meaningful work. Beginning on a conciliatory note, Butler explains that the essays in the volume would not exclusively treat 'women's questions', nor was the cause they advocated 'solely of women' -- but also 'the cause of men' ('Woman's Work', viii). She did not intend to 'reiterate any accusation' against men of the present or past generations, or charge 'any living being with a conscious and wilful participation in any existing social wrong' (ibid., ix). Rather the 'evils in society' that oppressed women were 'to a great measure' the result of accident, and of the 'halting and unequal progress of society' (ibid.). Women were victims of a 'transitional' period of industrialization, 'stranded' by the elimination of many of their traditional employments while being prohibited from pursuing new opportunities (ibid., xv). 
A critique of male domination none the less seeps through. While writing her pamphlet on women's employment, Butler received a letter from the positivist Frederic Harrison defending restrictions on women's labour on the grounds that women's place was in the home. Butler's introduction to 'Woman's Work and Woman's Culture' sets out to detail how wrong-headed, how 'Satanic', that radical position appeared to her. Quoting from the census, Butler documented the increasing number of women, outside of marriage, who had to work for 'starvation wages' ('Woman's Work', xv). The closing off of occupations to women precipitated poor women 'downwards' into prostitution and resulted in the 'destruction of bodies, of consciences, of souls' -- a fate that had no analogue for men. Economic dependence on men also corrupted women of the better classes, forcing them into mercenary marriages and destroying their dignity 'in the scramble for husbands' (ibid., xxiii). This dignity could be restored by education and employment in useful public work. 
Without challenging the importance of women's spiritual influence in the home, Butler called for the diffusion of the 'home influence' in the general society. Like other feminists of her time, Butler only partially challenged orthodox Victorian assumptions about women's separate sphere. She defended the right of women to maintain legal, political, and economic identities outside the family, but she also sought to exploit the notion of women's moral pre-eminence. She celebrated the feminine form of philanthropy, 'the independent, individual ministering, the home influence', against the masculine form, 'the large comprehensive measure, the organization, the system planned by men and sanctioned by Parliament' ('Woman's Work', xxix-xxx). Butler thus tried to mark out a specific area of public activity for women of the better classes. This feminine form of philanthropy was, in her mind, the best method of stemming the decline in moral values among 'our vast population' of the poor (ibid., xxxvi). 
Although she joined forces with secular liberals such as John Stuart Mill to defend women's rights, Butler tried to infuse her liberalism with the spiritual authority of 'essential Christianity'. Like other Christian feminists, she looked to Christ's teachings as a model of sex equality, while also claiming a special spiritual relationship between women and their saviour. Not only were women among Christ's earliest followers, but their love for him 'exceeds the love which it is possible for any man to feel for Him' ('Woman's Work', lx). Butler's effort to meld liberal feminism and Christianity generated significant tensions in her writings. However much the ethics of Christ seemed to validate liberal feminism, Christian eschatology, as Butler presented it, did not fit comfortably with liberal visions of progress. Butler ended her essay on a dark prophetic note that called into question the social efficacy of her applied Christianity. Struggling in the cause of 'suffering humanity' might not succeed in rectifying social evils, but it might hasten the Second Coming -- 'the advent of the Day which we long for' (ibid., lxiv). 
In 1869 Butler was approached by Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy to serve as honorary secretary of the Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts. The 'Contagious Diseases Acts' of 1864, 1866, and 1869 provided for the medical and police inspection of prostitutes in garrison towns and ports. Although the acts had been in force for a number of years, it was not until the late 1860s that public agitation against them mounted, in response to efforts to extend the acts to the north. One organization, the National Association, had already formed to demand the repeal of the acts, but the fledgeling repeal movement did not gain attention and notoriety until a 'Ladies' protest' was published in the 'Daily News', with 124 signatures of leading female members of the Society of Friends and of prominent feminists, including Elizabeth Wolstenholme Elmy, Florence Nightingale, Harriet Martineau, and Ursula Bright. This was soon followed by the formation of the Ladies National Association. Female participation in the repeal campaign astonished and perplexed the press and the British public, unused as they were to women speaking before mixed audiences on such matters as prostitution, venereal disease, and internal gynaecological examination. 
Over the next sixteen years repeal groups proliferated, reflective of the regional, political sectarian, class, and gender distinctions in the movement. Overall, repeal drew its power from its alliance of middle-class nonconformists, radical working men, and middle-class feminists, who had previously engaged in a range of liberal mid-Victorian reforms, such as anti-slavery, temperance, medical reform, and women's suffrage. Butler operated as the charismatic leader of the campaign, leaving everyday details and political lobbying to others, notably to the male leaders of the campaign, such as James Stansfeld, Henry J. Wilson, and James Stuart. Using the Ladies National Association as her platform, Butler pushed liberal feminism in new directions, developing theories and methods of political agitation that would directly affect future campaigns for the emancipation of women. She sponsored new forms of feminist activism, expanding beyond drawing-room meetings to promote a range of out-of-door political activities. She also elaborated the concerns of women's rights to include a defence of female bodily integrity. 
Butler repeatedly declared in public that she could never view the question of state regulation as 'fundamentally more a woman's question than it is a man's' (J. Butler, 'The Constitution Violated', 1871, 153). Yet, her 'revolt of the women' was infused with a sense of sexual grievance. In her public writings, she tended to mute expressions of sex antagonism or to displace them onto working-class women. In one of her 'public letters' on the 'Garrison Towns of Kent', for instance, she allowed a Chatham prostitute to deliver a powerful denunciation of men and male power, a denunciation that conveniently incorporated the entirety of Butler's brief against the acts: 'It is 'men, only men', from the first to the last that we have to do with! To please a man I did wrong at first, then I was flung about from man to man. Men police lay hands on us. By men we are examined, handled, doctored. In the hospital it is a man again who makes prayer and reads the 'Bible' for us. We are had up before magistrates who are men, and we never get out of the hands of men till we die! (Walkowitz, 'City', 92)' In private correspondence, Butler complained of the tendency of male leaders to dominate the movement and to shut out female initiatives, particularly when it came to policy matters and public appearances. Political differences led Butler to cultivate an inter-class alliance with working men and to identify a special mission for women in the repeal camp. 
During the repeal campaign, Butler resorted to daring acts of personal heroism that showed her solidarity with her fallen sisters. Many of these performances occurred during parliamentary by-elections in the early 1870s, when repealers challenged Liberal Party candidates who supported the acts. In 1870 repealers successfully opposed the candidacy of Henry Storks in Colchester and were elated by his defeat. Butler's activities during the Colchester by-election substantially contributed to this victory. In her 'Personal Reminiscences of a Great Crusade' (1896) she recalled how she was chased by a crowd of brothel-keepers and their flunkies in Colchester, forcing a Mrs Hampson and herself to seek refuge in the cellar of a 'Methodist' grocer, who installed them 'amongst his bacon, soap, and candles' (J. Butler, 'Personal Reminiscences', 33). She later encountered the same kind of opposition in Pontefract, when repealers opposed the candidacy of a member of the government, H. C. E. Childers, who had offered himself for re-election. A women's meeting was held in a hayloft; hired bullies 'led by two persons whose 'dress' was that of gentlemen' set bundles of straw afire while the Metropolitan Police casually looked on. Fortunately, 'two or three working women placed themselves in front' of Butler and Mrs Charlotte Wilson, so that they could make their escape by jumping down the hatch of a trapdoor. 'It was not so much personal violence that we feared as what would have been to any of us 'worse than death'; for the indecencies of the men, their gestures and threats, were what I would not like to describe. (Walkowitz, 'City', 91)' 'The people', Butler insisted, were 'more just, more manly, than those who rule them', a position she reiterated in 'The Constitution Violated', a pamphlet published in 1871 and 'Dedicated to the Working Men and Women of Great Britain' (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 142; 'Constitution Violated'). Butler condemned police power under the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' as a violation of the rule of law and of the English constitution. She characterized supporters of the acts as latter-day embodiments of 'Old Corruption', as adherents of a 'deadly materialism' that merely transferred 'the power of the deprivation of human rights from the hands of a monarch or hereditary aristocracy' into those of 'official experts' ('Constitution Violated', 206). At the same time, she situated the repeal campaign in a tradition of radical political protest, summoning up a range of earlier 'champions of liberty' from Wat Tyler to John Wilkes, who had served as icons of the Chartist struggle (ibid., 3, 4). Butler also condemned the unequal treatment of men and women under the acts, arguing that it was inhumane to regard fallen women as 'foul sewers' rather than as 'moral agents'. In framing the repeal campaign as a defence of the 'Ancient Constitution' Butler incorporated women, even prostitutes, into the body politic, and she made the health and bodily integrity of women essential to the welfare of the nation at large. 
Butler offers a different kind of historical justification for her own political activism in 'Catherine of Siena', published in 1878. In her biography of the fourteenth-century saint, Butler celebrated St Catherine as a pioneering example of a female activist and Christian mystic. Butler explained that she wished to link Catherine's 'spiritual life' to her 'public action in connection with contemporary events' ('Catherine of Siena', 2nd edn, 1879, vii). Not only did she personally identify with Catherine's struggle to carve out a public role for herself, she also represented the 'contemporary events' of Catherine's day as harbingers of the political and social problems that beset Victorian Britain. Medieval Siena, despite its beauty and sunny clime, suffered from many of the maladies that plagued the Victorian body politic. These included epidemic disease, political factions, a falling away of old-fashioned virtues, a tyrannical democracy, and a corrupt church and government. 
Having set the historical scene, Butler presents Catherine as a plebeian and medieval variant of herself. She introduces Catherine as a 'daughter of the people', descended from a 'race' of stern, republican artisans, an untutored woman who ultimately became the trusted adviser to political and religious leaders. Called out of her solitude by God to devote herself to 'active ministrations', Catherine encountered many of the same forms of prejudice and slanders about her 'virtue' that, many centuries later, were levelled at Butler ('Catherine of Siena', 1879, xii). Like Butler, Catherine overcame social resistance to her public activities, and she too went on to assume an ever widening circle of influence. Over time, Catherine extended her 'active ministrations' from personal philanthropy among the poor to mediating between political factions in Siena and advising the pope. Catherine's physical martyrdom -- her 'spareness in diet' -- served as another point of identification for Butler, as did Catherine's 'constant converse with God' (ibid., 32, 33, 38). According to Butler, Catherine cultivated a 'science of prayer', a practice that was 'experimental' and 'methodical'. There was nothing hysterical about Catherine's ecstasies and communions with God; they required 'sustained self-denial' and 'untiring diligence' (ibid., 38, 39). 
Besides celebrating a female tradition of Christian activism and prophecy, 'Catherine of Siena' also signalled Butler's romance with contemporary Italy and her engagement with European affairs. In 1874, when the repeal campaign was politically stalled in Britain owing to the fall of Gladstone's Liberal government, Butler undertook a mission to the continent to spark abolitionist efforts there. 'God', Butler wrote in 1875, 'has been training us, not for our battles in England alone, but for this battle of principles all over Europe' (Butler, 'Autobiographical Memoir', 109). Butler's example inspired men and women in almost every European country, as well as the United States, to take up the question of state-regulated prostitution. Butler was the moving force behind the formation of the British, Continental and General Federation for the Abolition of Government Regulation of Prostitution, founded in 1875. Not all of her followers shared her libertarian views. Whereas Butler advocated self-restraint and rescue work among prostitutes as an alternative to state regulation or repression, members of the German Moral Associations condemned prostitution as a crime and demanded the prosecution of women involved in the trade. 
More repressive modes of reform were also superseding repeal efforts at home. After the regulation system was suspended in England in 1883, Butler and her female allies shifted their attention to the foreign traffic in women and the entrapment of children into prostitution in London. They persuaded the journalist W. T. Stead to publish a sensational expose of child prostitution, the 'Maiden tribute of modern Babylon', in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in 1885. 'Maiden tribute' had an electrifying effect on public opinion and forced parliament to pass the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' of 1885, raising the age of consent for girls to sixteen and giving the police greater summary power to repress brothel-keepers and streetwalkers. An additional clause of the bill made indecent acts between consenting male adults illegal. Throughout Britain, grass-roots social purity groups were formed to oversee the local enforcement of this act. Purity groups soon turned their attention to the suppression of obscene books, birth control literature and advertisements for abortifacients, music-hall entertainment, and nude statuary. 
Repeal leaders of all persuasions initially filled many of the committee positions of the National Vigilance Association, which oversaw many of these legal prosecutions. However, this collaboration was short-lived for Butler and for some of her libertarian friends. In 1897 she explicitly warned her workers to beware 'of 'Purity Societies' which seek affiliation with our Society' on the grounds that they persecuted individuals and that they were 'ready to accept and endorse any amount of coercive and degrading treatment of their fellow creatures, in the fatuous belief that you can oblige human beings to be moral by force, and in so doing that you may in some way promote social purity. (Walkowitz, 'Prostitution', 252)' Her warnings were not heeded by many feminist leaders, including Millicent Fawcett, who remained actively engaged in the purity campaign throughout the first two decades of the twentieth century. 
During the late 1880s and 1890s Butler's attention shifted to India. After the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' in Great Britain in 1886, Butler led the campaign to end the regulation of prostitution in India through the cantonment regulations. When her husband died at Winchester in 1890, she temporarily ceased public activities. She soon resumed her agitation on behalf of her 'suffering sisters in India' by writing pamphlets about regulation in India, by contributing articles in repeal journals, and by corresponding with missionaries. Although she condemned the 'imperially imposed degradation' of Indian women under cantonment regulations, she did not condemn British imperial rule 'per se' (J. Butler, 'The New Godiva: a Dialogue', 1888, 13). On the contrary, she stoutly defended British manifest destiny and enunciated for feminists a special imperial mission of representing female colonial subjects, akin to their special role in representing the interests and sufferings of poor women within the nation. 
Although the 'new abolitionists' applauded and supported Butler's efforts on behalf of her 'Indian sisters', they were deeply critical of her support for the British cause during the South African War. In 'Native Races and the War' (1900) Butler defended the British empire against the criticism of our 'Continental friends' who regard 'British Colonization' as a 'series of acts of aggression, solely inspired by the love of conquest and desire for increased territory' ('Native Races', 138, 139). Butler acknowledged the greedy ambition of Rhodes and Jameson, as well as the harsh treatment of 'natives' by individual settlers, but she reiterated her conviction, that 'with all her faults, looked at from God's point of view, England is the best, and the 'least' guilty of nations' (Burton, 'Burdens', 12). As an old abolitionist and daughter of an abolitionist, she proudly pointed to the fact that British law made slavery illegal, whereas the Boers accepted no such law. Great Britain, she predicted, 'will in future be judged condemned, or justified, according to her treatment of those innumerable, colored races, heathen or partly christianized, over whom her rule extends' ('Native Races', 152). 
After her husband's death Josephine Butler moved into a number of lodgings around the country. In 1903 she took up residence near her eldest son, George Grey Butler, at Wooler, Northumberland, where she died at her home, 2 Victoria Villas on 30 December 1906. She was buried at Kirknewton, Northumberland. Her three sons survived her. 
A few full-length biographies of Josephine Butler have been written, but most historical studies have tended to concentrate on Butler's role in the repeal campaign. Historians have long acknowledged the campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' as a critical event in the history of feminism, and they have credited Butler with playing an instrumental role in articulating a feminist position on prostitution and in gaining public support for the repeal cause. Since the 1970s, the work of social historians has offered a deeper and more contextualized account of Butler and the political mobilizations she spearheaded. McHugh and the present author have highlighted the campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' as part of a network of influential middle-class nonconformist pressure groups in the mid-Victorian era, while the studies of Banks and Levine have successfully located Butler as a member of a generation of feminist friends and political collaborators. Historians influenced by Michel Foucault, such as Mort, Kent, and the present author, have stressed the importance of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and their opposition as a massive mobilization over sexuality issues that not only reshaped gender, class, and sexual subjectivities in late Victorian Britain but also informed national political history and state-building. 
Whereas the social histories of the 1970s and 1980s concentrated on Butler's participation in the repeal movement, later cultural histories have paid closer attention to her rhetoric and political thought in the overall body of her writings. Hadley and the present author have inquired into Butler's use of melodramatic narrative and performance, while Uglow, Caine, and Yeo have examined Butler's uneasy synthesis of liberalism and Christian feminism. In another direction, Burton has highlighted a set of allegiances left unexplored by earlier historians of repeal, notably Butler's investment in nationalism and British imperialism. This recent historical work not only highlights Butler as a distinguished exemplar of feminist humanitarianism, it also reveals the complex cross-currents of libertarianism and Christianity, ethnocentrism and internationalism, performance and politics at work in that humanitarian tradition. 


@@@@@


doc= 32215


Butler, Sir Montagu Sherard Dawes (1873-1952), administrator in India and college head, born at Julian Hill, Harrow, on 19 May 1873, was the third son of Spencer Perceval Butler, barrister, of Lincoln's Inn, later conveyancing counsel to the High Court of Justice and the office of works, and his wife, Mary, only child of the Revd Nicholas Kendall of Bodmin. As such he belonged to one of the famous Cambridge academic families, Henry Montagu Butler (1833-1918) being his uncle. Sir (Spencer) Harcourt Butler and Sir (George) Geoffrey Gilbert Butler were his brothers. Montagu Butler was at school at Haileybury College and was admitted to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1891. He gained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1894-5) with distinction in the second part; he was president of the union, coxswain of the college boat, and one of the founders of the May week ball. Elected into a fellowship in 1895, he decided to enter public service; in 1896 he headed the examination list for the Indian Civil Service, and was awarded the Bhaunagar medal. 
Late in 1896 Butler went to the Punjab, where his administrative ability was quickly recognized. In 1901 he married Anne Gertrude (1876-1954), daughter of George Smith, and sister of George Adam Smith. They had two sons and two daughters, the elder son being Richard Austen Butler, the politician, and one of the daughters Dorothy Middleton (1909-1999), author of 'Victorian Lady Travellers'. Butler was settlement officer of Kotah state in 1904-9, and in 1912-15 was joint secretary of the royal commission on public services in India. During the First World War, when he was deputy commissioner of Attock, he was active in the recruitment drive for the Indian army in the Punjab. In 1921, after the constitutional reforms enacted in 1919 had reconstituted the Indian legislatures, he became president of the legislative council of the province. In the next year he was appointed secretary to the government of India in the department of education, health, and lands, and in 1924 he was made president of the council of state. 
Butler was transferred to Nagpur as governor of the Central Provinces in 1925 and had to face the many problems created by the nationalist non-co-operation movement in the legislature. Butler aimed always at government by agreement, and would exercise infinite patience in the reconciliation of opposing views. He drove a wedge into the phalanx of non-co-operation by appointing a 'swarajist' leader as home member and succeeded in bringing other non-co-operators into responsible posts. During his second term of office as governor he was confronted by a revival of civil disobedience under the leadership of M. K. Gandhi, and endeavoured, wherever possible, to deal with offenders under the ordinary law, without invoking the aid of the special powers given by the government of India. 
Butler's consistent record of work for the welfare of India was recognized by his appointment as CIE (1909), CVO (1911), CB (1916), CBE (1919), and KCSI (1924). In 1933 he resigned to become lieutenant-governor of the Isle of Man. There, his insistence on a balanced budget provoked some preliminary opposition, but it was not long before his measures of reform were accepted, and he remained there for four years. Of his many appointments, none gave him such intense pleasure as his election to the mastership of his old college, Pembroke, in 1937, for which he had always harboured great affection. He had been made an honorary fellow in 1925 and had sent both his sons there. The mastership was no sinecure: Pembroke was only just beginning to recover from a series of disastrous losses in 1935, and Butler set about reorganizing its finances. He willingly accepted invitations to serve on the borough council as well as on the council of the senate and the financial board of the university. 
The outbreak of war upset many of Butler's plans for the college, but it served to intensify rather than to diminish his activity. Shortly after his election as mayor of Cambridge in November 1941 he was knocked down by an ambulance and severely injured during a tour of air-raid posts in the blackout; he recovered to serve an additional term as mayor. Similarly, he was delighted when the college extended his tenure of the mastership to the statutory limit. He retired in 1948, but even then retained his seat on the borough council as an alderman. He died suddenly in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 7 November 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 32216


Butler, Sir Richard Harte Keatinge (1870-1935), army officer, was born on 28 August 1870, the son of Colonel E. R. Butler, of the Army Medical Service. Having been educated at Harrow School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Butler was commissioned second lieutenant in the Dorsetshire regiment on 29 October 1890; he became lieutenant on 29 October 1892 and captain on 6 April 1897. On 5 June 1894 he married Helen Frances, second daughter of Major William Benjamin Battiscombe, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders; they had a son and a daughter. Butler had become adjutant of the 2nd Dorsets in March 1896 and continued in that capacity until September 1900, taking part in the battalion's operations for the relief of Ladysmith. He distinguished himself, rescuing a wounded man from the Tugela River during the retreat from Spion Kop, and again when the battalion stormed Alleman's Nek in June 1900. After being transferred to a mounted infantry unit Butler was severely wounded at Fort Itala in September 1901. For his services he had received a brevet majority on 29 November 1900. 
After passing from the Staff College, Camberley, in 1906 Butler was brigade major at Aldershot from April 1906 to April 1910, receiving his regimental majority in February 1910; he returned to Aldershot in November 1911 as general staff officer, grade 2. Having received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy in May 1913, Butler was selected to command the 2nd Lancashire Fusiliers on 24 June 1914 but was retained at Aldershot until the end of the training season. As a result he joined his new command only in September 1914; but he distinguished himself sufficiently during the first battle of Ypres to be given command of the 3rd brigade in 1st division on 13 November 1914, with the temporary rank of brigadier-general. On 21 February 1915, just three days after receiving his brevet colonelcy, he was appointed brigadier-general, general staff, to succeed the mortally wounded John Gough as Douglas Haig's chief of staff in the first army. On 23 June 1915 he was given the rank of temporary major-general. 
Haig had commanded at Aldershot immediately before the war and clearly had confidence in the qualities of vigour, resolution, and drive which made Butler successful in fighting commands with battalion and brigade. Consequently when Haig succeeded Sir John French as commander-in-chief in December 1915, he wanted to appoint Butler as his chief of staff. However, Butler was considered too junior for the post and on 22 December 1915 he was appointed deputy chief of staff at general headquarters (GHQ); he received substantive rank as major-general on 3 June 1916. Butler was to remain at GHQ until February 1918 but he was ill-suited to staff work. His energy made him apt to be impatient and he was not always very helpful with or sympathetic towards subordinates. Indeed he was generally considered excessively rude and, as a result, he only added to the general isolation of GHQ from the army. Nor did Butler have any real understanding of the requirements of a more technologically advanced mode of warfare and he was noticeably lukewarm towards the development of tanks. He would have gladly relinquished his post but Haig declined to release him for an active command, and it was only on 27 February 1918 that he was given the 3rd corps with the rank of temporary lieutenant-general. 
The 3rd corps formed part of Hubert Gough's Fifth Army, which was targeted by the major German offensive in March 1918. Butler had a different conception to his neighbouring corps commander, Ivor Maxse, of the kind of defences that should be prepared, favouring holding the front line in strength rather than developing a defence in depth. However, 3rd corps was short of manpower and was forced back towards Noyon, Butler commanding the Amiens sector when the German offensive was finally checked in April. Butler's corps then took part in Haig's counter-attack on 8 August but Butler himself suffered a nervous collapse and was removed at the request of Henry Rawlinson, who had superseded Gough. Butler returned to his command in time for the operations against the Hindenburg line in September but Rawlinson had little confidence in him and he was transferred to the Douai region that same month. 
Having been created CB in 1917, KCMG in 1918, and KCB in 1919, Butler commanded a division in the army of occupation from March to October 1919, then a division at Aldershot from November 1919 to February 1923. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 3 January 1923 and was general officer commanding, western command, from June 1924 to June 1928, before retiring on 1 January 1929. Butler died at his home, Roden Lodge, Shrewsbury, on 22 April 1935. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32217


Butler, Samuel (1835-1902), writer and artist, was born on 4 December 1835 at the rectory at Langar, near Bingham, Nottinghamshire, the eldest son in the family of four children (including another son, Thomas, and two daughters, Henrietta and May) of Thomas Butler (1806-1886), rector of Langar from 1834 and canon of Lincoln, and his wife, Fanny (1808-1873), daughter of Philip John Worsley, a sugar refiner, of Arno's Vale, Bristol. He was the grandson of Dr Samuel Butler (1774-1839), headmaster of Shrewsbury School, and afterwards bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, whose 'Antient Geography' Thomas Butler revised in 1851 and 1855. His aunt Mary, elder daughter of the bishop, was second wife of Archdeacon Bather. 
These family details were of great significance in Butler's life, in that he was called on to continue a family tradition, as in part he did, by going to Shrewsbury, then under the headmastership of Benjamin Hall Kennedy, his grandfather's successor. He distinguished himself at the family college, St John's, Cambridge (1854-8), coming equal twelfth in the classical tripos, and later wrote the life of his grandfather. More importantly he rebelled against his family by refusing to take orders in the church, as unbelief grew in him while serving as lay reader at St James's, Piccadilly. He recorded his pained and satirical dissent from patriarchal Victorian hypocrisy in his major novel 'The Way of All Flesh'. 
Butler's first independent wish was to become an artist. He had been taught drawing at Shrewsbury by Philip Vandyck Browne, a friend and associate of the noted watercolourist David Cox, and had executed some still preserved landscape watercolours; and he had attended some classes at the Cambridge School of Art. This was anathema to his father who wrote, 'The artist scheme I utterly disapprove. It will throw you into very dangerous company' (Butler, 'Family Letters', 88-9). After much discussion it was agreed he should go to the colonies, and with approximately $4000 from his father try to make his fortune, after which he would be free to follow his own wish. His father clearly banked on 'all that nonsense' being knocked out of the young man on contact with 'the real world'. Butler chose New Zealand, the most distant of colonies, and set sail from Gravesend aboard the 'Roman Emperor' on 30 September 1859. He established himself as a sheep farmer in the Rangitata district of Canterbury Island, describing the new country in his letters home with contrasting references to the English and the European landscape that had made such an impression on him as an eight-year-old boy travelling abroad with his family, and recounting the adventure of his land claim with great vividness. His father had his letters published as 'A First Year in Canterbury Settlement' (1863), with a preface by himself. Butler is now regarded as one of the early explorers of New Zealand, having crossed the Rangitata River, and narrowly missed the main pass through the mountains, as he described in the vivid opening to his utopian novel 'Erewhon, or, Over the Range'. Butler did not confine himself to sheep farming, but played a considerable role in the cultural life of the colony, organizing the first art exhibitions at the Christchurch Club. He published his first pieces (apart from some slight essays in the St John's magazine 'The Eagle') in the local newspaper, the 'Christchurch Press', especially the witty speculation entitled 'Darwin among the machines', in which he imagined some consequences of the recently published 'Origin of Species'. 
In 1864 Butler returned to England, having realized a tidy profit, and settled in rooms at 15 Clifford's Inn, Fleet Street, London. Although he was still not fully financially independent of his father, the bargain held, and he took up his career in art as a student first at F. S. Cary's in Bloomsbury, in the College of Art in South Kensington, and then at Mr Heatherley's well-known art school in Newman Street. His well-known painting 'Family Prayers' (1864) may have been a response to his return to his constricted family circle; it is usually associated with 'The Way of All Flesh', which has a chapter describing such a scene. The art school's informal manner offered an escape. Mr Heatherley himself was the subject of Butler's best-known oil painting, 'Mr Heatherley's Holiday' (1873), now in the Tate collection, depicting the genial head seated before the plaster casts of heroic antique statuary, mending a grotesque, frail skeleton with which the students performed the 'danse macabre' at parties. There he met Eliza Savage, an independent and witty young woman in a day when there were few female art students, whose correspondence with Butler between 1871 and 1885 is one of the gems of the Butler literature. She encouraged him also in the direction of fiction, which he professed to detest. The correspondence ended with her early death in 1886. He also met the young Johnston Forbes-Robertson, then sixteen, afterwards the noted Shakespearian actor. Wearing the Heatherley's suit of armour, Forbes-Robertson is the subject of one of Butler's earliest known photographs, in the atmospheric style of the Pre-Raphaelite vogue in photography, and foreshadowing the future actor's role as Hamlet. 
Forbes-Robertson left an affectionate memoir of Butler, showing him as a diligent student, but one with time for 'happy daily hob-nobs' over lunch at the Horseshoe pub. He notes that Butler was keen to be accepted as a student at the Royal Academy; but Butler's submissions did not lead to his acceptance, though he had at least eleven paintings hung in several exhibitions, including 'Mr Heatherley's Holiday' in 1874. J. B. (Jack) Yeats, at Heatherley's in the previous decade, wrote respectfully of Butler's 'emancipated intellect', but dismissed his attempts to paint in a 'Bellini-like' style, as proposed by Ruskin, whose 'Seven Lamps of Architecture' had impressed Butler as an undergraduate. Butler later adopted a satirical, even bitter view of the Pre-Raphaelite circles, but a number of Ruskinian aims continued to play a role in his thinking. He also met Charles Gogin, later a successful illustrator, who remained a life-long friend, and painted the portrait of Butler now in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Butler's literary reputation always eclipsed his work as an artist. In 1872 he published 'Erewhon' anonymously, to considerable acclaim. This searching and novel utopia was based on a map of an imaginary country inserted into the map of the New Zealand district he had explored. An interest in fictional maps is visible again in his later invention of a new version of the periplus of Odysseus, and in his fascination with the mapping of the geography of Jerusalem onto the Alps that characterized the site of the Sacro Monte at Varallo. This preoccupation may owe something to the classical atlas he saw his father revising when he was a schoolboy. His imaginary society undoubtedly arose from his close scrutiny of the ethical implications of Darwinism, one of the earliest such considerations. He locates the central point in a 'Nowhere' whose citizens are criminalized and punished for contracting and concealing disease, whereas traditional 'sins' and moral failings are cheerfully acknowledged and accepted. This highlights the question of whether 'criminals' are responsible for their crimes; are the causes of crime not what would now be called 'genetic'? And if so, is the self-righteousness of pastors and masters justifiable? In the famous chapter 'Book of the machines', with its museum of the technological innovations Erewhon had banned, Butler foresaw that technology would become overmastering, and that it would have to be controlled. As in all his best work, his topsy-turvy world produces shock, biting humour, and a provocation to fundamental rethinking. 
Butler's next book, 'The Fair Haven' (1873), like his essay entitled 'The evidence for the resurrection of Jesus Christ as given by the four evangelists critically examined' (drafted in New Zealand, published anonymously in 1865), pressed further on the religious assumptions and claims still being clung to by the churches. It is one of his most complex and least understood books; it purported to be a defence of the miraculous element in Christianity, as edited by William Bickersteth Owen, the brother of the deceased 'author' John Pickard Owen, but it was intended to undermine the proposed views. The chapter 'The Christ ideal' was an oblique attack on current aesthetic substitutes for religion. Formally, it was a subtle deployment of the persona of 'the editor' as developed in the higher criticism of the 'Bible' and in recent fiction. It was, however, taken at face value, and Butler was forced to reveal his authorship and his subversive intention. As the gullible critics had been taken in, they took their revenge in negative reviews. 
Butler pursued his reflections on Darwin and Darwinism in 'Life and Habit' (1878), 'Evolution, Old and New' (1879), 'Unconscious Memory' (1880), and 'Luck or Cunning?' (1886). He deserves a more considerable place than he has gained in accounts of Darwin's reception: in English histories of evolutionary thought he is often dismissed as merely idiosyncratic. (An unfortunate personal element entered, when he felt, wrongly, that Darwin had slighted him.) But in France, Butler's Lamarckist interests in the role of forms of heritable memory of experience valuable in the 'survival of the fittest' were welcomed, and his French translators and commentators saw him as an important figure in the history of ideas. George Bernard Shaw was also much influenced by Butler's thinking, and the evolutionary explorations in his plays, most explicitly in 'Back to Methuselah', as well as his social thinking, owe much to Butler, a debt Shaw gladly acknowledged. Butler is due for renewed attention, especially in light of recent developments in molecular biology which make a reconsideration of the subtler modes of inheritance and transmission possible. 
Butler's altercations with his father were not yet over. Perhaps the worst of them came in 1879 as a result of his father's discovery that over the years Butler had been giving money to Charles Paine Pauli, a charming rogue whom he had met in New Zealand and who had returned to England at the same time. It emerged at Pauli's funeral in 1897 that he had had a number of such supporters; a late note by Butler reveals his shock. His own financial situation had deteriorated, and he was obliged to travel to Canada, where he had invested his New Zealand gains, to try to put matters right. He felt he had misled Pauli in advising him on investments. His father's discovery of his misplaced generosity or what he construed as an egregious instance of financial mismanagement, and his horror at what this relationship might signify in his unmarried son's life, led to further threats that financial aid would be withdrawn. Finally, however, the elder Butler died in 1886, and Butler came into his inheritance. From that time forward he spent half the year in Italy at Faido and then at Varallo, where he felt both free and at home. 
Butler's productive travels in Europe, especially Italy, had already begun, and in 1881 he published 'Alps and Sanctuaries', the lively account of his travels to the sanctuaries of the Ticino, Piedmont, and Lombardy. His French translator, Valery Larbaud (also Joyce's translator), praised his appreciations of Italy, which he rated higher than those of his own countrymen. Amusing and readable, illustrated with Butler's own sketches and paintings, they also had a serious purpose: the rehabilitation of the sites and artists of the Counter-Reformation, the objects of popular Catholic pilgrimage, but ignored by aristocrats on the grand tour, by the new middle-class tourists, and by the connoisseurs and art historical specialists. He takes up cudgels for a form of art distasteful to the sectarian narrowness and class prejudices of his own family and many of his countrymen. Here he pursues Ruskinian themes in a novel context -- the work of anonymous or little known craftsmen who contributed to the pilgrimage sites of Varallo, Varese, Oropa, and Crea -- and uses the local villagers as models and pilgrims as participants in a sacred visual drama of events from the life of Jesus or Mary. Having despaired of making a conventional career in art, he successfully brought together his literary and his artistic gifts in 'Ex voto: an Account of the Sacro Monte or New Jerusalem at Varallo-Sesia' (1888). 'Ex voto' focused on Varallo, the founding site, and contained Butler's most original and sustained contribution to art history, his exposition of the chapel art of Varallo, and his pioneering rediscovery of the work of Gaudenzio Ferrari, painter and major sculptor of the life-size figures of the chapels at Varallo, and several more minor figures such as Tabachetti and the D'Enrico brothers, Giovanni and Antonio (better known as Tanzio da Varallo). While he lauded the unsung craftsmen, he also individualized them and drew their 'oeuvre' into art history. When the Sacro Monte of Varallo celebrated in 1986 the 500th anniversary of its founding, there was a special exhibition of Butler's letters to and from his many friends in Varallo, with whom he corresponded in Italian, together with one of his paintings of the site. 
Only a fraction of Butler's explorations of these themes could be published in the books themselves. He revisited them in depth in the series of paintings, sketches, and photographs of the routes he travelled, the towns and their artworks. The photographs are especially revealing. Butler and his assistant Alfred Cathie preserved a selection of his snapshots in albums left to St John's College, also the repository of the original glass negatives; his most prized album, with large photographs relating to the Sacro Monte, was sold to the Chapin Library at Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts. The full range and substance of this joint work of literary and visual art came to light only in the late twentieth century with Elinor Shaffer's 'Erewhons of the Eye: Samuel Butler as Painter, Photographer and Art Critic' (1988) and a related travelling exhibition of 1989-90. In 2002, the centenary of his death, St John's College, Cambridge, and Tate Britain held further exhibitions of his photography. The academy reject, the maverick applicant for the Slade professorship (1886), became a pioneer of a new art form. 
Butler's originality and irreverence were expressed again in the other group of works he published in the 1890s, on the classics. No one could go as unerringly to the heart of Victorian prejudices as he. The very title of his book 'The Authoress of the Odyssey' (1897) was calculated to offend the entire establishment nurtured on Gladstone's notion that a classical education, a grounding in the political and military tactics of Homer's 'Iliad' and the navigational prowess of the 'Odyssey', was the best preparation for young men whose task was to rule the empire. Butler's sly claim that the 'Odyssey' was essentially a domestic tale, the locations were limited to Sicily, the sailing instructions obscure, the adventures told only in recital at the dinner table, summed up in the bold surmise that the author was a woman, had, and even today still has, the desired effect. His project as usual was backed by a variety of related enterprises, in particular his fluent colloquial prose translations of the 'Iliad' (1898) and the 'Odyssey' (1900), which broke down the stilted pseudo-archaic 'high' style of translation then in vogue and deliberately, as he said, aimed at an ideal audience of young girls uneducated in the classics who would be caught up in the story. No other work of his received such extensive or more strongly divided reviews. Nor did he fail to carry his investigations into the field, trekking to Asia Minor to view the site of Schliemann's excavations of Troy, taking in the Greek sites 'en route', and photographing along the way. 
As usual, Butler was not just being mischievous, but was giving vivid expression to the current state of scholarly controversy. There was a long tradition supporting the position that the 'Iliad' and the 'Odyssey' were not written by the same hand, and that the former was centred on war and male pursuits, the latter on domestic and female pursuits. Moreover, since the work of F. A. Wolf at the end of the eighteenth century there had been an important critical shift towards the view that the Homeric texts were in any case not written by one author, but were the result of several centuries of oral poetry relating to the events at Troy, brought together in the sixth century BC by a group of editors. There was no single Homer, the 'blind bard' of tradition, and this continued to be the dominant view of scholars in the twentieth century. The Victorian defenders of the unity and greatness of Homer, however, tended to indulge, like Gladstone, and Matthew Arnold, in praise of the 'grand style' and the patriarchal interest. Butler took the most direct route to casting doubt on their values and their grandiloquence when he claimed that their canonical author was in fact a woman. Moreover, Butler presented a photographic record of Sicily as the home of the 'authoress'. It was increasingly held that the classical world of the 'Odyssey' was no longer the grand Mycenaean civilization of the time before Troy fell, but the shrunken and impoverished world of the centuries after the Trojan war. Butler's Sicilian photographs accordingly give the flavour of the small, domestic scale of Ulysses' holdings through shots of local sailing boats, dusty courtyards, and farm animals, sleeping men, and especially Circean pigs. These literary reinterpretations intersect with a finely observed current Sicilian landscape. His notable contributions to modernism are again discernible -- James Joyce made the argument that the 'Odyssey' was 'domestic' his own, reducing the Authoress's journey round Sicily to Bloom's day in Dublin. Paradoxically, Butler's ironic work also gave rise to a succession of modern attempts, by Victor Berard, the noted French classical scholar, and Jean Berard, Ernle Bradford, and Tim Severin, to sail in replicas of ancient ships along the routes of the 'Odyssey' and to photograph the landfalls. 
In 'Shakespeare's Sonnets Reconsidered' (1899) Butler's argument that the male object of Shakespeare's interest in the sonnets was a lower-class 'Mr WH' was undoubtedly a gesture of solidarity with Oscar Wilde, tried and imprisoned for a similar interest. There were a number of such gestures at the time, more or less explicit. The ironic championing of the obscure love object of the popular dramatists Shakespeare and Wilde was related to Butler's concern for the little regarded popular artists of the Sacro Monte and their models. In 'Erewhon Revisited' (1901) the protagonist, who had succeeded in escaping from Erewhon by balloon, returns to find to his astonishment that he has been made the centre of a new religious cult, based on the 'miracle' of his ascension. This enables Butler to analyse the phenomena of religion from their point of genesis, while disclaiming all responsibility for their uncanny parallels to certain known religions. In thus returning to the beginnings of his writing career, he showed that his wit and his scepticism were as fresh as ever. 
Butler's longest-standing friendship was with Henry Festing Jones, whom he regularly visited when in London, and with whom he sometimes travelled. They tried their hands at writing music, first Handelian minuets and gavottes, then an oratorio buffo, 'Narcissus' (1888). They studied counterpoint with W. S. Rockstro, and designed a 'Ulysses' oratorio (published in 1904). It has been said that for twenty years they shared the favours (for a consideration) of the same woman, on different days of the week. Butler was also accompanied to the end of his life by Alfred Emery Cathie, who had been employed in 1882, at the age of twenty-two, as his valet and clerk, and who became his photographic assistant and his companion. 
Samuel Butler fell ill (doctors disagreed on the cause of the malfunction of the digestive tract) and died in St John's Wood Road, London, on 18 June 1902. He had remarked that evening, when Jones, unusually, paid a second daily visit, that it was 'a dark morning'. This small, bookish man, who nevertheless had a strong streak of the intrepid explorer of new worlds about him, was by his own choice cremated at Woking, and his ashes were buried in an unmarked grave. His will appointed his cousin Reginald Worsley his executor and R. A. Streatfeild his literary executor, and stipulated that his pictures, sketches, and studies were 'to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as they may think best', while Jones was to have 'all interest in musical compositions upon which they had been jointly engaged'. Alfred Cathie was to have $2000, his personal effects, and his photographic cameras. 
It was the posthumous publication of 'The Way of All Flesh' (1903), however, that firmly established Butler's reputation. This powerful autobiographical work was started in the early 1870s but put away in 1884, two years before his father's death, as he felt that its publication would offend his family (his two surviving sisters were in fact unhappy about it). Had it been published at the time of writing, it would undoubtedly have received a less enthusiastic welcome than it did in the wave of anti-Victorian sentiment that characterized the years after his death. But this uneasy position between two periods has meant that literary scholars and critics of modernism have often remarked on its warm reception, but not in detail on its qualities as fiction, because they felt it belonged to the Victorian period, whereas the Victorianists saw it as falling outside their scope because it was published and received only in the modernist period. Thus it had strong affinities with nineteenth-century fictional forms and concerns, as a 'Bildungsroman', or novel of education, like Goethe's or George Eliot's, and as a study of the loss of religious faith, where comparisons would be to Carlyle and Mrs Humphry Ward. Yet those to whom he spoke most powerfully were not his coevals in fiction, Hardy and Meredith, nor those who came to modernism via aestheticism and decadence, but Shaw, Graves, Forster, Lawrence, Strachey, Wyndham Lewis, and Joyce, and critics like William Empson, heir to his provocative, ingenious, and witty criticism, as well as to men of letters abroad, especially in France. Quite possibly a new, comparative approach is required, looking at Butler's four works of fiction in the context of late nineteenth-century European naturalism as the stepping-stone to modernism. The status of 'The Way of All Flesh' is undisputed, however, and like 'Erewhon' it has remained in print without intermission. 
Festing Jones advised the executors on the disposition of Butler's estate, and became his first biographer, and the first editor of his notebooks, as well as author of some other pieces about him, including 'Darwin and Butler: a Step towards Reconciliation' (1911) and an account of their travels in Sicily. Jones proved a judicious and assiduous adviser, who did his best to place Butler's manuscripts, paintings, photographs, and personal objects in the repositories most appropriate to them: the early watercolours to Shrewsbury School, the bulk of the materials to St John's College, paintings and letters to his New Zealand sitters and correspondents. Butler had himself given away large numbers of his paintings during his lifetime. Jones's biography of Butler ('Samuel Butler, Author of Erewhon', 1919) was bulky but anecdotal. His best memorial to his friend was his selection of Butler's pithy observations, 'The Note-Books of Samuel Butler', which proved another substantial addition to Butler's reputation when the book appeared in 1912. It still stands its ground against the later selections and the one volume (of five projected volumes) of the modern edition of the notebooks, deftly capturing and juxtaposing Butler's variously passionate, shrewd, quirky, and surprising insights. 


@@@@@


doc= 32218


Butler, Sir (Spencer) Harcourt (1869-1938), administrator in India, was born in London on 1 August 1869, the second of the nine sons of Spencer Perceval Butler, barrister, of Lincoln's Inn, conveyancing counsel to the office of works, and his wife, Mary, only child of the Revd Nicholas Kendall of Bodmin. He was the brother of Sir (George) Geoffrey Gilbert Butler and Sir Montagu Sherard Dawes Butler. He was educated at Harrow School, then under the headmastership of his uncle Henry Montagu Butler and, after passing the Indian Civil Service examination in 1888, spent his probation at Balliol College, Oxford. In October 1890 he began his Indian career in the North-Western Provinces (renamed in 1902 the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh). In 1894 he married Florence, daughter of Francis Nelson Wright of the Indian Civil Service. Butler first received particular notice as secretary in 1901 of the famine commission presided over by Sir Antony (afterwards Lord) MacDonnell. The report which he drafted was for many years the standard authority on Indian famine prevention and relief. For this work he was appointed CIE. Later honours were the CSI (1909), KCSI (1911), GCIE (1923), and GCSI (1928). 
As deputy commissioner of Lucknow district (1906-8) Butler enhanced the beauty and amenities of the capital of Oudh. At the close of 1907 the viceroy, Lord Minto, took him from this post to be secretary of the foreign department, which then had charge of both external relations and those with the Indian states. Three years later (1910) he was appointed to the viceroy's executive council in charge of the new department of education, which included within its scope public health, local self-government, archaeology, and several minor branches. In 1913 he formulated a memorable government resolution which reshaped policy towards higher education. From now on the principle of expansion through five affiliating institutions was abandoned in favour of the establishment of independent teaching and residential universities. This set the pattern for the expansion of university education in India for the rest of the century. 
In 1915 Butler went to Rangoon as lieutenant-governor of Burma. By his development for the use of the allies of the output of wolfram concentrates from the Tavoy fields he broke the virtual monopoly which the Germans had acquired in the manufacture of tungsten, a valuable agent in the production of munitions. Butler also did much to awaken a new spirit in Burma, notably by raising a large sum by public subscription for the foundation of Rangoon University, thereby ending the inconvenient and unsatisfactory affiliation of the colleges of Burma to Calcutta University, across the Bay of Bengal. 
Early in 1918, when his term in Burma had run only half its course, Butler went as lieutenant-governor to the United Provinces. He allayed serious agrarian unrest in Oudh by reconciling the landowning 'talukdars' to a policy of tenancy reform. The Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, coming into force under the 1919 'Government of India Act' on 1 January 1921, initiated the system of provincial 'dyarchy', which gave elected Indian ministers considerable authority over fields of government 'transferred' to them; and the heads of provinces became governors. Like Lord Willingdon in Madras, Butler encouraged joint consultations between the two halves of his government -- the 'reserved', with executive councillors, and the 'transferred', with ministers responsible to the legislature. 
Butler had the unique experience of introducing the dyarchical system into two great provinces. The second of these was Burma, where the reforms took effect two years later than in peninsular India. As governor from the beginning of 1923, he nursed the area's public consciousness, but never concealed from higher authority the dangers of instability and the need for less exiguous defence measures. He took prompt steps to bring to an end slavery and human sacrifice, as practised by the Nagas in the unadministered territory bordering on the Hukawng valley, which he visited in 1925. 
Butler left Rangoon at the end of 1927, and accepted the chairmanship of the Indian states committee, which looked into relations between the Indian princes and British power. Reporting in 1929, it reaffirmed the doctrine of 'paramountcy', but laid down guiding principles on its application and on equitable financial relations between British India and the states. In 1931 he accepted the chairmanship of the governing body of the School of Oriental and African Studies, London University. He joined the boards of the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company, the National Provincial Bank, and other concerns. His occasional writings include his concise and fascinating 'India Insistent' (1931). 
Sir Harcourt Butler died from heart disease and gout in the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, St Pancras, London, on 2 March 1938. He was survived by his wife and only son, Victor. His gifted personality was well summed up by Sir John Hewett, one of the most distinguished of his predecessors in the headship of the United Provinces: 'He had a brilliant intellect, boundless energy, and wonderful capacity for getting at the root of a matter, ability to express his conclusions so as to be clear to all, and a very practical head in carrying them out. Butler was a wonderful host. His fondness for music added greatly to the charm of his entertainments.' Indeed, his social skills were an important factor in his successful career. 


@@@@@


doc= 32219


Butler, Sir William Francis (1838-1910), army officer and author, was born on 31 October 1838 at Ballyslateen, Suirville, co. Tipperary, the seventh child of Richard and Ellen Butler, who were Roman Catholics. Although descended from the earls of Ormond, the family were small landowners and suffered particularly through the famine of 1846-7, which made a lasting impression on Butler himself. His childhood memories also included witnessing evictions and being hoisted onto the shoulders of Daniel O'Connell. 
Butler's education began at a Jesuit school in Tullabeg, King's county, in 1847 but this was interrupted by his mother's death two years later, and it was some time before the family finances improved sufficiently to send him to Dr James Quinn's school in Dublin. 
Watching the frequent departures of British regiments from Dublin during the Crimean War and later reading reports of the Indian mutiny appear to have fuelled Butler's desire for a military career, and he was directly commissioned as an ensign in the 69th foot without purchase on 17 September 1858 on the recommendation of a distant relative, Sir Richard Doherty. After two years in garrison depot at Fermoy, Butler joined the regiment in Burma and served with it there and at Madras. One leave took him to Vellore, where he was instrumental in erecting a monument to those of the 69th killed during the 1806 mutiny. Subsequently his interest in the regiment's past was to bear fruit in 'A Narrative of the Historical Events Connected with the 69th Regiment', published in 1870. A visit to St Helena on the voyage back to Britain in 1864 similarly stimulated an interest in Napoleon, and at his death Butler was to leave an unpublished manuscript on Napoleon's captivity. 
Regimental service continued at Gosport and Aldershot, promotion to lieutenant having come on 17 November 1863. In 1866 the 69th went to Guernsey, enabling Butler to make the acquaintance of Victor Hugo. There followed a short period at the Curragh before the threat of Fenian raids from the United States saw the regiment embarked for Canada in August 1867. Inspired by the novels of Fenimore Cooper, Butler spent his first leave travelling the American frontier, and in the spring of 1868 replaced Lieutenant Redvers Buller as the inspecting officer of outposts on the Canadian frontier. Butler engaged in some frontier land speculation, as he was considering leaving the army rather than being purchased over in his regiment. He returned home on leave in September 1869 partly to raise the money required for the investment, and returned to Canada after his father's death in March 1870. 
There appeared little prospect of military advancement, but just before leaving Ireland, Butler had learned that Colonel Garnet Wolseley, whom he had briefly met in Montreal, was organizing an expedition to overthrow a provisional government established by 'metis' on the Red River. Butler's celebrated telegram to Wolseley, 'Remember Butler, 69th Regiment', resulted in his being charged with an extended reconnaissance mission to the Red River settlements by way of the United States, involving a descent of the river to Lake Winnipeg. At some personal risk, Butler met the 'metis' leader, Louis Riel, at Fort Garry in July, and then traversed some 400 miles of wilderness in twelve days to meet Wolseley. Riel had fled when Butler and the expedition returned to Fort Garry, but Butler remained there after the troops withdrew and undertook a new mission in October to assess the situation in Saskatchewan. Returning to Fort Garry in February 1871, he had accomplished a winter journey of over 2700 miles. His report to the lieutenant-governor of Manitoba recommended the establishment of a special force to keep law and order in the Northwest Territories, the North-West Mounted Police emerging two years later. Butler returned to England and, after visiting France in the latter stages of the Franco-Prussian War, eventually secured a captaincy in an unattached (half-pay) company on 13 April 1872. Butler's earlier land speculation had become fortuitously profitable with the discovery of oil, and he returned to the Canadian north-west, this time navigating the Athabasca, Peace, and Fraser rivers. Tall, strong, energetic, and resourceful, Butler was ideally equipped for exploration, and his literary talents also found full scope in describing his exploits -- 'The Great Lone Land' (1872) and its sequel, 'The Wild North Land' (1873), becoming classic travel narratives. 
Returning to Ottawa from the north-west in August 1873, Butler discovered that Wolseley was now to lead an expedition to the Asante kingdom. Another telegram was dispatched and, on reaching England, Butler found orders to follow Wolseley to Asante. Wolseley not only had the gift of recognizing ability but also of fitting individuals into roles within the emerging Wolseley ring appropriate to that ability. Again, Butler acted on his own initiative by going from Accra to the kingdom of Akim, and leading its fighting men on a parallel course to that of Wolseley from Cape Coast Castle towards the Asante capital at Kumasi. Arriving at Accra in October 1873, Butler had persuaded the Akim chieftains to advance within 20 miles of Kumasi, but his force deserted near to the Asante army Butler hoped to intercept. Wracked with near-fatal fever, Butler was invalided home and spent two months recovering at Netley Hospital. For his services he was promoted major on 1 April 1874 and received the CB. His account of the campaign, 'Akim-foo: the Story of a Failure', was published in 1875. 
Continuing his convalescence in Ireland, Butler was summoned in February 1875 to join Wolseley, who was going to Natal as governor and high commissioner to work towards South African confederation. Butler became protector of (Indian) immigrants and a member of the legislative council, and undertook missions to Bloemfontein, Kimberley, and Basutoland. On returning to England in October 1875 he was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general at the War Office, where he remained until February 1879, when he was sent back to South Africa as assistant adjutant-general on lines of communication at Durban during the Anglo-Zulu War. 
Butler married on 11 June 1877 a fellow Roman Catholic, Elizabeth Southerden Thompson ['see 'Butler, Elizabeth Southerden, Lady Butler], the military painter. They had three sons and three daughters, one of whom died in infancy. Elizabeth's choice of subject, often reflecting her husband's views in depicting less celebratory imperial incidents and controversial Irish scenes such as that in 'Evicted', contributed to a decrease in her popularity. Butler was a more authoritarian husband and father than his radical sympathies for the underdog might suggest. 
Butler received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 21 April 1880 for his South African services and he was considered as a possible private secretary to the new viceroy, Lord Ripon, but Gladstone apparently considered that a Roman Catholic viceroy was 'sufficiently experimental' ('Autobiography', 215). Butler instead became assistant adjutant-general in the western district at Devonport. He held the post from 1 July 1880 until August 1884, with the exception of three months from August to October 1882 when he joined Wolseley's staff in Egypt as assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general, being present at Tell al-Kebir. Butler did not believe the campaign to be justified, and he protested against the possible execution of the Egyptian nationalist leader, Arabi Pasha. This did not damage his career, and he was made aide-de-camp to the queen with the rank of colonel on 18 November 1882. He published anonymously in 1882 'The Invasion of England', in the popular genre of purposive future-war fiction pioneered by G. T. Chesney's 'Battle of Dorking'. 
Two years later Butler was again summoned by Wolseley for the expedition to relieve Gordon at Khartoum. Butler had met Gordon briefly in 1876 and greatly admired him. Consulted by Wolseley on the possibility of ascending the Nile in boats in the manner of the Red River campaign, Butler was charged in August 1884 with the provision of 400 boats, to be manned in Egypt by Canadian voyageurs. Butler and the boats -- later increased to 800 -- arrived in September, and for the next three months he toiled to get boats, men, and supplies up the cataracts. It was an arduous task and the relationship between Wolseley and Butler deteriorated. It became more difficult with each campaign for Wolseley to find an adequate role for each of his ring as their individual seniority and reputation advanced. Butler had always worked best alone, and not only resented Herbert Stewart's preferment in a field command but also felt himself excluded by Buller, acting as Wolseley's chief of staff. Wolseley professed to find Butler's faults 'more amusing & less objectionable than the virtues of other men' (TNA: PRO, WO 147/8), but he was irritated by Butler's habit of predicting events only in hindsight and resolved not to re-employ one who 'does not pull well in a team' (Wolseley to his wife, 22 Oct 1884; Hove Central Library, Wolseley Collections, W/P 13/27). Having accomplished the task of passing his boats upriver, Butler joined Wolseley at Korti and was attached to William Earle's river column in December 1884. He persuaded Earle to turn a Mahdist position at Kirbekan on 10 February 1885 rather than attacking it frontally, and when the expedition returned down the Nile he commanded rearguards at Meroe and Dongola. 
Butler was given the local rank of brigadier-general on 1 July 1885 and by September, having been mentioned in dispatches, he was back at Wadi Halfa to command the force holding the Egyptian frontier. He repulsed a Mahdist attack at Koshe in December 1885 and that same month also commanded a brigade at Giniss, the last battle in which the British army fought in red coats. He continued to hold the frontier until his troops were replaced by Egyptians in May 1886 and he himself was invalided home in June. With no prospect of immediate re-employment, he spent the next two years in Brittany and Ireland. He was created KCB on 25 November 1886, but this was somewhat overshadowed by his being cited as a co-respondent of Lady Colin Campbell, a friend of his wife, in the sensational 1886 divorce action brought by her husband. There was little evidence that Butler was guilty of impropriety, but he appeared so from his refusal to take the witness stand during the hearings in November and December, for which he was criticized by the jury and the press. 
While unemployed Butler completed his account of the Gordon expedition, 'The Campaign of the Cataracts' and 'Charles George Gordon', both published in 1887. He was recalled to work on an inquiry into the army ordnance department, but the report he drafted was judged so offensive to the War Office civil authorities that it was suppressed, and his only employment in 1889 was to negotiate the purchase of sites for the new defences of London. However, in February 1890 he was given the Alexandria command, being promoted major-general on 7 December 1892 and moved to command a brigade at Aldershot on 11 November 1893. Transfer to south-east district at Dover followed on 24 February 1896. 
To reach high military rank as an Irish Catholic nationalist was unusual, but it was the more so given the sympathy Butler showed for the crown's opponents in many of his campaigns: he later wrote of his regret that 'the majority of our recent wars should have had their origins in purely financial interests or sordid Stock Exchange ambitions' ('Autobiography', 349). Especially critical of the Egyptian expedition in 1882, he once declared the Gordon relief expedition the only justifiable campaign in which he had participated. 
In October 1898 Butler was offered command of the troops in South Africa, and this proved the most controversial episode of his career. He was hostile to the tough, assertive policy of the high commissioner towards the Transvaal republic. In Alfred Milner's absence on leave, and without any guiding instructions, Butler temporarily assumed the appointment of high commissioner in November 1898, when Uitlander agitation was increased by the shooting of an Uitlander, Tom Edgar, by a Boer policeman. Sensing 'a colossal syndicate for the spread of systematic misrepresentation' ('Autobiography', 400), Butler refused to forward the Uitlander petition demanding British intervention. After Milner's return in February 1899 Butler prepared a scheme of defence for the Cape and Natal; later he was accused of negligence in not forwarding it to the War Office until June. Butler's relationship with Milner deteriorated further when Butler made it clear that he would regard any war as a calamity, and Milner insisted the cabinet replace either Butler or himself. Aware of the feeling against him, Butler tendered his resignation on 4 July 1899. It was accepted on 9 August and Butler left South Africa on 23 August, switching commands with Frederick Forestier-Walker at western district. 
Butler remained at western district for six years, with the exception of four months at Aldershot in late 1900, being promoted lieutenant-general on 9 October 1900. His perceived sympathies for the Boers, however, resulted in his being forbidden to attend the queen on her visit to Bristol in December 1899, and in continuing press hostility. It was not until 1903 that the royal commission on the war in South Africa largely vindicated his pre-war warnings and his defensive preparations. Indeed, Lord Esher concluded that Butler would be an ideal quartermaster-general in a reformed War Office structure. Butler's radicalism precluded any such appointment, although he did preside over a committee on the disposal of war stores in South Africa in 1905. After retiring on 31 October 1905, Butler received the GCB in June 1906 and was called to the Irish privy council in 1909. Made a governor of the Royal Hibernian Military School, Butler was also a member of the senate of the National University of Ireland and a commissioner of the board of national education in Ireland. 
In retirement Butler devoted himself to writing, and his works included 'The Light of the West with some Wayside Thoughts' (1909) and his 'Autobiography', begun in 1909 but finally edited and published by his daughter in 1911. He was also keenly interested in the Gaelic League. He died of a heart condition on 7 June 1910 at Bansha Castle, co. Tipperary, where he had lived since retirement, and was buried at Killardrigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 32220


Butlin, Sir Henry Trentham, first baronet (1845-1912), surgeon, the fourth son of the Revd William Wright Butlin ('b'. 'c'.1813, died 1902), vicar of Penponds, Cornwall, and his wife, Julia Crowther Trentham, was born at Camborne, Cornwall, on 24 October 1845. He was educated at home until, at the age of nineteen, he went to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, to study medicine, having decided, like his paternal grandfather, to enter the medical profession. After qualifying (1867), he became house surgeon to James Paget. On 27 September 1873 he married Annie Tipping, daughter of Henry Balderson, merchant, of Hemel Hempstead. 
After holding several junior posts, Butlin was elected an assistant surgeon to the hospital in 1881, full surgeon in 1892, and in 1897 a lecturer in surgery at the hospital school. For twelve years he had charge of the throat department, and played a great part in its development. 
Besides service to St Bartholomew's and its school, Butlin was the first dean of the faculty of medicine of the University of London. He was also successively councillor, treasurer, and president (1910) of the British Medical Association, and councillor and president (1909-11) of the Royal College of Surgeons, but was forced by failing health to resign that office shortly before his death. He was Erasmus Wilson professor of pathology, and later professor of pathology and surgery to the Royal College of Surgeons. The University of Durham conferred on him the honorary degree of DCL, and that of Birmingham, an honorary LLD. He was created a baronet in 1911. 
Butlin was an energetic and successful man whose qualities were rewarded by the highest appointments in his profession and a large medical practice. He wrote a large number of papers, addresses, and monographs, dealing for the most part with the pathology of carcinoma and sarcoma, particularly of the larynx and tongue; among others, he wrote a well-known book on 'Diseases of the Tongue' (1885). He was an excellent lecturer and teacher. 
Butlin was a man of cultured taste, had a keen appreciation of art, was a good linguist, and liked to spend his holidays in travel in France, Spain, or Italy. Riding and driving were among his favourite recreations. He died at his home, 82 Harley Street, London, on 24 January 1912, leaving his wife, two daughters, and a son, who succeeded his father as second baronet; he joined the army while an undergraduate at Trinity College, Cambridge, and was killed in action in 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 32221


Butt, Dame Clara Ellen (1872-1936), singer, was born on 1 February 1872 at 4 Adur Terrace, Southwick, Sussex, the eldest daughter and eldest surviving child of Henry Butt, a captain in the mercantile marine, and his wife, Clara Hook, great-granddaughter of Theodore Hook. Both her parents sang and they encouraged Clara to cultivate her voice, which early showed the richness and compass for which she was to become renowned as a contralto. When her parents moved to Bristol in 1880, the headmistress of South Bristol high school, a Miss Cook, heard her pupil's low notes and asked the bass Daniel Rootham, conductor of the Bristol festival chorus, to hear her. He set about training her voice and enrolled her in his chorus. In January 1890, when she was almost eighteen, she won a scholarship to the Royal College of Music, where she studied with John Henry Blower. 
Clara Butt's scholarship was extended for a fourth year. The college sent her to study for three months in Paris with V. A. Duvernoy, the cost being met by Queen Victoria, who had heard of the student's talent through the prince of Wales, then patron of the college. Later in her career Clara Butt studied with the baritone Jacques Bruhy in Paris, with the soprano Etelka Gerster in Berlin, and in Italy. She made her professional debut in the Royal Albert Hall, London, as Ursula in Sir Arthur Sullivan's 'The Golden Legend' on 7 December 1892. Three days later she sang the title role in Gluck's 'Orfeo' when it was staged at the Lyceum Theatre by students of the Royal College of Music. Bernard Shaw wrote in 'The World' that she 'far surpassed the utmost expectations that could reasonably be entertained' (Shaw, 14 Dec 1892). 
Clara Butt's reputation was soon made, and she became what today would be called 'the flavour of the month', no doubt aided by her imposing presence on the platform -- she was 6 feet 2 inches in height. Less than a year after the appearance in 'Orfeo', Shaw reviewed a Royal Choral Society performance of Handel's 'Israel in Egypt' conducted by Sir Joseph Barnby at which he singled out Clara Butt's singing of 'Their land brought forth frogs' as magnificent, adding, 'the last fourteen bars came with the true musical and dramatic passion which reduces all purely technical criticism to a mere matter of detail' (Shaw, 29 Nov 1893). After this she was in demand at all the principal festivals and by 1898 was living in London in a flat in Hyde Park Mansions. There, in January 1899, the composer Edward Elgar called on her with a song cycle he had sketched for the forthcoming Norwich Festival. She was in her bath at the time and instructed her woman companion to send him away. Elgar complained to her manager (N. Vert), and a few days later he was received with more warmth. The result was 'Sea Pictures', for contralto and orchestra, of which she gave the first performance at Norwich on 5 October 1899 with the composer conducting. Elgar's host at Norwich, James Mottram, described her 'wonderful dress, the material of which, it was whispered, indicated appropriately the scales of a mermaid's sinuous form' (Mottram, 253). Two days later she sang four of the five songs (with piano accompaniment by Elgar) at St James's Hall in London. Elgar was thrilled with her performance, and there is evidence in his correspondence with A. J. Jaeger, of Novellos, to support her claim in later years that he wrote the part of the Angel in 'The Dream of Gerontius' with her voice in mind. Nevertheless, for whatever reason, she did not sing in the first performance of that work at the Birmingham Festival on 3 October 1900, although she sang in 'Sea Pictures' on the previous evening at the festival. (She recorded some extracts from 'Gerontius' in April 1916.) 
In 1900 Clara Butt married the baritone singer Robert Kennerley Rumford (1870-1957), with whom thereafter she gave many highly successful and lucrative concerts, mainly of popular ballads, in Britain and the United States and throughout what was then the British empire. But one of the two songs with which she was most closely associated was by Elgar. Sitting next to him on 26 November 1901 at a concert at which the first two 'Pomp and Circumstance' marches were played, after listening to the trio melody of no. 1 she asked him to 'write something like it for me'. After a 'little talk and persuasion on my part, you said 'You shall have that one, my dear'' (Clara Butt to Edward Elgar, Elgar birthplace archive, Broadheath). Elgar was planning an opulent final movement for the coronation ode he was writing for the coronation of King Edward VII in 1902. A. C. Benson provided the text for this, beginning with the words 'Land of hope and glory'. As soon as Booseys, the publishers, saw the score, they recognized its potential as a solo song and asked Elgar to revise it accordingly. With slightly different words from those in the ode, Clara Butt sang it for the first time at a concert in the Royal Albert Hall on 24 June 1902. The king's appendicitis postponed his coronation until October, so the ode was not performed until the Sheffield Festival on 2 October 1902 and in London three weeks later. Clara Butt sang in neither performance. The other great tune which she made virtually her own was 'Abide with me', closely followed in the Butt popularity stakes by 'O rest in the Lord' from Mendelssohn's 'Elijah'. 
During the First World War, Clara Butt was indefatigable in her energy and generosity in organizing concerts for charity and singing in them. Outstanding among these occasions was that from 8 to 13 May 1916, when she sang in six successive performances of 'The Dream of Gerontius', raising $2700 for the Red Cross. In publicity before the performances, the first of which was attended by King George V and Queen Mary, it was announced that Clara Butt believed there was a new attitude towards death. Many of those without faith before the war, she argued, were now hungering to believe that there was life beyond the grave. For her wartime work she was appointed DBE in 1920. This was the year in which she made only her second appearance on the opera stage, when she again sang Gluck's 'Orfeo' -- this time at Covent Garden with Sir Thomas Beecham conducting. 
Clara Butt made many gramophone records, too many of them of the potboilers with which she and her husband filled their recitals. The warm-heartedness of her singing later came to be thought excessive, but undoubtedly it met the taste of the time. Her audiences were thrilled by the booming, trombone-like strength of the tone and by the unashamed emotional portamentos which she imported into her singing. Her voluminous performance of 'Land of hope and glory' has become almost a caricature of an era, but this should not render listeners deaf to its sincerity and noble solemnity. A recording made in September 1920 of 'Where corals lie' from 'Sea Pictures' is an example of the lightness of touch she could command, and explains why the composer valued her artistry so highly in his works, when managements could afford her high fees. 
Clara Butt knew tragedy in her private life. She and Rumford had two sons and a daughter; both sons predeceased her. From 1901 to 1929 the Rumfords lived at 7 Harley Road, Hampstead, after which they moved to Brooke Lodge, North Stoke, Oxfordshire. In 1931 she had an accident which led, after a painful illness, to her death at North Lodge, North Stoke, on 23 January 1936, three days after King George V. 


@@@@@


doc= 32222


Butterworth, George Sainton Kaye (1885-1916), composer and folk dancer, was born on 12 July 1885 at 16 Westbourne Square, Paddington, London, the only child of Sir Alexander Kaye Butterworth (1854-1946), a solicitor and later general manager of the North Eastern Railway Company, and his wife, Julia Marguerite (1849-1911), the daughter of George Wigan MD of Portishead, Somerset, and a professional soprano before her marriage. His first school was Aysgarth, Yorkshire, from which he entered Eton College as a king's scholar in 1899. He distinguished himself in the athletic and social dimensions of school life as well as in intellectual pursuits; early promise in music was nurtured through study with Charles Lloyd and Thomas Dunhill at Eton, as well as with Christian Padel in York. From 1904 to 1908 he was in residence at Trinity College, Oxford; he took a third class in the honour school of 'literae humaniores' and was active in musical circles, holding the presidency of the university musical club from October 1906 to March 1907. 
By the time he left Oxford, Butterworth had abandoned plans for a career in the law, and the subsequent years were restless for him. He worked for a short while as a music critic for 'The Times', and as a writer also contributed articles on the composers York Bowen, Henry Balfour Gardiner, and his teacher Dunhill to the second edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1904-10). In 1909 he accepted a teaching post at Radley College but the following year returned to London, and from October 1910 to November 1911 he was enrolled at the Royal College of Music, where he studied the organ with Sir Walter Parratt, the piano with Herbert Sharpe, and theory and composition with Charles Wood. 
The most powerful stimulus to Butterworth's artistic development came not from academic study, however, but from two quite different sources: his involvement with the 'rescue' and revival of English folk-music and folk-dance gathering pace at the time, and his intimate friendship with a leading figure of this movement, Ralph Vaughan Williams, both of which had begun in his Oxford days. Butterworth became a major worker in the field, collecting more than 450 items, including songs, dance tunes, and dances; in 1906 he joined the Folk-Song Society, and he was a prominent figure in the English Folk-Dance Society, of which he was one of the founders in 1911, as well as a member of its original morris-dance side or team. An accomplished and passionate devotee of folk-dance, he once declared, 'I'm not a musician, I'm a professional dancer' (Barlow, 91). Folk-dancing appears to have been the one activity in which he felt completely assured and fulfilled, and which to some extent knit together the disparate threads of his life up to this point (film of Butterworth dancing survives). He collected and arranged an album of Sussex folk-songs and, in collaboration with Cecil Sharp, published several books of country and morris dances. The friendship with Vaughan Williams encompassed many shared ideals; they admired each other's music, and Butterworth provided both moral and practical support in the composition, performance, and reception of the older man's 'London Symphony' (first performed 1914), which was dedicated to Butterworth's memory on its publication in 1920. At his death Butterworth left the majority of his manuscripts to Vaughan Williams. 
Butterworth's surviving oeuvre of original compositions dates mostly from the period 1910-14. It is small but distinctive and finely honed, and its core has established a firm hold in the repertory, at least in Britain. (His actual output was larger: a number of works, including songs, piano pieces, and some early chamber music, appear to have been destroyed by the composer in 1915.) It comprises eighteen songs (the majority to words from A. E. Housman's 'A Shropshire Lad', the remainder settings of W. E. Henley, R. L. Stevenson, P. B. Shelley, and Oscar Wilde), three short choral pieces, a suite for string quartet (unpublished), and four orchestral pieces, three of which are idylls partially based on folk-song material, and the fourth a rhapsody thematically connected with two of the 'Shropshire Lad' songs. The assimilation of folk-song (in this Vaughan Williams's influence was crucial) is the key to a style that is simple and restrained, yet which distils deep passions that may on occasion emerge with force; folk-song suggested how basic melodic and harmonic vocabulary could be freed from a nineteenth-century tonal syntax (and attendant expressive ethos) that seemed exhausted and blandly cosmopolitan to many composers of the era. The 'Rhapsody: a Shropshire Lad' (first performed under Arthur Nikisch at the Leeds festival of 1913) demonstrates impressively that Butterworth was developing both the capability of working on a larger scale without stylistic strain or contrivance and an individual handling of orchestral resources (even if the imprints of Elgar and Sibelius, in addition to Vaughan Williams, can be felt at times). 
An unidentified colleague at Radley summed up Butterworth's character in terms echoed closely by other contemporaries: 'He had strength of character, opinions and the courage of them, a rugged directness of manner coupled with a gift of keen criticism and an absence of heroics. Few men can have been worse at making an acquaintance or better at keeping a friend. (Butterworth, 11)' Whether any of Butterworth's friendships were more than platonic is uncertain; although he seems generally to have preferred the company of men, his sexual orientation remains unclear. His modesty, kindness, and natural gifts of leadership were commented on as early as his prep school days. He was a good-looking man, of medium height and build, dark-haired and with the full moustache fashionable in his day, and the most notable feature of his face in photographs is the sensitive and humorous cast of the eyes. 
In many respects Butterworth emerges as an almost perfect example of a certain kind of Englishman of his generation -- he loved cricket, for instance, as well as country life in general -- and the reception of his music has also been dominated by its identification with a ruralist and often elegiac vision of 'Englishness'. Such associations were sealed by the composer's distinguished conduct and sudden death in the First World War; as an example of youthful promise cut short he is the most important musical counterpart of a war poet such as Rupert Brooke (although he did not compose during the conflict). He enlisted on the outbreak of war in August 1914 and was subsequently commissioned in the 13th Durham light infantry. In France in 1916 he took charge of his company after the commanding officer was wounded; during that summer he was three times recommended for, and was twice awarded, the Military Cross. The second decoration honoured conduct on the morning of his death, 5 August 1916; he was killed by a bullet through the head at Pozieres during the first battle of the Somme. He was buried on the front line; no grave marking survives, but his name appears on the Thiepval memorial close by, and a trench was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32223


Buxton, Patrick Alfred (1892-1955), medical entomologist, was born on 24 March 1892 at 5 Hyde Park Street, Paddington, London, the eldest of the three children of Alfred Fowell Buxton, banker and chairman (1916-17) of the London county council, and his wife, Violet, daughter of the Very Revd Thomas William Jex-Blake, headmaster of Cheltenham and Rugby schools and dean of Wells, and brother of Sophia Jex-Blake (1840-1912), physician and campaigner for women's rights. Buxton's mother was of Norfolk descent, and his Quaker predecessors were prominent in business, philanthropy, and social reform, and included his great-grandfather, Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, first baronet (1786-1845), and Sydney Charles, first Earl Buxton (1853-1954). When he was eight, Buxton's family moved to Chigwell, Essex. He was educated at home until he was ten, then spent three years at a preparatory school before attending Rugby School (1905-11). 
Buxton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1911, and that year published his first paper (with his brother, Denis) in the 'Entomologist's Record and Journal of Variation'. The following year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Entomological Society of London. He graduated from Cambridge with first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1914/15), and in 1916 was elected to a Trinity College fellowship on a piece of undergraduate research completed in difficult wartime conditions. Having embarked on the study of medicine in November 1913, and served in the field ambulance in the autumn of 1914, Buxton qualified in medicine (MRCS, LRCP) from St George's Hospital in 1917. Taking up a commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps, he was posted to Mesopotamia and north-west Persia, where he devoted as much time as possible to natural history. This was the beginning of a nine-year, semi-peripatetic existence for Buxton and his consanguineous wife, Muryell Gladys, fourth daughter of William Talbot Rice, vicar of Swansea, whom he had married on 16 January 1917. 
After returning to England, Buxton spent 1920-21 working under G. H. F. Nuttall at Cambridge and taking a course in tropical medicine in London. In March 1921 he accepted the position of entomologist to the medical department in Palestine, and undertook research on malaria, and on desert and semi-desert faunas. His experiences in north-west Persia and Palestine during and after the First World War led to the publication of what he called that 'vigorous young man's book', 'Animal Life in Deserts' (1923). This attractive work became a classic; it was continuously in demand for the next half-century and was reprinted in 1955. Under the auspices of the London School of Tropical Medicine, Buxton led a two-year expedition, from late 1923, to Samoa, the New Hebrides, and Ellice and Tokelau islands to study filariasis. He and his colleague G. H. E. Hopkins made exhaustive collections of the insects of the island, which formed the basis of the 'Insect Fauna of Samoa' (9 pts, 1927-35). Their two-volume 'Researches in Polynesia and Melanesia' (1927-8), however, represented the official record of the expedition. Encompassing geography, meteorology, and ethnology, Buxton's broad interest in natural history also extended to languages. He mastered Arabic, and endeavoured to learn the 'pidgin' of the south seas while in Samoa. 
On his return to London in January 1926 Buxton was appointed head of the department of entomology in the new London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and in 1933 he became professor in the University of London, where he remained until his death. One of the most widely travelled biologists of his time, he briefly returned to Palestine in 1931, and made a seven-month expedition to northern Nigeria in 1933. At the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine he gave a new direction to his subject by insisting on the necessity for basing applied entomology on a scientific understanding of the physiology of insects. To this end, he published a letter in 'Nature' in 1926 that declared that 'real progress will not be made in applied entomology... until we devote time and labour to the study of the fundamentals of insect physiology' ('Nature', 117, 1926, 624). His appointment of V. B. Wigglesworth (1899-1994) as his assistant in the same year, and subsequent appointments, helped to consolidate this approach. Through his own research he made an impact on the study of mosquitoes and filariasis in the south Pacific, of plague fleas in Palestine, of the tsetse fly in Nigeria, and of the human louse in many parts of the world. More specifically, from 1926 to 1939, Buxton focused on the relations of insects to climate. He identified the importance of the immediate habitat, or 'microclimate', for the understanding and control of insects. By his own researches in this field, and by his examples and the appointments and opportunities which he secured for others, he did much to spread his physiology-based programme for applied entomology. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Buxton concentrated all his energies on the improvement of insect control in the armed forces and in civilian life under wartime conditions. He established close relations with the medical departments of the War Office, Admiralty, and Air Ministry, and organized series of lectures to nurses and shelter marshals. He convinced Sir Edward Mellanby, secretary of the Medical Research Council, to create an entomological subcommittee of its military personnel research committee, with himself as chairman. Throughout the war, he travelled to the USA, Egypt, and west Africa to investigate and to promote insect eradication measures. Anticipating a repetition of large-scale trench warfare, he turned his attention to the concomitant problem of the louse. His immediate goal was to find a 'lasting' insecticide with which to impregnate clothing. This research resulted in the publication of 'The Louse' (1939; 2nd edn, 1947), and prepared the way for the early exploitation of the new insecticide, DDT. 
Buxton's career reached its zenith during the war years and the next decade. He was elected to the Athenaeum in 1942 and elected FRS the following year; he was twice president of the Royal Entomological Society of London (1942-3 and 1953-5); and he was awarded the Mary Kingsley medal of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine in 1949, and the gold medal of the Linnean Society in 1953. He was appointed CMG in 1947. He also served on the councils of the Royal Society, the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, the Royal Entomological Society, and the Zoological Society. In conjunction with his work with the colonial medical research committee, Buxton made two exhaustive tours in east Africa in 1945-6, furthering his study of the tsetse fly and trypanosomiasis, and contributing to his 'magnum opus', 'The Natural History of Tsetse Flies' (1955). From 1946 to 1949 he served as a member of the Medical Research Council. 
Affectionately known as Buggy, Buxton had a strong and distinctive personality. Remembered as 'upright but humane', and prone to a 'slightly explosive temper' (Busvine, 'Warmed Both Hands', 93), he elicited respect and fear from contemporaries: 'Completely honest, considerate, and helpful to others, and with a quick wit and a lively sense of humour, he yet had an ironic and somewhat sarcastic manner which could strongly antagonize those who did not see beyond it' (Wigglesworth). He was intensely interested in all sides of natural history, and he was an enthusiastic and exotic gardener: his buttonhole was often adorned with a rare leaf or flower. All this was combined with a dislike of music, of poetry, and of philosophy, and a curious lack of interest in scientific generalizations. He had a fine command of English and wrote in a lucid unaffected style, and he was equally effective as a speaker, with a vivid descriptive power and a way of presenting even familiar matters in a new light. 
After the death of Andrew, one of his two sons and four daughters, in 1952, Buxton seemed weakened. Three years later, he succumbed to bronchopneumonia and cancer of the prostate, and died on 13 December 1955, at his home, Grit Howe, South Park, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire. His funeral was held three days later at St James's, Gerrards Cross. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32224


Buxton, Sydney Charles, Earl Buxton (1853-1934), politician, was born in London on 25 October 1853, the younger son (the three subsequent children of the marriage were daughters) of the liberal politician Charles Buxton (1822-1871) and his wife, Emily Mary (died 1871), eldest daughter of the physician Sir Henry Holland. He was grandson of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, 'liberator of the slaves'. The family background was one of well-to-do Quaker stock in East Anglia, brewers and bankers. Buxton attended Clifton College (1868-70) and went on to Trinity College, Cambridge (1872), but very soon had to abandon his studies there on account of osteomyelitis of a leg. He then travelled for his health in South America (1873) and Egypt (1875). By 1876 he was strong enough to seek and secure election to the London school board, on which he served until 1882. He also worked from 1882 to 1884 very energetically as an honorary secretary to the fund set up by J. H. Tuke to assist emigration from western Ireland. He was already a fluent writer and publicist, mainly on political and fiscal matters, publishing in 1880 a 'Handbook to Political Questions of the Day'. Written as an exercise in self-education, this influential manual eventually passed through eleven editions. In 1888 it was followed by 'Finance and Politics: an Historical Study, 1783-1885' (2 vols.), still a work of great value. 
Buxton stood unsuccessfully for parliament as a Liberal at Boston (1880), but was elected for Peterborough in 1883. Losing that seat in 1885, he was eventually elected in 1886 for Poplar, which remained his constituency until 1914. Poplar brought him successful involvement in the great dockers' strike of 1889 as an arbitrator sympathetic to the dockers' case, and he won lasting popularity with his (mainly working-class) constituents in the Isle of Dogs. He maintained a very strong interest in industrial conditions, arising from his involvement in east London, and the question of London's government remained another major preoccupation, together with education. He was a very active member of the royal commission on elementary education, 1886-8. In the Commons he was a member of an informal group of progressive radicals which included Asquith, Grey, and Haldane. When the Liberals came to power in 1892 he was appointed under-secretary at the Colonial Office, a post he held until 1895. The secretary of state, Lord Ripon, being in the Lords, Buxton had to answer on colonial matters in the Commons, besides holding special responsibility for southern Africa, a crucial area in view of the situation in the Transvaal and the problems of relations with Rhodes's British South Africa Company. In 1894 he played a role as adviser to Sir William Harcourt in the framing of the innovative 'Death Duties Bill'. Out of office from 1895 to 1905, he remained a frequent speaker in the Commons, was a member of the commission of inquiry into the Jameson raid, followed a moderately 'imperialist' line concerning the South African War, and took account of East End opinion in defying Liberal orthodoxy by supporting -- contrary to most of his party -- the anti-immigration 'Aliens Bill' of 1905. 
In December 1905 Buxton became postmaster-general, with a seat in the cabinet. His principal achievements in this office included the purchase for $15,000 of coastal wireless stations from Lloyd's and the Marconi Company (1909), penny postage to the USA, and reduced charges for the postage of literature for blind people. He also won notable success in securing better terms of employment in the Post Office and better relations with the staff (he was responsible for official recognition of the Postal Servants' Union). In February 1910 he was appointed to succeed Winston Churchill as president of the Board of Trade. Here he was responsible for much legislation, notably the important unemployment section (introducing compulsory contributory insurance against unemployment in certain trades) of the 'National Insurance Act' 1911, the 'Copyright Act' (1911), the 'Miners' Minimum Wage Act' (1911-12), the 'Act Extending Trades Boards to Additional Trades' (1913) and the 'Bankruptcy Act' (1913). After the loss of the 'Titanic' in 1912 he became much involved in regulations concerned with safety at sea. 
Early in 1914 he was named governor-general of the Union of South Africa; he resigned his office and left the cabinet and the Commons. He was appointed GCMG and in May raised to the peerage as Viscount Buxton of Newtimber, in Sussex. He reached South Africa on 8 September and opened parliament the next day. The country was deeply divided, the wounds of the South African War of 1899-1902 being by no means healed, and for the first three months of his governor-generalship a party of Boers was in revolt against the government which had declared war on Germany. Buxton's responsibilities were wide, since he was also high commissioner over the protectorates of Basutoland, Bechuanaland, and Swaziland and had a certain (if not clearly delineated) authority in Rhodesia. The South African prime minister was Louis Botha whom he had met in England (1907 and 1911) and the two men greatly liked and esteemed each other. This close friendship was an important factor in the success of Buxton's governor-generalship. He spent much time on the move (frequently by train), getting to know the country and its peoples, making a point of visiting the 'nationalist' Boer strongholds, and winning general popularity, as did Lady Buxton. In 1919 he toured Basutoland and Bechuanaland. His sensitivity to African aspirations made him doubtful about South African plans to have Swaziland transferred to the Union, and Smuts's 'Native Affairs Bill' (1920) tried to meet these doubts by providing for a native affairs commission. Botha died in office in 1919. Buxton's period of office was then prolonged; he finally laid it down in September 1920. On his return to England he was raised to an earldom and he became chancellor of the Order of St Michael and St George. Thereafter he did not play a very prominent role in politics, but in 1923-4 he was an active supporter of Lord Grey of Fallodon's leadership of the Liberals in the House of Lords. 
Buxton was twice married: first, in 1882 to Constance Mary (died 1892), the second daughter of John Lubbock, first Lord Avebury, with whom he had two sons and one daughter; both boys predeceased their father, the younger in childhood. In 1896 he married Mildred Anne (died 1955), elder daughter of Hugh Colin Smith, governor of the Bank of England, with whom he had one son, who was killed in action in 1917, and two daughters, the elder of whom predeceased her father. The osteomyelitis from which Buxton had suffered since his schooldays gave him trouble throughout his life and in 1930 he had to suffer the amputation of a leg. He died at his home, Newtimber Place, near Hassocks, Sussex, on 15 October 1934, and was buried at Newtimber. 
Buxton was an energetic humanitarian whose temperament accorded well with his family's motto 'Do it with thy might.' His voluminous writings also testify to his industriousness. He did not excel as a public speaker, but people were won over by his modesty and charm. Smuts wrote of his 'simplicity of character and approachableness'. Fishing and shooting were his favoured recreations and he wrote on them also (notably 'Fishing and Shooting', 1902). He shared with his close friend Grey a taste for observing birds. These open-air pursuits gave him refreshment and solace amid the tragedies of his family life. 


@@@@@


doc= 32225


Buxton, Sir (Thomas) Fowell, third baronet (1837-1915), philanthropist, brewer, and colonial governor, was born on 26 January 1837 at West Ham, Essex, the eldest of six sons of Sir Edward North Buxton, second baronet (1812-1858), and his wife, Catherine, second daughter of Samuel Gurney (1786-1856), of the Quaker family of Upton, Essex. Buxton's paternal grandfather was Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, the anti-slavery campaigner. Buxton entered Harrow School in 1850 and matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1855, proceeding MA in 1859. On 11 June 1858 he succeeded his father as third baronet and took over landed property and a partnership in the brewing firm Truman, Hanbury, Buxton & Co. of Spitalfields, where he worked until 1889. On 12 June 1862 he married Lady Victoria Noel (1839-1916) ['see 'Buxton, Lady Victoria], youngest daughter of Charles Noel Noel, the first earl of Gainsborough. Of their thirteen children, five sons and five daughters survived infancy. His wife was left physically disabled by a spinal illness in 1869. From 1865 to 1868 he was Liberal MP for King's Lynn, but failed to be elected in 1874 (Westminster), 1876, 1879 (North Norfolk), and 1880 (West Essex). In parliament he promoted the Imperial Federation League and he represented Britain at several European conferences on slavery and central African affairs. 
Buxton's evangelical faith and his wealth made him an influential figure in the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society (of which he was elected president in 1899), the volunteer movement, movements for the welfare of Africans and the improvement of elementary schools, the Church Missionary Society, and Missions to Seamen. He was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1858. He was also a member of the Commons Preservation Society and, with his brother Edward North Buxton, was much involved in its campaign begun in 1866 to save Epping Forest. In particular he contributed to the fund to enable the woodcutter Thomas Willingale to assert his customary rights in a chancery suit. 
In 1895 Buxton was appointed governor of South Australia. He was a choice which provoked amazement in England and irritation in South Australia, where the radical premier, Charles Cameron Kingston, made clear his displeasure by cutting the governor's salary and abolishing his expenses -- actions which could have only symbolic meaning for the wealthy Buxton. There were also some differences of policy between Buxton and Kingston, but Buxton's quiet good-heartedness and the pleasant manner of his wife and numerous children won over his critics, until Kingston declared 'Governor Buxton and his flock to be the most sociable and commonsense family who have ever inhabited the Adelaide vice-regal mansion' (Howell, 515). Buxton regularly visited prisoners, the insane, the sick, and the destitute; and his wife, also a devout Christian, actively promoted education (particularly for girls), and the welfare of mothers. They clearly enjoyed meeting colonists of all sorts, and regarded the recipients of their very extensive charity as individual people, with their own concerns and needs. Buxton was also remarkable for his interest in Aborigines; he took pains to understand their land-tenure system and to explain it to settlers, whom he exhorted to make amends for past injustices. 
While on leave in England in 1898, the health of Buxton's wife and eldest son gave cause for concern and Buxton resigned without returning to Australia, though he continued to be interested in South Australian affairs. In 1899 he was created GCMG for his services. He died at Cromer on 28 October 1915 in a cottage, having characteristically given Colne House, the family home at Cromer, for use as a war hospital. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas Fowell Victor Buxton (1865-1919); his younger sons included Noel Edward Noel-Buxton, first Baron Noel-Buxton (1869-1948), and Charles Roden Buxton (1875-1942). His wife's memoirs show Buxton as a man of high principle, prepared to run the risk of unpopularity (as when he opposed his landlord neighbours' wish to enclose Epping Forest), and who put family concerns above office (as when he resigned his governor-generalship). His wealth (he left over $420,000) gave him that freedom of action, but his modesty and generosity made him unusually widely admired and well liked. 


@@@@@


doc= 32226


Buzzard, Sir (Edward) Farquhar, first baronet (1871-1945), physician, was born in Grosvenor Street, London, on 20 December 1871, the eldest of four sons (there were two daughters) of Thomas Buzzard (1831-1919), an eminent neurologist, and his wife, Isabel (died 1901), daughter of Joseph Wass of Lea, Derbyshire. He was educated at Charterhouse School from 1885 and won a scholarship to Magdalen College, Oxford. He excelled in lawn tennis and football. He played for the university (1893-4) and for the Old Carthusian eleven, winners of the amateur cup (1894, 1897), the London senior cup (1895-7), and the London charity cup (1896). After obtaining a fourth class in natural science (physiology) in 1894, he completed his medical training at St Thomas's Hospital, London, where he won the Mead medal in 1898. In 1899 he married May (died 1951), a musician, the daughter of Edward Bliss of Edgbaston, Birmingham. They had two sons and three daughters; the younger son and eldest daughter also became doctors. 
Following in his father's footsteps Buzzard went to the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases at Queen Square, London, acting first as house physician to his father's close colleague, J. Hughlings Jackson; later he became assistant physician, a post he held from 1905 to 1922. In 1903 he became assistant physician to the Royal Free Hospital, London, and he was later full physician and lecturer in medical pathology. By 1910 he had made his reputation, having secured his fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians in 1906 and having delivered the Goulstonian lectures of 1907, 'Toxic and infectious diseases of the nervous system'; he had also succeeded to appointments at other London hospitals, including the Queen Alexandra Military Hospital, the Royal Hospital for Incurables, the Throat Hospital, Golden Square, and the Belgrave Hospital for Children. In 1910 he returned to St Thomas's Hospital as a visiting physician, and he remained there until 1928, when he became consulting physician. During the First World War he was consultant to the London command, rising to the rank of colonel, during which time he helped to enlarge the understanding of 'shell shock'. 
Although he made no important discoveries, Buzzard surpassed his father in extending knowledge of neurology. He produced many publications but these were mostly in the form of contributions to textbooks, the chief being 'Pathology of the Nervous System', written in 1921 with J. G. Greenfield. Because of the many calls upon his time, original work was abandoned, and he devoted fewer hours to hospital work than his colleagues desired; nevertheless, his clinical opinion was greatly valued, and he excelled by his knowledge and judgement. He was less successful as a teacher: 'Buzzard was usually silent, and his ward teaching was reduced to the essentials of diagnosis' (Munk, 'Roll'). This 'contrasted with the polished fluency of his prepared public disquisitions' (ibid.). Students found him awe-inspiring and ponderous. At the Royal College of Physicians he was made councillor (1922-3), censor (1923-4, 1927), and representative on the General Medical Council (1927-9). He was the Lettsomian (1926), Maudsley (1932), and Earl Grey memorial (1939) lecturer. His appointment as physician-extraordinary to King George V in 1923 was followed by his becoming KCVO in 1927, and he was created a baronet in 1929. The pinnacle of his career came when he was appointed regius professor of medicine at the University of Oxford, in 1928. 
The Oxford appointment was a turning point in Buzzard's career. Despite his conventional background and manner Buzzard turned out to be 'a consistent ally of innovation and reform' (Webster, 322). As a member of Huntercombe Golf Club Buzzard was one of the group of medical men who had access to Sir William Morris, later Lord Nuffield. With the generous support of Nuffield, to whom he acted as doctor, friend, and adviser, Buzzard did much to further the cause of British medicine. His main aim was to develop a medical school devoted to clinical as well as to laboratory research. This was realized with the creation of the Nuffield Institute for Medical Research in 1936, and the enlargement of the Oxford medical school thereafter. 
Buzzard also played a part in the process that led to the creation of the National Health Service in 1948. In his presidential address to the British Medical Association in 1936 he called for reform, indicating the lack of time available to doctors as being the main defect in a disorganized service. Teamwork was needed and this could only come through a co-ordinated hospital system. Starting in Oxford in 1937 and later as the first chairman of the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust, Buzzard helped to develop a regional link between voluntary and municipal hospitals, with the unified staffing of both and the payment of all doctors. The day of honorary service was over, he declared, and he foresaw the end of the voluntary hospital, resulting later in its absorption in a nationalized framework. As for general practitioners, he placed them in the community, furthering the cause of preventive and social medicine to which he attached great importance. This view was set forth forcefully in his Harveian oration for 1941 of the Royal College of Physicians. 'As a skilled politician and effective communicator he was ideally placed to render reform palatable to the conservative establishment, and to mediate with the vested interests threatened by the dramatic changes taking place' (Webster, 322). 
As a result of Buzzard's influence an institute of social medicine was created at Oxford, with J. A. Ryle being appointed to the first chair in 1943. Buzzard's views on GPs anticipated the role fashioned for them in 1948 when the profession was sharply divided and consultants were given staffs of their own in the hospital world. Buzzard also had views on the health of the population as a whole. Although he criticized a British Medical Association report on physical education in 1936 because it valued gymnastic exercises over field games, he attached more importance to heredity and hygiene. Every individual, he believed, should develop a 'health conscience' (Cooke, 20). In 1938, influenced by eugenic views current at the time, he opposed marriage of the unfit, envisaging the day when it would be subject to state control. 
If Buzzard was effective in committee work, he was less successful in politics, failing in 1937 to secure the university seat as a Conservative. That made no difference to the way he was valued by the university, and his term of office was extended for five years beyond the normal retirement age; he did not become an emeritus professor until 1943. In 1940 he was awarded the Osler memorial medal; many other honours came his way over the years, but he is most remembered for his work in Oxford -- no one did more for the medical school. He died at his home, 85 Banbury Road, Oxford, on 17 December 1945, and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his elder son, Anthony Wass (1902-1972). 


@@@@@


doc= 32227


Byng, Julian Hedworth George, Viscount Byng of Vimy (1862-1935), army officer, was born on 11 September 1862 at Wrotham Park, Barnet, Hertfordshire, the seventh son and youngest of the thirteen children of George Stevens Byng, second earl of Strafford (1806-1886), and of the four sons and three daughters born to his second wife, Harriet Elizabeth (died 1892), younger daughter of Charles Compton Cavendish, first Baron Chesham. His grandfather, John Byng, first earl of Strafford, had commanded a brigade at Waterloo and ended his career as a field marshal. His great-great-great-uncle was the unfortunate Admiral John Byng who was shot on his own quarterdeck, as Voltaire put it, 'pour encourager les autres'. 
Financial strictures caused Lord Strafford to impose a regime of strict frugality on his household. Most of Julian's clothes were cast-offs, luxuries unknown. He was educated at home (1867-74), then at Eton College (1874-8), where he was nicknamed Bungo and failed to progress beyond the lower fifth form. Unable to afford a regular army commission, he entered the army at seventeen through the 2nd Middlesex militia. He became an excellent horseman, shot, and cricketer, and developed a love of music and the theatre. Three years later the prince of Wales offered his old friend Strafford a place for Julian in his own regiment, the 10th Royal Hussars, an invitation which could not be refused. He was gazetted on 27 January 1883 and, in March, joined them at Lucknow. The 10th was a very expensive regiment, the youngest officer needing a private income of at least $600, most having twice that. Julian's tastes were modest, but he was popular and, by buying ponies cheaply, training them for polo, and selling at a profit, he managed on $200. 
Early in 1884 the 10th hussars were on their way home when they were diverted to Suakin to suppress the rebellion in eastern Sudan. In a month-long campaign Byng took part in the historic charge at al-Teb (29 February) and had his horse killed under him at the fierce engagement at Tamai (13 March). He was mentioned in dispatches. He was fortunate in experiencing his first action so early in his career for it gave him both the confidence of personal experience of battle and a compelling incentive to study his profession. On 20 October 1886 he became adjutant of his regiment. Nine days later his father died, leaving him $3500. In his four years in the appointment Byng proved a superb adjutant who achieved much for the lasting welfare of his soldiers. 
While stationed at Hounslow, Byng helped Lord Rowton investigate the living conditions of 'casual labourers' in the most squalid districts of London, which led to the establishment of 'Rowton houses' to provide decent, inexpensive lodgings. In the process he learned far more about how much of the population of Britain lived than was known by most politicians, let alone officers of the army. In 1894 he had graduated from the Staff College, Camberley, where he had helped Colonel G. F. R. Henderson compile his classic work, 'Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War' (1898). After three years as a squadron leader in his regiment, he was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general (DAAG) of Aldershot command. He was promoted captain in 1889 and major in 1898. 
Byng arrived in South Africa with General Sir Redvers Buller's headquarters on 9 November 1899, to be met with orders to raise and command a new regiment of colonial irregulars, the South African light horse. Tough, irreverent, and natural horsemen, his new troopers were far from being the disciplined and highly trained hussars he knew, but Byng recognized their value as a military asset. Readily adapting to their informal ways, he soon earned their respect. Helped by his sense of humour and a sure military instinct, he became a leader of irregular cavalry of the highest quality. In the fighting along the Tugela River, Winston Churchill acted as his galloper. Later he was employed in command of a column, then of a group of columns, until March 1902 when he returned to England. Byng received the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel on 29 November 1900 and of colonel in February 1902, and was five times mentioned in dispatches. 
On 30 April 1902 Byng married Marie Evelyn (1870-1949), only child of Sir Richard Charles Moreton of Church Crookham, Hampshire. At the war's end he was appointed to command the 10th hussars at Mhow in the central provinces of India. There he suffered two bitter disappointments. Badly treated miscarriages resulted in his wife's being unable to bear children. Then in a polo accident in January 1904, his right elbow was so badly broken and dislocated that it was feared he would have to leave the army. He returned to England and after months of painful treatment, was pronounced fit for service in the field. 
In 1904 Byng formed the army's new school for cavalry at Netheravon which he commanded until 1905 when he was promoted to command the 2nd cavalry brigade at Canterbury. He was appointed CB in 1906. In 1907 he moved to the 1st cavalry brigade at Aldershot which he commanded until 1 April 1909 when he was promoted major-general and placed on half pay until October 1910 when he took command of the territorial East Anglian division. In the interim he was part-time editor of the 'Cavalry Journal' and became the first district commissioner for north Essex for the Boy Scout movement, which he helped organize with characteristic thoroughness. For the first time Byng had a home of his own, Newtown Hall, at Dunmow in Essex, which was then something of a literary centre. He formed lasting friendships with London editors and the well-known writers who were his neighbours. He read extensively and welcomed the opportunity of broadening his already wide range of interests. In October 1912 Byng was appointed to command the force in Egypt. When war broke out in 1914 he was recalled to command the 3rd cavalry division. 
In the first battle of Ypres Byng's division gave brilliant support to the 1st corps and was repeatedly called upon to restore ugly situations at short notice and in the most unfavourable conditions. Byng proved as cool, determined, and resourceful in difficult circumstances as he had been in South Africa. In March 1915 he was appointed KCMG and in May he took command of the cavalry corps in the temporary rank of lieutenant-general. Three months later he was sent to Gallipoli to command the 9th corps at Suvla. General Sir Ian Hamilton's request for Byng to command the landing force there had been refused, and now that the operation had gone disastrously wrong he was being sent to retrieve it. It was too late. He set out immediately to make his corps' position tenable and, within a week of arrival, began to study the problem of evacuation. He reasoned that the Gallipoli operations were yielding few strategic benefits, that the army must either drive on and seize its final objectives, for which they did not have the resources, or that the force should be withdrawn and used elsewhere. Alone of the senior commanders, he considered that withdrawal need not be costly provided it was carried out before more German help to the Turkish enemy arrived and before the weather broke. His optimism and enthusiasm were infectious and turned the outlook of other commanders from an acceptance of the inevitability of disaster to a belief in the possibility of success. The withdrawal, without casualties, was completely successful and Byng was appointed KCB (1916). 
In February, after a brief spell in Egypt in the Suez Canal defences, Byng was sent to command the 17th corps in France. Three months later he was ordered to replace another British officer, Lieutenant-General Sir E. A. H. Alderson, as commander of the Canadian corps, no Canadian yet being ready for the appointment. Simultaneously he was promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant-general for distinguished services in the field. Unlike most corps of the British expeditionary force (BEF), which were simply headquarters to which divisions were assigned as required, the Canadian corps was a cohesive force consisting permanently of its national divisions. Its commander controlled its administration and preparation for battle in a way not open to his counterparts in the British army. Within a week, on 2 June, Byng had to deal with near disaster when the Germans captured Mount Sorrel and Hill 62 which overlooked Ypres. Local counter-attacks failed, but on 11 June the lost ground was recaptured in an expensive counter-offensive. 
Byng had an extraordinary gift for impressing the troops under his command with his friendly personality and sense of humour. He soon gained not only the confidence but the affection of the Canadian corps where every man came to recognize the tall figure in crumpled uniform and worn boots. Nowhere in the world at war was there such a large formation in which the links between commander and soldiers were so strong. The corps distinguished itself on the Somme, in the battle of Flers-Courcelette in mid-September, and at the end of the month in the Thiepval Ridge operations; but its greatest feat under Byng's command was the capture, in April 1917, of Vimy Ridge, the most dominant and tactically important feature on the whole of the western front. 
In June of that year, Byng, although loath to leave his Canadians, was appointed to command the Third Army in succession to General Sir Edmund Allenby. Within days of his arrival he became absorbed in planning the most daring and original operation yet undertaken by the British on the western front, the Cambrai offensive. Conceived as a diversion to distract the enemy from the main British attack near Ypres, its objects were to capture the wooded heights above Bourlon and roll up the German front towards the Sensee marshes to the north; at the same time it was to thrust eastwards, capture Cambrai, and exploit in the direction of Valenciennes. The key elements were surprise, the use of a massive force of tanks to open gaps in the enemy wire, the employment of 'predicted fire' from massed artillery without preliminary registration, the use of aircraft to neutralize enemy batteries and interdict the battlefield, the swift breakthrough of the enemy defences by infantry, and the launch of cavalry divisions into the enemy rear areas. Planned to take place in October, the operation depended for its success on the Ypres offensive being in progress. In the event, the government ordered the reserves essential to the plan to be sent to Italy, and on 12 November Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig halted the Ypres offensive but ordered the Cambrai operation to take place. 
The first stage of the assault, launched on 20 November, was brilliantly successful, but serious setbacks occurred (including the last-minute arrival of German troops freed by the collapse of Russia), and the available reserves could not maintain the momentum. At the end of the month the Germans counter-attacked the salient created by the British advance. On the north they were held but they broke the southern flank and were only stopped by hurriedly organized counter-attacks. 
As an operation Cambrai was a disappointment but it broke the mould of the accepted tactics of 1917. At that time there was no significant mobile force but cavalry: tanks were unreliable mechanically, too short in range, and too few in numbers. It is from Byng's attempt to exploit their potential in combination with other arms that Cambrai derives its influence on the history of warfare. Into a single operation, meticulously planned, he brought together the secret concentration of an overwhelming force of guns and armour, 'silent registration' by the artillery, the engagement of ground targets by the air force, deceptive measures, including simulated attacks and dummy tanks spread over a front of 30 miles, the breakthrough of the enemy's defences by tanks and infantry, the plan for a deep thrust into the enemy's rear by a mobile force and, above all, surprise. Notwithstanding the obvious technical limitations, it was the prototype of the wide-ranging battles of the Second World War. 
The German offensive of March 1918 fell heavily upon the Third Army, though less so than on the Fifth on its right. The Third put up a stubborn resistance, lost relatively little ground, and smashed the offensive near Arras. Byng had, however, to make a rapid withdrawal, which got temporarily out of hand, from the remains of the Cambrai salient. That autumn the Third Army played a great part in the offensive which decided the issue of the war. Its first attack was launched on 21 August. By a series of heavy blows, in conjunction with the Fourth Army on its right and the First Army on its left, it drove the enemy back to the Hindenburg line and, on 27 September, broke that position. In the space of eighty days it advanced 60 miles -- a fast pace for that war -- won eighteen significant battles, and took 67,000 prisoners and 800 guns. 
On only two subjects have Byng's judgement as a commander been brought into question: his aims in the battle of Cambrai and his delay in evacuating the Cambrai salient in March 1918. It has been suggested in the 'History of the Great War' that in the former case he was unduly optimistic, refusing to modify an ambitious plan when it was found impossible to put at his disposal resources as large as originally intended because they had been used up at Ypres and in Italy. Yet Sir Douglas Haig, the commander-in-chief, approved Byng's plans for the attack at each stage of their development and was present with him at critical times during the operation. It was Haig who ordered the operation to take place when it did, and to continue when the hoped-for breakthrough was not achieved. 
Byng's judgement may have been more questionable in the second case, but his conduct of the final offensive of 1918 established him as a field commander of the first rank. His was the largest of Britain's five field armies and he controlled its operations with a sureness of touch derived from four years of active operations. Its successes reflected his meticulous planning and a personal flair in which was combined an instinct for surprise and a faculty for forecasting the actions of the enemy. His willingness to break free from orthodoxy, to accept new weapons and concepts of operations, led to the plan for the Cambrai offensive which so influenced commanders in the Second World War. In 1919 Byng, who had been promoted general in 1917, was appointed GCB, raised to the peerage (August) as Baron Byng of Vimy, and received the thanks of parliament and a grant of $30,000. Other honours came his way. From Canada there was a commission as an honorary general (1920) and there were honorary doctorates from Cambridge (1919) and Oxford (1931). In March 1919 he was offered the southern command, but he requested retirement to make way for a younger man. While he was in Egypt in 1913 his wife had bought Thorpe Hall at Thorpe-le-Soken. There she created a beautiful home and a widely famed garden and Byng was able to enjoy his favourite sport of shooting. In the interest of his soldiers he took on the trying and delicate task of administering the United Services Fund. 
In June 1921 Byng was appointed governor-general of Canada where already he was widely popular. Yet even those who had hoped for the most from it were astonished by the success which he made of his mission. Well supported by his wife, he kept up the requisite state and entertained on a large scale, but was otherwise unconventional, mixing with people as had none of his predecessors. He travelled widely and developed a talent for making brief and telling speeches devoid of the platitudes too common on official occasions. The theme to which he constantly returned was the need for unity in the dominion and for eliminating the bitterness of political strife. In his last year there was a widespread desire that he should serve a second term, but this he would not consider. 
In June 1926, shortly before he was due to return to England, Byng became involved in a painful political crisis. The prime minister, W. L. Mackenzie King, had in the previous September sought and obtained from the governor-general a dissolution of parliament on the understanding that, if after the election King met the Canadian House of Commons and subsequently was unable to carry on, the leader of the opposition should be given the chance to form a government. The general election which followed seriously weakened King's position, and he had since governed with his minority Liberal Party dependent on outside support. Now, having to face a vote of censure certain to go against him, King asked for a second dissolution. Byng refused it and called upon Arthur Meighen, leader of the Conservatives, the strongest party in the house, to form a government. In less than a week, having seen the censure motion passed, the new prime minister was defeated. Byng then granted Meighen a dissolution, and in the subsequent election the Liberals were victorious. 
Though accused during the election of favouring Meighen over King, Byng had behaved with complete impartiality. He refused King's advice to dissolve parliament at a time when to do so would have prevented its voting on an outstanding motion censuring the government. He accepted Meighen's advice to dissolve parliament, after it had been shown that neither party could govern. Byng's last days in Canada were clouded by this episode but it was with affection and deep regret that the people of Canada said farewell to him. 
Until King's second request for dissolution no prime minister in Britain or Canada had attempted to challenge the right of the crown to refuse unconstitutional advice. Byng's response to it confirmed that residual power was real and deterred similar situations from developing elsewhere in the Commonwealth. Byng contended that the governor-general should represent the crown, not the British government, and that the constitutional relationship between him and the prime minister of Canada was the same as that between the sovereign and the British prime minister. The Imperial Conference, held shortly after Byng's return to England in 1928, confirmed this principle. 
In June 1928 Byng was asked by the home secretary, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, to become chief commissioner of the Metropolitan Police. There was a need at Scotland Yard for a leader of great character and prestige: the public was worried by apparent inefficiency and corruption within the police, and morale within the force was low. Byng tried to excuse himself on the grounds of age and indifferent health, but strong pressure was put upon him and he gave way. The appointment was vigorously attacked on class grounds by the Labour opposition in parliament -- virulently by the left-wing press. Yet so effective was his leadership of the police that when, a year later, a Labour government took office, they refused to accept his offer of resignation, and assured him of their full confidence and support. 
Byng's reforms were widespread and fundamental. He retired inefficient senior officers, tightened up discipline, instituted a system of promotion based on merit, and reorganized the structure of the force to correspond with the distribution of London's population. He reorganized the system of patrolling, abolishing the regular schedules of policemen's beats to which criminals became accustomed. He instituted police telephone boxes, greatly extended the use of police cars, and established a central information room to control them by radio. Yet his reforms were not resented in the force, over which he established as strong a hold as he had done over every other body of men he had commanded. Byng's health deteriorated towards the end of his term of office and he resigned in September 1931. 
Byng had been appointed GCMG in August 1921 and advanced to a viscountcy in June 1926 but the award which gave him the greatest satisfaction was that of a field marshal's baton in October 1932. He died suddenly on 6 June 1935 at Thorpe Hall of an inoperable abdominal blockage, and was buried on 8 June at the church of Beaumont-cum-Moze in Essex which, as a devoted Anglican, he had regularly attended. He and his wife having had no children, Byng's peerage became extinct. 
Byng had developed, through careful self-preparation and experience, from a somewhat shy young officer, avoiding when he could all society except that most congenial to him, to a public figure at home in any society and able to impress his personality on multitudes. He was one of the most intellectual of Britain's wartime commanders and his qualities of leadership were unquestionably high. Unlike the popular conception, his headquarters in the field was notoriously simple. He had a deep and natural empathy with his men, a genius for friendship, and many friends in all walks of life. Unlike other generals, he refused to write his memoirs -- he ordered his papers to be destroyed on his death -- or to criticize others, which may account for the lack of wide recognition, until recently, of his true worth. He never held independent command in the field, and on that basis he cannot be judged. On the other hand, beyond being thoroughly competent and personally inspiring, he was gifted with an open-mindedness and imagination which rose above the pervading orthodoxy of the First World War. 
Byng's greatest weakness was a guileless belief in the integrity of mankind, of which some less scrupulous occasionally took advantage. But coupled with his massive integrity, it was the basis of the trust and devotion of his soldiers and the root of his reputation as a battlefield leader. 


@@@@@


doc= 32228


Byrne, Sir Edmund Widdrington (1844-1904), judge, was born at Islington, London, on 30 June 1844, the eldest son of Edmund Byrne of Whitehall Place, Westminster, solicitor, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Cowell. He was educated at King's College, London, before entering as student at Lincoln's Inn on 5 November 1863. He was a pupil in the chambers of George Osborne Morgan and was called to the bar on 26 January 1867. His family's connections with solicitors gave him a large practice as a conveyancer and equity draftsman, while his powers of clear and concise statement in court put him among the leading juniors of the Chancery bar. On 13 August 1874 he married Henrietta Johnstone, daughter of James Gulland of Newton, of Wemyss, Fife; they had several children. 
Byrne became queen's counsel in 1888 and a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1892. He attached himself to the court of Mr Justice Chitty where he and Robert Romer QC soon shared most of the work between them. A well-grounded lawyer and pleasant speaker, Byrne was an admirable leader in routine Chancery cases. He was at his best as advocate in a court of first instance. His appearances in the higher tribunals were rare, except in the Court of Appeal in cases in which he had appeared at earlier hearings. 
In July 1892 Byrne won a parliamentary seat, the Walthamstow division of Essex, as a Conservative candidate. The 'Finance Act' of 1894 and the abortive 'Employers' Liability Bill' of 1895 gave him the opportunity to make many legally minded interventions in debate. Byrne quickly adapted to parliamentary life and he was referred to in the press as one of 'the busy bees'. In July 1895 he was again returned for Walthamstow with a largely increased majority. 
On the promotion of Chitty to lord justice, Byrne was given the vacant judgeship in the Chancery Division (18 January 1897), and was duly knighted. On the bench he was painstaking, courteous, and patient, and his judgments, which included many patent cases, were nearly always affirmed upon appeal. Contemporary colleagues thought him overly scrupulous, however, and judged him too slow, morbidly conscientious, and reliant on authority, being particularly irritated by his falling behind in his cases. 
Byrne died after a very short illness on 4 April 1904 at his home, 33 Lancaster Gate, Hyde Park, London. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32229


Byron, Robert (1905-1941), traveller and writer on art, was born at Wembley, London, on 26 February 1905, the only son among three children of Eric Byron, civil engineer, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of William Robinson, of Southall Manor, Middlesex. He was educated at Eton College and at Merton College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in modern history in 1925. At Eton Byron was active in the Society of Arts, where, according to his contemporary Harold Acton, he 'distinguished himself for his provocative tirades' (Acton, 92). The pair did not get on at school but became friends at Oxford, where they discovered a shared taste for Victoriana. Believing that it was not necessary 'to be solemn in order to be serious', they made humour 'one of their symbols' (ibid., 119), and were originators of the social milieu captured by Evelyn Waugh in 'Brideshead Revisited'. At one particularly uproarious fancy dress party, staged by the Hypocrites' Club, Byron 'gave a hectic impersonation of the Widow of Windsor'. Few women were present on this occasion, which 'rumour transformed... into a shocking orgy' (ibid., 124). Soon afterwards the club was closed by the proctors. 
Acton remembered being somewhat cowed by Byron's self-confidence at Oxford: 'He could not understand what prevented me from rushing into print when I expressed some casual opinion. He saw an article in everything' (Acton, 192). And Byron's first book emanated from his first travels, in 1925 to Greece, a country for which he had a passionate admiration and where, as a distant relative of Lord Byron, his name carried a particular resonance. 'Europe in the Looking-Glass' (1926) was a high-spirited account of this undergraduate jaunt, and it was followed during the next four years by three ambitious studies in late Hellenism, of which 'The Byzantine Achievement' (1929; repr. 1987) is the most satisfying. 
In 1929 Byron travelled to India as special correspondent for the 'Daily Express', and in the next year made a brief journey into Tibet. The first literary result of these experiences was 'An Essay on India' (1931) which, in the opinion of the viceroy, Lord Willingdon, contained the best brief statement of Indian political problems at that time. His Tibetan journey was recorded two years later in 'First Russia, then Tibet'. A period of journalism in London was followed by a visit to Persia and Afghanistan during 1933 and 1934, an adventure which promoted the best of his books, 'The Road to Oxiana' (1937). This may be described as an enquiry into the origins of Islamic art presented in the form of one of the most entertaining travel books of modern times. He wrote it in China during 1935 and 1936 after making the overland journey to the Far East through Russia. 'The Road to Oxiana' was reprinted in 1981 with an introduction by Bruce Chatwin. Chatwin considered it 'a work of genius' which he personally elevated 'to the status of 'sacred text'' (Chatwin, ix). But it was also an important book. In between the 'bravura passages' (ibid., xvi) Byron was expounding a serious thesis about the significance of Afghan influence on Persian civilization. 
In 1936 Byron settled in London, where he found work as a public relations officer with the petroleum information bureau. He had become obsessed with the threat posed to European civilization by Nazism, and confessed to his friend Christopher Sykes: 'It's a queer unexpected situation to find that the only person talking sense in this country is Winston Churchill' (Sykes, 161). Byron visited Germany in 1937 and again in 1938, when he attended the Nuremberg rally 'to see the enemy' (ibid., 166). Each visit intensified his anger: 'I shall have warmonger put on my passport' (ibid., 163). He took 'the extremest imaginable anti-Munich view' (ibid., 168) and conducted a personal crusade against appeasement: he startled the diners at a London club by leaning across a table to ask a Chamberlainite member of parliament: 'Are you in German pay?' (ibid., 173). 
The violence of his behaviour, though, earned Byron disapproval in high places and when war broke a first-rate appointment was denied him. Disappointed, he accepted work as a sub-editor in the overseas news department of the British Broadcasting Corporation. While on his way to Cairo as a special war correspondent for a group of English newspapers he was drowned by enemy action, when his ship was torpedoed off Stornoway on 24 February 1941. He was unmarried. He had greeted the war with characteristic levity when it finally came: 'Well, there's one thing to be thankful for: the post-war decadence ought to be even better than the last' (Sykes, 175). 
Byron's writing showed continuous growth and even his lightest things, such as 'How we Celebrate the Coronation' (1937), were written with all his energy and care. His development was very rapid and while still a young man he became, what he remained, the only writer of his time to convey a vivid idea of Byzantine art and civilization to the common reader. His first books sometimes erred on the side of massiveness of expression but his most considered and interesting performance, 'The Road to Oxiana', was written with such charm and verve that most contemporary readers did not recognize it as a serious and original contribution to Islamic studies. Paradoxically it was better appreciated by the specialists, for whom he had no liking, than by the unspecialized readers to whom it was addressed. He may be said to have anticipated views which later scholarship has adduced from fuller evidence than was then available. 
Byron was 'moderately fat, short, with very fair hair, a penetrating rolling eye... and a voice whose quiet lazy intonations never concealed the abounding vitality behind it, and which, on sometimes small, and sometimes not easily detectable provocation, broke out into violent spatter of invective. (Sykes, 81-2)' He was of a polemical disposition and unfortunately he allowed this to leave blemishes on all his books, even his best. 'The Byzantine Achievement' includes a bitter condemnation of the Roman Catholic church, and 'An Essay on India' seven pages of vituperation directed at the 'anti-dominion' party in Britain in the 1930s. There is some disproportion in his work as a result, but the fault is compensated by the delight which goes with intense enthusiasm and mastery of style. Byron was the subject of the principal essay in Christopher Sykes's 'Four Studies in Loyalty' (1946) and a selection of his letters to his mother was published in 1991, edited by his sister Lucy Butler. 


@@@@@


doc= 32230


Bywater, Ingram (1840-1914), Greek scholar, was born in Islington, London, on 27 June 1840, the only son of John Ingram Bywater (1812/13-1864), a customs clerk, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Marshall (died September 1903). He was educated at private schools, University College School, London (1853-6), King's College School, London, where he started Greek, and at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated as a scholar in 1858. 
As an undergraduate Bywater was the pupil of Jowett and Robinson Ellis, and the friend of Pater and Swinburne. He read and was influenced by Carlyle. His father generously supported his education, paying for private coaching by James Bryce and T. H. Green. He gained a first in classical moderations in 1860, and in 'literae humaniores' in 1862 (BA 1862, MA 1865). In 1863 he was elected to an open fellowship at Exeter College. As a young fellow he became a close friend of Mark Pattison and his accomplished wife ['see 'Dilke, Emilia Francis (1840-1904)]; they influenced his attitudes. With them Bywater travelled on the continent, visiting many libraries and museums. Pattison collected early printed books, and Bywater's Sunday visits to his lodgings were presumably partly devoted to bibliography. Pattison was also an uncompromising advocate of scholarship, who alleged that the atmosphere of Oxford was inimical to study: 'a Fellowship is the grave of learning'. Bywater's opinions were more moderate, and his manner of expression more conciliatory; but he stated that research was undervalued and undersupported at Oxford, and that the college tutorial system left too little time and initiative to the student or his teachers. He became a friend of William Morris and of Dilke, and was an early supporter of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (1877), who always lamented the effect in Oxford of the neo-Gothic revival. 
During Bywater's twenty years as a tutor most of his time was spent teaching and on the studies for which he became famous. The publication in 1877 of his edition of the 'Fragments of Heraclitus' won him an assured position in the world of European scholarship, and he was invited by the Prussian Academy of Sciences to edit the works of Priscianus Lydus (published 1886). He contributed to German journals and his relations with continental scholars, notably Professor Jacob Bernays, of Bonn, were cordial and fruitful. He travelled on the continent, but never visited Greece. 
Charles Cannan used to say that though Bywater was doubtless an eminent Aristotelian, it was to be deplored that he had not become a bookseller, in which profession he must have been pre-eminent. Actually, he might have become librarian of the Bodleian. The curators, of whom Pattison was one, and Coxe, the veteran librarian, wanted him; and in 1879 he accepted, experimentally, the post of sub-librarian. He found the duties too irksome. He was expected routinely to read manuscripts and shrank from doing so: 'those who care for MSS. 'per se' are usually dull dogs' (Jackson, 88). He resigned in 1880. He declined the headship of Exeter College, offered in 1887. 
In 1884 Bywater was appointed to a new readership in Greek. On 19 August 1885 he married Charlotte (died 17 Feb 1908), widow of Hans William Sotheby (died 1874), formerly fellow of Exeter College, and daughter of Charles John Cornish of Salcombe Regis, from the well-known Devon family of Cornish; they had no children. She had ample means and varied accomplishments, literary and artistic. They lived in term-time at a 'very ordinary villa' (Jackson, 212) at 6 Norham Gardens, on the edge of the university parks, and in vacation at Mrs Bywater's London house, 93 Onslow Square, Kensington. This was Bywater's real home until his death; and there, with his wife's help, he gradually increased his remarkable collection of early classical books, on which he spent much. 
In 1893 Jowett died, and Gladstone nominated Bywater, whose claims were supported by the testimony of German scholars, as regius professor of Greek. The popularizer and translator was thus succeeded by a scholar more purely scientific: Bywater's aim was 'the perfection of learning' (Jackson, 126). He occupied the chair until 1908. He continued to lecture, especially on Plato's 'Republic' and Aristotle's 'Poetics'. Those who believed college particularism or examination demands prevented the university from making the most of its professors noted that few undergraduates attended in the Schools lectures which formerly had crowded Exeter College hall. 
Following his wife's death in 1908 Bywater resigned his professorship and retired to his London house. In 1909 he published the crowning labour of his Aristotelian studies, the monumental edition of the 'Poetics'. Thereafter he undertook no large work of his own, but he continued to contribute occasional articles to the 'Journal of Philology' (of which he had been an editor since 1879), and to help scholars by reading their proofs. 
As an editor of Greek texts Bywater was the first of the English scholars of his generation. He had a wide familiarity with manuscripts, an unrivalled knowledge of the history of classical learning and the editorial art, and a fine sense of what he called the 'Sprachgebrauch'. He added untiring industry and keen insight into the logical sequence of his author's thought. It has been objected to his interpretations of Aristotle that he was too much a grammarian and too little a philosopher; but this apparent limitation was due not to narrowness but to a considered scepticism. In the preface to the 'Poetics' he reminds us 'that the very idea of a Theory of Art is modern, and that our present use of this term 'Art' does not go further back than the age of Winckelmann and Goethe' (Jackson, 136). This was with oblique reference to the work on the 'Poetics' of Samuel Henry Butcher, much of which Bywater regarded as irrelevant. In private he was more outspoken: 'You must not expect from me anything about fine art, for I don't think Aristotle said anything about it' (ibid., 136). 
Scholars evaluating Bywater's published work have laid stress on the quality of its form, the laborious accuracy of his indexes, and the fine judgement which by a punctuation change clarified an obscure passage. But his editions of Heraclitus and Aristotle, and even the ampler commentary on the 'Poetics', reflect one side only of his vast learning and his catholic humanism. His profound veneration for Aristotle was untinged by superstition. His statement in 1914 to a 'Morning Post' interviewer was characteristic: 'My chief works... have been on Aristotle, a philosopher who influences people to this day without their knowing it... It is astonishing how profound in some ways was Aristotle's knowledge of science' (Jackson, 199). 
Much of Bywater's work was anonymous, and hardly known except to those who benefited by it. He was a delegate of Oxford University Press from 1879 until his death, and assiduous in reading manuscripts and proofs. His immense bibliographical knowledge and his practical wisdom were enough to assure him power and usefulness as a learned publisher; but on many scholarly enterprises he was not content to advise or to decide. He read with care the proofs of the 'Oxford Classical Texts', which he and Charles Cannan promoted, and guided the editors' critical methods. He contributed much to the 'Oxford English Dictionary' that would otherwise hardly have been found. 
Bywater was president of the Oxford Aristotelian Society from its inception in the early 1880s until he left Oxford in 1908. Members met in his rooms weekly during term and construed and discussed one of Aristotle's more important writings. The knowledge and the methods inculcated had far-reaching influence on philosophical studies in Oxford. 
In university politics Bywater was a liberal and reformer. He wanted examinations reduced and did not favour compulsory Greek in universities. To national and international affairs his attitude was sceptical; his values were conservative -- 'the vulgar radicalism of my youth' was his own phrase -- and he had no illusions. He considered liberalism destructive, disliked democracy -- quoting Carlyle -- and disliked the influence of the United States, which he considered 'the great breeding-ground of popular crazes' (Jackson, 187). He was long acquainted with Joseph Chamberlain -- whom he referred to as Camerarius -- and favoured tariff reform. He had learned much from Germans, and had done much to introduce German scientific methods into English scholarship; but in later years he deplored the growing chauvinism which prevented Germans from admitting that they could learn anything from an English book. 
Bywater was an expert bibliophile, 'a prince among bibliophiles' (Jackson, 161). The collection he bequeathed to the Bodleian Library, which there bears his name, is much more than a collection of rare and beautiful books. It is, as he himself wrote, 'a conspectus in its limited way of the literature of learning from the age of Bessarion to that of the Elenisgonoi of Scaliger and Casaubon'; and it is also part of the work of a great humanist. He was generous in gifts of valuable books to individuals and institutions, and a benefactor of the Ashmolean Museum and Cambridge University Library. In his London home, surrounded by his books, Bywater was most himself. As one of his younger friends wrote: 'It was there that he was a great teacher. It was not merely that he was a master of his subject -- and of one's own; but one felt powerfully the stimulus of a temperament from which what may be called the casual impurities of intellectual life -- pedantry, hurry, irrelevance, pretentiousness, cleverness -- had been purged away.' Admired as a great scholar, Bywater received honorary degrees from Cambridge, Dublin, and Durham, and foreign academic honours, and was one of the original fellows of the British Academy. He was of medium height with square shoulders, spoke with a 'never-to-be-forgotten lisp' (Jackson, 59), and smoked much, both a large pipe and cigars. He died at his home, 93 Onslow Square, London, on 17 December 1914, and was buried at Salcombe Regis, near Sidmouth, Devon, on 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 32231


Cable, (Alice) Mildred (1878-1952), missionary and author, was born on 21 February 1878 in Sydenham Road, Guildford, the daughter of John Cable, master draper and sometime borough councillor and magistrate, and his wife, Eliza Kindred. From early youth she believed that she had a missionary vocation, and while still at Guildford Girls' High School she began training with the China Inland Mission. Confirmed in her intentions, she went to London to receive formal training as a pharmacist, taking courses which would be useful in her future endeavour including anatomy, surgery, and midwifery, and qualifying as MPS. Her plans were seriously threatened when the Boxer uprising in 1900 disrupted Chinese missionary work; and this was further compounded by the ending of a love affair, to which she only ever made one public reference, in the spiritual autobiography, 'Something Happened' (1934), where, thirty-five years after the event, she described receiving news which made a 'goblin of the sun' and where 'the brightest things of life burnt themselves to ashes' (p. 75). 
Despite these set-backs Cable left England for China in September 1901, as soon as it was safe for missionaries to return there. She was sent to Huozhou in Shanxi province, where she joined the veteran missionary Evangeline French (1869-1960) in setting up a girls' school, which eventually developed into a women's teacher training college. They also campaigned against foot binding and were active in the rehabilitation of opium addicts. In 1907 they were joined by Francesca Law French (1871-1960) ['see under 'French, Evangeline], younger sister of Evangeline, and, as the Trio, they were to spend the rest of their lives together. 
Cable was committed to the idea of an indigenous church, and sought to involve Chinese Christians in all areas of their mission. She believed that their work in Huozhou could be self-sustaining and that her skills might be more usefully exploited in areas still relatively untouched by the protestant missionary movement. It was with this intention that she gained permission to initiate a mission in north-west China. The Trio left Shanxi in June 1923 and arrived in Jiuquan in Gansu province in late 1924. After establishing a base and native church at Jiuquan they devoted the next thirteen years to travelling, by mule cart, across the trade routes of the Gobi Desert, 'gossiping the Gospel', as Cable described their method of proselytizing; leaving biblical tracts in hostelries, visiting country fairs, and disseminating their Christian message on a personal level by befriending local people. 
It is for the Trio's work in this part of central Asia that they were to become widely known in missionary circles and also to the British public. While their numerous journeys across the Gobi Desert were motivated by their evangelical calling, the hardships and frequent dangers endured made them pioneer women travellers and explorers of this region, and they were the first British women to visit the city of Urumchi. Their work was frequently obstructed by growing political disturbance, and Cable's medical skills, which saved the life of Muslim warlord Ma Zhangying, proved a valuable passport to their own survival. She was recognized as a leading authority on the Gobi Desert, and her most famous book, of eponymous title, was published in 1942. It was in recognition of that expertise that she was awarded the Lawrence memorial medal by the Royal Central Asian Society in 1942, and, with the French sisters, the Livingstone memorial medal of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society in 1943. 
Although Cable was the youngest of the Trio she soon established herself as its dominant partner. The numerous books published while they were in China and afterwards, though written with Francesca French, were largely Cable's work, and their tone and views more accurately reflect her own personality. Cable described herself as someone for whom faith was difficult, but she seemed not always to appreciate that this might also be true for the people among whom she evangelized. While generally appreciative of the various cultures in that part of China, she maintained a horror of all forms of idolatry, a prejudice which is reflected in her descriptions of Tibetan lamaism and, occasionally, in the methods of the mission's Roman Catholic rivals. 
In 1936, as China collapsed into further political instability and Soviet influence increased in the north-west, the Trio were finally forced to leave. On their return to England, Cable immediately threw herself into the work of the British and Foreign Bible Society and, as its vice-president and chairman of the women's committee, it was to the service of this organization that she devoted the rest of her life. Cable and Francesca French toured England and Wales on the society's behalf and, in 1947, the Trio visited Australia, New Zealand, and India as part of their ongoing missionary project. In 1951 they were invited to Brazil by the Evangelical Union of South America, and Cable was enthusiastic about the future of the protestant church in that part of the world. 
Cable was of medium height with hair, turned grey at a young age, scraped back in a bun, and dark rings around her eyes which made her look rather like a panda. She was generally seen as a formidable and rather intimidating personality, which earned her the nickname Napoleon among Bible Society activists. Her life was shared in total companionship with the French sisters and as a guardian to Eileen Guy, a Tibeto-Mongolian deaf mute adopted in Jiuquan in 1925. Cable died on 30 April 1952 at her London home, 13 Buckingham Mansions, West End Lane. She was cremated at Golders Green on 6 May. She bequeathed her estate to the French sisters and, after their deaths, to Eileen Guy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32232


Cadbury, George (1839-1922), confectionery manufacturer and social reformer, was born at Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 19 September 1839, the third son and fourth child of John Cadbury (1801-1889), cocoa and chocolate manufacturer, and his wife, Candia (1805-1855), daughter of George Barrow, merchant and shipowner, of Lancaster. The Cadbury family, of west-country origin, had settled in Birmingham at the end of the eighteenth century. John Cadbury began as a tea and coffee dealer in 1824, and started to manufacture cocoa in 1831. The firm of Cadbury Brothers was established in 1847, when Benjamin Head Cadbury left the family drapery business to join his brother John. The Cadburys were long associated with the Society of Friends, and Quakerism was a powerful influence on the attitudes and actions of George Cadbury. 
George Cadbury was educated at home and as a day-boy at Lean's Quaker school at Edgbaston. His mother, an ardent temperance worker, died in 1855, and soon afterwards his schooling ended. His original wish was to become a surgeon, but circumstances led him into commerce, and, in 1856, after a period of employment in the grocery business of Joseph Rowntree at York, he joined his father's cocoa factory in Bridge Street, Birmingham. His elder brother, Richard, had been at work there since 1850. John Cadbury's health failed after his wife's death, and the business declined to a position where its future was threatened. In April 1861 Richard and George, aged respectively twenty-five and twenty-one, took entire control. It was only after a hard struggle and great personal sacrifice on the part of the two young partners that in 1864 prosperity began to return. Richard had scientific and artistic interests, but George, it was said, channelled his energies into the creation of a strong business, which would reflect his religious ideals, his belief in thrift and hard work, worthy products, fair dealing, and good employment conditions. 
The place of Cadbury Brothers as one of Victorian Britain's most notable businesses was achieved with the introduction of Cocoa Essence in 1866. Cadburys was the first British firm to employ the Van Houten press, which removed excess oils from the cocoa bean; its use enabled the firm to manufacture a finer powder, in large quantities. At a time when parliamentary attacks were being levelled at adulterated foodstuffs, Cocoa Essence benefited from the absence of additives traditionally used to counteract the taste of the excess oils, and the new product was effectively packaged, branded, and advertised. What distinguished George Cadbury from his competitors was his willingness to introduce innovations, and, by 1910, his firm had replaced Frys of Bristol as the country's largest cocoa and chocolate manufacturer. 
By 1879 the Bridge Street building was inadequate to the firm's needs, and the partners took the opportunity of making their greatest social and economic experiment -- the moving of their works into the healthier rural surroundings of Bournville, 4 miles from Birmingham. Here, they improved factory layout and the efficiency of their operation, and they were able to expand their industrial welfare work, improving employment conditions and creating a model housing estate. Benefit schemes, including sick pay and pensions, were eventually introduced. The Bournville experiment in housing and town planning was George Cadbury's own. However, the success of the new factory made it likely that slum conditions would, if allowed, grow up in its neighbourhood. To avoid this, he bought, between the years 1893 and 1900, some 300 acres of adjoining land, on which he had built about 30 houses by the time he founded the independent Bournville Village Trust, in December 1900. The trust could own land anywhere in Great Britain, and even the Bournville estate was never intended by George Cadbury to be solely for the benefit of employees of his own business. By 1931 the capital of the trust had increased from $170,000 to over $500,000, and it held more than 1000 acres of land. 
Cadbury married, in 1873, Mary (1849-1887), daughter of Charles Tylor, writer and lecturer, of London; they had three sons and two daughters, among them Edward Cadbury who followed his father into the confectionery trade. After Mary's death he married, in 1888, Elizabeth Mary Cadbury (1858-1951), daughter of John Taylor, a member of the London stock exchange and director of various City companies; three sons and three daughters were born of the second marriage. The oldest son of George and Elizabeth was Laurence Cadbury, who became managing director of Cadbury Brothers in 1919. 
Richard Cadbury died in 1899, and Cadbury Brothers finally became a company, with George as its chairman. Innovation in product technology and marketing continued with the introduction of Cadbury's Dairy Milk in 1905 and Bournville cocoa in 1906. Under George's leadership, Cadbury Brothers had grown from an enterprise of 20 employees to one of about 8600. 
An important part of George Cadbury's social work was the adult school movement. As a young man he had begun as a teacher in an adult school in Birmingham, and he continued to teach until the age of seventy-two, riding or, in his later years, bicycling into the city at six o'clock on Sunday mornings to take his 'Bible' class. Hundreds of Birmingham men learned from him how to read and write. The resulting insight which he gained into working-class conditions inspired his interest in housing and factory reform. His love of the country led him to attach special importance to the provision of gardens for working-class houses. 
Cadbury's other social activities were many, and were mostly concerned with giving practical form to the opinions he held. In 1901 he acquired a controlling interest in the 'Daily News' in order to give voice to Liberal Party, nonconformist views in general, and to oppose the South African War in particular. He also owned four newspapers in the Birmingham district, and he took a leading part in the campaign against sweated labour. Cadbury died at his home, the Manor House, Northfield, Birmingham, on 24 October 1922, survived by his second wife. In 2010 Cadbury plc was taken over by the American food company Kraft. 


@@@@@


doc= 32233


Cadman, John, first Baron Cadman (1877-1941), mining engineer and industrialist, was born on 7 September 1877 at The Villas, in the north Staffordshire mining village of Silverdale, the eldest son of James Cope Cadman (1851-1914) and his wife, Betty, 'nee' Keeling (died 1924). His father was a mining surveyor and engineer and the general manager of the Silverdale Coal and Iron Works; later he became president of the Institution of Mining Engineers, in 1903. After local schooling, Cadman left Newcastle under Lyme high school at seventeen to become a pupil of his father. He attended local mining classes which the Staffordshire county technical education department had established for working miners. In 1896 Cadman won the council's first county mining scholarship, to study geology and mining at Armstrong College in Newcastle upon Tyne, then part of Durham College of Science, where he graduated BSc (first class) in 1899 and MSc in 1902; he was elected fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1900 and became DSc in 1908. 
After graduation Cadman went to Silverdale as assistant general manager to his father. Then, after a period as a colliery agent in Durham, he moved to Scotland in 1902 as HM inspector of mines (east Scotland), before once more returning to Staffordshire as HM inspector in 1903. Here he was to show conspicuous bravery in mine rescue work, particularly at the Hamstead colliery disaster of March 1908. In September 1904 he was seconded as chief mining engineer for Trinidad and Tobago. Having previously encountered oil seeps in Staffordshire and the oil shales of Fife and Lothian, he was now introduced to the natural oil and bitumen of the asphalt lakes. From then on it was the oil industry to which he was to make such a major contribution, though he remained a loyal servant of the coal industry too. This posting also introduced Cadman to his future wife, Lilian Julia (died 1963), daughter of John Harrigan, magistrate of Port of Spain, Trinidad. They married on 27 July 1907, and had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1908, soon after his return to England, Cadman was appointed professor of mining at Birmingham University, where his main duties were to lecture on the mining of coal and metal ores. However, his interests in oil were already aroused and he gave courses on petroleum as soon as he took up his chair, when there were only about twenty students in the department. To demonstrate the vital role he saw for the emerging oil industry, in 1912 he set up the first undergraduate course in Britain on petroleum mining technology, leading to the new degree of bachelor of science (petroleum). Cadman drew initially on his oil experiences in England, Scotland, and Trinidad, but these were soon augmented by his introduction to oil in the Middle East in 1913. Cadman's desire to integrate the training of geologists, chemists, and engineers was furthered when Professor W. S. Boulton established a petroleum exploration course in the geology department, which Cadman's petroleum mining students could take for their final year. 
These courses had been established in the face of much academic opposition; T. H. Holland (1868-1947), professor of geology at Manchester University, reported in 1913: 'I really cannot find one commendable feature in the latest and most flagrantly advertised of our now bewildering variety of university degrees, the 'B.Sc. (Petroleum Mining)', at Birmingham... It is unfair to entice young men into a blind alley, and saddle them with a freak title that will handicap every attempt that they make in after life to specialise in a recognised branch of technology. (Holland, 351-2)' In 1913 Cadman, appointed to the Admiralty commission on fuel oil under Admiral Sir Edmund Slade, visited the Persian oilfields to report on whether an assured supply of oil could be found there for the British navy, thus fulfilling the wishes of Admiral John Arbuthnot Fisher (1841-1920) to convert the engines of British navy ships to burn oil. The commission's report influenced Churchill's epoch making decision to adopt oil burning engines in the British fleet. It also dramatically changed the fortunes of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC), in which the government acquired a majority holding in 1914. Cadman also helped to organize the search for oil in Britain during the First World War, using imported American technology. Two of the sites chosen to drill for oil were in north Staffordshire. These attempts, to check the sources of the local oil seeps which he had long known, gave useful, if negative, lessons for the future. Cadman was made CMG in 1916. 
Cadman was a founder member of the Institution of Petroleum Technologists, established in London in March 1914 to advance both the study of petroleum and British interests in the rapidly developing world of oil. Clashes of personality at the institution, amid crises over maintaining oil supplies to Britain and the empire during the First World War, disrupted the two academic petroleum courses available in Britain (that in London had started in 1913). When the war ended a major libel action resulted, which was won by Cadman. This, with the death of Sir Boverton Redwood amid the aftermath of war, caused the true significance of these developments to be forgotten. 
During the First World War, Cadman emerged as the leading British authority on oil. He directed HM petroleum executive between 1917 and 1921 with conspicuous success. He was appointed KCMG in 1918 for this service. With the ending of war, he was appointed technical adviser on oil to the British government and, with much new diplomatic work demanding long absences from Birmingham, he resigned his chair there in 1920. In 1921 he was made technical adviser to APOC and moved to London. With typical energy, he collaborated with Standard Oil of America and encouraged American participation in the Turkish Petroleum Company. In this Cadman proved a fine diplomat and successful negotiator. He was largely responsible for stopping the aggressive and self-destructive oil policies then existing between Britain and the United States. 
In 1923 Cadman became a managing director of APOC. Here he organized the better application of science to industry and to oil exploration, and he built up the research element of APOC's operations. Cadman was instrumental in encouraging the British Geological Survey's foray into geophysics, by giving it APOC advice and funds. These allowed survey officers to see first-hand the results of their geophysical work in the field in Persia. Cadman's management skills, helped by an unusual understanding of human nature, were appreciated by many in APOC, and 1925 saw him appointed deputy chairman; early in 1927 he became chairman, a post he retained until his death. These were remarkable appointments, with Cadman the first 'professor' scientist to become chairman of a British industrial company with a capital of tens of millions of pounds. He was rewarded by being made GCMG in 1929. He also played a vital role by acting as chairman in setting up the Iraq Petroleum Company and by devising a pipeline by which Iraqi oil could reach the Mediterranean. 
Cadman fought any division of science into 'pure' or 'applied'. Alongside his pioneering role in the international oil industry, he showed his continuing vision in his involvements with the Bridgeman committee on television from 1935, which he later chaired. This was the first body to see the future significance of this new means of communication. Not content with this, in 1937 Cadman was asked to chair a government committee into the work of Imperial Airways and the future of international aviation transport. Cadman thus played a vital role in three of the most significant developments of the twentieth century. He was awarded several honorary degrees and became Lord Cadman in 1937, choosing to recall his mining birthplace as Baron Cadman of Silverdale. He was finally elected FRS in 1940. 
Throughout his life Cadman was a devout Anglican, and he was appreciated for his friendliness, humour, and humanity. He enjoyed music and played the violin in his earlier years. He died from a stroke, at his home, Shenley Park, near Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, on 31 May 1941, aged sixty-three, worn out by further wartime work. He was buried at his birthplace, Silverdale, in the church of St Luke on 4 June. He had made an enormous and international contribution to the industry he had helped to create, making probably the greatest contribution to oil ever achieved by an individual Briton. He is honoured by the Cadman medals which are awarded by Birmingham University, the Institute of Petroleum, and the Institution of Mining Engineers, and by the Cadman memorial lectures of the Institute of Petroleum and the Royal Society of Arts. 


@@@@@


doc= 32234


Cadogan, Sir Alexander George Montagu (1884-1968), diplomatist, was born in London on 24 November 1884, the youngest child in the family of seven sons and two daughters of George Henry Cadogan, fifth Earl Cadogan (1840-1915), a politician, and his first wife, Lady Beatrix Jane Craven (1844-1907), the fourth daughter of William Craven, second earl of Craven. 
Alec Cadogan grew up in surroundings of what can only be called grandeur. Life alternated between Chelsea House at the corner of Cadogan Square, a residence described by Harold Macmillan as 'a kind of baronial castle' (Macmillan, 30), and a family estate of 11,000 acres at Culford Hall, near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. However, the grandeur was tempered by strict routine and cultivation of a high sense of obligation. In 1897 Cadogan went to Eton College, to the house of A. C. Benson, an outstanding and versatile master in an outstanding Eton period. His all-round ability brought him to be captain of the oppidans, president of the Eton Society, and an editor of the 'Eton College Chronicle'. He also showed early signs of that satirical sense of humour that never left him nor ever descended into wounding sarcasm or bad taste. A. F. Scholfield, librarian of Cambridge University (1923-49), a contemporary of Cadogan, later recalled the pleasure with which the back row of sixth form awaited the next cartoon or caricature to be handed down from Cadogan further in front. He proceeded in 1903 to Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a second-class degree in history in 1906. 
In October 1908 Cadogan headed the list in the examinations for the diplomatic service, and in the following January was posted as attache to the embassy in Constantinople. In September 1910 he was granted an allowance for knowledge of Turkish and almost immediately afterwards was promoted third secretary. On 3 August 1912, shortly after returning to London, he married Lady Theodosia Louisa Augusta Acheson (died 1977), the third daughter of Archibald Brabazon Sparrow Acheson, fourth earl of Gosford. Theo Cadogan was a lady of highly individual character who exercised great influence in family matters without intrusion into official business, and the marriage was extremely happy. They had one son, Ambrose ('b'. 1914), and three daughters, Patricia ('b'. 1916), Cynthia ('b'. 1918), and Gillian ('b'. 1922). 
In April 1913 Cadogan was transferred to another grand embassy, in Vienna, where high society was obsessed with the measurement of social rank. However, this was not a completely wasted opportunity for further diplomatic education because the Balkans remained volatile, and there was no reluctance to give him responsibility. He was temporarily in charge at the embassy when news of the assassination of the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, came in from the consul at Sarajevo. The sequence of events that this precipitated led to Britain's declaration of war on Austria-Hungary on 12 August 1914, and two days later Cadogan returned to London. 
There followed a period of nearly twenty years in the Foreign Office. During this time Cadogan went steadily up the promotion ladder, and as private secretary from January 1919 to March 1920 to Cecil Harmsworth, parliamentary under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, he was in a position to observe political life closely. But his most important assignment, commencing in 1923, was as head of the small but influential League of Nations section, for which the permanent under-secretary, Sir Eyre Crowe, recommended him as 'the best man in the Office' ('The Times', 17 July 1968). He accepted this task in the belief that the league itself and, above all, the pursuit of disarmament could lead to real and permanent results, and that, if it did not, nothing would prevent the rearmament of Germany. It meant long periods accompanying successive Foreign Office ministers to Geneva, but he thought their active involvement preferable to greater reliance on a permanent British representative. He was soon indispensable to them and was highly regarded by the league secretariat. He was made a CMG in June 1926 and promoted counsellor in December 1928. 
In this uphill pioneering work at the League of Nations there were periods of progress under Sir Austen Chamberlain and Arthur Henderson. But the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in September 1931, a little over four months before the world disarmament conference convened in Geneva, was an irretrievable set-back. Cadogan, who was secretary-general of the large British delegation to this conference, was temporarily buoyed up by the fresh presentation of British disarmament policy in early 1933 provided by Anthony Eden. But once Hitler had assumed power in Germany, there was no further hope of reconciling German claims and French insistence on security -- and Cadogan attached much weight to security. The task now seemed hopeless. Thus it was that in the late summer of 1933 Cadogan, who had resisted suggestions that he might become secretary-general of the League of Nations or high commissioner at Danzig, accepted the suggestion of the permanent under-secretary, Sir Robert Vansittart, that he should become minister in Beijing. He had been made a CB in June 1932, and in January 1934 was knighted KCMG and formally appointed to the China legation. He confided to his diary his pleasure at 'going 11,000 miles away' ('Diaries', ed. Dilks, 8). 
Cadogan established a good relationship with Chiang Kai-shek but could not escape the British Far Eastern dilemma of the time. This was how to protect Britain's important interests in China while striving to limit the military and political ambitions of Japan by keeping relationships with it as friendly as possible. Cadogan was not happy with the guidance on or offers of practical assistance for China that he received from home, and was forced to support a policy of playing for time. This meant recommending to the Chinese direct negotiations with the Japanese invaders and to his own government protest at only their more outrageous actions. In June 1935 his legation was upgraded to embassy status, and he was accordingly promoted ambassador. 
Early in 1936 Eden, now foreign secretary, invited Cadogan to return from China in order to become the senior deputy under-secretary in the Foreign Office. Surmising correctly 'that this post might carry the succession to Vansittart' ('Diaries', ed. Dilks, 12), the colourful campaigner against Germany whom Eden was determined to oust, Cadogan accepted, taking up his post in October 1936. By now he was universally regarded as the perfect embodiment of the senior civil servant. He was not only intelligent, efficient, imperturbable, loyal, economical in language, and thoroughly conventional (to his detractors 'cold'), he was also 'sound' in judgement, reserved but not without charm, and possessed of an instinct for contacting the right person in the right way at the right time. In short, he would be a first-class assistant rather than a dangerous rival, and on 1 January 1938 he duly succeeded as permanent under-secretary. However, Cadogan's situation was rendered difficult by the retention of his predecessor (until the summer of 1941) as chief diplomatic adviser, a title that signified no authority but was not interpreted by Vansittart as disguising a sinecure. The two men were as different in outlook as in temperament, Vansittart seeing the worsening European situation with intellectual clarity, Cadogan seeing it without illusions but with a sensitive eye to what the country and its leaders would in fact be prepared to do. As a result, when Eden resigned in February 1938 in protest at Chamberlain's attitude towards negotiations with Mussolini, Cadogan found himself more in agreement on this as on most other matters of foreign policy with the prime minister than with Eden. 
In the trauma of Munich in September 1938 Cadogan took a characteristically middle position. He knew the Anglo-French weakness in defence, and, like the new foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, was reconciled to cutting Britain's losses in Europe's heartland in order to defend her interests more effectively around its perimeter. Thus he felt that great efforts should be made to reach a compromise with Hitler while concentrating on rearmament. But when at one moment it appeared that the British government might positively encourage Hitler to march into Czechoslovakia, he wrote a strong minute urging Halifax to try to dissuade Chamberlain from going as far as that; Halifax was persuaded -- and successful. Cadogan was first and foremost of the 'realpolitik' school of foreign policy, and had no illusions about the power of diplomacy unsupported by force. This sometimes brought him into conflict with younger colleagues in the Foreign Office, but he was not completely unsentimental. 
By the time the Second World War broke out in 1939 Cadogan (who was promoted GCMG in January that year) enjoyed the complete confidence of Halifax. When Eden returned to the Foreign Office in 1940, this confidence was continued, if in a somewhat different mode, and he soon acquired that of Churchill. The pressures on Eden were huge even before he assumed leadership of the House of Commons in November 1942, and the chairmanship of the cabinet by the prime minister was notoriously -- and increasingly -- chaotic. It is thus hardly surprising that the dependence on Cadogan's advice and brisk execution of business was great, and that in April 1944 it was seriously rumoured that he was to be appointed foreign secretary. Throughout the war he was at the shoulders of both Churchill and Eden at the inter-allied conferences, and was frequently present at cabinet meetings after April 1940. Nor did he confine his non-deferential side entirely to his secret diary strewn with exclamation marks. At a critical moment in Moscow in August 1942, following an acerbic encounter between Churchill and Stalin, he told the prime minister flatly and repeatedly and with some effect that his attitude to the draft Soviet communique was wrong. 'I had never', observed Churchill's doctor, who was present at this encounter, 'seen anyone talk to the P.M. like this' (Lord Moran, 'Winston Churchill: the Struggle for Survival', 1966, 78). Cadogan was also required to devote considerable time in London to dealing with the representatives of exiled governments and difficult personalities such as de Gaulle. During the last years of the war he also had to cope with the amalgamation of the various branches of Britain's overseas representation and the Foreign Office in order to create the new combined foreign service, though he passionately hated discussion of administrative questions. The issue of reform in which he was most immediately interested was how to prevent the accumulation of mountains of red-labelled red boxes on his desk. It is as well that he had a robust constitution and that at the end of his impossibly long working day he was able, after having 'refreshed himself' (Butler, 37), to open his heart in his diary. He was promoted KCB in January 1941. 
From July 1945 Cadogan received from Ernest Bevin and Clement Attlee the same confidence accorded to him by Churchill. But in that year the Labour government, after debating whether to appoint a politician or a diplomatist as the first United Kingdom permanent representative at the headquarters of the United Nations (UN) in New York, appointed Cadogan. He would have preferred the Washington embassy. However, while he had a vast understanding of world affairs as a whole, he had little specialized knowledge of the United States. Moreover, he had extensive experience of the League of Nations, and in August-September 1944 had been the principal British delegate at the allied conference on world organization at Dumbarton Oaks, where his performance 'won him golden opinions in the United States' ('Diaries', ed. Dilks, 669). Since he had also been prominent at the UN's charter-drafting conference at San Francisco in April-May 1945, he was clearly the safe choice, though some would have preferred a 'younger and more original man' (G. McDermott, 'The Eden Legacy and the Decline of British Diplomacy', 1969, 88). He left the Foreign Office in February 1946, and in the same year was sworn of the privy council. He had been permanent under-secretary for the unusually long period of eight years. 
New York, to which Cadogan went when he was already sixty-two, and where he was allowed considerable latitude, was his final post. Despite his legendary antipathy to personal publicity, he adapted surprisingly well to conference diplomacy. He also displayed here an authority, in all senses of the word, which maintained at a time of relative material weakness the standing of the United Kingdom in the world organization, and so the post proved a worthy culmination to his diplomatic career. For all his quietly ironic humour, he was never a cynic, and continued to believe that, despite human frailty and incompetence, it was better to strive after workable international institutions than do nothing. His advice on the teething problems of the UN was often sought by other delegations and the secretariat. He remained in his post at New York until his retirement in June 1950. In the same year he was elected an honorary fellow of Balliol, and on 1 January 1951 he was given the Order of Merit, the first civil servant to receive this honour. 
Shortly after his retirement in 1950 Cadogan joined the boards of the National Provincial Bank and the Phoenix Assurance Company. However, this did not signal the end of his involvement in public affairs -- far from it. In 1951 he accepted nomination as one of the three government directors of the Suez Canal Company, and in the following year Churchill appointed him chairman of the board of governors of the BBC. He had no liking for radio and television and took a poor view of the journalistic profession, but this did not matter unduly since he did not believe that the job required interference in daily administration. This suited his director-general, Sir Ian Jacob, for whom Cadogan had both liking and respect. Cadogan refused to take the BBC into the political battle over whether it should retain a monopoly over television, from which emerged in 1954 the 'Television Act' and the Independent Television Authority. Nevertheless, he was sometimes less reticent with regard to the content and timing of the BBC's own programmes. His position at the BBC presented him with a conflict of interests when the Suez crisis broke in 1956, because of his role in the Suez Canal Company and his long and close connections with Anthony Eden, though it is not clear whether he acknowledged this. In January of that year Cadogan was also appointed chairman of the Commonwealth-American Current Affairs Unit, an offshoot of the English-Speaking Union and important vehicle of British cultural diplomacy. 
Though he had no part in its planning and marked reservations about its execution, Cadogan strongly supported government policy during the Suez crisis. He also firmly opposed broadcasting that might disturb an imminent diplomatic conference or unsettle British troops on the eve of battle. It is not surprising, therefore, that at certain intervals, especially in the earlier stages of the crisis, Eden was able to exploit his position and personal relationship with Cadogan in order to secure favourable treatment for the government by the BBC. This led to pronounced unease at the corporation. Nevertheless, it is a mistake to believe either that Cadogan was solely responsible for the BBC's behaviour during Suez or that he was Eden's entirely pliable agent at Bush House. It is notable in particular that he actively and successfully resisted the government's attempt late in October to force it into line by threatening a 20 per cent cut in the funding of the external services. At the end of his term with the BBC and the Suez Canal Company in 1957 Cadogan retired completely from public life. 
Cadogan was a man of outstanding professional skill and standards, of consistent calm, reticent about personal and family matters, and eschewing conventional affability. His naturally grave face, long in proportion to his height, made him at first sight a little forbidding unless one knew about the humorous corner to his mouth or provoked a sudden smile. As part of his professional equipment, he practised a truly prodigious self-control. Colleagues who worked close to him testified to a 'passion for work', in which some, but not all, found a trace of melancholy, alleviated in his last two years at the United Nations by an easing of the strains of recurring crisis. What all could agree is that he was, as one colleague put it, 'a most distinguished civil servant'. When younger he had been skilful at woodwork and oil painting; in later life he returned to the latter and added keenness for gardening and the open air. Throughout his life he played golf regularly, vehemently, and rather badly. He died in London on 9 July 1968, survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32235


Cadogan, George Henry, fifth Earl Cadogan (1840-1915), politician, was born at Durham on 9 May 1840. He was the eldest son of Henry Charles Cadogan, the fourth earl (1812-1873), and his wife, Mary Sarah (1808-1873), daughter of Gerald Valerian Wellesley (prebendary of Durham and brother of the first duke of Wellington) and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Sloane. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, and as a young man accompanied the prince of Wales on various tours at home and abroad. At the general election of 1868, as Viscount Chelsea, he stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative for Bury. He was elected for Bath in 1873, but in the same year went to the House of Lords as Earl Cadogan in consequence of his father's death. Disraeli made him under-secretary of state for war in 1875, and under-secretary for the colonies in 1878. During the second Salisbury administration (1886-1892) he was lord privy seal, and responsible for Irish business in the House of Lords. In the session of 1887 he introduced the 'Irish Land Act' of that year, and in April he joined the cabinet. At this time he advised Queen Victoria with respect to her domestic affairs. For his political and other services he received the Garter in July 1891. 
When the third Salisbury administration was formed (June 1895) Cadogan became lord lieutenant of Ireland with a seat in the cabinet. He was warmly interested in G. W. Balfour's 'Land Act' of 1896, and pressed the Treasury until he obtained more liberal terms of purchase for Irish tenants than that department was at first inclined to allow. Afterwards he turned to the subject of Irish education. He appointed commissions to investigate intermediate education (1899) and university education (1901); and he sponsored the act of 1899 which created a new department of agriculture, industries, and technical instruction for Ireland. He dealt quietly but firmly with the demonstrations which were stimulated in Ireland by the South African War. He was accused of weakness by 'The Times' (1902), which drew an unfavourable and unfair contrast between his views and those of the chief secretary, George Wyndham, who had succeeded Gerald Balfour in 1900. But Cadogan enjoyed the full confidence of Lord Salisbury, by whom he was twice dissuaded from resigning. Though he was in favour of pacifying agrarian discontent by the concessions embodied in the Wyndham 'Land Bill' of 1902, he consistently urged the cabinet to coerce disaffected areas and to proceed against seditious newspapers. He resigned in July 1902, at the same time as Lord Salisbury, and retired into private life. 
Cadogan was one of those peers to gain spectacularly from urban property at the end of the century. In 1880 he owned about 800 acres in London, much of it in Chelsea, where he was lord of the manor. Against the trend, he extended his agricultural holdings, buying the Culford estate in Suffolk for $175,000 in 1890. In conjunction with Lord Iveagh he spent substantial sums on model dwellings for workmen and on other schemes of social betterment. In 1900 he was elected as the first mayor of Chelsea. 
He married twice: first, in 1865, Lady Beatrix Jane Craven (1844-1907), daughter of the second earl of Craven and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Walter; and second in 1911 at Florence his cousin, Countess Adele Palagi, daughter of Count Neri Palagi and his wife, Olivia Georgiana, daughter of Sir George Cadogan, brother of the fourth earl. With his first wife he had seven sons (one of whom was Sir Alexander Cadogan of the Foreign Office) and two daughters. He died at his home, Chelsea House, Cadogan Place, Chelsea, London on 6 March 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 32236


Caillard, Sir Vincent Henry Penalver (1856-1930), financier, was born in Kensington, London, on 23 October 1856, fifth child and eldest son of Camille Felix Desire Caillard (1822-1898) of Wingfield House, Trowbridge, Wiltshire, who was at his death the longest serving county court judge, and his first wife, Emma Louisa (1827-1865), daughter of Vincent Stuckey Reynolds of Canonsgrove, Taunton. His maternal grandmother was first cousin to George Basevi and Benjamin Disraeli, earl of Beaconsfield. He had three brothers, one half-brother, and five sisters. He was educated at Eton College (1869-72) and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1875), where he was a gold medallist. He was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1876. 
During 1879-80 Caillard helped to delineate the new Balkan borders when, following defeat in the Russo-Turkish War, the Ottoman empire ceded independence to Serbia, Romania, and Montenegro. He served initially as an assistant commissioner on the Montenegrin frontier commission and was later sent on special missions to Epirus and Dulcigno. During 1882 he worked in the intelligence branch of the War Office before Sir Charles Dilke obtained his appointment to the headquarters staff of Sir Garnet Wolseley in Egypt. 
It was possibly to Dilke's influence that Caillard owed his appointment in 1883 to succeed Edgar Vincent, afterwards Viscount D'Abernon, as financial representative of Britain, Belgium, and the Netherlands in Constantinople, alternating with French representatives as president of the council of administration of the Ottoman public debt. This body managed tobacco, silk, wine, and salt revenues in the interests of foreign creditors, and many higher administrative or financial questions were under its sanction. Caillard reorganized its administration and modernized its methods of sericulture and viticulture. In Constantinople he soon developed a taste for sinuous intrigue. He had a cosmopolitan outlook, was somewhat reserved in manner, and was inclined to overstretch himself. Admired by some for his tact, initiative, and ambition, he was also distrusted as meddlesome, self-seeking, and unrealistic. In the late 1880s he headed a group seeking the concession to build the strategic Anatolian Railway, but his manoeuvres were over-elaborate, and the concession was jockeyed into German control partly as a result of his muddling. 
In 1898, when Caillard's father died, he inherited his Wiltshire property, resigned from the Ottoman public debt, and was nominated by Ernest Cassel as a director of the National Bank of Egypt (1898-1908) and the armaments manufacturers Vickers. After becoming financial director of Vickers in 1906, he was a leading power in the strategy and management of one of Britain's most diversified and dynamic industrial combines. He travelled widely on its behalf, and was engaged in many international negotiations of byzantine complexity, notably for the erection of arsenals in Turkey and Russia (1913-14). The collapse of the company's internal accounting system during the wartime expansion of 1914-18, and its purchase of rolling-stock and electrical companies associated with Dudley Docker for inflated prices in 1918-19, were misfortunes for which Caillard was responsible. After a long decline, he was forced to retire from Vickers in 1927. He was a director of many associated companies, as well as the London, Chatham and Dover (1905-22) and other railways. 
Caillard composed musical settings for the 'Songs of Innocence' of William Blake and had other artistic interests. From the 1880s he professed strong anti-German sentiments and supported many patriotic causes. In 1885 he contributed articles on Albania, Bulgaria, and Turkish finance to the radical-imperialist 'Fortnightly Review' (vols. 43 and 44), and his later articles in the 'National Review', particularly 'Industry and protection' in vol. 75 (1920), proved a decisive influence in the decision of Joseph Chamberlain to launch his protectionist campaign. As chairman of the tariff commission in 1904, as unsuccessful Conservative parliamentary candidate for Central Bradford in 1906, in articles, speeches, committees, and clubland cabals, at the Royal Colonial Institute and the Compatriots' Club, Caillard worked for imperial tariff preference and British world hegemony. He strove hard to assert the interests of large-scale manufacturing in British policy: in 1916 he joined Docker in founding the Federation of British Industries (of which he was president in 1919) and in the same year, together with other Vickers directors, he formed the London Imperialists (renamed the British Commonwealth Union), which tried to increase the influence of business leaders in parliamentary life. In the 1890s he privately corresponded on Turkish affairs with Lord Salisbury, and in 1917 he was an intermediary between David Lloyd George and Basil Zaharoff when the latter was entrusted with negotiations to bribe Turkish politicians with $10 million in gold to accept peace terms. 
Caillard was knighted in 1896 and held several decorations. His name was suggested for a peerage by his country neighbour Walter Long in 1923. He married first, in 1881, his stepsister, Eliza Frances (1859-1926), sister of Sir John Hanham, ninth baronet, and daughter of Captain John Hanham, whose widow became Caillard's father's second wife. By this marriage Caillard had one son and one daughter. He married secondly, in 1927, Zoe Gertrude (1868-1935), widow of John Oakley Maund (died 1902), rentier, and daughter of Robert Ellis Dudgeon, physician. Caillard died of pneumonia at 63 boulevard Victor Hugo, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Paris, on 18 March 1930, following an operation at the American Hospital in Paris, and was buried on 26 March at St Mary's Church, Wingfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 32237


Caine, Sir (Thomas Henry) Hall (1853-1931), novelist, was born on 14 May 1853 at 130 Bridgewater Street, Runcorn, Cheshire, the eldest of the six children of John Caine ('bap'. 1821, died 1904), blacksmith, and Sarah (1829-1912), daughter of Ralph Hall of Liverpool and his wife, Mary. John Caine was born in the Isle of Man, and was working as a journeyman ship's smith in the Runcorn docks when his first child was born. Soon afterwards he took his family to the Toxteth area of Liverpool, where he lived for the rest of his life. Sarah Caine, a seamstress, was born in Whitehaven and went to Liverpool when her father, a stonemason, sought work there. Caine was educated at the Hope Street British Schools in Liverpool, becoming head boy in his final year. On leaving school in 1867, aged fourteen, with a talent for drawing, he was apprenticed to John Murray, an architect. He later maintained that he was an autodidact who owed his further education to the Liverpool Free Library, where he read voraciously. At the age of seventeen, after the death of his grandfather Ralph Hall in 1870, Caine suffered the first of the 'nervous collapses' which were to plague him for most of his life. He threw up his apprenticeship and fled to the Isle of Man, where as a child he had spent holidays with his maternal grandmother. She had died in 1866, however, so he went to stay with his aunt Catherine Teare and her husband James, who was the schoolmaster at Maughold. He stayed for over a year, helping with the school and taking over at a salary of $40 p.a. when his uncle died. 
It was during this period that Caine encountered the writings of John Ruskin, who greatly influenced his political thinking. He returned to Liverpool and his architectural work in the spring of 1872, becoming an active member of the Ruskin Society. He later made Ruskin's acquaintance and visited him at Coniston. Caine also joined the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, where he met William Morris. He began to write regularly both for the Liverpool papers and for journals such as 'The Builder'. As a theatre critic he met the actor Henry Irving. When Bram Stoker joined Irving as manager at the Lyceum Theatre, he and Caine became devoted friends. Stoker dedicated his vampire novel 'Dracula' to Hall Caine, although the form, 'To Hommy-Beg' (Manx for Little Tommy), kept it secret from the public for years. 
Increasingly drawn to writing as a career, Caine resigned his job with John Murray and went to work for Bromleys, a firm of builders, as a draughtsman. At this time he helped to found the Liverpool Notes and Queries Society, which flourished. This and his journalistic work brought him to the notice of a number of influential people in Liverpool, and he began corresponding with several eminent literary men. A chance meeting on holiday in the Lake District introduced him to the poetry of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Enthralled by Rossetti's work, he gave a lecture on it in January 1879, and when it was published he sent a copy to Rossetti, who replied in friendly manner. Much correspondence ensued before Caine was invited to Rossetti's Chelsea home in September 1880; in the following year he went to live there and remained until Rossetti's death in 1882. He idolized Rossetti and without doubt the poet was the most important influence on his life. Through Rossetti, Caine was introduced to the Pre-Raphaelite circle, and consequently to London literary and artistic society, making a number of good friends in the process, including Ford Madox Brown, William Sharp, Frederic Shields, and Theodore Watts (later Watts-Dunton), as well as Christina Rossetti. 
In January 1882 Caine published an anthology, 'Sonnets of Three Centuries', and some months later produced 'Recollections of Rossetti', a tribute published in the same year. He remained in London, launched as an author and journalist. 'Cobwebs of Criticism' appeared in 1883 and his first novel, 'Shadow of a Crime', in 1885, followed by 'A Son of Hagar' (1886). He had hoped to be seen as a man of letters but the failure of his 'Life of Coleridge' (1887) sent him back to fiction, and he produced his first commercial success with 'The Deemster' (1887), a novel set on the Isle of Man in the eighteenth century, and centring on the redemption of a murderer condemned to exile in isolation for his crime. While the critics carped, Caine's readership grew, and the novel was adapted for the stage by Wilson Barrett as 'Ben-my-chree' -- Manx for 'Girl of my heart'. 
In December 1882 Mary Alice Chandler (1869-1932) went to live with him; she was thirteen, which was at that time the age of consent. Their elder son, Ralph, was born in Hampstead, London, in 1884 and they were married secretly in Edinburgh on 3 September 1886. The ceremony was the Scottish one, by declaration before witnesses. They were living in Bexleyheath, Kent, at the time; they moved to Keswick in Cumberland in 1888. A second son, Derwent, was born there in 1891. 
For forty years Caine travelled widely, visiting the places where he was to set several of his romances, from Iceland to Egypt, London to Rome. In 1892 he went to Berlin and the Russian frontier on behalf of the London Russo-Jewish Committee to investigate Jewish persecution. In 1895 he made the first of many visits to the USA and also went to Canada, where he negotiated with the government on behalf of the Society of Authors and the Foreign Office over a new copyright law. 
Caine continued to write, eventually producing fifteen romantic novels, and he became astonishingly popular and famous. He was a powerful story-teller, using his novels, mostly based on the eternal love triangle, to propound his political and social ideals. 'The Bondman' (1890) launched the publishing firm of Heinemann. Set in the Isle of Man and Iceland, it was an involved story of love and revenge, and was adapted and staged at the Drury Lane Theatre, London, in 1906, with Mrs Patrick Campbell as Greeba; it was filmed by Herbert Wilcox in 1929. 'The Manxman' (1894) was an immediate success, and is probably Caine's best-known book. It was dramatized in two forms, first by Wilson Barrett and later by the author himself. It was filmed by the London Film Company in 1916, and again, by Alfred Hitchcock, in 1929. In a letter to Caine, Edmund Gosse wrote that it was 'a contribution to literature and the most fastidious critic would give in exchange for it a wilderness of that deciduous trash which our publishers call fiction' (Hall Caine archive). 

'The Christian' (1897) was the first novel in Britain to sell 1 million copies. The central characters of Glory Quayle and John Storm are among Caine's best creations, although his frank treatment of sexuality worried some readers and critics. The play was first staged in the USA, to great acclaim, but did less well in London. 'The Eternal City' (1901), set in Rome, sold even better, and was dramatized twice, filmed in 1915, and remade in 1923. 'The White Prophet' (1909), however, immersed Caine in political controversy, as it expressed sympathy with the position of the Egyptian nationalists. 'The Woman thou Gavest me' (1913) retrieved his reputation while at the same time causing the biggest furore of any of his novels because of its open-minded treatment of marriage and divorce; it made a popular film after the First World War. It is clear that many of his novels were well-suited for dramatic and cinematic adaptation; their sometimes improbable plots none the less made for good drama, particularly when shorn of their didactic element. Caine himself also wrote a number of original stage plays and film scripts. 
As a youth Caine was a communist but later became a Christian socialist. Votes for women, marriage law reform, and workers' rights were some of the causes he championed. A member of the House of Keys from 1901 to 1908, he advocated nationalization of the Isle of Man's trains, trams, and ferries as well as the land. He had long supported the Liberals in England, but declined an invitation from Lloyd George to stand for the Westminster parliament. 
Caine had met the prince of Wales through Irving's Beefsteak Club and remained on friendly terms when the prince became Edward VII. In 1905 and 1908 he edited 'gift books' for Queen Alexandra in aid of her charities but did not allow his name to appear other than as a contributor. In September 1914 he resumed his desk at the 'Daily Telegraph' and wrote impassioned propaganda. He also edited 'King Albert's Book' (Christmas 1914) to raise money for the 'Telegraph's' Belgian fund, and a delighted King Albert created him an officer of the order of Leopold of Belgium. In 1918 the Belgian government presented him with his portrait painted by Alfred Jonniaux. 
Caine returned to America in 1915 and 1916, speaking in the allied cause. In 1916 he joined Lord Robert Cecil at the Foreign Office to draft the document proposing a League of Nations after the war. The government invited him to write an epic propaganda film but the war ended before it was finished. In November 1917 he was offered a baronetcy but refused it, and soon afterwards he was made a KBE. Hating his forename, he insisted he should be known as Sir Hall, not Sir Thomas. Later he was made a Companion of Honour. His war work finished, he returned to fiction. 'The Master of Man' (1921) was followed by 'The Woman of Knockaloe' (1923), his last novel. Both were set in the Isle of Man, where he had made his home at Greeba Castle. For the centenary of Rossetti's birth he brought out a revised version of his 'Recollections' (1928), dedicated to the memory of their friendship. 
In appearance Caine was short, not more than 5 feet 4 inches tall, with red hair and beard and staring, slightly protuberant eyes. His hair receded while he was still young and with his pointed beard he bore a slight resemblance to the Stratford portrait of Shakespeare, a likeness he cultivated: if people did not remark on it he was apt to point it out. He could be charming though always serious but had a temper to match his hair. He had been born into the Church of England but his father joined the Myrtle Street Baptist Chapel when he was about seven years old. Caine, a deeply religious man who hoped to be remembered by his voluminous 'Life of Christ' (published posthumously in 1937), returned to the Church of England as an adult. Hall Caine died at Greeba Castle on 31 August 1931, and was buried in Maughold churchyard, Isle of Man, on 4 September. His wife died six months later and was buried beside him. The handsome monument over their grave was designed by Archibald Knox. 


@@@@@


doc= 32238


Caine, William Sproston (1842-1903), politician and temperance advocate, born at Egremont, Wallasey, Cheshire, on 26 March 1842, was the eldest surviving son of Nathaniel Caine JP (died 1877), metal merchant, and his wife, Hannah (died 1861), daughter of William Rushton of Liverpool. Educated privately at Gibson's school, Egremont, and the Revd Richard Wall's school at Birkenhead, Caine entered his father's business at Egremont in 1861, and in 1864 was taken into partnership. He moved to Liverpool in 1871. Public affairs soon occupied much of his attention, and he retired from the firm in 1878. He retained, however, the directorship of the Hodbarrow Mining Co. Ltd, Millom, and he secured the controlling interest in the Shaw's Brow Iron Co., Liverpool, leaving the management of the concern in the hands of his partner, Arthur S. Cox. The collapse of this business in 1893 involved Caine in heavy liabilities, which he honourably discharged, but thenceforth his resources were largely devoted to paying off the mortgage which he raised to meet the firm's losses. 
Caine's father was raised a Wesleyan but joined the Baptists on his marriage; Caine was brought up as a Baptist under the influence of Hugh Stowell Brown, whose memorial volume he edited (1887). On 24 March 1868 he married Alice, Stowell Brown's daughter; they had two sons and three daughters. He developed early a bent for preaching and philanthropic work. In later life in London he was from 1884 to 1903 the lay pastor of a mission church known as the Wheatsheaf in Stockwell, south London, but he was largely preoccupied with the temperance movement, and at Liverpool he found his first scope for propagandist zeal. As president of the Liverpool Temperance and Band of Hope Union, he formed and became chairman of a Popular Control and License Reform Association, with a monthly organ, the 'Liverpool Social Reformer'. In 1873 he was elected vice-president of the United Kingdom Alliance. He was also president of the Baptist Total Abstinence Society, the Congregational Temperance Society, the British Temperance League, and the National Temperance Federation. 
In 1873 Caine first sought election to parliament, mainly with a view to enforcing his temperance views. He was in general agreement with the radical wing of the Liberal Party, and unsuccessfully contested Liverpool for the Liberals in both that and the next year. In 1880 he was returned as radical member for Scarborough, and without delay he urged on the House of Commons his advanced temperance opinions. In a maiden speech on 18 June 1880 he supported the successful motion of his friend, Sir Wilfrid Lawson, in favour of local option. Identifying himself with the extreme radical section of the party, he seconded Henry Labouchere's motion of dissent from Gladstone's proposal for a national monument to Lord Beaconsfield (12 May 1881). His activity was officially recognized by Gladstone on 17 November 1884 by his appointment as civil lord of the Admiralty in succession to Sir Thomas Brassey. Although he retained his seat at the necessary by-election, he was defeated in Tottenham at the general election of 1885. He soon, however, returned to the house as MP for Barrow in Furness at a by-election on 6 April 1886. 
Caine declined to accept Gladstone's home-rule policy, and took an active part in organizing under Chamberlain's direction the dissentient Liberals into a new party of 'Liberal Unionists'. In the division on the second reading of Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill' (7 June) Caine and Henry Robert Brand (afterwards second Viscount Hampden) acted as tellers for the ninety-three Liberal Unionists, who brought down the government. The home-rulers gave the new party the sobriquet of the 'Brand of Caine'. At the ensuing general election Caine was again returned for Barrow, and was appointed chief Liberal Unionist whip. But his radical convictions and extreme temperance views, which were unaltered, soon rendered the alliance with the Conservatives distasteful. Although the scheme of G. J. Goschen in 1890 for compensating holders of extinguished public-house licences was modified under pressure from Caine, he marked his dislike of it not only by resigning his post of whip but by vacating his seat in the house. On seeking re-election at Barrow as an independent Liberal he was defeated. Within the same year he rejoined the Liberal fold, and in 1892 re-entered the house for East Bradford as a Gladstonian Liberal and voted for the 1893 'Home Rule Bill'. At the general election of 1895 he lost his seat, and only re-entered the house in 1900 as Liberal member for Camborne. In the interval he sat on Lord Peel's royal commission on the liquor-licensing laws (1896-9), and signed the minority report and the addendum in favour of direct local veto. 
The native population of India also engaged Caine's sympathies, and he criticized severely British methods of government, especially the encouragement for fiscal purposes of the liquor and opium trade. In 1890 he visited India as a delegate to the Indian National Congress at Calcutta, and contributed to the 'Pall Mall Gazette' a series of letters called 'Young India' which ably advocated large measures of self-government. He sat on the royal commission of 1895-6 on the administration of Indian expenditure, signing the minority report recommending a diminution of civil and military expenditure, and would, but for ill health, have sat on the opium commission. 
Caine's activities exhausted his strength. A voyage to South America in 1902 failed to restore his health, and he died of heart failure on 17 March 1903 at his home, 42 Grosvenor Road, Westminster, London. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking. Caine was a puritan in politics and religion, whose moral courage and philanthropic instincts were superior to his intellectual gifts. Abrupt in manner, downright in speech, but of imperturbable good humour, he was dubbed by political associates the 'genial ruffian'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32239


Caird, Edward (1835-1908), philosopher and college head, was born on 23 March 1835 in Greenock. His father, John Caird (1787-1838), the partner and manager of a firm of engineers in Greenock and a deeply religious man, died while Edward was still an infant. His mother, Janet (1799-1889), the daughter of Roderick and Isabella Young of Paisley, raised her large family after her husband's early death, with the assistance of her extended family. Among Edward's brothers was John Caird, theologian and principal of Glasgow University. Edward lived for much of his childhood with his aunt Jane Caird of Greenock. He was a delicate and retiring child; brought up by his aunt in religious and secluded surroundings, he displayed an interest in spiritual matters from an early age. He was first schooled at Greenock Academy, where he was taught by David Duff, later professor of church history at Edinburgh. Caird recalled: 'He was the first teacher that really awakened my mind' (Jones and Muirhead, 14). 
Caird began studies at the University of Glasgow in the winter of 1850. He won prizes in Greek and Latin, ecclesiastical history, and divinity. At this time he also made several lasting friendships, most notably with John Nichol, later professor of English literature at Glasgow University. His university career, however, was punctuated by bouts of ill health. In the winter of 1856 he went to St Andrews with his aunt Jane to convalesce and to study divinity, and in the spring of 1857 he went to Perthshire to visit his brother John. He resumed studies in divinity at Glasgow later that year, although by this time he had decided not to enter the ministry and to pursue philosophical scholarship instead. He was already much influenced by the idealist bent of Carlyle and Goethe, for whom he developed a lifelong admiration. 
Elected to a Snell exhibition in 1860, a scholarship which sent Scottish students to Oxford, Caird went up to Balliol College, where he found himself in the company of men such as Sir Courtney Ilbert -- who was to gain fame as the law member of the viceroy's council in India -- J. A. Symonds, and Thomas Case. But Caird at twenty-five was by this time rather older than many of the other students, and he tended to associate with the younger dons, notably the idealist philosopher T. H. Green. 'Caird and Green were kindred souls', observed J. L. Strachan-Davidson, a fellow student who later succeeded Caird as master of Balliol (Jones and Muirhead, 28). Caird was elected to the Old Mortality Club, which promoted the study of reform, in the company of Green, A. V. Dicey, John Nichol, James Bryce, and others. He was awarded the Pusey and Ellerton scholarship in Hebrew in 1861 and the Jenkyns exhibition in 1862. He earned a first class in the final classical school in the next year and was elected a tutor at Merton College in 1864. 
In May 1866 Caird was unanimously elected professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow against a field of strong candidates. He was initially reluctant to stand because his friend Nichol was also a candidate and, as he wrote to Jowett, 'I would rather have no professorship while the world standeth than do anything unkind to Nichol' (Jones and Muirhead, 48). But Nichol withdrew in his friend's favour and Caird was pleased to return to Scotland to take up the joint work of lecturing and scholarship for which he was so well suited. A year later, on 8 May 1867, he married Caroline Frances (Fanny) Wylie of Carluke, Lanarkshire. 
After twenty-seven years at Glasgow, in 1893 Caird was unanimously elected master of Balliol College. He was reluctant to leave Glasgow: 'I may say that nothing would have made me do it, except what has happened -- a unanimous call to the College of Jowett and Green' (Bosanquet, 381). Upon his return to Balliol, he remarked to a friend: 'I shall have my hand on the heart of England' (Jones and Muirhead, 54). While he was less intimately connected to undergraduate life and more closely engaged in scholarship than his predecessor Benjamin Jowett, he was regarded as a very effective master. Like Jowett and T. H. Green, he regarded the task of the college as training students in the art of moral citizenship. As master, he continued to read and write philosophy: in this period he published 'The Evolution of Religion' (1893) and, drawn by the emphasis in the Oxford curriculum on classical Greek philosophy to return to a study of Plato and Aristotle, he also published 'The Evolution of Theology in the Greek Philosophers' (1904). But by 1907 his work was so hampered by a paralytic illness that he resigned the mastership of the college. 
In the company of T. H. Green and F. H. Bradley, Caird led the revival of an idealist philosophy which became the most striking and powerful intellectual force in late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Britain. His most significant contribution to this philosophical movement lay in his two works on Kant. In 1877 he published a critical account of the 'Critique of Pure Reason'; this was followed in 1889 by a two-volume exposition of Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason', 'Critique of Practical Reason', and 'Critique of Judgement'. Caird's primary purpose was to demonstrate that, notwithstanding Kant's reputation for promoting dualism, the Kantian system was premised on a deep organic unity. Caird interpreted Kant freely, for he was convinced that Kant did not fully understand how consistently organic his own philosophical system actually was. Some critics regretted this radical reconstruction of Kant. But none the less, the volumes were widely regarded as authoritative, 'in many ways the culmination of the long English endeavour to assimilate Kant' (Pringle-Pattison, 278). 
In 1883 Caird published a short study of Hegel: the first part was a biographical account, and the second a brief critical review of his philosophy. The comprehensive grasp of the development of philosophy in Germany which characterized his volumes on Kant was also demonstrated here. He paid special attention to Hegel's notion of a spiritual unity underlying superficial difference. He was also much interested in the resonance between Hegelian principles and Christianity. He read the Hegelian language of self-realization as essentially that of St Paul and St Augustine: the individual must relinquish an isolated life in order to live a spiritual or universal one. As a friend and contemporary philosopher, Bernard Bosanquet, commented: 'In Hegel... he found the nearest approach which any philosopher had made to the conception which he sought of a fully correlated concrete whole' (Bosanquet, 384). The highest expression of this unity he found in Christianity. For Caird, God was the absolute principle of unity. 

'The Evolution of Religion', initially delivered as the Gifford lectures at St Andrews between 1890 and 1892, is Caird's most explicitly constructive work. Here he sought to interpret Christianity along idealist principles and to weld together evolutionary ideas and theology by arguing that human history is an unfolding of a consciousness of the universal unity which underlies our experience. In a sense, Christianity was simply one of many expressions of this spiritual revelation; but Caird claimed a unique status for Christianity, more specifically for a thinking protestantism: it alone makes explicit in human consciousness the implicit idea of God or the Absolute. A modern and philosophical Christianity, Caird contended, also rightly admits the reality of evil but rather than lapsing into despair employs the idea of a timeless unity in which truth and good triumph over evil. While those of his contemporaries who leaned towards a materialist view of human experience were unconvinced, the book had a significant impact on others who had been searching for a rational account of spiritual experience, especially for those who, like Caird, were increasingly dissatisfied with the Calvinism in which they had been raised. 
A contemporary of his regretted that Caird had devoted so much labour to the exposition of other philosophical systems, notably that of Kant, and suggested that he might have had a greater influence on his generation by working out an independent position. It is true that, with the exception of the work on religion, most of Caird's publications were interpretations of other philosophers. But like Green's these interpretative works indirectly formulated an alternative philosophical position. As Bosanquet explained, their critical interpretations were animated by the obligation to contest atomism and to demonstrate the underlying organic nature of human experience: 'we find in them throughout a peculiar lofty preoccupation or sense of spiritual duty', Bosanquet noted, which did not infuse the writings of even slightly younger idealists to the same extent (Bosanquet, 382). This commitment to revealing an all-pervasive organicism was linked to a strong communitarian strand which ran through Caird's work, most strongly expressed in the lay sermons which he delivered as master at Balliol College. He constantly returned to the twin themes of social unity and individual independence, depicting the barrenness of a society which does not seek harmony between social and individual ends. He called on students to renounce selfishness and to pursue the common good. Philosophical study and social duty could not be separated. 
For Caird social duty meant engagement in a variety of reform causes. As a student at Glasgow he became involved in campaigns for free education, the extension of the franchise, and the rights of women. He was at the forefront of the long and arduous campaign to admit women to university classes and degrees at Glasgow. He was one of four professors to begin lecturing to university extension classes of women in 1868; he repeatedly argued the cause of women's education before the university senate; and he served on the governing body of Queen Mary College, a women's college, before and after its formal incorporation into the University of Glasgow. He was also much involved with other aspects of university reform, for example ending the restriction of the teaching of theology to established church members. He played an important role in the Women's Protective and Provident League, which had been founded in 1888 to improve the working conditions of women and children and which later became the Glasgow Council for Women's Trades. Caird worked energetically to improve the industrial position of women; he advocated that the 'Factory Acts' include laundries. This invited one critic to complain that Caird was 'the principal teacher of what is called the new or sympathetic economy' (Jones and Muirhead, 118). Both Edward and Caroline Caird were instrumental in initiating the university settlement movement in Glasgow. Caird defended the philosophy of settlement: 'The general condition of the life of the poor could not be raised unless they were given the opportunities of social and intellectual progress and of contact with things that are beautiful' (Jones and Muirhead, 115). In keeping with this ideal, Edward and Caroline hosted evenings of entertainment, mainly music, once a fortnight at a house in the East End. Upon his return to Oxford as master of Balliol, Caird continued his support for university settlement by giving talks at Toynbee Hall. He also continued to crusade for extending university education to women: one of his first tasks as master was to open Balliol lectures to women students. 
While aspects of contemporary socialism appealed strongly to him, Caird, like many of his contemporary idealists ['see 'British idealists], regarded class difference as a necessary and constructive feature of modern society, on the grounds that each class had an appropriate function and place in the social organism. He regretted, however, class antagonism which stood in the way of a sense of national unity. For Caird, the nation was 'the greatest ethical unity to which our services are immediately owing' (E. Caird, 'Lay Sermons and Addresses', 1907, 80). He was convinced that 'it is only that ideal of social service that can really purify our lives' (ibid., 118). But the patriotism which Caird himself felt and which he attempted to encourage in Balliol students was in no sense a shallow jingoism or antithetical to a wider internationalism. He was opposed to the South African War, and accordingly to the university's conferring of an honorary degree on Cecil Rhodes; he supported the movement towards international federation. 
Caird was distinguished by a prominent forehead, imposing mutton-chop whiskers, penetrating dark eyes, and a tall frame. His contemporaries recalled his sympathetic, gentle, and modest nature, which concealed great strength of will and conviction. A colleague remembered that, while at a meeting of the philosophical society at Oxford, Caird, then master of Balliol, commented favourably on all the speakers, save one. On this speaker, he was silent. For Caird this silence expressed an outspoken and forceful disagreement. He told a friend after the meeting that he 'was glad to get that shot' at the philosopher in question (Jones and Muirhead, 69). 
Caird was one of the foremost British philosophers of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. He was also an important figure in the liberal theology movement. His influential study of Kant gave vitality to the discussion of the philosopher, and of German philosophy more generally, in Britain. For decades it remained the most important work on Kant in the English language. His students filled the chairs of philosophy in American, British, and colonial universities, continuing to expound variations of Caird's philosophical idealism, even as idealism began to be superseded by logical positivism. Caird's contribution to philosophy was recognized by the conferring of the honorary degrees of LLD by St Andrews in 1883 and by Glasgow in 1894, DCL by Oxford in 1891, and DLitt by Cambridge in 1898 and the University of Wales in 1902. Portraits of Caird hang in Balliol College and Glasgow; a tablet in Balliol College chapel and a bronze medallion at Glasgow further commemorate his legacy. He was an original member of the British Academy and a member of the French Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques. Edward Caird died in the evening of 1 November 1908 at his home, 12 Bardwell Road, Oxford, and was buried in St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford, beside T. H. Green and Benjamin Jowett. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32240


Caird, Sir James, of Glenfarquhar, baronet (1864-1954), shipowner, was born in Glasgow on 2 January 1864, the elder son in a family of six of James Caird, lawyer, and his wife, Mary Ann Hutcheson. Educated at Glasgow Academy, he joined the firm of William Graham & Co., East India merchants, in 1878. Eleven years later he went to London and in 1890 joined Turnbull, Martin & Co., managers of the Scottish Shire Line of steamships. By hard work and enterprise he prospered, and in twelve months was made manager. By 1903 he was sole partner and owner of the Scottish Shire Line, and in co-operation with the Houlder and Federal Lines he opened up the trade between the United Kingdom and the Antipodes. Early in 1916 he started a new shipyard at Chepstow to build standard ships quickly where enemy attacks could not interfere with production. 
Overcoming immense difficulties, the venture succeeded so well that in 1917 the government stepped in and bought out Caird and his associates. Foreseeing the slump in shipping which would follow the end of the First World War, Caird in the same year sold to the Clan Line his interest in the Shire Line, and in Turnbull, Martin & Co. He remained a director of some twenty-five companies connected with shipping, shipbuilding, ship repairing, and allied industries, as well as being chairman of the Smithfield and Argentine Meat Company, in which he held a large block of founders' shares. 
By then Caird was a comparatively rich man, and from the early 1920s he devoted a large part of his fortune to preserving British naval and shipping memorials, to which he became passionately devoted. In association with the Society for Nautical Research he provided most of the money needed to repair and restore HMS 'Victory' (Nelson's flagship at Trafalgar, berthed at Portsmouth) with an initial sum of $50,000 to start the work and a further $15,000 to enable it to continue. In 1927 steps were being taken to found a national museum of the sea, a venture to which Caird gave his wholehearted and energetic support. Under the chairmanship of the seventh Earl Stanhope, and in association with the honorary secretary, Geoffrey Callender, of the Society for Nautical Research, a board of trustees, of whom Caird was one, was set up to found the new museum. The realization of this project became possible when the Royal Hospital school moved to Holbrook and the old school buildings at Greenwich, including the Queen's House, became vacant. Caird then guaranteed to meet the whole cost (amounting eventually to over $80,000) of converting the buildings. In addition, he began purchasing every available collection or individual item of maritime historical interest, including rare books, globes, atlases, instruments, and manuscripts. The Macpherson collection of sea pictures and the 'Mercury' collection of ships' models were secured, and to these he added his own collections. During the second reading of the 'National Maritime Museum Bill' in the House of Commons in June 1934 it was stated that the collections Caird had already offered to the nation were worth more than $300,000. 
The new museum was opened by King George VI in April 1937 and Caird continued his never-flagging interest and support. In all, he gave more than $1.25 million to the museum. His account of the inception of the National Maritime Museum was published in 'Syren and Shipping' (2 January 1935), under the title 'A museum in the making'. To the last, when he became too ill to take an active part, he continued to shower his gifts upon it. His name is perpetuated in the Caird Library and the Caird Entrance. A Caird medal has been awarded annually since 1984. The Caird Fund makes grants for maritime research and finances Caird fellowships. Nor were the museum and HMS 'Victory' alone in benefiting from his generosity. The historic 74-gun ship of the line HMS 'Implacable' (the last survivor of the enemy ships that fought at Trafalgar) was also saved by him in the years between the wars. She was sunk with naval honours in 1949, her timbers having deteriorated beyond repair. To museums and art galleries in his native Scotland he was a generous benefactor; and in the Second World War he provided the cost of a complete ambulance unit. To his parish church, St Mary's, Wimbledon, his gifts included a house for the curate and money for the new church spire. 
Caird was stocky in stature, tough and wiry, with immense energy, a shrewd expression, a merry twinkle in his eye, and a delightful Scots voice. He was the kindliest of men, generous almost to a fault, but never making a show of his benefactions, shrouding his greatest gifts in secrecy, and never seeking any reward. He nevertheless loved to drive a hard bargain and could not bear to be 'had'; but he was always scrupulously fair and often gave more than was asked when he thought the seller might be in need, or even that a dealer was not taking sufficient profit. 
Until his illness in 1949 Caird continued to attend his office in the City daily. He was extremely alert and had an excellent memory. He celebrated his eightieth birthday at his home in Scotland by bringing down a 'royal' after a long day's stalk, which many a younger man would have given up. It was this wonderful vitality and his simple way of living which endeared him so much to all around him at Glenfarquhar, Fordoun, where he dispensed quiet yet generous hospitality in which gillies, keepers, shepherds, and guests shared alike. 
In 1928 Caird was created a baronet; and after the opening of the new museum in 1937 the prime minister wanted to submit his name for a peerage, but Caird refused, saying that he did not want reward for what he had done or for what he had given to the nation. 
Caird married in 1894 Henrietta Anna (died 1953), daughter of William Henry Stephens, architect, of Ardshane, Holywood, co. Down. They had one daughter but no son and on Caird's death at his home, Well House, Arthur Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, on 27 September 1954, the baronetcy became extinct. 


