@@@@@


doc= 2983


Boulton, Matthew (1728-1809), manufacturer and entrepreneur, was born on 14 September 1728 at New Hall Walk, Snow Hill, Birmingham, one of four children, three of whom survived to adulthood, of Matthew Boulton (died 1759), toy manufacturer and merchant, and his wife, Christiana Piers (died 1785) of Chester. He was educated at the academy of the Revd John Hausted in Deritend, Birmingham. 
The 'toy' trade of Birmingham consisted of several distinct branches of the hardware industry. Makers of gold and silver toys produced trinkets, snuff-boxes, inkstands, and a variety of other goods. The tortoiseshell toy makers, as the term implies, worked particularly in that material, while steel toy makers produced corkscrews, buckles, watch-chains, candle-snuffers, and other goods. The largest branch of the toy trade was that of buckle making and chape making (the chape being the part of the buckle by which it was fastened to the strap or ribbon). Buckle making and chape making were independent trades in the eighteenth century. 
The elder Matthew Boulton's branch of the Birmingham toy trade was that of steel toys, chiefly buckles for both shoes and knee-breeches. The younger Matthew joined his father on leaving school and is said to have produced an enamelled or inlaid buckle when only seventeen years old, which contributed to the expansion of his father's business. At the age of twenty-one he became a partner in the business and his father entrusted the management to him. About 1756 he married a distant cousin, Mary Robinson (1727-1759/60?), the elder daughter of Luke Robinson, an 'opulent mercer' of Lichfield. Her mother was an heiress and Mary's share of the estate was $14,000. The couple had been married only a few years when Mary died suddenly, probably in 1759 or 1760; there were no surviving children. In 1759 Boulton's father died, leaving the business to his son. 
After several years Boulton sought to marry Anne (Nancy) Robinson (1735-1783), Mary's younger sister. This was forbidden by ecclesiastical law but, supported by the view of John Fry in 'The Case of Marriage between Near Kindred' (1756), in which it was asserted that 'marriage with a deceased wife's sister is fit and convenient being opposed neither to law nor morals' (p. 80), Boulton pressed his case, and though Anne's brother was opposed to the match it does not appear that the mother-in-law was. The marriage nevertheless took place some time prior to 1767, probably out of Birmingham, the bride also bringing with her $14,000, which was her share of her parents' estate. Boulton's marriage, and with it the addition to his fortune, was the cause of a number of letters of congratulations from his friends. Later in his life, alluding to his fortune, he remarked that he had had the option of living the life of a gentleman but chose, rather, to become an industrialist. 
Matthew and Anne had two children: Anne, who died unmarried in 1829, and Matthew Robinson Boulton (1770-1842). Anne (nicknamed Nancy) developed some crippling ailment from which she never recovered. Matthew Robinson was educated according to the liberal principles espoused by his father and his associates, with much focus on chemistry, mechanics, and geology, as well as the acquisition of French and German. He, in partnership with James Watt jun., directed Soho Foundry and, on his own account, Soho Mint and Soho Manufactory after his father's death. 
Ever a sociable individual, Matthew Boulton had a wide circle of friends, especially those of one particular group, whose number swelled eventually to fourteen and became known as the Lunar Society (an allusion to the fact that they met to dine and converse on the night of the full moon). He particularly enjoyed the company of Dr William Small, who had been introduced to Boulton by Benjamin Franklin in 1765. Small became Boulton's personal physician and also a close friend and adviser whose judgement both Boulton and, in due course, James Watt valued highly. Dr Erasmus Darwin of Lichfield, medical practitioner to a number of families in Warwickshire and Staffordshire, and also an author, was a founder member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, which met at Boulton's house and, less frequently, at the homes of other members. 
Members of the Lunar Society had been interested in the design of steam engines even before Watt joined their number. Boulton had invented a steam engine, the design of which he discussed with Erasmus Darwin and Benjamin Franklin. His toy business was the cause of his interest in metallurgy, an interest shared by William Withering and James Keir. In both Boulton's and Keir's cases intellectual interest produced industrial applications. The potter Josiah Wedgwood was another member of the society, and the relationship between science and industry is well illustrated in Wedgwood's plan to develop a research establishment in the Staffordshire Potteries. Wedgwood and Boulton collaborated over the production of cameo jewellery set in cut-steel mounts, Boulton, not altogether in jest, suggesting that he might establish a pottery so as to integrate the manufacture of cameo ware more effectively. Interest in chemistry and its practical applications, as, for example, in the manufacture of sulphuric acid, impacted on Boulton's silver plate, Sheffield plate, and minting activities. 
Measurement was a concern shared by a number of the members of the Lunar Society; and Boulton's interest in it was crucial to developments in assaying as well as to engine drawing, an essential element in the steam engine business. It is clear, however, that the interplay of science and industry involved both high seriousness 'and' merriment; and the latter had highly practical sides as well. Boulton, for example, joined in the late eighteenth-century enthusiasm for balloons and ballooning. When the Derby Philosophical Society sent a message to the Lunar Society by balloon (it was sent off-course by the wind), practical play and scientific experiment were closely engaged; and Boulton made a balloon to entertain his children when in Cornwall. However, as a mark of his involvement with scientific endeavours, he was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1785. In addition, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783 and was a member of the Society of Civil Engineers from 1792. In 1800 he became a proprietor of the Royal Institution. 
Boulton's own career coincided with, and also contributed to, the emergence of Birmingham as a thriving provincial industrial town in the last half of the eighteenth century. Water-wheels were used in rolling and slitting mills, for blade mills (used in the edge tool trades), and in the nearby Black Country forges. Birmingham was noted for the manufacture of a great variety of metal goods. This can be, at least in part, attributed to a long tradition of working in iron and brass. The town had a tradition of liberalism; dissenters settled there and a lively and inventive commercial community emerged. A large number of patents was granted to Birmingham men during the eighteenth century, the majority of them concerned with materials such as metal alloys; with processes such as casting, rolling, and stamping; and with products such as buttons, buckles, and nails. Such was the reputation of the town that it became known as the toyshop of Europe. By mid-century Boulton was the most eminent toy manufacturer, but there were thousands of small masters, each of whose business was conducted in workshops comprising part of, or attached to, their dwelling house. Birmingham industry was characterized by the workshop rather than the factory until well into the nineteenth century. 
In 1760 Boulton appeared before the committee of the House of Commons, representing the interests not only of the buckle makers of Birmingham but also those of Warwick and Wolverhampton, the issue being a petition for leave to bring in a bill to prohibit the export of buckle-chapes. A skilful practitioner of 'the Art of Parliamentary Lobbying' (Robinson, 'Parliamentary lobbying', 209), his evidence provided a vivid description of the scale of the buckle trade and the wages of buckle makers and chape makers. The buckle was said to be 'by far the most considerable Article in the Toy Trade' ('JHC', 901). At this period his business consisted of the manufacture of steel toys and a mercantile business exporting a wider range of midland hardware products. 
Wishing to expand his business, and being constrained at his Snow Hill site, Boulton acquired the lease of a site on Handsworth Heath. The land contained a cottage, the site of which became Boulton's Soho House, while in the valley below, the brook had been dammed and a metal-rolling mill and dwelling house built. In summer 1761 he built dwellings for workmen, workshops, and a warehouse. He demolished the rolling mill and in the following year began to plan the construction of a new factory. The original architect, T. Lightoler, did not provide what was required, and the work was subsequently undertaken by various members of the Wyatt family. The Wyatts of Lichfield and Burton upon Trent were, perhaps, the most famous family of eighteenth-century surveyors and architects. They included in their number John Wyatt, who was the London agent of Boulton and the merchant John Fothergill, the carpenter William Wyatt, and the wooden-screw manufacturer Charles Wyatt, besides the architect and builder members of the family who designed and built Boulton's house, warehouse, and manufactory. 
Benjamin Wyatt & Sons were subsequently commissioned to build the Soho Manufactory to the design of William Wyatt. The factory was completed in 1766 and became a showpiece. In the 1790s Boulton engaged the architect James Wyatt to remodel Soho House. James appears to have lost interest in the project, however, and the work was eventually completed by Samuel Wyatt in 1796-8. The house, while designed as a comfortable, yet elegant, family dwelling, contained several novel features. A warm-air convection heating system was installed, while the window frames were made of an alloy invented by fellow 'lunatik' James Keir, and the elevations were slate-hung while appearing to be ashlar. Soho House survives as a museum but the manufactory was demolished in the mid-nineteenth century. Samuel Wyatt was also engaged to design a new Snow Hill warehouse for Boulton. 
Soho Manufactory was the focus of Boulton's numerous business enterprises. In 1762 he formed a partnership with John Fothergill, which lasted until 1781. Fothergill had served an apprenticeship in Konigsberg and had travelled extensively in continental Europe, probably for Joseph Duncumb of Birmingham as well as for Lewis and Capper. He spoke French and German, his responsibility in his partnership with Boulton being for the mercantile side of the business. He travelled largely in the Baltic for the partnership, though it traded with Italy and France as well. The partners employed a German clerk who acted as a traveller for them in Russia and was probably a contact of Fothergill's from Konigsberg. Fothergill was clearly well connected, having friends in the world of banking and finance, but he does not appear to have had sufficient capital for his share of the partnership with Boulton and had to borrow. 
Boulton directed his own attention primarily to the organization of production. The range of products was extended to steel jewellery, including Wedgwood's jasper-ware cameos set in Boulton and Fothergill's cut-steel mountings. Wedgwood also ordered mountings and flutings from Boulton for vases. The threatened pottery at Soho did not materialize and neither did the challenge damage the friendship between the two men. The development of Boulton's and Fothergill's business produced an invitation to Boulton to settle in Sweden, but he declined to meet the Swedish emissary. 
The entrepreneurial flair evident in all of Boulton's business activities, and especially his close attention to fashionable design, were most noticeable in the manufacture of buttons. These, along with a wide range of other cut-steel goods, formed an important part of Boulton's output aimed at a mass market. However, like Wedgwood, he specifically targeted royalty and aristocracy in the first instance. 'In future we shall take care to have some thing new in the Button way against every Birth Day of our Sovereign', Boulton wrote, 'and shall present to such of the Nobility as we can make so free with (and such as are most dressy) some setts to garnish their Cloaths with on that Day' (Robinson, 'Eighteenth century commerce and fashion', 47). In his letters he often asked Fothergill to send him sets of new buttons for such special customers as the duke of Marlborough. 
Yet unlike John Taylor, whose toy business generated considerable wealth, Boulton and Fothergill made losses over their eighteen years of trading. Fothergill had established many foreign connections, but they did not prove profitable and Boulton's London agent and banker urged that this aspect of the business be closed. As early as 1774 Fothergill had considered the business to be on the edge of bankruptcy. Relations between the partners deteriorated, culminating in charges being made by Fothergill against Boulton, which resulted in the latter's giving his partner notice that the partnership should cease on 31 December 1781; Fothergill died in the following year. 
In the early 1760s Boulton acquired the technology for manufacturing Sheffield plate -- a sheet of silver fused to one of copper and subsequently rolled. For some years he was the only producer of Sheffield plate outside Sheffield itself, and no other Birmingham manufacturer is known to have been making Sheffield plate until about 1770. While Boulton did not introduce any improvements to the technology, he was one of the first to apply sterling silver thread instead of plated wire thread to articles, thus covering the edges where the most wear occurred and thereby concealing the copper. He manufactured Sheffield plate under the business name of the M. Boulton Plate Company. He supplied a variety of articles, including candlesticks in different patterns, jugs, tureens, and cups, and he was the first to make plated telescope tubes for the London instrument maker Jesse Ramsden. Shortly after the manufacturing of Sheffield plate was established Boulton commenced the manufacture of silver plate (that is, sterling silver ware). The same designs could be used as for Sheffield plate and by the 1780s he was commissioning designs from some of the leading architects of the day. For their part his architect friends, particularly the Wyatts, repaid him for his early commissions by introducing his wares to their landed clientele. 
During the late 1760s and early 1770s Boulton commenced the production of another luxury product -- ormolu. This was made of a metal -- normally brass but sometimes bronze or copper -- which was gilded by the process of mercurial gilding and did not require assaying. Ormolu was used in a wide range of decorative wares, particularly for mounts and vases of various sorts. Production peaked in 1771 and declined soon afterwards. One of the major outlets for Boulton's ormolu, Sheffield plate, and silver plate was Christies, the auction house, in London. Some of his ormolu was purchased by George III and Queen Charlotte, pieces being acquired for Windsor Castle and Buckingham Palace. A sale at Christies in 1772 failed, however, resulting in a number of valuable pieces remaining unsold and having to be reduced in price subsequently. 
Another short-lived business was mechanical painting, in which Boulton was partnered by Francis Eginton. Eginton had been employed at Soho as a maker of Japanned ware. However, the business failed to become profitable and Fothergill insisted that it should cease. In June 1780 the agreement with Eginton was terminated. Eginton went on to establish himself as a glass painter and achieved considerable success. Boulton's technique of copying works of art has unfortunately been lost. 
Boulton maintained a steady trade in toys to France, from which country he obtained both workmen and tools which enabled him to capture the French trade in ormolu. Besides the quality of his wares he competed on price, consistently undercutting London silversmiths in fashionable markets. Furthermore, because of his reputation as a well-regarded host, distinguished foreigners and members of the British aristocracy visited Soho, and a number of them placed orders. In endeavouring to raise the standards of taste in Britain and to introduce high-quality art wares, Boulton was encouraged by his friend the Hon. Mrs Elizabeth Montague, who remarked on 'our victories over the French in our contention of arts... [and] The achievement of Soho, instead of making widows and orphans, making marriages and Christenings'. She urged: 'Go on then, sir, to triumph over the French in taste and to embellish your Country with useful inventions and elegant productions' (Dickinson, 54). The toy business was continued variously as the M. Boulton Button Company (1782-1809), Boulton and Scale (1782-96), and Boulton and Smith ('c'.1796-1809). 
As late as September 1778 Boulton was still not convinced 'how far it may be prudent in me to stick to Engines or Buttons for I can consider Buttons as a sheet anchor' (Robinson, 'Eighteenth century commerce and fashion', 39). Yet the business on which Boulton eventually focused most attention was his partnership with James Watt. Watt had visited Soho in 1767 and met Dr Small and Fothergill, though Boulton was absent; he also met Erasmus Darwin in Lichfield. He again visited Soho in 1768 on his journey back to Glasgow from London, where he had been on business associated with the patent which was granted him in 1769 for his improvements to the steam engine. Immediately on returning to Glasgow he informed his patron Dr Roebuck, who had taken over the engine development debts, of Boulton's desire to participate in a steam engine business. John Roebuck (bap. 1718, d. 1794), who had studied medicine at Edinburgh and Leiden, was both an industrial chemist and a manufacturer. He developed the manufacture of sulphuric acid, formerly made in glass retorts, to an industrial scale in lead tanks, and established a factory for its production at Prestonpans in Scotland and also, in partnership with Samuel Garbett, in Birmingham. Together, Roebuck and Garbett established the Carron ironworks, Roebuck also leasing coalmines and establishing salt works at Bo'ness. Watt's first experimental engine was built on Roebuck's land. Roebuck was over-extended financially, however, and was therefore more ready to entertain the possibility of involving Boulton in the manufacture and marketing of the Watt engine. 
Boulton was offered a licence to manufacture the steam engine in Warwickshire, Staffordshire, and Derbyshire, but he declined, while strongly indicating his desire to be engaged in a joint project with Watt. Roebuck's bankruptcy provided the opportunity for Boulton to take over his share in Watt's engine. In 1774 Watt moved to Birmingham and in 1775 the patent was extended for twenty-five years to 1800 by act of parliament, the Boulton and Watt partnership commencing in that year. Under the terms of the partnership Watt assigned two-thirds of both property and the patent to Boulton, while Boulton undertook to pay the expenses already incurred, to meet the costs of experiments, and to pay for materials and wages. The profits were to be divided in proportion to their shares. 
It would be incorrect to stereotype Boulton as the entrepreneur and Watt as the inventor, for Boulton made many suggestions for improvements to the engine and Watt also had a good head for business. But there is no doubt that Boulton's flair for marketing was significant for the early success of the business. He took an order for an engine for Bloomfield colliery in the Black Country. The 50 inch diameter engine was a considerable scale-up from the 18 inch cylinder of Watt's original Kinneil engine. The engine became a showpiece to which prospective customers went and were frequently persuaded of the opportunities afforded by steam power. 
In 1769 Boulton had told Watt that he would build a manufactory alongside his Soho Manufactory in which to construct engines for the world. The reality was rather different, as Boulton and Watt was largely a consulting engineering partnership in the early days, and only a small proportion of the engine parts, by value, were made at Soho. The first major market for Boulton and Watt engines was in Cornwall, and, despite the partners' considerable anxieties with the way mines were managed -- with the over-production of copper ores and the consequent temporary abandonment of engines -- Cornwall proved to be a lucrative market for them. It was Boulton who perceived the potential afforded by the growth of the cotton-spinning industry and urged Watt to develop a rotative engine. Before the expiry of the patent, rotative engines far exceeded the number of reciprocating engines sold per year, though in terms of horsepower they were smaller. 
It was during the partners' frequent absences in Cornwall that James Keir (1735-1820), a chemist, glassmaker, and member of the Lunar Society, moved from Stourbridge to Winson Green, giving up direct involvement in glass manufacture in order to be nearer to Soho to assist in the management of Boulton's interests. Both Boulton and Watt had a high opinion of Keir and had hoped to attract him and his capital to their business, but after some long time Keir decided not to commit his own capital to a partnership which would have meant the possibility of servicing Boulton's debts. Yet Keir did not withhold his criticisms on the management of the Boulton and Fothergill business. It seems likely that, with the shelving of the proposed partnership, Keir continued to act as an unpaid manager at Soho to the detriment of his own business interests. But by 1781 Boulton and Keir had settled their business differences and remained affectionate friends. 
On the opening of the purpose-built steam engine factory, Soho Foundry, in 1796 Watt effectively retired from active business, though he remained a partner with Boulton and their respective sons. The company became known as Boulton, Watt & Sons from 1795 to 1800 and on Watt's formal retirement in 1800, Boulton, Watt & Co. The sale of steam engines to overseas customers and the attempts to obtain overseas patents were greatly facilitated by Boulton's mercantile connections as well as by his skilful networking. 
While the steam engine business was the most lucrative of Boulton's business adventures, it was the mint that appears to have given him most satisfaction. A mint to supply copper coinage to the government was established at Soho Manufactory. Towards the end of the eighteenth century Boulton undertook the supply of complete mints for overseas customers, the first one being the imperial mint in St Petersburg. Other orders followed and one of his last commissions before his death was the new Royal Mint in London. It was particularly for his mint interests that he sought out expert engravers and die-sinkers from continental Europe to enhance the level of skill at Soho Manufactory. By means of his mint machinery and the flow-production system in which it was deployed he achieved greater accuracy in the finished product. 
Boulton's political and negotiating skills are demonstrated in his advice to Watt on the application to parliament for the twenty-five-year extension to the 1769 patent, in the persistence with which those who pirated the steam engine were pursued through the courts in the 1790s, in the creative solution to the export of steam engine parts to France when Britain was at war with that country, in the successful petition for the establishment of an assay office in Birmingham, and in his role in the establishment of the General Chamber of Manufacturers. This organization was intended to be a permanent one, representing the interests of manufacturers nationally. It was short-lived, however, the focus for its endeavours being opposition to the younger William Pitt's proposals for preferential trade between England and Ireland. A modified bill was passed but the Irish parliament had already rejected the English alterations. When Pitt planned a trade agreement with France in 1786, he refused to consult with the General Chamber of Manufacturers as an organization, though he did consult Wedgwood and Boulton, among others, on an individual basis. 
Boulton and other manufacturers of silver plate in Birmingham sent their wares to York, Chester, or London for hallmarking prior to being sold. This resulted in delays and sometimes in damage to the goods. Boulton took the lead in the actions which finally resulted in an act of parliament for the establishment of a Birmingham assay office. Birmingham and Sheffield agreed to collaborate rather than compete, with the result that offices were established in both towns. The Birmingham office was opened in 1773 and Boulton was the first manufacturer to use its facilities. 
Boulton played a significant role in Birmingham's public life. There was a strong element of self-interest in his promotion of canals, for not only was he an investor but he also depended on canals for transporting engine parts. Moreover, Boulton and Watt pumping engines were purchased by a number of canal companies, particularly those in the midlands. His contributions to the establishment of the general hospital and the dispensary, and his involvement in the Theatre Royal, the new facade of which was designed by his friend Samuel Wyatt, are evidence of his wider social contribution. He became high sheriff of Staffordshire in 1795. 
Towards the end of his life Boulton suffered from stones in the kidneys. He endured considerable pain but even when confined to his room did not cease work. In 1802, seven years before he died, he told a banker, 'My doctors say my only chance of continuing in this World depends on my living quiet in it' (Boulton to Harts, 28 March 1802, Matthew Boulton MS 1788, box H). He died of kidney failure at Soho House, Handsworth, Birmingham, on 17 August 1809. His funeral, 'furnished in the handsomest manner avoiding ostentation' (Dickinson, 192), took place on 24 August, and he was buried in St Mary's Church, Handsworth. 
Both Watt and Keir wrote brief memoirs of Boulton. To Watt he was 'not only an ingenious mechanick, well skilled in all the practices of the Birmingham manufacturers, but possessed in a high degree the faculty of rendering any new invention of his own or others useful to the public, by organising & arranging the processes by which it could be carried on' (Dickinson, 203). To this Keir added that Boulton was 'proof of how much scientific knowledge may be acquired without much regular study, by means of a quick & just apprehension, much practical application, and nice mechanical feelings' (ibid., 197). 
Of above medium height, Boulton had grey eyes and a slightly receding forehead. He was impulsive, ebullient, and a risk taker. His insights into industrial organization and his ability to realize them were of a high order. Yet he had business failures as well as successes. He did not heed warnings from friends or colleagues when he did not appreciate the message. As Keir said, 'whatever he did or attempted, his success or his failure were all on a large scale' (Dickinson, 196). 
Boulton was one of the leading innovating entrepreneurs of the industrial revolution. He found conversation easy, enjoyed entertaining, and was a gracious host. The list of visitors to Soho is a roll-call of British and foreign nobility, many of whom sat at Boulton's table and visited his manufactory. Yet, like Josiah Wedgwood, he produced for the mass market, as well as the aristocratic market, instructing his London agent to promote the goods as widely as possible: 'We think it of far more consequence to supply the people than the nobility only; and though you speak contemptuously of Hawkers, Pedlars and those who supply 'Petty' shops, yet we must own that we think they will do more towards supporting a great manufactory, than all the Lords in the Nation' (Dickinson, 39). 
Still known today for his support of James Watt and the manufacture of steam engines, Boulton was equally interested in producing fine bronze products for an ever-expanding consumer society. One of the most important and astute of Birmingham manufacturers, his enterprises contributed to an industrial revolution that was 'quintessentially industrial, commercial and urban' (O'Brien, 786). 


@@@@@


doc= 2984


Boulton, Richard (bap. 1674, d. c.1724), medical writer, the son of Ralph Boulton, of Chester, and Agnes Brown, was baptized at Ince, Wigan, Lancashire, on 3 December 1674. He matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 29 November 1697. Boulton was already well versed in medical texts, publishing 'A Treatise of the Reason of Muscular Motion' in 1697 and composing another treatise. John Meare, principal of Brasenose, urged Arthur Charlett, master of University College, to lend Boulton help. On 11 February 1698 Charlett wrote to Hans Sloane that Boulton had laboured hard at the books of 'your faculty', desiring to 'become an Early Author', but that because Boulton was only 'a Poor Servitor', he had never had the chance to see patients. Perhaps the letter helped Boulton's second work, 'A Treatise Concerning the Heat of the Blood', to earn the imprimatur of the College of Physicians, London, on 5 March 1698. Dedicated to Meare, the treatise took respectful exception to Thomas Willis's view that heat in the blood was caused by sulphurous particles, advancing instead the mechanical explanation that heat was rarefied matter in swift motion. 
By 18 May 1698 Boulton felt able to approach the influential physician Charles Goodall by letter. Goodall replied on 26 May via a third party, asking Boulton to come to London to help with a work of natural history. Near the end of the summer Boulton arrived in London; Goodall asked him to work on books against opponents of the College of Physicians, in return for room and board, and Goodall's influence in advancing Boulton's medical career. Boulton attacked one of the thorns in Goodall's side in 'An Examination of Mr John Colbatch' (1698); but he could not resist adding to it an appendix against a pamphlet printed by Charles Leigh, a physician from Manchester, who had attacked the reasoning of Boulton's work on heat in the blood, going on to compare him to the London empiric Gideon Harvey and to Rabelais's Pantagruel. Boulton's appendix replied that Leigh's pamphlet would serve a purpose only in a 'bog-house', although 'most People are afraid of fouling their Fingers with a Piece of Paper the Doctor hath dirty'd already'. Needless to say, Leigh took high exception to such remarks from an Oxford student, and hearing who had backed Boulton, wrote to Goodall. Goodall replied to Leigh in a letter dated 6 December, disowning Boulton, who confronted his patron, only to be kicked out of Goodall's house. To Leigh's 'Reply to Mr Richard Bolton' (1698), further cutting at Boulton and printing Goodall's letter, Boulton responded with 'A Letter to Dr Charles Goodall' (dated 18 January 1699), which reviewed Goodall's turncoat and underhanded behaviour. Goodall tried to destroy Boulton by publishing 'A Two-Penny Answer to R. Boulton's Six-Penny Letter to Dr Charles Goodall' (1699), said to be from William Wilkinson, his footman. It compared Boulton to some famous London quacks and to religious radicals, such as 'W. Pen, G. Whitehead, or one of Muggleton's Successors'. The controversy spread, and when the well-known William Salmon weighed in on Boulton's side, Goodall or one of his defenders replied in turn in the 'Post Boy' of 14 February 1699, with an advertisement asking that two quacks be brought to Bedlam (Bethlem Hospital): the first Salmon, the second Boulton, who was described as: 'an odd contriv'd sort of a Country Clown, in a grey Coat, which he cannot change for want of another;... wears his own hair; late of 'Brazen Nose' and still of 'Brazen Face'; being Impudent, proud, insolent, Atheistical, silly senceless, and a most abominable Lyer, Betrayer of his Trust, and a notorious Contriver and Fomenter of Mischief; with the several signs of a Madman following.' Boulton had obviously fallen into difficulties, and turned to publishing to support himself: he brought out 'A System of Rational and Practical Chirurgery' in 1699 and 'The Works of the Hon. Robert Boyle Epitomised' in three volumes, from April 1699 to 1700. According to Wilkinson's 'Two-Penny Answer', the advance offered by the publisher for the Boyle epitome gave Boulton the wherewithal to print his 'Letter to Goodall'; Boulton also wrote to Sloane that he undertook the epitome on account of 'misfortunes still attending' him. He later begged Sloane to help him find a way to make a living. He may have turned to medical practice, for between 1714 and 1724 he brought out four more medico-surgical works: a treatise on gout, the king's evil, and venereal disease; a work on external remedies; an essay on plague; and 'Some Thoughts Concerning the Unusual Qualities of the Air' (1724). He also published 'A Vindication of the Compleat History of Magick' (1722), in which he mentions that he had been out of England for some time. The date of Boulton's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2985


Bouquet, Henry (1719-1765), army officer and military writer, was born at Rolle in the Pays de Vaud, Switzerland. In 1736 he joined the regiment of Constant in the service of the states general of the United Provinces as a cadet, and in 1738 became an ensign. He distinguished himself while serving with the Sardinian forces in the War of the Austrian Succession, and in 1748 was appointed captain-commandant and lieutenant-colonel of a new regiment of Swiss guards which had been raised by the prince of Orange at The Hague. After liaising with the French in their evacuation of captured Dutch territory, he accompanied Lord Middleton on a tour of France and Italy. 
At this time, close-order, linear formations formed the backbone of European armies' tactical systems. But when fighting erupted between France and Britain in America in 1754 their inapplicability to many operations in colonial theatres was quickly revealed. Indeed, the need for light troops capable of countering irregular opponents using sniper rather than volley fire and operating in forested, enclosed, or otherwise broken terrain was highlighted as early as July 1755, when a column of redcoats under General Edward Braddock was destroyed by French skirmishers and Native Americans. Although superior in numbers, Braddock's men, deployed in serried ranks in keeping with the nostrums of European battlefield tactics, proved no match for their dispersed, elusive opponents, who, firing at will and exploiting any available cover, picked off officers and men with virtual impunity. 
The British, however, learned from this disaster and soon began supplementing existing small bodies of Canadian auxiliaries and friendly Native Americans with new units which were specifically designed with the realm of 'la petite guerre' -- the war of outposts, patrols, and skirmishes -- in mind. Bouquet, along with another Swiss soldier of fortune, Frederick Haldimand, took command of one such unit, the 60th Royal American regiment. Comprising several battalions, this was specially trained for the 'service of the woods'. After playing a key role in the defence of Virginia and Pennsylvania, in 1763-4 Bouquet was entrusted with two expeditions from Canada. In the first, he was ordered to relieve Fort Pitt. This he duly did, beating off a powerful body of Native Americans near Turtle Creek on 5 August. The 1764 expedition also pitted him against such opponents; striking against the Ohio tribes, he triumphed at Bushy Run and ultimately compelled the Shawanese and Delaware to sue for terms. He was appointed brigadier-general and commandant of all the troops in British America's southern colonies, but he perished at Pensacola, Florida, in an epidemic in the autumn of 1765. 
Bouquet's successes against irregular foes contrasted starkly with Braddock's defeat only eight years before. But Bouquet's ruminations on the theory of 'la petite guerre' were as significant as his part in its practice. Indeed, persuaded that aptitude had to be moulded by theory, he applied this principle to his innovative training of the 60th regiment. Of all the works produced by the Enlightenment's military thinkers, he had found Count Turpin de Crisse's 'Essai sur l'art de la guerre' (1754) particularly engrossing and was recommending it to his colleagues long before it was translated into English in 1761. An account of his own campaign against the Ohio tribes was composed by William Smith and published first in Philadelphia in 1765. A second edition appeared in London the following year, for which Bouquet provided an appendix on the training, tactics, and equipment of light infantry deployed in enclosed terrain against an irregular opponent. Though smaller than John Simcoe's 'Operations of the Queen's Rangers' (1844) or Banastre Tarleton's 'Southern Campaigns' (1787), his writings rank among the most noteworthy contributions to the illumination of mid-eighteenth-century colonial warfare. 


@@@@@


doc= 2986


Bouquet, Philip (1670/71-1748), Hebrew scholar, was the son of Thomas Bouquet of La Rochelle, France. He was educated at Westminster School and admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 12 June 1689, aged eighteen. Having been elected a scholar in 1690 he graduated BA in 1693 and proceeded MA (1696), BD (1706), and DD (1711). He was elected fellow of his college in 1696 and was ordained priest on 14 March 1703. In 1704 he was temporarily appointed regius professor of Hebrew, in the absence of Henry Sike, the eminent oriental scholar for whom the post was reserved. Sike was elected in August 1705 but, following his death seven years later, Bouquet was elected to fill the chair permanently. He was a tenacious ally of the controversial master of Trinity, Richard Bentley, and refused to sign the petition against him. He was described by the Cambridge antiquary William Cole as 'a meagre, thin man, bent partly double, and for his oddities and way of living was much ridiculed' (BL, Cole MSS). 
Bouquet contributed a copy of elegiacs to the university collection of poems on the death of George I and the accession of George II in 1727. He died, senior fellow of Trinity, on 12 February 1748 and was buried in the college chapel on 16 February. According to Cole he left his considerable wealth to French refugees. 


@@@@@


doc= 2987


Bourchier, Henry, first earl of Essex (c.1408-1483), magnate, was the son of Sir William Bourchier, count of Eu (c.1374-1420), and of Anne of Woodstock (c.1382-1438), daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, and widow of two earls of Stafford. Although he was a great-grandson of Robert Bourchier, first Lord Bourchier (died 1349), the first lay chancellor, Henry Bourchier was not in the direct line of succession to the barony of Bourchier, since his grandfather was Lord Robert's younger son. He was half-brother of Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham, and elder brother of Thomas, Cardinal Bourchier, William, Lord Fitzwarine, John, Lord Berners, and Eleanor, duchess of Norfolk, all of whom benefited considerably from their mother's royal and aristocratic connections. In 1420 Henry succeeded his father in the French 'comte' of Eu, but not yet in the estates in Essex and Suffolk brought to his family by his paternal grandmother, Eleanor Lovaine, for these remained in his mother's possession until her death. He was knighted at Leicester in May 1426, and after obtaining a papal dispensation he married, on 15 October following, at St Peter's Abbey, Gloucester, Isabel (died 1484), the daughter of Richard, earl of Cambridge, and Anne, daughter of Roger Mortimer, earl of March. Isabel was the sister of Richard, duke of York (who gave her an annuity of $100), and the widow of Sir Thomas Grey of Heaton. 
Bourchier's service as a military commander began the next year in the duke of Bedford's army in France, and he subsequently also took part in Henry VI's coronation expedition of 1430. Three years later, on the death without children of his kinswoman, Elizabeth, Lady Bourchier, he succeeded to the barony of Bourchier, and was henceforth summoned to parliament either as Lord Bourchier or (as in 1435) as count of Eu. When translating the latter title into English he referred to himself as 'earl', but contemporaries did not accord him precedence above his fellow barons. He may have taken part in the duke of Gloucester's expedition to relieve Calais in 1436, and in 1439 he was one of the diplomatic envoys sent there for peace negotiations. In 1441 he crossed the channel again, this time with a large force in support of his brother-in-law York, who appointed him captain of Neufchatel and governor-general of the marches of Picardy. Before their departure from England Bourchier also contracted to serve for seven years as captain of the important border fortress of Le Crotoy. The crisis at the exchequer brought about by over-assignment of revenues meant that payment of his salary, set at $1000 p.a., quickly fell into arrears and he was long the crown's creditor, although he eventually recouped some of his losses when he took over as treasurer of England. As reward for his military services he was created Viscount Bourchier during the parliament of 1445-6, and elected knight of the Garter on his third nomination in 1452. 
The influence of Buckingham, who always stayed loyal to Henry VI, perhaps counterbalanced Bourchier's links with the increasingly dissatisfied York, whom he served as a councillor. During York's first protectorate in 1454 he assumed a prominent role as a member of the royal council, working in close association with his brother, Thomas, now archbishop of Canterbury, and that summer he was sent to Calais to conduct difficult negotiations with the mutinous garrison. Although it is unclear whether he fought at the battle of St Albans on the Yorkist side, or, intending to do so, arrived the next day in company with his other brother-in-law, Norfolk, he was appointed treasurer just a week later, on 29 May 1455. He and his brother Thomas, the chancellor, both held office until October 1456, when they were 'sodenly discharged' owing to pressure brought to bear on the king by Margaret of Anjou (Davis, 2.165). Certain of Bourchier's sons were retained by their uncle York, but it was not until two of them were attainted with the duke in the parliament of 1459 that Bourchier himself came out in open support of the Yorkist exiles. He fought on their side at Northampton in July 1460, and immediately after their victory he was again appointed treasurer. Even so, he probably did not favour the outright deposition of Henry VI until after the deaths of York and his own son, Edward, at Wakefield in December 1460. He fled the battlefield at St Albans in February 1461 after the Lancastrians won the day, and was among those who set Edward, then earl of March (his wife's nephew), on the throne on 3 March 1461, and advanced with him to Towton. 
Edward IV, as he had thus become, confirmed Bourchier in office as treasurer, and on 30 June 1461 created him earl of Essex. His close attendance on the king brought him considerable royal patronage, notably grants of estates forfeited by the earls of Wiltshire and Oxford, in part to compensate him and his wife for an unfulfilled bequest of Isabel's uncle Edmund, earl of March (died 1425), whose heir was now king. Although replaced as treasurer in April 1462, in the next year he carried out important administrative work at Calais and served on an embassy to St Omer for negotiations with France and Burgundy. As steward of the household for at least three years from May 1467 or earlier he stood by Edward throughout the political crises of the late 1460s, and was arrested when Henry VI was restored in the autumn of 1470. After secretly working for Edward's reinstatement and mediating between him and his rebellious brother, Clarence, he raised Essex in his support in April 1471. Having welcomed Edward back to London, he substantially reinforced the royal army, in which, at Barnet, his son and heir apparent, Humphrey, Lord Cromwell, was killed. He then successfully defended the capital against the Kentish rebels led by Thomas Neville, the Bastard of Fauconberg. The influence of Bourchier's family in south-east England was of critical importance for the re-establishment of Edward IV's authority and the stability of the second part of his reign. Edward placed a heavy reliance on his uncle, not only as a councillor and in military matters (as when, in 1473, Bourchier forced the earl of Oxford to re-embark following his landing at St Osyth), but as treasurer and chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the south for the full twelve years. Bourchier acted temporarily as keeper of the great seal in 1473 during the chancellor's illness. This was evidently a time of prosperity for him, for he profited from his offices, in particular the treasurership, and from his investments in overseas trade. He dealt extensively in wool and cloth produced on his own estates, as well as in Cornish tin, and imported luxury goods from the Mediterranean. The king confirmed him and his countess in possession of the lordship of Tyndale and Wark, Northumberland, settled on Isabel long before by her uncle Edward, duke of York, and Bourchier's inherited estates gave him at least $1400 a year. 
Bourchier died on 4 April 1483, just five days before the king, and was buried at Beeleigh Abbey. His tomb, which later also housed his widow (who survived until 2 October 1484), was subsequently removed to Little Easton church. In furtherance of his dynastic ambitions he had acquired wives for his sons from the ranks of the peerage. Henry (died 1458) was matched with Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Scales, seventh Baron Scales, and Humphrey with a niece and coheir of Ralph, Lord Cromwell; while Sir John and Sir Thomas both married rich widows, those of Lord Ferrers of Groby and Humphrey Stafford, earl of Devon. But four of his six sons predeceased him, three of them without surviving children, so he was succeeded by a grandson, also Henry Bourchier, the child of his eldest surviving son William and Anne Woodville, the queen's sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 2988


Bourchier, Henry, second earl of Essex (1472-1540), magnate, was the son of Sir William Bourchier (died 1483) and his wife, Anne (died 1489), daughter of Richard Woodville (Wydeville), Earl Rivers. His father's death made Henry heir to his grandfather, Henry Bourchier, first earl of Essex, who died later in 1483. His inherited position was strong in both political and dynastic terms: his grandfather had been a leading Yorkist councillor, his great-uncle Thomas Bourchier was archbishop of Canterbury, and through his mother he was first cousin to Henry VII's queen Elizabeth. His background fitted him for a central place at the new Tudor court and he was duly prominent in all its great ceremonial occasions, from Henry's coronation in 1485 to Elizabeth's funeral in 1503 and beyond. As he reached maturity in the 1490s he also took a leading part in court jousts and revels. He sat occasionally in the king's council and was named to royal commissions but held no great responsibility in Henry's government. His limited aspirations perhaps helped to preserve him from the political turmoil that engulfed other aristocratic courtiers from 1501, but his service to Henry was not without reward in small grants of land and other favours. 
Greater prospects beckoned with the accession of Henry VIII, who made Essex captain of his new guard, the king's spears, in November 1509 and constable of Windsor Castle in July 1511. For the first two years of the new reign Essex jousted and danced with the king as much as anyone, but thereafter he was supplanted by younger favourites. He last jousted at court in June 1517 and began a steady retreat into the life of a country peer. His military career equally never matched those of his forebears. He raised troops and fought loyally in France in 1492 and against the rebels of 1497; he oversaw musters in 1512 and contributed 469 men to Henry's French campaign of 1513, when he led a cavalry charge to rescue captured artillery. Yet in 1521, when his 'hardinesse' brought him to the king's mind as a possible commander for an expeditionary force, it was stressed that he would need 'sad [counsillors] adjoyned to hym', and he was not chosen ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 1.32). 
In the 1520s Essex still appeared at court on occasion, serving as marshal of the English party at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, and attended some sessions of the council. But in the 1530s he generally turned out only for the greatest events. He was licensed to miss every session of the Reformation Parliament and he attended only sparsely in 1536 and 1539. Officially it was ill health and deafness that prevented his attendance, but he could be lively enough at home in Essex, whether on his own business or the king's. His household accounts for 1533/4 show him hunting and travelling between his houses, and in 1539 he reviewed coastal defences in the spring and oversaw the trial of the abbot of Colchester in December. Though his religion was conservative it does not seem to have been passionately so: it was more likely indifference than dissidence that kept him away from the centre of affairs. 
At the local level Essex's influence rested on an unusually concentrated body of estates in Essex, Hertfordshire, and Suffolk, sufficient to generate a taxable income just below the mean for the peerage, at $568 11's'. 2died in 1523 and $850 in 1534. The main inheritance, of which he had livery in September 1493, had been reduced amid the complex politics of 1483-5 to less than half his grandfather's holdings at their peak, but it was subsequently complemented by lands inherited from his uncle Sir Thomas Bourchier in 1491 and from his mother in 1503 on the death of her second husband, the earl of Kent. Essex was not very active on the land market, but he did make some efforts to expand his estates further. His bid for the lands of dissolved Beeleigh Abbey, where his ancestors lay buried, was unsuccessful. More effective, but at the cost of considerable trouble, was his marriage to Mary, one of the two daughters and heirs of the Hertfordshire knight Sir William Say. Their marriage contract of 1497 promised them a share of Say's lands worth $200, but failed to specify which estates should make it up. In 1499 Mary's sister Elizabeth married William, Lord Mountjoy, and it took lawsuits lasting from 1505 to 1515 to settle which of Say's manors would pass to which daughter. Essex could be pleased with the final outcome, which at Say's death in 1529 gave him estates near his own and sufficiently valuable to make up more than a quarter of his income by his death. Mary was alive in 1535, but not at her husband's death in 1540. Essex seems to have been an attentive and effective landlord and though often in debt was never in serious financial difficulties. He maintained a household of about fifty servants and rebuilt his main seat, Stanstead Hall in Halstead, as a moated brick courtyard-house with elaborate turrets and chimneys. 
Essex's following among the greater gentry of his region was less impressive than that of his richer and more politically prominent neighbours, the de Vere earls of Oxford. His affinity -- a tight network of his tenants and local officers and above them a dozen Essex and Hertfordshire gentlemen of middling rank, frequent occupants of county administrative offices and in several cases highly assiduous justices of the peace -- none the less met his rather limited aims. Those aims were perhaps constricted further by his lack of a son. His daughter Anne had married Sir William Parr in 1527. When Essex fell off a young horse and broke his neck on 13 March 1540, they inherited his estates, but his title was granted to Thomas Cromwell. It was only in 1543, when his sister Katherine married the king, that Sir William followed his father-in-law as earl of Essex. Henry Bourchier was buried at Little Easton, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 2989


Bousser, Sir John (d. 1329/30), justice, is first mentioned as deputed by Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, to represent him in the parliament summoned in 1306. In 1312 he was permitted to postpone the assumption of the rank of knight for three years in consideration of paying a fine of 100's'. From at least January 1315 he acted as justice of assize in Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, and subsequently in other southern and East Anglian counties. While most of his judicial work remained centred on the south-east of England, the range of his activities increased. From 1316 he participated in Newgate gaol deliveries and he headed many commissions there between 1323 and 1329. He was also entrusted with gaol deliveries at Hertford (1317, 1323-6, 1329) and Colchester Castle (1317-20, 1323-5), and with special commissions at Bury St Edmunds (1319), Dorchester (1321), and Rayleigh (1326). His extensive engagement in commissions of oyer and terminer from 1316 onwards focused on the same region. Bousser was keeper of the peace in Essex in 1317 and 1319/20 and in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Lincolnshire in 1326. His other tasks included the investigation of abuses committed by purveyors (Kent, Surrey, Sussex, 1317); the alleged corruption of royal officials in the same counties (1318, 1323), in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire (1321), and in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire (1326); allegations against tax collectors in Somerset, Dorset, Wiltshire, Gloucestershire (1320), and Suffolk (1326); and complaints against commissioners of array in Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex (1323), and Suffolk, as well as against the keepers of the gaols in London (1326). These and similar tasks did not diminish with his appointment as justice of the common bench on 31 May 1321. Earlier in the same month he was among the thirty-eight judges summoned to attend parliament at Westminster. Already in 1319 he was involved in sensitive business, examining the record and process of a case relating to property in London, where in the following year he was openly accused of partiality by Simon Cofferer, the defendant in another case heard by him. In 1323 he investigated proceedings in the London husting and reviewed a judgment of the London sheriffs' court in the following year. 
While Bousser maintained his connections with the de Vere family, he had clearly become a political supporter of the Despensers by 1322, investigating attacks on their possessions in Cambridgeshire and Wales and opening trespass proceedings against Roger Mortimer and others. In addition he appears to have acted as a Despenser agent in their attempts to acquire properties in Gower, Kent, and Worcestershire. In May 1323 he was summoned to attend parliament at York and in October opened an investigation into reports of miracles in Bristol at the place of Henry Montfort's and Henry Wylyngton's execution. In the remaining years of the reign he dealt with confiscated goods of insurgents and was appointed justice of oyer and terminer to investigate complaints made by the Despensers. After Edward II's fall he was summoned to attend a council meeting at Westminster in December 1326. He succeeded in regaining his former position; he took an oath in the London Guildhall to safeguard Queen Isabella and her eldest son in January 1327, acted as justice of oyer and terminer together with Roger Mortimer in Wales in the following month, and was reappointed justice of the common pleas in March. 
In 1302 Bousser obtained the manor of Edwardstone in Suffolk for life, and by marriage to Helen, daughter and heir of Walter of Colchester, he acquired the manor of Stanstead. The centre of his properties was in and around Halstead in Essex, where his son Robert Bourchier held the view of frankpledge after his father's death. Robert became chancellor in 1340 and a younger son, John, was rector of Sible Hedingham. Bousser remained active on the bench until Ascension day 1329 and may have died as early as July of that year; he was certainly dead by October 1330. 


@@@@@


doc= 2990


Bourchier, John, second Baron Berners (c.1467-1533), soldier, diplomat, and translator, was the son of Sir Humphrey Bourchier (died 1471) and Elizabeth (died 1497), daughter and sole heir of Frederick Tilney of Boston, Lincolnshire. His father, a Yorkist, was killed at the battle of Barnet in 1471, and Berners succeeded to the barony at the age of seven when his grandfather died in 1474. The family was a distinguished one: one of his grandfather's brothers was summoned to parliament as Baron Fitzwarine in 1449, another was created earl of Essex in 1461, and a third became archbishop of Canterbury in 1454. His paternal great-grandmother Anne was the daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, sixth son of Edward III. 
After the death of Berners's father his mother married Thomas Howard, created second duke of Norfolk in 1514. The first duke, John Howard (died 1485), was Berners's guardian and Berners himself married Katherine (died 1536), John's daughter from his second marriage. (Berners's stepfather, Thomas, was the son of John's first wife, Katherine Moleyns.) Berners had two legitimate children, both daughters. Mary, the elder daughter, married Alexander Unton of Wadley, but was childless and predeceased her father. The younger daughter, Jane, married Sir Edmund Knyvet, sergeant-porter to Henry VIII; heir to Berners's English properties, she lived until 1561. In his will Berners also named three illegitimate sons, Humphrey, James, and George, and he also had a daughter Ursula, who married Sir William Sherington. Berners's portrait, formerly attributed to Holbein, but in fact by an unknown Flemish artist, hangs in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Anthony Wood claims that Berners was educated at Balliol College, Oxford, but there is no evidence to substantiate this; Wood probably confused him with his distant relative John Bourchier, son of Lord Fitzwarine. At the time of the marriage of Richard, second son of Edward IV, on 17 January 1478 Berners was knighted. According to Richard Grafton's continuation of Hardyng's chronicle he was involved in the attempt to put Henry Tudor on the throne in 1484 and subsequently fled to Brittany. Probably as a consequence of his connection with Thomas Howard, who was the chief general in England, he contracted in 1492 to 'serve the king in his warres beyond see on hole yeere with two speres' (Rymer, 'Foedera', 12.479), and in 1497 he took part in the suppression of Perkin Warbeck's rebellion. He was first summoned to parliament on 14 October 1495 and was regular in his attendance when in England. He was last summoned on 9 August 1529. 
In Henry VIII's reign Berners acted as a soldier and diplomat. In 1513 he took part in the French campaign and then seems to have joined his half-brother, Lord Thomas Howard, who had been made lord admiral on 2 May 1513, in Scotland and to have acted as marshal to the army. After peace had been restored with France, Norfolk led the group that escorted Princess Mary to France to marry Louis XII; Howard, now earl of Surrey, was a member of the entourage and Berners was chosen to be Mary's chamberlain. The French, however, demanded the dismissal of all her menservants and Henry Courtenay, earl of Devon, was appointed to wait on her instead. In May 1514 Berners was granted the chancellorship of the exchequer for life in reverson after Sir Thomas Lovell. He received a new grant on 29 May 1516 and finally succeeded to the office after the death of Lovell on 24 May 1524, being admitted on 14 July 1524. In 1518 Berners was sent on a special mission to Spain with John Kite, archbishop of Armagh, as part of a scheme for a general peace in Europe. Throughout the mission the ambassadors were plagued with financial problems, Berners reporting to Wolsey on 26 July that 'we lye here with most charge and expence, horse and man, & in most scarcity of all good things as well meat as drink, that may be thought' ('LP Henry VIII', 2/2, no. 4342). But although seriously ill with gout for much of the time, he nevertheless sent a spirited report back to Henry VIII on the customs at the Spanish court. Berners was not present at the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, as has been generally stated, but remained with the council in London. On 28 November 1520 Henry appointed him deputy of Calais and he occupied that position until 1526 when he was replaced by Sir Robert Wingfield. He then returned to England, but took up the Calais appointment again in 1531, on condition of paying Wingfield 100 marks per annum during his tenure of office. His successor as deputy was Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle. 
Berners became heavily involved in lawsuits over his properties in England, and had to borrow money from the king as early as 1511. His debts continued to grow and in 1532 Henry ordered his agents to watch over Berners's personal effects. After Berners's death at Calais on 16 March 1533 his half-brother Lord Edmund Howard, controller of Calais, was directed to seize all his goods in Calais for the crown. By the terms of his will, dated 3 March 1533 and proved on 4 February 1534, Berners left his great tenement in Calais to Sir Francis Hastings, later second earl of Huntingdon, and one of the executors of his will. He also left Lord Edmund a standing cup of silver. In an attempt to deal with a debt of $500 he requested the king to accept after his wife's death Staffordshire properties settled on her by deed of jointure. He was buried in the parish church in Calais. 
Like his more famous predecessor Sir Thomas Malory, Lord Berners combined an active military life with a strong literary bent -- the 'post mortem' inventory of his goods listed eighty books in his study -- and he was an accomplished translator both of French and Spanish texts. 'Arthur of Lytell Brytayne', probably his earliest work, dates to the second decade of the sixteenth century. It is a translation of 'Artus de la Petite Bretagne', a fourteenth-century prose romance which was first printed in Lyons in 1493; Berners seems to have made use of the second version of 1496. The first surviving edition of Berners's translation was printed by Robert Redborne, perhaps 'c'.1560, and there was another edition in 1582 (STC 807, 808). Berners's statement that he gave up the translation after a few pages because of the fantastic nature of the story but picked up again once he realized the text had a moral purpose is probably conventional rather than autobiographical and may be in direct imitation of Caxton, thus showing the literary tradition in which Berners was situating himself. The first edition of the French prose version of 'Huon de Bordeaux', another exemplary chivalric romance of which Berners's 'Huon of Burdeux' is a translation, was published by Michel le Noir in 1513. The earliest surviving edition of Berners's translation, now in private ownership and unavailable for inspection, is undated, but the second was printed in 1601 (STC 13998.5, 13999). The undated edition was issued from the press of Julian Notary, perhaps as early as 'c'.1515. Although the first edition is described as imperfect at beginning and end, the second has a preface and colophon in which it is stated that the earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings, requested the translation and sponsored the printing. It also gives a date of 1570. There are problems determining which earl of Huntingdon is meant, but it is likely that the reference is to Francis Hastings, the second earl. In this case, there must have been a lost edition, in which the preface and colophon first appeared, printed for Hastings between his creation as earl in 1545 and his death in 1561, and perhaps a 1570 edition as well. 
Berners's best-known work is his translation of Froissart's chronicles, begun soon after 15 August 1521 when Henry VIII signed the treaty of Bruges, undertaking to declare war on France the following year. According to Berners's preface, the project was undertaken at Henry VIII's express command. The Tudor arms appear on the verso of the title page. The translation, made from one of the early printed editions in four books, was no doubt intended to remind 'noble gentlemen' of their ancient right to France and was meant to spur them on to bravery by enabling them 'to see, behold, and read the high enterprises, famous acts, and glorious deeds done and achieved by their valiant ancestors'. The first volume, completed in 1522, was printed by Richard Pynson on 28 January 1523 (STC 11396). According to the colophon the second volume was finished on 10 March 1525 and was printed on 31 August (STC 11397), that is the day after the treaty to end the war with France was signed at The More. Pynson's device is found at the end of the second volume and he may have shared the costs of publication. Lord Berners's translation of Froissart was republished in the 'Tudor Translations' series in six volumes edited by W. P. Ker (1901-3). 
Berners's first three translations were all of chivalric romances and histories of the type favoured by Caxton, and the prose style tends to be old-fashioned as well. After his return to England in 1526 Berners's choice of material and manner of expression changed -- perhaps as a result of exposure to new literary trends -- and his last two translations were of more up-to-date works by Spanish authors. Berners himself claimed that he undertook the translations at the request of the children of his sister Margaret, Lady Bryan, both of whom were well connected in court circles. His niece Elizabeth, the wife of one of Henry's former minions, Sir Nicholas Carew, master of the horse, asked him to translate Diego de San Pedro's 'Carcel de amor'. The resulting work, 'The Castell of Love', is a translation from the French version, 'La prison damours', published in 1525, but it includes a preface first found in the French edition of 1526, which thus gives a 'terminus a quo' for its production. It also contains a continuation by Nicolas Nunez, not found in any of the surviving early French editions, and Berners translated directly from the Spanish in this section. He consulted the Spanish original in the earlier parts too. There is no evidence that the 'Castell of Love' was published during Berners's lifetime, and the first surviving edition was printed by John Turke 'c'.1548, the second by Robert Wyer 'c'.1552, and the third by J. King 'c'.1555 (STC 21739.5-42). Berners's last work, 'The Golden Boke of Marcus Aurelius', derives from the French translation by Rene Berthault (1531) of Antonio de Guevara's 'Libro aureo de Marco Aurelio'. According to the colophon Berners completed the work on 10 March 1532; it was undertaken at the request of Sir Francis Bryan, who was a close associate of Henry VIII as well as the brother of Lady Carew. Bryan, who himself translated another work by Guevara, was probably responsible for the publication in 1535 by Thomas Berthelet (STC 12436), and the work went through at least ten editions by 1586. 
In his 'Index Britanniae scriptorum' John Bale attributes two other works to Berners -- a comedy, 'Ite in vineam' and a 'De officiis Calesianorum' -- on the authority of unnamed individuals from Calais ('ex testibus Calesiensibus'). There are no records of the former, but the latter may be the 'Ordinances for watch and ward of Calais' (BL, Cotton MS Faustina E. vii, fols. 89-102) printed in 'The Chronicle of Calais', edited by J. G. Nichols (London, 1846), pages 140-62. Bale also claims that Berners translated many books from Italian, but he gives no authority for the statement. 
No manuscripts of any of Berners's works survive and no printed books from his library can be identified. When Lady Carew's husband was executed in 1539 his goods were sequestered and Beddington Place fell to Henry VIII. According to a 'post mortem' inventory of Henry VIII's possessions, there were twenty books at Beddington. Of these, ten were copies of Froissart -- one copy described as 'Frosort', four copies of the 'premier volume of Froscoit', three copies of the 'secund volume de Froscoit/Frosart', and two of the 'third volume'. These were almost certainly books acquired by Lady Carew from her uncle. At Henry's palace at Westminster there were also copies of 'La prison damours' and the 'Livre dore de Marc Aurele' in the editions used by Berners, but this is no doubt a coincidence. 


@@@@@


doc= 2991


Bourchier, Sir John (c.1595-1660), politician and regicide, was the second but eldest surviving son of William Bourchier (1559- 'c'.1631) of Beningborough, and his wife, Katherine ('c'.1565-1623), daughter of Sir Thomas Barrington of Hatfield Broad Oak, Essex. He was descended from a family of Norman extraction, a branch of which had settled in Yorkshire during Elizabeth's reign. His father was certified a lunatic in 1598 and upon the death of his grandfather, Sir Ralph Bourchier, that same year, his wardship was granted to his mother and her brother, Sir Francis Barrington. Bourchier matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in December 1608, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 6 March 1610. He was knighted on 11 November 1619, and about a year later married Anne (died in or before 1649), daughter of William Rolfe of Hadleigh, Suffolk, with whom he had ten children. By 1625, when he was appointed a JP for all three Yorkshire ridings, his estate was valued at $2200 per annum. 
Under the tutelage of his mother and the Barringtons, Bourchier acquired a lifelong commitment to the advancement of godly religion and became closely acquainted with a number of leading puritans, including Sir William Masham, Sir William Strickland, and Henry Darley. His religious convictions may partly explain his refusal to pay the forced loan in 1627, and he gave further offence to the crown in 1633 by pulling down fences in the newly enclosed royal forest of Galtres, near York. His right of access to the forest was not recognized by Strafford or the council of the north, which fined him $1800 and detained him in custody. Deeming him mad like his father, Strafford thought Bourchier had acted 'rather out of animosity towards me... than with the least insolent thought towards his Majesty' (Radcliffe, 1.249). Bourchier looked to Strafford to help mitigate his punishment (apparently travelling to Ireland to attend him), and had his fine reduced to $1000. Although he petitioned parliament against Strafford in February 1641, he apparently disapproved of his case being used as one of the charges at the lord lieutenant's trial. 
Bourchier signed almost every Yorkshire petition of 1642 in support of parliament and godly reformation, and against the king's attempts to raise forces in the north. Early in June, while gathering support for a petition at a meeting of the Yorkshire freeholders on Heworth Moor, he had a violent altercation with the royalist peer Thomas, Viscount Savile. Soon after the outbreak of civil war, Bourchier was imprisoned at York by the royalists. Released by June 1643, he took refuge in Hull, where he was involved in the arrest of the Hothams. During 1645-6 he signed almost all the Yorkshire county committee's letters to parliament pleading that the Scottish army be removed from the region. He was returned to parliament for Ripon in the spring of 1647, probably on the interest of Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, the steward of the borough's manorial courts. He helped to mobilize the Yorkshire parliamentarian forces in 1648, and by late November had emerged as a parliamentary patron of the Independent divine Thomas Brooks. Bourchier retained his seat at Pride's Purge, registering his 'dissent' from the vote that the king's latest answer constituted grounds for further negotiation on 20 December. He attended all four sessions of the king's trial, and signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. A committed Rumper, he was elected to the third and fifth councils of state, figured prominently in the Rump's punishment of delinquents and exploitation of sequestered property, and in July 1651 obtained a grant of $6000 out of Strafford's estate (although there is no evidence that he received any of it). He was active on the Rump's army committees and was a key figure in the committee for plundered ministers and in settling ministers in sequestered livings. 
Bourchier apparently supported the Cromwellian religious settlement, being appointed a trier and ejector in 1654. With the restoration of the Rump in May 1659 he returned to Westminster, where he aligned with those anxious to rein in the Quakers. On 18 June 1660 he surrendered himself to parliament, and early in August he died, asserting to the last his support for the regicide: 'I tell you, it was a just act; God and all good men will own it' (E. Ludlow, 'Memoirs', ed. C. H. Firth, 2 vols., 1894, 2.293). He was buried on 8 August at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street. His son Barrington Bourchier, having aided the Restoration, obtained a grant of his father's estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 2992


Bourchier, Robert, first Lord Bourchier (d. 1349), administrator, was the son of Sir John Bousser (d. 1329/30), a judge of the common pleas, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Walter of Colchester. The family's estates lay in Essex, where Robert later added substantially to them, especially in and around Halstead. He is first recorded in 1318, and later appears to have been employed by the de Vere earls of Oxford, whose estates were concentrated in Essex, but from the late 1320s he also served the crown. In 1327 he accompanied Sir Bartholomew Burghersh on a diplomatic mission to Charles IV of France. He was returned as a knight of the shire for Essex to the parliaments of 1328-9, 1330 (twice), 1332 (once), and 1339 (both). In 1329 he was a commissioner of the peace in Essex, and during the 1330s he was appointed to a modest number of judicial commissions, nearly all in that county, but there is no evidence that he received a formal legal training, and though in 1334 he was appointed chief justice of the justiciar's bench in Ireland, he never took up office. If anything he pursued a military career. He was ordered to join the invasion of Scotland in the summer of 1335, and though the mistaken belief that he fought at Cadsand in November 1337 is attributable to an error (subsequently often repeated) by his descendant John Bourchier, Lord Berners, in the latter's translation of Froissart, in July 1338 he was in the company of the earl of Northampton, when the earl accompanied Edward III to Flanders. He also established links with Hugh Audley, earl of Gloucester, from whom he was receiving a fee of $100 per annum by 1340. 
On 14 December 1340 Bourchier was appointed chancellor of England, the first layman to hold that office. The context of his appointment was Edward III's quarrel with Archbishop John Stratford, over the alleged failure of the English administration to support the king's war effort in Flanders and France. The primate's brother Ralph Stratford, bishop of Chichester, was dismissed as chancellor, and Bourchier was chosen to replace him, presumably as a competent man of affairs who could be relied upon to do the king's bidding. His relative lack of personal means, which led to special arrangements having to be made to finance the chancery clerks in his household, and to the king's providing an annual fee of $100 to replace the one Bourchier had been receiving from Audley, was doubtless a positive advantage in Edward's eyes, since it made the new chancellor more dependent upon royal favour than an ecclesiastical magnate could be trusted to be. Bourchier appears to have fulfilled the king's expectations. In the first parliament of 1341, along with Bishop Orleton of Winchester and Sir John Darcy, he urged the archbishop to submit to the king. And though the parliament extracted the king's assent to articles requiring that officers of state be appointed and sworn in parliament, Bourchier protested against the king's concession, and it was later repealed. 
Bourchier resigned as chancellor on 27 October 1341, but continued to serve as a member of the king's council; in 1345 a debt to the crown was specifically remitted for his good services in this respect. He also served the king again as a soldier, in the autumn of 1342 accompanying Edward to Brittany in command of a contingent of men-at-arms. But the 'sires de Boursier' whom Froissart records as fighting in the division of Edward, the Black Prince, at the battle of Crecy in 1346 may well have been Bourchier's son and heir, John, born of his marriage (by 1329) to Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Prayers of Sible Hedingham and his wife, Anne, daughter of Hugh of Essex. In the late 1340s Robert Bourchier was once more employed as a diplomat. In 1347 he was among those empowered to negotiate a truce with France, and early in 1348 he was commissioned to accompany the king's daughter Joan to Spain, there to marry the future Pedro I of Castile, but she fell victim to plague at Bordeaux. In November 1348 he received a personal summons to parliament, and is consequently regarded as having become Lord Bourchier. Robert Bourchier died between 12 March and 18 August 1349, probably of the black death, and was buried at Halstead, where he had intended to found a college of eight chaplains. 


@@@@@


doc= 2993


Bourchier, Thomas (c.1411-1486), cardinal and archbishop of Canterbury, was probably the second son of William Bourchier, count of Eu (c.1374-1420), and Anne of Woodstock, daughter and heir of Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, and granddaughter of Edward III. His mother's second marriage, to Edmund Stafford, fifth earl of Stafford, created links that would be important for the children of her third marriage. Like his brothers (the eldest, Henry Bourchier, who was created earl of Essex by Edward IV, and William and John, who were to be summoned to parliament respectively as lords Fitzwarine and Berners), Thomas owed much to his mother's royal and aristocratic connections. So, too, did their sister, Eleanor, who married John (VI) Mowbray, third duke of Norfolk (died 1461). 
At some point after his father's death Thomas Bourchier was sent to Oxford, and despite his youth he rapidly gained preferment in the church. By April 1427 he was master of the hospital of St Mary Magdalene at Paull in Yorkshire; on 1 December following, the council of regency offered him the deanery of St Martin's-le-Grand, London; and prebends in five different cathedrals fell to him within the next six years. He entered holy orders on 24 September 1429, being ordained acolyte and subdeacon in the diocese of London. By his mother's presentation in 1432 he secured a canonry in the royal free chapel of St Mary in Hastings Castle, linked with the prebend of West Thurrock in Essex. When Thomas Polton, bishop of Worcester, died at Basel on 23 August 1433, the candidacy of Bourchier, who by then had graduated MA at Oxford, was promoted by his kinsman Cardinal Beaufort to fill the vacancy, even though he was much younger than the minimum age for consecration as a bishop required under the provisions of the Council of Constance. The process of his elevation to the see lasted over eighteen months and involved lengthy negotiations with the papal court, as Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47) had already nominated Thomas Brouns, dean of Salisbury (died 1445), as Polton's successor. Bourchier's election by the prior and chapter on 9 December was prompted by a letter of recommendation from the royal council, and the support of the Commons in parliament, who laid stress on his royal blood and his outstanding abilities. A letter of fulsome praise of his academic record was sent by Oxford University to the pope, to whose ruling Bourchier formally submitted on 27 December. Eventually, on 21 February 1435 Brouns was translated to Rochester and the pope cancelled his previous nomination to Worcester by an antedated bull in favour of Bourchier, whose nomination therefore bears the date 9 March 1434. When Bourchier was consecrated, on 14 March 1435, it was on the strength of a provision in which the pope declared that he had 'hitherto promoted no one of the like age to a cathedral church' ('CEPR letters', 1427-1447, 213-19). The temporalities of the see were restored to him on 15 April. 
In the course of the negotiations, at some point before 20 March 1434, Bourchier had been made chancellor of his university, a position he held for three years. He conducted his business in Nevill's Inn, one of the buildings that occupied the site of what is now Corpus Christi College. On 25 October 1435 the bishopric of Ely fell vacant. The chapter agreed to postulate Bourchier, who sent messengers to Rome to procure 'bulls' for his translation from Worcester, but despite the papal provision in this instance he lacked the support of the king's ministers, who had a number of other preferred candidates for the see, which ultimately went to Louis de Luxembourg, archbishop of Rouen, in 1437. It was not until the latter died in 1443 that Bourchier was nominated by the king and elected by the chapter. Having received a bull for his translation, dated 20 December 1443, he was confirmed and had the temporalities restored to him on 27 February 1444. His conduct as bishop was adversely criticized by the historian of the monastery of Ely, who asserted that Bourchier had never celebrated mass in his own cathedral except on the day of his installation. Although there is ample evidence for his attendance on Henry VI's council at Westminster and elsewhere, Bourchier's registers for Worcester and Ely nevertheless show that he was conscientious about residing in both dioceses. He spent considerably more time at Worcester than he did away from it, at any rate after July 1437, while as bishop of Ely he resided in his diocese at least once a year, usually in the summer. Perhaps it was the fact that he never seems to have stayed at Ely itself that was resented in that house. 
Bourchier was increasingly employed as a conciliator in disputes between his peers, a role for which he was apparently qualified not only by profession but also by temperament, for he was evidently regarded with genuine feelings of trust. Sir John Fastolf (died 1459), generally suspicious of the motives of his contemporaries, referred to him as 'one of the lords earthly that I most trust upon' ('Paston Letters', 2.109). Bourchier intervened to defuse violent local disputes between lords, as part of a process of applying his energies to matters of high political moment. In the critical days of February 1452 he was among the lords most closely occupied in preventing civil war by reaching terms with the duke of York, and on other occasions he engaged in arduous and delicate diplomacy as an arbitrator, reaching complex landed settlements. He was named as a mediator in the quarrels between the dukes of York and Somerset, and between the duke of Exeter and Lord Cromwell. 
Bourchier's stature increased in the winter of 1453-4 after Henry VI was struck by an incapacitating mental illness, and at the beginning of the third session of parliament in February 1454 it was he who, in the king's name, charged the Commons to elect a new speaker. When Cardinal John Kemp, the archbishop of Canterbury and chancellor, died on 22 March, Bourchier joined the deputation of lords in parliament who rode to Windsor the next day to inform the king and seek his guidance, but Henry failed to respond. Accordingly, the Lords appointed York as protector, and on 30 March the council, in compliance with a petition from the Commons, recommended Bourchier's promotion to the see of Canterbury, 'for his great merits, virtues and great blood that he is of' ('Proceedings... of the Privy Council', 6.168). On 6 April the temporalities of Canterbury were committed to two of his brothers, his half-brother the duke of Buckingham, and other well-wishers. He was translated from Ely on 21 June, and the temporalities were restored to him on 6 August. On 6 September William Paston wrote 'My lord of Canterbury hath received his cross, and I was with him in the king's chamber when he made his homage' ('Paston Letters', 1.155-6). He was enthroned on 24 January 1455, following the king's recovery. On 7 March he was appointed chancellor, in place of York's ally the earl of Salisbury, and received the seals at Greenwich. Meanwhile, he had helped pave the way for Somerset's release from the Tower of London, yet, remarkably, apparently also retained the confidence of York, despite the failure of his attempts to mediate between them, and his acceptance of office in Henry VI's revived court regime. It was to Bourchier as chancellor and archbishop that York and his allies wrote to declare their peaceable intentions in May 1455, claiming that they were marching south to do the king service and to vindicate their loyalty. Bourchier allegedly sent a special messenger to the king at Kilburn, but this man was not allowed to come into the royal presence, so the opportunity to prevent armed conflict was lost. Following the Yorkist victory at the battle of St Albans on 22 May Bourchier was retained as chancellor, and his brother Henry (York's brother-in-law) was made treasurer a week later. The archbishop made the opening speech to the assembled Lords and Commons on 9 July, and it was he who prorogued the parliament at the end of the month. In October, after news of the murder of Nicholas Radford and the breakdown of order in the west country 'was told to my Lord Chaunceler' ('Paston Letters', 2.127), the Lords in parliament reluctantly agreed to York's reappointment as protector, and on 17 November Bourchier announced the royal assent. He then survived both York's brief eminence and its peremptory conclusion. In the summer of 1456 he and his brother, the treasurer, attempted to carry on the business of government in London by holding a great council there, but the focus of power was shifting to the midlands, to the queen, Margaret of Anjou, and her supporters. A few months later both brothers were suddenly discharged from office, Thomas Bourchier being dismissed on 11 October. Their half-brother Buckingham, attending a great council at Coventry in October, was reported to have taken their dismissal 'right straungely' ('Paston Letters', 2.165). Nevertheless, the archbishop continued his endeavours as a peacemaker, and the temporary reconciliation of the factions in the spring of 1458 is largely attributable to his efforts. He needed also to deal with conflict within the church. In the previous year he had cited Reginald Pecock, bishop of Chichester, to appear before him to answer charges of heresy. On receiving an adverse verdict from the commission to which Pecock's works had been committed for examination, he faced him with the alternative of abjuration or burning; when Pecock chose the former and resigned his see, he had him confined at Canterbury. At Bourchier's request the Augustinian friar John Bury wrote his 'Gladius Salomonis' as a reply to Pecock's 'Repressor'. 
Immediately following the flight of the Yorkists, after the confrontation at Ludford on 12 October 1459, Bourchier joined his brothers and Buckingham in taking oaths of allegiance to Henry VI at the Coventry parliament in November. It may have been the attainder of two of his nephews (Thomas and John, the sons of his brother Henry) in the same parliament, and his increasing impotence as the queen's party grew in strength, that made him more partisan. By the summer of 1460 the Yorkist earls were confident of his help. Before crossing the channel from Calais they forwarded to him copies of their manifesto, and he met them at Sandwich and rode with his cross borne before them to London, which admitted them on 2 July. Next day he opened a session of a convocation at St Paul's to which the earls recited their grievances. It was resolved that he and five of his suffragans should accompany the Yorkist army to Northampton to use their diplomatic skills to obtain a peaceful settlement with the king. These efforts failed, and in the ensuing battle, on 10 July, Bourchier's half-brother Buckingham died fighting on the Lancastrian side. Henry VI was escorted into London by the Yorkists, and Bourchier was temporarily given custody of the seals, until the 25th. His brother Henry was again made treasurer, and they and the Nevilles assumed control over the administration. Even so, the archbishop was not yet ready to co-operate in the deposition of the king. York apparently failed to consult him before making his dramatic entry into the parliament chamber to claim the throne on 10 October, and Bourchier immediately showed that he did not condone the duke's repudiation of allegiance. However, two weeks later the Lords including Bourchier agreed to the compromise by which York should succeed after Henry VI's death. Only in February 1461, after York had been killed at Wakefield, and when the triumphant queen's forces were threatening London, did the archbishop concur that York's son Edward, earl of March, should be set on the throne in Henry's place. Initially he had fled with the chancellor, Bishop George Neville (died 1476), to Canterbury, awaiting better news, but they returned to London where, at a meeting of the earl's council on 3 March, they agreed that Edward was now rightful king. 
Bourchier's support for Edward IV from the first day of his reign is unquestionable. He was immediately ordained to be a councillor, with a salary of $200 per annum, and on 28 June he set the crown upon Edward's head. Four years later, on 26 May 1465, he also crowned Edward's queen, Elizabeth Woodville. His wholehearted commitment to the new regime extended to financial support, both for the king himself, in the form of loans, and for the king's brothers, whom he assisted 'for a long time at great charges' ('CPR', '1467-77', 295-6). Furthermore, he took on the trusteeship of estates belonging to other members of the royal family. It was a sign of his standing that from time to time he was commissioned to prorogue or dissolve parliaments in the king's place. For example, he dissolved parliament during Edward's absence on 2 May 1462, and acted as his locum for part of that of 1463-5. As a reward, and also as a means of obtaining a show of papal support for the Yorkist dynasty, the king petitioned Pope Paul II ('r'. 1464-71) to make Bourchier a cardinal in 1465, and it appears that he was actually named accordingly on 18 September 1467, although several years elapsed before the red hat was sent and his title of cardinal-priest of San Ciriaco in Thermis formally acknowledged in England. In 1469 the pope wrote to the king, promising that it should be dispatched shortly, but the readeption of Henry VI no doubt delayed its transmission further, and it was only sent by the succeeding pope, Sixtus IV ('r'. 1471-84), in 1473. It was reported that Edward IV teased George Neville, now archbishop of York, by sending him the papal letter of 1467 naming Bourchier as a cardinal, when Neville had been blatantly seeking a similar position in Rome, and this may have soured Bourchier's own relations with the Nevilles, who at the start of the readeption had him arrested. Although he was released and summoned to the 1470 parliament, he and his brother Essex secretly worked for Edward's restoration both by mediating with the duke of Clarence, whom they succeeded in winning over to his brother's cause, and by raising armed retinues to bolster Edward's forces. The archbishop sent a timely warning to Edward not to land at Cromer, Norfolk, which was well defended, and following his successful landing further north Bourchier welcomed him to London on 11 April 1471. After the victory at Barnet on the 14th he was among the first to acknowledge Edward's newly born son as prince of Wales, and was one of those appointed to counsel the prince and administer his lands during his minority. In the 1470s Bourchier remained a prominent member of the king's council, and in 1475 when Edward IV set out with his army for France, he was nominated to the executive body left in control of English affairs. In the agreement made between Edward IV and Louis XI at Picquigny, the cardinal was named as one of just four arbitrators (two from each country) to whom the differences between England and France were referred. Rewards for Bourchier's services included valuable wardships, notably those of the heirs of the duke of Buckingham and Lord Latimer. 
In 1480, feeling the effects of age, Bourchier appointed a suffragan, but three years later, after the unexpected death of Edward IV, he was again called upon to take part in public affairs. On 2 May 1483 the young Edward V, on his way to London, wrote to him requesting him to see to the safety of the Tower and the treasure there, and five days later Bourchier took official custody of the royal jewels and seals, as the executors of Edward IV's will hesitated to act. He saw that the funeral expenses of nearly $1500 were paid. Surprisingly, during the critical two weeks at the end of May and beginning of June he withdrew from London to Knole, but then, on 16 June, as the head of a deputation from the council, he played a crucial part in persuading the king's mother to deliver up her second son, Richard, duke of York, from sanctuary at Westminster to the keeping of his uncle the protector, Richard of Gloucester. To what extent deception was practised on him by the protector remains uncertain. Domenico Mancini, an eyewitness, claimed that Gloucester surrounded the abbey with troops, and that the cardinal, 'suspecting no guile', sought only to prevent violation of the sanctuary ('Usurpation', 88). There is no reason to suppose that he either encouraged or resisted Gloucester's usurpation, although it may well have caused him unease. He crowned him Richard III on 6 July, although Mancini says he was reluctant to do so, and he did not attend the coronation banquet. His favourite nephew, Sir Thomas Bourchier of Berners, joined the rebellion against the new king in the autumn, and the archbishop thought it prudent to procure a royal pardon for himself on 8 December. Henceforth there is no record of his attendance on Richard's council. He crowned Henry VII on 30 October 1485, and on 18 January 1486 married him to Elizabeth of York. 
In 1456 Bourchier had purchased from Lord Saye and Sele the manor of Knole in Sevenoaks, which he adopted as a favourite residence, altered substantially, and bequeathed to the see of Canterbury. Margaret Paston had remarked in 1469 that he was 'an old man' who might 'happe to dye' at any moment ('Paston Letters', 1.337), but he lived on for seventeen more years. In his will, dated 27 March 1486, he left several valuable images, jewels, and vestments, and a great bowl of gold (this last to be kept as a family heirloom). His bequests of $100 each to the universities for the creation of loan chests to benefit poor scholars, while generous, nevertheless compare poorly with the great foundations at Oxford of his contemporaries Henry Chichele and William Waynflete. He died at Knole three days later, and was buried beneath an imposing monument next to the high altar in Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 2994


Bourchier, Thomas (d. c.1586), Observant Franciscan friar, is of obscure origins. Wadding and Sbaralea suggested that he might be identical with another Franciscan, Thomas Langton, but Parkinson has Langton and Bourchier as two distinct men. Thomas was descended from the Bourchiers who were earls of Bath, but his place of birth is unknown. He was educated at Magdalen College, Oxford, and went to Paris for religious reasons, where he became a Franciscan, if he was not one before then. Wolfgang Eder, the printer of the Ingoldstadt edition (1583) of Bourchier's 'Historia', said on good authority that Bourchier entered the order in 1566, which would suggest that he died in his forties. However, Davenport said that he became a Franciscan at Greenwich in the reign of Queen Mary, and Gillow gives the year 1558. 
Bourchier received a doctorate in theology at the Sorbonne, and was highly respected for holiness and learning. He eventually went to Rome, stayed at the Aracoeli friary, and was appointed a penitentiary at the basilica of St John Lateran. He wrote much, said John Pits, who knew him. At the time of his death he was, according to the rather prejudiced Robert Parsons, 'younge, stronge, lustie, and vehement in the faction' against the Jesuits in the setting up of the English College in Rome. In 1585 a 'frier boutser' ('Memoirs') corresponded with Sir Francis Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's secretary of state, perhaps officially, about moderation in matters of religion. 
Thomas Bourchier's reputation rests principally on his work as an ecclesiastical historian. The first edition of his history was entitled 'Historia ecclesiastica de martyrio fratrum ordinis divi Francisci, dictorum de observantia', and was printed in Paris in 1582. The book covered the period between 1536 and 1582. Well aware of the death of many at home and abroad for religious reasons, Bourchier wrote accounts of five Observant Franciscan martyrs in England; other martyrs in the Netherlands and the Spanish Netherlands; two Irish martyrs, Bishop Patrick O'Healy and Conn O'Rourke (beatified in 1992); and finally the martyrs of Flanders, including the Scot John Gray. The title and contents were rearranged in the Ingoldstadt edition of 1583. Bourchier's 'Historia' was the first published account of the martyrs, and is important for the transmission of the 'fama martyrii'. That his work is generally reliable is clear from the detailed account of the two Irish martyrs (died 1579), which he probably got from an Irish source in Paris; Bourchier had, in fact, lived for a while with O'Healy and O'Rourke in the Paris friary, 1578-9. Pages 185-234 read like a long sermon or address on self-defence in the fight against evil and the consequences of being overcome, using examples from the animal world. This is applied to Henry VIII and Elizabeth I, who were learned persons; Bourchier said Elizabeth knew Latin, Greek, French, Italian, Spanish, and German. According to Allison and Rogers the account of the Flemish martyrs is by Florentinus van Oyen of Leiden. There were several further editions of Bourchier's work, which were used by many Franciscan chroniclers and others. He did not edit, as was thought, the Latin translation by Socolovius of 'Censura orientalis ecclesiae' by Hieremias II, patriarch of Constantinople. He had hoped to publish the 'Liber ad fratres' of the English martyr Thomas Belchiam, written to inspire the friars and others to stand firm in their faith. 
Thomas Bourchier died at the basilica of St John Lateran, Rome, about 1586. He was probably buried with the friars of Aracoeli. 


@@@@@


doc= 2995


Bourdillon, James Dewar (1811-1883), administrator in India, was the second son of Thomas Bourdillon (died 1854), vicar of Fenstanton and Hilton, Huntingdonshire, and his wife, formerly Miss Dewar. He was educated partly by his father, and partly at a school at Ramsgate; having been nominated to a writership in the East India Company, he went to the East India College, Haileybury, in 1828, and in 1829 to Madras. After serving in various subordinate appointments in the provinces, he was appointed secretary to the board of revenue, and in 1854 secretary to government in the departments of revenue and public works. He was one of three members of a commission appointed to report upon the system of public works in the Madras presidency. The report of the commission, which was written by Bourdillon and published in 1856, emphasized the importance of irrigation and improved communications for the prevention of famines and the development of the country. Bourdillon was also the author of a treatise on the often misunderstood ryotwari system of land revenue, under which land rights were settled and revenues assessed on the ryots (individual cultivators) and which was characteristic of Madras. With Sir Thomas Pycroft he reformed the transaction of public business in the provinces and at the presidency, especially the reporting of the proceedings of local Madras government to the government of India and the secretary of state. 
Bourdillon's health failed in 1861, and he was compelled to leave India and to retire from the civil service without achieving as high an appointment as he might have expected. He continued his interest in India, particularly financial questions, occasionally contributing to the 'Calcutta Review'. He died suddenly at his home, 10 Calverley Park Gardens, Tunbridge Wells, on 21 May 1883 leaving a widow, Anne, and two sons, one of whom was in the Bengal civil service. 


@@@@@


doc= 2996


Bourgeois, Sir (Peter) Francis (1756-1811), landscape painter and founder of the Dulwich Picture Gallery, was given to obfuscation and romance where his origins were concerned; but he was born in London, the son of Issac Bourgeois ('b'. 1707/8), who was of Swiss descent, and his wife, Elizabeth Gardin (died 'c'.1766), an Englishwoman presumably of Huguenot stock. Issac was a watchmaker in St Martin's Lane, who, Benjamin West told Joseph Farington, left England on the death of his wife, abandoning both the young Francis and his sister. Bourgeois told Farington (who, like West, was a friend) that he was looked after by his future dealing partner Noel Desenfans from the age of ten, his sister being sent to Switzerland. However, Bourgeois's account may not be accurate, given Desenfans's circumstances about 1766, but it does seem certain that Bourgeois was under Desenfans's care from about 1776. He lived thereafter with Desenfans and his wife, Margaret Morris. 
Desenfans arranged for Bourgeois to be taught by P. J. de Loutherbourg, whose style of painting he adopted, although hardly justifying his own aim 'to attain Mr. Loutherbourg in execution, Mr. Gainsborough in colour and Mr. [Richard] Wilson in forms and grandeur' (Whitley, 2.142). In 1776, as part of his training, Desenfans sent Bourgeois on a tour of France, the Netherlands, Italy, and Switzerland. The grand design, of forming an important artist out of a minimal talent, culminated in Bourgeois's election first as an associate of the Royal Academy (1787) and then as an academician (1793), following much 'puffing' in the press orchestrated by Desenfans and the lavish entertainment of academicians. The campaign was lent weight by the award in 1791 of a knighthood (or its equivalent) to Bourgeois by StanisLaw August, king of Poland, who made him his official painter. The knighthood came about through a visit of Prince Michael Poniatowski, the king of Poland's brother, to London in 1790, when he asked Desenfans to devote himself to creating a major art collection for the king. The title was recognized in the same year by George III, who appointed Bourgeois his landscape painter in 1794. Between 1779 and 1810 Bourgeois exhibited 103 pictures at the Royal Academy (and five at the British Institution). Contemporaries were by no means always impressed with his work, but he was evidently charming in a dandiacal way: the poet and critic Leigh Hunt said of him: 'His oath and buckskin would never allow me to consider him a serious person' (Waterfield, 17). 
Bourgeois and Desenfans were very much a dealing partnership, even though Bourgeois was 'officially' a painter first and foremost, and Desenfans liked to pretend that his pictures were merely the collection of a gentleman. They were busy as dealers in the 1780s and, after 1786, when the household moved to 38 and 39 Charlotte Street, Portland Place (now Hallam Street), they might hang as many as 360 important pictures, with no fewer than fourteen Poussins in the dining-room. The Polish collection was the high point of their dealing activities but also very nearly their downfall. In 1795 Poland was partitioned, StanisLaw abdicated, and Desenfans and Bourgeois had 180 paintings suddenly 'in stock', after an outlay, so Desenfans claimed, of $9000. 
An auction of the Polish paintings held in 1802 was not a success. In any case, Bourgeois was intent upon keeping many of the Polish pictures, as well as others acquired from such sales as that held in 1795 (handled by Desenfans) of pictures from the important collection of Charles-Antoine de Calonne, including Poussin's 'Triumph of David' and Rembrandt's 'Portrait of a Young Man'. Bourgeois, Desenfans complained, continued to buy pictures 'like a child who wishes for everything in a toy shop' (Waterfield, 22). When, however, Desenfans died in 1807 he left all the pictures to Bourgeois, and the rest of his property to Bourgeois and his widow. It sheds credit on both that they seem to have worked harmoniously from then on to keep the collection intact, aiming to make it freely available to the public. 
Although Bourgeois stated late in life that these were the wishes of Desenfans, they were more probably his own. In 1810 he unsuccessfully tried to buy the freehold of the house in Charlotte Street so that the house 'may be gratuitously open to artists as well as to the publick' (Waterfield, 22). By December that year, according to Farington, the British Museum's unpredictable 'aristocracy' had turned him against that institution as a possible destination. In his will he therefore left over 350 pictures to Mrs Desenfans on condition that she left them in turn to Dulwich College. Bourgeois was prompted to make his will after suffering a fall from his horse on 20 December 1810; he died, unmarried, on 8 January 1811. 
The Bourgeois bequest included, as something of a poisoned chalice, twenty-one of his own pictures, wildly disparate in subject matter and handling (from 'William Tell' to 'Tobias and the Angel', 'A Tiger Hunt', portraits, and landscapes) but uniformly bad in quality. Bourgeois also left an endowment for the collection of $10,000, and $2000 to create a new gallery at Dulwich College after Mrs Desenfans's death. She, however, wanted work to start at once 'to see the wishes and intentions of her dear Friend Sir Francis Bourgeois carried into effect' (Waterfield, 27), and to give the pictures to the college as soon as a gallery was ready. With her additional financial help, a gallery designed by Sir John Soane (as Bourgeois had wished) was swiftly built, incorporating a mausoleum (as had initially been erected in 1807 by Soane for Desenfans's body at the back of the Charlotte Street house). In March 1815 Bourgeois was interred in the mausoleum within the Dulwich Picture Gallery, together with both the Desenfanses. And so in death, as in life, 'they were not divided'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2997


Bourke, Sir Richard (1777-1855), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 4 May 1777 in Britain Street, Dublin, the only son of John Bourke of Dromsally, co. Limerick, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Edmund Ryan of Boscable, co. Tipperary. He was educated at Westminster School (1788-93) and at Oriel College, Oxford (BA 1798). He was gazetted ensign by purchase in the Grenadier Guards on 22 November 1798 and while on active service in the Netherlands in 1799 was shot through both jaws. In later life he felt that this wound prevented him from speaking forcefully in public and declined all invitations to stand for parliament. On 22 March 1800 he married Elizabeth Jane, daughter of John Bourke of Carshalton, Surrey. They had seven children: John (who was an invalid), Mary Jane, Anne, Frances, Richard (Dick), and two daughters who died in infancy. 
By 27 August 1805 Bourke had attained the rank of major and in 1806 became superintendent of the junior department of the Royal Military College, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He was on active service in South America, and as quartermaster-general took part in the storming of Montevideo in 1807. In 1809 he was appointed permanent assistant in the quartermaster-general's department and served in the Peninsular War. He had learned Spanish and was sent by Wellesley to contact Cuesta, the commander-in-chief of the Spanish army. In 1809 Bourke learned that his wife was gravely ill and was granted leave to return to England. On returning to Spain, he was stationed at Corunna as military resident from 1812 to 1814. In addition to his overt duties, he arranged a spy ring to gather information on enemy movements and conditions behind the enemy lines, drawing on a special secret service account to cover expenses. He was promoted colonel on 4 June 1814 and was made a CB. 
After the war Bourke retired on half-pay and lived on his estate, Thornfield, Castleconnell, in co. Limerick. He managed his estate, became a magistrate and chairman of the Irish Distress Committee for Limerick. In 1825, finding his income inadequate for the needs of his family, he sought an appointment overseas. The tories were in power and although he was an avowed whig he made a good impression at the Colonial Office and was appointed lieutenant-governor of the Eastern District of Cape Colony. He and his family arrived in Cape Town in February 1826. When the governor, Lord Charles Somerset, returned to England on leave (and later resigned), Bourke assumed office as acting governor of the whole colony. 
Bourke's task was not easy. The minority white population, both British and Dutch, were dissatisfied with the government, the laws were uncodified, and many of the officials inefficient and corrupt. The economy was depressed and the colony in debt. Bourke removed local dues and restrictions and by seeking markets in Mauritius and elsewhere increased exports appreciably. Government control of the press was much resented and on Bourke's recommendation its independence was secured by statute in 1829. He was instructed to reorganize the government according to the recommendations of a commission of inquiry appointed by the British government; this difficult task was accomplished by May 1828. 
The most controversial part of Bourke's governorship (which was regarded either as 'Bourke's wicked reign' or as most enlightened) was his native policy. He tried to improve the conditions of free persons of colour who were bound by oppressive labour contracts and subject to a pass system which prevented them from moving freely in search of better-paid work. On 17 June 1828, after the courts had been reformed, the council passed ordinance 50 which liberated them from the pass laws and protected them from exploitation; it came to be known as the 'Magna Carta of the Hottentots'. 
Bourke and his family left the Cape in September 1828 and returned to Thornfield. When the whigs took office in 1830, he again sought a post and was appointed governor of New South Wales, Australia. He arrived in Sydney in December 1831; to his great sorrow, his wife died at Parramatta in May 1832. He found the colony deeply divided between the 'exclusive' faction made up of free immigrants and their descendants and the 'liberals' who included many emancipists (former convicts). His policies were favoured by the latter and often opposed by the former. One of his controversial measures was the substitution of civil for military juries in criminal cases, which the legislative council, though still wholly nominated, passed only on Bourke's casting vote. Another concerned the criminal law relating to convicts. He found that magistrates were not always impartial and attributed this in part to the complexity of existing regulations. He asked Chief Justice Forbes to draft a single bill consolidating the law and reducing the magistrates' powers. It was passed by the legislature but severely criticized by many landowners and in the press. 
Another controversial issue related to religion. Bourke had seen the evil effects of sectarian intolerance in Ireland and believed that there should be no attempt to establish a dominant colonial church. Despite opposition from the Anglican Bishop Broughton, 'Church Acts' were passed by the legislature in 1836 which gave support from public funds to the major denominations in proportion to their numbers. 
A further important measure was the 'Crown Lands Occupation Act' of 1836, which provided for the issuing of occupation licences for pastoral purposes on unsurveyed crown land. Much of this had been illegally occupied by squatters to the detriment of the revenue. Under Bourke's legislation commissioners of crown lands were appointed to collect licence fees and also to act as magistrates. Many squatters had crossed the straits from Van Diemen's Land and settled in the Port Phillip district (later Victoria). In 1836 Bourke appointed a resident magistrate for Port Phillip and in 1837 himself visited the area, had a plan of streets drawn up, and the first building sites measured and offered for sale. 'I have had much pleasure in affixing Whig names in the Bush,' he wrote. He travelled widely throughout the colony and he strongly supported the British government's plans for 'assisting' migration by introducing the 'bounty' system, whereby those who arranged to bring out approved migrants were paid a bounty from the crown land revenue. This brought out 50,000 migrants between 1838 and 1842, though while Bourke was governor arriving convicts and free migrants had already raised the population he had to deal with from 51,000 in 1831 to over 97,000 in 1838. 
Bourke resigned his office in December 1837. C. D. Riddell, the colonial treasurer, had disobeyed his orders and Bourke dismissed him from the executive council. The secretary of state ruled that he had no power to do so and ordered that Riddell be reinstated. Believing that his personal honour was in jeopardy, Bourke resigned. The popular esteem in which he was held was shown by the great ovation the crowd gave him as he left the colony. A fund was opened, and rapidly filled, to erect his statue, which stands before the Public Library of New South Wales, in Sydney. 
Bourke had been made KCB in 1835 and gazetted lieutenant-general and colonel-in-chief of the 64th regiment in 1837. In 1839 he was appointed high sheriff for the county of Limerick; he was offered, but declined, the governorship of Jamaica and the command-in-chief of the forces in India; he was promoted general in 1851. In collaboration with Earl Fitzwilliam, he edited the correspondence of his kinsman Edmund Burke, published in 1844. Bourke died of heart failure at Thornfield, on 13 August 1855, and was buried in the churchyard at Castleconnell. 


@@@@@


doc= 2998


Bourke, Richard Southwell, sixth earl of Mayo (1822-1872), viceroy of India, was the eldest son of Robert Bourke (1797-1867), who succeeded his uncle as fifth earl of Mayo in 1849, and his wife, Anne (or Annie) Charlotte Jocelyn (died 1867). Born in Dublin on 21 February 1822, the eldest of ten children, he grew up in an evangelical household at Hayes in co. Meath. Robert Bourke was a younger brother. He was educated at home, and in 1841 entered Trinity College, Dublin, where, without going into residence, he took an ordinary degree. Bourke was not a highly educated man, but became an accomplished sportsman. 
In 1845 Bourke visited Russia, and on his return published an acutely observed account of his tour, 'St Petersburg and Moscow: a Visit to the Court of the Czar' (2 vols., 1846). In 1847 he was active in famine relief in Ireland, and at the general election was returned as a protectionist for co. Kildare. On 31 October 1848 he married Blanche Julia Wyndham (1826-1918), daughter of George, first Lord Leconfield. They were to have four sons and three daughters; the eldest daughter died an infant in 1851. In 1849 his father succeeded to the earldom of Mayo, and Bourke assumed the courtesy title Lord Naas. In 1852 he was appointed chief secretary for Ireland in Lord Derby's administration, and held the same office in subsequent Conservative administrations until his appointment as viceroy of India by Disraeli in 1868, having succeeded to the Irish earldom in 1867. 
Mayo sat in the House of Commons as member for co. Kildare from 1847 to 1852, for Coleraine from 1852 to 1857, and for Cockermouth from 1857 to 1868. As chief secretary, he became the acknowledged manager of the Conservative Party in Ireland, and a significant factor in the relative electoral successes of his party in Ireland at the mid-century. In particular, he was largely responsible for the limited electoral agreement with the Independent Party between 1857 and 1859, which was of great advantage to the Conservatives in Ireland. He opposed the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland, but gradually became less sectarian in his opinions. He was resolute in his handling of the Fenian crisis of the 1860s, but in 1867 he encountered difficulties in dealing with the Orangeman William Johnstone of Ballykilbeg. Despite initially opposing it, he came to support compensating tenants for improvements made without the consent of their landlords. He has been described as one of those 'efficient, loyal and dedicated politicians of the second rank without whose constant hard work the tedious chores so necessary for success tend to remain undone' (Hoppen, 293). 
In 1868 Disraeli selected him for the governor-generalship of India, which Mayo had long coveted. The Conservative ministry had in fact resigned before the office became vacant, and, despite the fact that Mayo had already sailed for India, Gladstone seriously contemplated cancelling the appointment, believing that a viceroy should not be appointed by a government in its last agony. However, the recall was not issued. Energetic, buoyant, and self-assured, Mayo had no preconceived ideas about India and made his own policies based on the facts as he came to see them. 
Sworn in as governor-general at Calcutta on 12 January 1869, the first question which engaged the new viceroy's attention was the relationship with the neighbouring state of Afghanistan. Mayo's predecessor, John Lawrence, advised him to meet the amir, Sher Ali, as the civil war of succession seemed to have ended after six years. Approving of the decision to aid the restoration of settled government in that country, Mayo arranged to meet the amir at Ambala in the Punjab in March 1869. As it had been widely reported that Sher Ali was under the control of Russia and Persia, the effect of such a meeting would be considerable throughout central Asia. Sher Ali, on his part, made no secret of his desire to meet the viceroy. As in March the government of India would be in transit from Delhi to the summer capital, Simla, no impression would be given of deviating from normal arrangements; and by making the venue Ambala and not Peshawar, which was nearer Afghanistan, it was implied that the meeting had been sought by the amir, rather than the viceroy. No approval for the meeting was sought from London, the government merely suggesting that Lawrence's policy of reserve and abstention from central Asian politics be maintained. 
In matters of ceremonial Mayo, to the amir's satisfaction, treated him as an equal. The viceroy's main objectives were the creation of a strong and independent government in Afghanistan, total abstinence from interference in its internal affairs, the development and promotion of trade with central Asia, access to information about events in that region, and a frontier that was well policed. A middle path between interference and inaction, a policy of watchful friendly relations, was the safest course. The advance of Russia could be checked mainly by pushing British commerce northwards. The British would assist the amir -- without intervening in the domestic affairs of Afghanistan or pushing troops or residents into his country -- to form a strong and permanent government in return for increased facilities for trade, and measures to maintain order in those portions of the border over which the amir had any influence. Mayo resisted, on his own responsibility, Sher Ali's demands for British refusal to recognize anybody else as amir, for a fixed and increased subsidy, and for a treaty of mutual assistance. All that he would offer was an assurance of 'cordial countenance and some additional support as it may be advisable', a siege battery, 6000 muskets, and a letter of general support discouraging Sher Ali's foes and viewing with 'severe displeasure' attempts to thwart his 'rightful rule'. Neither side mentioned Russia or central Asia. 
Both sides were satisfied with the results of the Ambala conference. The British government was concerned that Mayo might have gone too far in his support for the amir, but the viceroy stood his ground. In 1871 the amir's eldest son, Yakub, imperilled the peace and it was suggested that the government of India should dispatch troops to support Sher Ali. But Mayo preferred to watch and wait, and advised Sher Ali to seek a settlement. Father and son were reconciled, and Mayo had secured peace with dominance. 
Mayo also sent his own emissary to St Petersburg, instead of relying on the British ambassador, and secured a statement from the tsar that his government had no intention of extending his empire. A party of Russian troops which had crossed the Oxus was withdrawn, and the Russian government also promised not to meddle in Afghan affairs, and requested the government of India to define the frontiers of Afghanistan. The ruler of Yarkand sent an envoy to Calcutta for support and advice and Mayo decided to send a British mission to Yarkand. Trade with central Asia was promoted and a treaty concluded with the maharaja of Kashmir which provided Britain with transit facilities through his state. A boundary dispute between Afghanistan and Persia, with the possibility of increased influence for Russia, was avoided by persuading Persia to submit the case to arbitration. 
Mayo's general policy was to create outworks of the British empire in the border states, and, while assuring them that there was no danger of annexation, to encourage them to seek British support and to ward off interference by any other European power. He hoped thereby to form a cordon of friendly and independent states around the Indian frontier, and claimed that, without firing a shot or moving a soldier, he had made British influence paramount in regions which had been for years the 'hard nut' of Anglo-Indian politics. 
Similarly, Mayo's government entertained cordial relations with the princes within the borders of India. Abstaining from needless intervention but not tolerating misgovernment, he sought to convince these princes that the British government sincerely desired to enable them to govern their states in such a manner as to secure the prosperity of the people and to maintain their own just rights. He encouraged the establishment of the Mayo College at Ajmer and the Rajkumar College in Kathiawar for the education of the sons of the chiefs and nobles in the Indian states. 
In India directly under British administration conditions were far from normal during Mayo's tenure of office. Scarcity of food developed in some areas, and, before it deepened into famine, Mayo sanctioned a programme of public works to relieve unemployment, and provided advances for the sinking of wells. To public works generally he devoted much attention and took charge personally of the public works department, as well as of the foreign department. He sought to provide adequate defences for the principal Indian ports and effected large savings in the construction of barracks. Though his aim was to secure an equilibrium in the finances by reducing expenditure and augmenting the revenue, he did not retrench essential public works and expanded the scope of administrative activity. He wished India to be self-sufficient as far as possible and prospected for coal and iron. As private enterprise had failed to locate good iron ore, he wanted the government to show the way and take advantage of the construction of the railways by the state to utilize vast quantities of iron ore. But he was careful not to waste public funds and by 1872 had reduced expenditure by nearly $5 million. 
Complementary was the development of sources of revenue. The introduction of an income tax in 1869 led to no great increase of revenue and the financial crisis was severe. By reductions in expenditure on civil and military administration, the increase of salt duties in Madras and Bombay, and raising income tax in the middle of the financial year, Mayo converted the anticipated deficit into a small surplus, and the three following years produced an aggregate surplus of nearly $6 million. He also decided to place a larger proportion of the charges for local requirements onto local resources, which not only reduced central expenditure, but met the political objective of entrusting a large number of Indians with local responsibility and the management of district affairs. Decentralization of finance was resisted by officials both at the centre and in the provinces, but Mayo overruled the opposition. 
Mayo also implemented a reform, proposed by John Lawrence, of constructing extensions of the railway system with funds borrowed by the government, rather than entrusting such work to private companies with interest guaranteed by the state. He also adopted the narrow gauge of 3 feet 3 inches for the new state railways. He passed a land improvement act and an act to facilitate by government loans works of public utility in towns. 
Mayo cautioned the local governments to effect economy in expenditure and to tax the districts no more than was necessary. Yet he was not sufficiently sensitive to the fact that articulate India was still in an irritable mood. The increase in income tax from 1 to 2.5 per cent and then, in 1870, to 3.225 per cent was severely criticized. The articulate middle-class opposition did not make his task easier. The foreign policy of peace and friendship, commendable in itself, had no healthy effect within the country. Uneasiness, especially among the Muslims, became clear, and Mayo discerned that the task of successfully governing the Indian empire was daily becoming more difficult. A Wahabi conspiracy, seeking to cleanse Islam of idolatry and superstition, had been spreading over the years across northern India. As it was believed that a war against an infidel government could not be carried on by their Muslim subjects, the Wahabis gathered across the frontier. Emissaries toured India, especially Bengal, urging Muslims to join what officials termed a 'crescentade' and contribute funds liberally. Many Wahabi agents were arrested and the Calcutta high court rejected their habeas corpus petitions. This did not seem to deter the conspirators and Wahabi dissent and the discontent caused by novel taxation fed on each other. Mayo, shaken in nerve, decided to reduce the income tax as much as possible; but he was confident that British military strength had so increased that no fresh mutiny need be feared and he blamed a few non-official Europeans for objecting to the income tax. Increase of expenditure and taxation was to him the only real danger. When the income tax was reduced by two-thirds in the budget of 1871, agitation against it ceased. 
Disaffection, however, now spread among the Sikhs. The Kukas, in a similar vein to the Wahabis, called on all true believers to abandon temples and mosques, disregard distinctions of caste, and lead lives of abstinence. From such iconoclasm the movement drifted to a zeal for cleansing the Sikh faith and then to a yearning for the revival of Sikh political supremacy. But a policy of firmness tempered with moderation, as in Mayo's foreign policy, seemed to be effective, and in May 1871 he reported to the queen that tranquillity generally prevailed in India. Soon after, in September, he was dismayed when the officiating chief justice of the Calcutta high court was stabbed to death by a Pathan. 
Though no evidence was discovered to suggest that the murder had been organized, the belief that this was the first political murder in India since 1857 revived an atmosphere of panic. Mayo reassured the public that there was not the least ground for apprehension; all that was required was quiet, though active, watchfulness. In January 1872, when the Kukas attacked Maler Kotla in the Punjab, the provincial authorities had sixty-five men blown away from guns (a form of military execution). Mayo's government condemned these summary executions in the belief that such actions could be justified only by immediate and urgent necessity, which he did not believe existed in this case. Then, on 8 February 1872, Mayo himself was assassinated by a Muslim Afghan convict at Port Blair in the Andaman Islands, where he was on a tour of inspection. His body was returned to Ireland, where he was buried in state at Johnstown church, near Naas, in co. Kildare. His widow was appointed a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Victoria (1872-4), and received a parliamentary annuity of $1000, and a similar pension from the Council of India, together with the sum of $20,000. 
India was to Mayo his destined ground of service and success. He shared the Conservative belief in imperialism, and that racial superiority ensured permanent rule: a self-governing India was not even a distant possibility in a remote future. He did not, therefore, fear the long-term consequences of the promotion of education and the association of Indians with the administration. Believing that such discontent as existed among educated Indians was due to unemployment, he was willing to declare Indians eligible for all posts in the legal and judicial branches of the government, and most posts in the police service. But it was the duty of the British to provide India with efficient administration. 'The days of conquest are past; the age of improvement has begun', he publicly declared. The maintenance of peace, the removal of disaffection, and the promotion of prosperity were the best ways of strengthening the imperial connection. Mayo's objectives were a strong executive, paternal administration with no pretence of promoting self-government, and the maintenance of the rule of law. He worked extremely hard, had an easy command of men, and gave full attention to every problem of administration. He invited even junior provincial officers to be his guests and acquaint him with their work; and he undertook long tours to secure first-hand knowledge of men and matters. He had seen more of India in his three years than most civil servants managed in a lifetime, and knew more about India than any other viceroy until George Curzon at the end of the century. He encouraged popular representations to the central government, instructed the home department to inquire into every allegation of injustice, and reserved the right to communicate directly with any official. It was such energy, drive, and curiosity which led to the occasion of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 2999


Bourn, Samuel (1648-1720), Presbyterian minister, was born at Derby, the son and grandson of clothiers who had 'spent considerable sums... contriving engines' to supply the town with water ('Sermons', preface), although his parent's names are unknown. These expenses might have hindered Bourn's education had not his uncle Robert Seddon (1629-1696), the ejected vicar of Kirk Langley, Derbyshire, taken care to send him to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1671. Unwilling to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', Bourn left the university without a degree in 1672 and returned to Derby, where he served as a schoolteacher and afterwards as chaplain to Lady Hatton. He was probably ordained as a presbyterian later that decade while living with a Bourn aunt in London. In 1679, through the influence of the London divine Samuel Annesley, he became pastor of the presbyterian congregation at Calne, Wiltshire, at an annual salary of less than $10. Here he remained for the next sixteen years despite receiving more lucrative offers from churches in Bath, Durham, and Lincoln. Between 1690 and 1695 the London Common Fund awarded him yearly grants, ranging from $6 to $8, to encourage his ministry. Shortly after his arrival in Wiltshire he married the daughter of the Revd George Scortwreth (died 1659), of Lincoln. Bourn left Calne in 1696, when the dying Seddon recommended him as his successor at Bolton, Lancashire. Initially unpopular with all save the 'most judicious and serious', Bourn nevertheless resisted calls to return to his former flock at a higher salary. Gradually, 'by his great integrity and inoffensive behaviour', he won over the entire Bolton congregation, which later that year built him a new meeting-house, the Bank Street Chapel, on land given by Seddon (ibid.). 
Bourn excelled in the pulpit, according to his son and namesake Samuel Bourn (1689-1754). If in prayer his 'grimaces... were somewhat peculiar... [and] might perhaps be disagreeable to strangers', he preached as became an orator; in his voice was a 'mixture of softness and vehemence... which tended at once to convince and ravish the souls of the hearers' ('Sermons', 3.12-13). William Tong (1662-1727), a native of Bolton, who contributed a short memoir to Bourn's posthumous sermons, likewise thought him 'one of the best preachers that ever I heard' ('Sermons', preface). Considering the meagreness of his stipend, Bourn's charity was as exemplary as his preaching. His success in pleading for the needy earned him a reputation as 'the best beggar in Bolton' ('Sermons', 3. 25). He not only helped found a school there for twenty poor children, but eventually bore the cost of its maintenance himself. His benefactions culminated in a bequest of $20 to support a weekly lecture in Bolton, as large a legacy as he left to any of his children. 
Tragedy struck Bourn's family in 1701 when three of his seven children died, including his eldest son, Joseph, aged twenty-one. His own health had been declining for several years, under the strain of unwearied study and constant preaching, before he died at Bolton on 4 March 1720 ('Nonconformist Register', 280). His widow had also suffered 'under great decays... of old age', though 'not without some lucid intervals' ('Sermons', preface). On his deathbed Bourn expressed complete satisfaction with his nonconformist principles. His son Samuel, who had already arrived in Bolton to preach at one funeral, stayed to deliver his father's funeral sermon as well. In 1722 he published this discourse, on '2 Kings' 2: 3, along with two sets of the elder Bourn's sermons, 'The transforming vision of Christ' and 'The Believer's Hope... the Reason and Motive of Real Holiness'. He dedicated this volume, his father's only printed work, to a relative, Madam Hacker of Duffield, Derbyshire, wife of Mr Hacker, perhaps the son of the regicide Francis Hacker. The inclusion of a recommendatory preface by William Tong, a staunch Calvinist, is curious, for he and Bourn's heterodox son, who refused to subscribe to the Westminster assembly's catechism at his ordination, were strange bedfellows indeed. Naturally each offered his own distinctive interpretation of the deceased, making it difficult now to characterize Bourn's theological position. While Tong emphasized his abhorrence of recent departures from traditional Reformed teaching, the younger Bourn minimized his father's attachment to any particular human creeds: men were judged not by the orthodoxy of 'their opinions, but by their hearts and lives' ('Sermons', 2.50). Both men did agree that, whatever Bourn's doctrinal leanings, tolerance towards those of differing views and an insistence upon 'moral righteousness' constituted the core of his divinity ('Sermons', 3.8). Another Samuel Bourn (died 1742), minister of the Presbyterian meeting at Epping, Essex, was a subscriber at the Salters' Hall debate in 1719. 


@@@@@


doc= 3000


Bourn, Samuel (1689-1754), Presbyterian minister, was born at Calne in Wiltshire, the second son of Samuel Bourn (1648-1720), dissenting minister, and his wife, Miss Scortwreth. He was taught classics at Bolton and trained for the Presbyterian ministry at the Manchester academy of John Chorlton and James Coningham. He became minister at Crook, near Kendal, in 1711. Probably in the same year he married Hannah Harrison, 'nee' Taylor (died 1768), of Kendal. They had nine children, three of whom died before adulthood. Of their six surviving sons, two became ministers: Joseph (1713-1765) at Congleton and then Hindley, and Samuel Bourn (1714-1796) at Norwich. Abraham, who was a surgeon in Market Harborough, Leicester, and Liverpool, wrote several pamphlets in defence of dissent. Benjamin became a London bookseller, publishing some of his father's works, and wrote 'A Sure Guide to Hell' (1750). Daniel built an early cotton mill at Leominster, and Miles was a mercer in Dudley. 
At first doctrinally orthodox, Bourn's intention not to subscribe to the Westminster assembly catechism at his ordination prompted a number of local ministers to boycott the occasion. When in 1719 the Salters' Hall conference made the trinitarian controversy a burning question among dissenters, Bourn, hitherto 'a professed Athanasian', studied the writings of Samuel Clarke and Daniel Waterland, and accepted Clarke's heterodox scheme. In his ministry at Crook he dedicated a child (probably of Baptist parentage) without baptism, according to a form printed in the memoirs of him by Toulmin. In 1720 he succeeded Henry Winder (died 1752) at Tunley, near Wigan. He declined a call to the neighbouring congregation of Park Lane but accepted one (dated 29 December 1727) to the new chapel at Chorley. On 7 May 1731 he was chosen as one of the Monday lecturers at Bolton, a post which he held along with his Chorley pastorate. 
On 19 April 1732 Bourn preached the opening sermon at the New Meeting in Birmingham, which replaced the Lower Meeting, and on 21 and 23 April he was called to be colleague with Thomas Pickard in joint charge of the congregation and a larger one at Coseley. He and his family moved to Coseley and he began his ministry on 25 June. Harassed by the JP John Ward of Sedgley Park, who sought to make him take a parish apprentice, Bourn twice successfully appealed to the quarter sessions. Ward then tried to remove him from Sedgley parish to his last legal settlement on the pretext that he was likely to become chargeable to the parish, to which Bourn wrote a spirited reply, later published by Toulmin. After Pickard's death, Bourn was joined by Samuel Blyth MD. His new colleague was hot-tempered and set about attacking field preachers and Quakers. 
Bourn corresponded with Philip Doddridge, with Groome, vicar of Sedgley, and with the Kidderminster dissenters on the subject of subscription. In his catechetical instructions he 'improved upon' the assembly's catechism. Strongly believing that family religion was the first step towards national reformation, Bourn published prayers and catechisms for all age groups. His polemical points in his pamphlets centred on his suspicion of human formulas of doctrine: he accused protestant systematizers of doctrine of behaving like the pope in requiring allegiance to their schemes and urged that confessional subscription should be avoided. He disapproved of the use of technical theological terms not found in the 'Bible' and was equally suspicious of enthusiasm. He argued that an 'Arian' interpretation of the Trinity was appropriate because the orthodox view of the identity of substance of the three persons precluded the idea of equality between them. The Particular Baptist theologian John Gill attacked these views in his defence of Calvinist orthodoxy. 
On 18 September 1745 Bourn delivered the charge at the ordination of Job Orton at High Chapel, Shrewsbury, and on 12 September 1750 he 'prayed over' Noah Jones at his ordination at Pensnett meeting-house, Cradley. In 1751 he declined a call to succeed John Buck (died 1750) in his father's congregation at Bolton. He died at Coseley of paralysis on 22 March 1754. He was small, slight, active, and sharp-eyed and somewhat dishevelled in appearance. Although his reputation for heterodoxy went before him, he was seldom polemical in the pulpit and his prayers were notable. With hindsight Joseph Priestley, who ministered at the Birmingham New Meeting from 1780 to 1791, said that his Congregation was 'the most liberal, I believe of any in England; and to this freedom the unwearied labours of Mr Bourn eminently contributed' (Priestley, 1.339). 


@@@@@


doc= 3001


Bourn, Samuel (1714-1796), Presbyterian minister, was born at Crook, near Kendal, the second son of the Presbyterian minister Samuel Bourn (1689-1754) and his wife, Hannah Harrison, 'nee' Taylor (died 1768), of Kendal. He was educated at Stand grammar school, Lancashire, and Glasgow University, where he studied under Francis Hutcheson and John Simson. His ministry began in 1742 at Rivington, Lancashire, though he was not ordained until some years after his settlement. In his ordination declaration he specified the duties of the ministry, and elevated the 'New Testament' as the sole authority in matters of doctrine and ethics. While he enjoyed the friendship of Hugh Willoughby, fifteenth Lord Willoughby of Parham, who lived at Shaw Place, Rivington, and was a representative of the last of the Presbyterian noble families, Bourn felt constricted, and was impatient for advancement. 
On 12 May 1752 Bourn delivered a sermon on 'Mark' 4: 30 before the Lancashire provincial assembly of ministers at Manchester. In the same year the sermon was published under the title 'The Rise, Progress, Corruption and Declension of the Christian Religion'. This led to his being invited to Norwich, where in 1754 he succeeded Peter Finch as the colleague of John Taylor. Bourn was thus present when the Norwich Presbyterians left the building in Little St Mary's (owned by the trustees of the Walloon or French protestants), in which they had been worshipping, for their new Octagon Chapel, which was opened on 12 May 1756. In the following year Taylor left Norwich for the dissenting academy at Warrington, and John Hoyle and Robert Alderson (father of Sir E. H. Alderson) came in succession as Bourn's colleagues. Among those raised under his ministry was Sir James Edward Smith, founder of the Linnean Society. 
After losing $1000 speculating on his brother Daniel's cotton mill business, Bourn travelled from place to place in 1758 seeking subscriptions to finance the publication of two volumes of his sermons. He entrusted his manuscript to the rationalist and controversialist Samuel Chandler of the Old Jewry, and in 1759 heard Chandler preach a denunciation of the doctrine of the annihilation of the wicked as utterly inconsistent with Christian teaching. Since Bourn had espoused that doctrine in one of his sermons he took this as a personal attack, and published a letter against Chandler in 1759. John Mason (1706-1763) entered the controversy with his 'Christian Morals' (1761), and Bourn appended a rejoinder to his 'Discourses on the Parables of our Saviour' (1764). 
Bourn was highly respected by those clergy of the Church of England who knew him, and when, about 1775, he became too ill to work and retired on $60 p.a. to Thorpe, Norwich, Dr Mann, bishop of Cork, offered him a sinecure living of $300 p.a. if only he would conform to the established church. Bourn declined -- a display of nonconformist integrity which earned the admiration and the practical support of Samuel Parr, later headmaster of Norwich grammar school. 
Like his father, Bourn was an Arian in the line of Samuel Clarke. At a time when the preaching of morality was widespread, he was unusually pessimistic in expecting no great improvement in the moral state of humanity. His sermons are forceful, carefully argued, and sometimes solemn. He also published 'A series of discourses on the principles and evidences of natural religion and the Christian revelation' (1760), and his last publication comprised 'Fifty Sermons on Various Subjects, Critical, Philosophical and Moral' (1777). His projected 'History of the Hebrews' was left unfinished at his death. Bourn married late in life; he and his wife left no children. He died at Norwich on 24 September 1796, and was buried three days later in the graveyard of Octagon Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 3002


Bourn, Thomas (1771-1832), schoolteacher and educational writer, was born in Hackney, Middlesex, on 19 April 1771, and was educated at a private school in Well Street. He became a teacher at the school of the Revd S. Palmer until 1791 when he became a teacher of writing and geography in the private girls' schools run by William Butler (1748-1822), a Quaker. He married Butler's daughter in 1796 and had a family of eleven children. 
Bourn published 'A Concise Gazetteer of the most Remarkable Places in the World' (1807; 3rd edn, 1822), a compilation of over 900 pages which sought to make geography more attractive to learners by associating places with historical occurrences, famous persons, and remarkable facts. Drawing upon the educational works of his father-in-law (whose 'Arithmetical Questions... for the Use of Young Ladies' he edited in 1829) and the biographical compilations of his friend Stephen Jones, Bourn sought to present useful knowledge in an appealing way, to draw young female readers away from the dangerous frivolities of popular novels. Bourn claimed to use a conversational method of teaching in preference to learning by rote: 'Young people require to be entertained as well as admonished' ('Concise Gazetteer', viii). He died at his house in Mare Street, Hackney, Middlesex, on 20 August 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 3003


Bourne, Gilbert (c.1510-1569), bishop of Bath and Wells, the son of Philip Bourne of Worcestershire, was born 'c'.1510 (Foxe reports that Bourne was aged about forty-one in 1551). Having entered Oxford University in 1524, he graduated BA in 1528, became a fellow of All Souls College in 1531, and proceeded MA in 1533. Four years later, in February 1537, he was 'dispensed to take all holy orders outside statutory times and two on [the] same day' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 4.62). He then completed his studies in 1543 when he received the degree of bachelor of theology, also from Oxford. 
Between 1541 and 1551 Bourne was given a number of preferments. In 1541 he became rector of Duntisbourne Abbots, Gloucestershire; in 1542, he was made prebendary of the fifth stall of the king's new foundation at Worcester; about 1543 he became chaplain to Edmund Bonner, bishop of London; in 1545 he obtained the prebends of Holborn and Wildland, both at St Paul's, London; in 1547 he was proctor for the clergy of the diocese of London; in 1548 he exchanged the prebend of Wildland for that of Brownswood, also at St Paul's; in 1549 he was made archdeacon of Bedford; in 1550 he became rector of High Ongar, Essex; some time before April 1550 he was vicar of Arlingham, Gloucestershire; and in 1551 he was given the rectory of Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire. 
Because he received and maintained so many preferments during such a period of religious turmoil, Bourne must have agreed with or, at the very least, not openly resisted the changes in religion that occurred during that time. As chaplain to Bonner, however, he remained loyal to his superior during Bonner's troubles with the Edwardian government. 
On 13 August 1553, less than a month after Mary I's accession, Bourne was almost killed when he preached a sermon at Paul's Cross, denouncing the protestant changes of Edward VI's reign, and singing the praises of Bonner, deprived of the bishopric of London in 1549, but soon to be restored. The crowd that gathered to hear Bourne's sermon became so angry with his remarks that they began to riot, and someone threw a dagger at Bourne that narrowly missed its target. 
Probably through the influence of his uncle, Sir John Bourne, who was principal secretary of state during Mary's reign, Bourne was made bishop of Bath and Wells by papal provision, being consecrated on 1 April 1554. The temporalities were restored on 20 April, and he received papal confirmation on 6 July of that same year. 
Little can be said of Bourne's secular administration of his diocese, but he did recover the valuable manor of Banwell, lost under Edward VI, albeit at the cost of a reserved rent of $115 per annum. Inevitably religious issues dominated his episcopate, which saw the diocesan clergy deprived of at least 106 benefices -- a ratio of one deprivation for every six benefices. The exact cause for many of these deprivations cannot be determined, but in most cases it was probably because the incumbent had married during the Edwardian period when clergy were permitted to do so -- something that the Marian religious injunctions of 1554 undid. As for heresy cases, the surviving evidence indicates that Bourne condemned two men, Roger Hues (or Curryer) and Richard Lush, but that only Hues went to the stake. Lush, who was condemned on 5 November 1558, in part for saying that Hues was unjustly executed, must have been spared a fiery end by Mary's death less than a fortnight later. 
Outside his diocese Bourne was a member of the commissions that in 1555 examined the martyrs Thomas Tomkins and John Philpot, and (before he became a bishop) he may have been the Dr Bourne who attempted to persuade Walter Mantel to recant. Perhaps for his loyal service to the Marian government, or through the continued influence of his uncle, Bourne was appointed president of the council in the marches of Wales on 29 October 1558, and held this position until February 1559. 
After Elizabeth I's accession Bourne refused to take the oath of supremacy, and was subsequently deprived some time between 18 October 1559 and 11 January 1560 -- by the middle of November Cecil was proposing Berkeley as his successor. Bourne was sent to the Tower of London on 18 June 1560. His fortunes thereafter are not always clear. In 1561 he was released into the custody of Nicholas Bullingham, bishop of Lincoln, but a letter of June 1562 to the privy council from the lieutenant of the Tower may show that Bourne was then back in the latter's keeping. If so, he was returned to Bullingham in 1563, following an outbreak of plague in London, and seems to have remained in his care until at least the end of 1565, when Bullingham asked to be relieved of his prisoner. Bourne was then handed over to George Carew, archdeacon of Exeter (who was also the dean of Bristol and of St George's Chapel, Windsor), and probably remained in Carew's keeping until his death at Silverton, Devon, on 10 September 1569. Bourne was buried in Silverton church on the south side of the altar, having bequeathed what possessions he had to his brother Richard. 


@@@@@


doc= 3004


Bourne, Henry (bap. 1694, d. 1733), antiquary, was baptized at Newcastle upon Tyne on 16 December 1694, the son of Thomas Bourne, a tailor. He was bound apprentice to a glazier in 1709, but showed such aptitude for learning that he was allowed to cancel his indentures and was sent to resume his education at the Newcastle grammar school. He was admitted a sizar of Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1717, holding a scholarship of $5 from Newcastle corporation, under the tuition of the Revd Thomas Atherton, a fellow townsman. He graduated BA in 1720 and MA in 1724, and received the appointment of curate of All Hallows Church, Newcastle, where he remained until his death. He married twice; he and his first wife, Margaret (died 1727), had three children, two of whom, Henry and Eleanor, survived infancy. On 30 May 1728 he married Alice Inchbald (died 1773), with whom he had two children who both died young. 
In 1725 Bourne published 'Antiquitates vulgares, or, The antiquities of the common people, giving an account of their opinions and ceremonies', which he dedicated to the mayor and corporation in recognition of their encouragement of learning and support for the clergy. This was republished, with additions by John Brand, in 1777 in his 'Popular Antiquities', and forms the groundwork of the later labours of Sir Henry Ellis and W. C. Hazlitt. Consequently, it is often cited as an early example of folklore studies, although Bourne's purpose had been to identify which customs should be retained and encouraged and which abolished or regulated. In 1727 he issued a liturgical manual, 'The harmony and agreement of the collects, epistles, and gospels, as they stand in the Book of Common Prayer for the Sundays throughout the year', in recognition of which he was awarded a lectureship in 1728. He also wrote a history of his native town, which was substantially complete at his death. It was afterwards published by subscription by the printer John White in 1736, in support of Bourne's widow and children, as a folio volume dedicated to Sir Walter Blackett, under the title of 'The History of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, or, The Ancient and Present State of that Town'. The history was based on William Grey's 'Chorographia, or, A Survey of Newcastle upon Tine' (1649) and followed the tradition of a topographical survey, giving a lively account of Newcastle in the early eighteenth century as well as of its history. Bourne complained in the preface of the difficulties he had met as a humble curate in gathering materials for his work. Christopher Hunter of Durham had plans to publish an edition with considerable additions in 1750, but these never came to fruition. In 1757 a few large paper copies were printed; these are now very rare. 
Bourne, who was described by his vicar as 'universally beloved' (Adamson, 'Henry Bourne', 150), died in Newcastle on 16 February 1733 and was buried in All Souls, Newcastle, on 18 February. His widow outlived him for many years and retired to Mrs Davidson's Hospital in Newcastle, where she died in 1773. 


@@@@@


doc= 3005


Bourne, Hugh (1772-1852), founder of the Primitive Methodist church, son of Joseph Bourne, farmer and wheelwright, and his wife, Ellen Steele, was born at Fordhays Farm, in the parish of Stoke-on-Trent on 3 April 1772, and, after some education at nearby Werrington and Bucknall, worked with his father in his business. The family moved to Bemersley, in the parish of Norton in the Moors, in 1788, and Bourne then took employment under his uncle, William Sharratt, a millwright and engineer at Milton, Staffordshire. 
Bourne had been carefully brought up by a pious mother, and his conversion occurred through solitary reading. In June 1799 he joined the Wesleyan Methodists, soon after became a local preacher, and in 1802 built, chiefly at his own expense, a chapel at Harriseahead, Staffordshire. In imitation of the camp meetings which had promoted revivalism in America, Bourne, together with his brother James, William Clowes, and others, held a camp meeting on Mow Cop, near Harriseahead, on Sunday 31 May 1807. The meeting commenced at six in the morning, and prayer, praise, and preaching were continued until eight at night. This successful meeting was the first of many held in that part of the country. The Wesleyan Methodist conference at Liverpool on 27 July 1807 passed a resolution prohibiting such gatherings. The camp meetings, however, continued, and on 27 June 1808 Bourne was expelled from the Wesleyan Methodist Society by the Burslem circuit's quarterly meeting; but he still continued to raise societies, recommending them to join the Wesleyan circuits, and as yet entertained no idea of organizing a separate community. The Wesleyan authorities remained hostile, and a disruption was the consequence. 
On 14 March 1810 the first class of the new community was formed at Stanley, near Bemersley. Quarterly tickets were introduced in the following year, and the first general meeting of the society was held at Tunstall on 26 July 1811. The name Primitive Methodist, implying a desire to restore Methodism to its primitive simplicity, was formally adopted on 13 February 1812, but the opponents of the movement often called the members 'ranters'. The first annual conference was held at Hull in May 1820, and a deed poll of the Primitive Methodists was enrolled in the court of chancery on 10 February 1830. Bourne and his brother purchased land and built the first chapel of the new connexion at Tunstall in 1811. After the foundation and settlement of the society Bourne made many evangelizing journeys to Scotland and Ireland. During 1844-6 he travelled in Canada and America, where he obtained large congregations. 
Bourne lived to see Primitive Methodism with 1400 Sunday schools, 5300 chapels, and 110,000 enrolled members. He died, unmarried, from a mortification of his foot, at Bemersley on 11 October 1852, aged eighty, and was buried at Englesea Brook, Cheshire. He was, in common with many preachers and members of the Primitive Methodist church, a rigid abstainer. Bourne's preaching skills were limited; he was most notable for the more intimate, 'conversation' and cottage prayer meetings. For the greater part of his life he worked as a carpenter and builder, so as not to become chargeable to the denomination, and it was not until he had reached his seventieth year that he was placed on the superannuation fund. He published widely, including an 'Autobiography' (n.d.); an unconventional defence of female preaching in 'Remarks on the Ministry of Women' (1808); 'A Treatise on Baptism' (1823); a 'History of the Primitive Methodists' (1823); and a 'Large Hymn Book' (1824). He was also editor of the 'Primitive Methodist Magazine' for twenty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 3006


Bourne, Immanuel (1590-1672), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born on 27 December 1590, the eldest son of Henry Bourne (died 1649), clergyman, and his wife ('nee' Bright), of Gray Stones near Sheffield. In 1595 his father became minister of East Haddon, Northamptonshire. Immanuel matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 6 May 1608, graduated BA on 29 January 1612, was ordained deacon at Oxford in February 1613 and priest in March 1614, and proceeded MA on 12 June 1616. 
An early indication of Bourne's taste for controversy was his Paul's Cross sermon of 10 June 1617: 'The Rainebow', published that year with a dedication to Robert Spencer of Wormleighton, was a brave, if forlorn, attempt to enlist the support of the arch-encloser of Northamptonshire against depopulating enclosures. Another Paul's Cross sermon, delivered on 22 August 1619 and published as 'The Godly Man's Guide' (1620), was addressed to 'merchants and tradesmen'. About 1619 William Piers (the future Laudian bishop of Bath and Wells), another Christ Church man and a former Northamptonshire rector, but by this time rector of St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, appointed Bourne as preacher in his parish. Here he became chaplain to Sir Samuel Tryon and his wife, Elizabeth, in whose household he met his own future wife, Jemima ('c'.1602-1679), daughter of Sir Thomas Beckingham of Tolleshunt Major, Essex; she was Lady Tryon's young cousin and companion. On Tryon's presentation, Bourne was instituted to the living of Ashover, in the Derbyshire Peak District, on 11 July 1621. Further publications followed, 'The True Way of a Christian, to the New Jerusalem' appearing in 1622 and 'The Anatomie of Conscience', an assize sermon preached at Derby, in 1623. 
In the summer of 1623, by licence dated 7 July, Bourne married Jemima; the couple had at least three sons -- Elisha ('b'. 'c'.1625), Samuel ('b'. 'c'.1628), and Obadiah ('b'. 'c'.1634) -- and four daughters, Jemima, Mary -- who subsequently married the local preacher John Billingsley (1625-1684) and was mother of John Billingsley (1657-1622) -- Lidiah, and Dorothy. In 1625 and 1630 Bourne bought extensive property in Ashover, including Eastwood Hall, and he later purchased the advowson of Ashover, thus assuring the future of his sons. Family ties with Derbyshire strengthened further at this period as his younger brothers Nathaniel ('b'. 1601/2) and Elisha ('b'. 1604/5) also gained livings there. Bourne himself sat on the commission of the peace for the county, and was related to another local JP, John Spateman. In 1639 he was prosecuted by high commission for organizing a fast day during time of plague in contravention of a royal proclamation; the case set him back by $300. He also took his own parishioners to court for their lead tithe debts. 
Bourne claimed that, at the outset of the civil war, he adopted a neutral position. This did not protect him: indeed, both sides victimized him. When Sir John Gell left Derbyshire to the earl of Newcastle's men, the cavaliers, 'like demons, destroyed all they came neare and left the poore to starve'. Bourne lost, in this way, all his books and 'my Manuscripts, near thirty years studies and pains night and day rent in pieces and taken away' (Bourne, 'Light from Christ', 7). He began to side with parliament. He ceased to pray for the king in public, left marriages to the JPs, and, when 'the kyng's cause became hopeless', accepted an appointment on the committee of sequestration, 'thinking thereby to soften some of the hard measures dealt out to the kyng's friends' (I. Bourne to W. Bourne, 28 Aug 1646, Derby Public Library, Ashover Collection). He was briefly in 1646 rector of Calbourne in the Isle of Wight and became preacher at St Sepulchre, Holborn, in London, because Derbyshire was neither 'safe nor comfortable abiding'. In June 1646, recently returned to Ashover, Bourne found the parliamentary troops were busy taking over his church and hall to prevent their falling into malignants' hands. 
Bourne was always a high clericalist by conviction. According to his 'A Light from Christ', a catechism first published in 1645 and reissued, enlarged, in 1646, ministers were 'ordained by Christ, in a special calling above others, to be instruments or outwards of converting men and women unto Christ' (Bourne, 'Light from Christ', 129). Although, as he later explained, his purpose in this work was to help right the 'sad evidences... of deplorable ignorance' (I. Bourne, 'A Defence and Justification', 1659, 5), he felt in 1646 that 'our Church is now in a hopeful way of Reformation' (Bourne, 'Light from Christ', 329) and he supported the introduction of a watered-down form of presbyterianism. By 1656, as a despairing member of the Chesterfield classis debating with James Naylor, he had lost his optimism. That year he became rector of Waltham on the Wolds, Leicestershire, and laid out his position on the ordination controversy in 'A Defence of the Scriptures'. In 1659, as his youngest son, Obadiah, a graduate of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, was instituted to the Ashover rectory, he published 'A Defence and Justification of Ministers' Maintenance by Tithes'. 
Unlike his son-in-law John Billingsley, Bourne retained his living in 1662, but he was still prepared to challenge his social superiors. His 'A Golden Chain of Directions to Preserve Love between Husband and Wife' (1669) roundly criticized his patron, the earl of Rutland, for his divorce and remarriage. In 1670 Bourne became rector of Aylestone, Leicestershire. He died at Ashover on 27 December 1672, his eighty-second birthday, and was buried, at his request, in the chancel of Ashover church. He left a substantial library. His will of 1671 made his widow, Jemima, 'with whom I have lived comfortablie fifty yeares', his executor, providing from his private property for her, for his surviving son, Obadiah, still rector of Ashover, and for all future rectors there. His grandson Samuel Bourne (1653-1694), son of his eldest son, Elisha, was designated, and became, Obadiah's successor. 


@@@@@


doc= 3007


Bourne, Nehemiah (1611-1691), naval officer and official, was born in Wapping, the eldest son of Robert Bourne (died 1625), a prosperous shipwright, and his wife, Mary (died 1630); John Bourne (bap. 1620, d. 1667) was his brother. Though his father had hoped he would be educated at Cambridge, Bourne chose to follow in the family business, and married the very young Hannah Earning of Limehouse ('c'.1616-1684) on 18 January 1631. The Bournes belonged to a network of puritan mariners and merchants, and in 1638 they emigrated to Massachusetts in the 'Confidence', owned by William Rainborough. Nehemiah established himself as a merchant and shipowner at Charlestown, Dorchester, and finally Boston, where he became the town's first shipbuilder. He and his wife were admitted to the Boston church in 1641, and two of their five children were born in New England. Bourne returned to England in the winter of 1643-4 to fight for parliament, serving as a major in the regiment raised by Thomas Rainborough, and also leased some of his ships to the state. Resigning his commission early in 1645 he returned to Massachusetts, and in October that year pressed unsuccessfully for its laws against Anabaptists to be dropped. On 19 December 1646 he and his wife sailed again for England, this time intending to remain. Over the next few years Bourne was busy trading to America in his own ships, and was unable to accept an invitation to serve the new Commonwealth's navy in 1649; but when he returned from New England in January 1650 Sir Henry Vane pressed him again, this time with success, recommending him to the generals-at-sea as a gallant man who would do the state 'both service and honour' (TNA: PRO, SP 25/123, 226). Bourne was appointed to the 'Speaker', a newly built second-rate, and commanded the North Sea squadron the following winter, assisting the army in its operations in Scotland. In May 1652, now in the 'Andrew', Bourne was commanding a squadron in the Downs when Tromp appeared with a powerful Dutch fleet; he sent a warning to Blake, and was able to join him in time to play a prominent part in the battle off the Downs on 19 May, which began the First Anglo-Dutch War. Bourne was in action again on 28 September, at the Kentish Knock. His bravery in both actions was admired, but the state had more urgent need of his administrative skills, and on 20 December 1652 he was appointed one of three new navy commissioners, all of them former American settlers, responsible for ships, supplies, and manning. Bourne discharged his duties with immense energy, and in the critical early months of 1653 was busy pressing men in the Thames, securing prize goods, and providing for injured mariners after the battle of Portland. Though he liked to bombard the admiralty with lengthy accounts of his labours and problems, Bourne was undoubtedly an effective administrator and responsible for the development of Harwich as a major naval base, serving in effect as its first resident commissioner. He retained his own shipping interests and, following the closure of the Baltic, contracted to supply masts and other stores from New England. 
After the peace with the Dutch in April 1654 Bourne was based at the Navy Office in London, and with two colleagues took on responsibility for naval victualling, with an additional $250 salary. From 1655 he resumed his shipbuilding activities, constructing a new shipyard at Wapping, and also invested in the East India Company. He remained an energetic commissioner throughout the decade, despite mounting problems as the finances of the Commonwealth deteriorated rapidly in its final years. Though Bourne served the protectorate loyally, he suspected that Richard Cromwell's rule would end in a Stuart restoration, and was ecstatic at the restoration of the Rump Parliament in May 1659. 'The Lord Jehovah hath most eminently and signally once more appeared for his own great name', he told a friend in New England (Firth, 3.209). He was dismayed by the king's restoration in May 1660, and his public career ended when new commissioners were appointed on 4 July. He took the oaths enabling him to remain a member of Trinity House, of which he had been an elder brother since 1656, but ceased to be part of its governing body. 
By the beginning of 1662 Bourne had resolved to leave England once more, and in May obtained a pass for his family to depart. He crossed to Hamburg and appears to have spent most of the 1660s in Rotterdam, a good base for his mercantile activities. By 1670 he was living in London again, in Abchurch Lane, still engaged in colonial trade. In his last years he was also occasionally involved in Trinity House business, and was consulted by the Navy Board in 1689. His wife, Hannah, had died on 10 June 1684 and was buried at Bunhill Fields on 21 June. Bourne died in the spring of 1691 and was buried beside her. His will, dated 11 February, was proved in May. Bourne was a typical servant of the Commonwealth, a committed radical, energetic, public spirited, yet with a shrewd eye to personal profit. 


@@@@@


doc= 3008


Bourne, Reuben (fl. 1692), playwright, belonged to the Middle Temple, and left behind him a solitary comedy which has never been acted. The title of this is 'The Contented Cuckold, or, The Womans Advocate' (1692). To quote its author, the play 'wants both Language, Wit and Plot' (preface). Its scene is Edmonton, and the principal character, Sir Peter Lovejoy, contends that a cuckold is one of the scarcest of created beings. 


@@@@@


doc= 3009


Bourne, Robert (1761-1829), physician and chemist, was born at Shrawley, Worcestershire, on 18 August 1761, the second son of Robert Bourne. He was educated at Bromsgrove grammar school and was elected a scholar at Worcester College, Oxford, on 1 July 1777. He took his BA in 1781 and was elected a fellow in 1784 on taking his MA. Following a period of training at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London, he became BM in 1786, and DM in 1787, in which year he was elected honorary physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary at Oxford, a post he held until 1824. According to family tradition he spent a year or longer in the Netherlands to further his knowledge of medicine and natural philosophy. 
In September 1790 Bourne became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, to whom he delivered the Harveian oration in 1797. In 1794 he succeeded the disgraced Thomas Beddoes as reader in chemistry at Oxford, and he delivered a series of lectures at the Ashmolean Museum that year. His 'Introductory Lecture' of 1797 shows that he stressed the need for a knowledge of chemistry among doctors. Like the lectures of Richard Watson at Cambridge, Bourne's lectures were designed to show how a knowledge of chemistry could be useful to students who would later inherit land, become MPs, or take an interest in manufactures and commerce. Understandably, however, given that Bourne's life was given over to medical practice, he made no contribution to the advancement of chemistry. He ceased his chemistry lectures in 1803 on the appointment of John Kidd to the newly endowed chair of chemistry and his own election as the first Aldrichian professor of physic. He resigned this chair in 1824 on election to the Lord Lichfield professorship of clinical medicine. 
In 1795 Bourne had married Mary, daughter of James Burr of Spelsbury, Oxfordshire. They had two sons and two daughters. After his first wife's death he married Mary, the widow of the Revd James Griffith, master of University College. Bourne had a large medical practice in Oxford and its county and was active in the modernization of the Radcliffe Infirmary, of which he was a benefactor. He wore his hair in a pigtail long after it had ceased to be fashionable. His only published medical work appeared in 1805. It consisted of twenty-two case histories of pulmonary consumption, in which his treatment had been to use an astringent prepared from the bearberry, 'A. uva-ursi'. Although he kept very careful records of all of his patients throughout his career, these histories were destroyed by his son in 1830. Bourne's great-grandson, Gilbert Charles Bourne, rowed at Oxford and was an anatomist there. 
Bourne appears to have spent his entire career at Oxford, where he died after prolonged illness on 23 December 1829. An inscription to his memory was erected in Worcester College chapel and is reproduced in Munk's 'Roll of the Royal College of Physicians'. 


@@@@@


doc= 3010


Bourne, Vincent (bap. 1694, d. 1747), Latin poet, was the son of Andrew Bourne and his wife, Ann. He was baptized in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, on 22 July 1694. He attended Westminster School, and became queen's scholar in 1710. There he was a pupil of Robert Freind, and became proficient in the art of writing Latin verse; Westminster required its students to compose a number of epigrams in elegiac couplets every week, and it was to this medium that Bourne returned most frequently in later life. A number of his school verses appeared in the popular collection of Westminster compositions entitled 'Lusus Westmonasterienses' that appeared in 1730 and went through several later editions. 
Bourne was admitted as a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 27 May 1714. He became a scholar on 13 May 1715, proceeded BA in 1717, was made a fellow in 1720, and commenced MA in 1721. At Cambridge he distinguished himself as a Latin poet, and was selected to write a set of tripos verses in the spring of 1717. In September of the same year he sent a friendly Latin poem to Joseph Addison to celebrate the latter's recovery from illness (reproduced in Aikin, 2.214). In 1721 Bourne edited a collection of tripos verses entitled 'Carmina comitalia Cantabrigiensia', including, within a section of miscellaneous pieces at the end, five poems from his own pen and two by his friend John Jortin. Of these, Bourne's 'Corydon querens' -- a translation of Nicholas Rowe's 'Colin's Complaint' -- was issued separately the same year and again in 1726. 
On 14 May 1727 Bourne married Lucia ('b'. 1694?), widow of George Jewell, in St Margaret's, Westminster. (Jewell, who died in 1725 aged thirty-one, had attended Westminster and Trinity at the same time as Bourne, and was an usher at Westminster.) By this point Bourne had probably already become an usher at Westminster School himself, a position he held until his death. He and Lucia had a son, Thomas, and a daughter, Lucia; the family probably divided its time between the house Bourne had built in Westminster and his farm near Bungay, Suffolk. 
Though generous and genial, Bourne was ill-suited to teaching: William Cowper, who was one of his pupils at Westminster, recalled that he was slovenly in appearance and idle, and so poor a teacher that 'he seemed determined, as he was the best, so to be the last, Latin poet of the Westminster line' ('Letters and Prose', 3.234). In 1734 the first collection of Bourne's work, 'Poematia', appeared: it was an instant success. A second edition emerged in 1735, and a third, with additional poems, in 1743; there were three more in the eighteenth century and a further five in the nineteenth (Mitford's, of 1840, is the closest to a scholarly edition). The book was dedicated to the duke of Newcastle, a former schoolmate of Bourne's, who may have been responsible for the poet's appointment as deputy serjeant-at-arms to the House of Commons in November 1734. 
Alongside Bourne's translations from English poets (he also wrote versions from David Mallet, Matthew Prior, and John Gay), he produced many occasional pieces, which, though some were probably written as demonstrations for his pupils, are his best work. Bourne wrote without pretension, but with restrained elegance and bold mastery of Latin language and metre. The deceptive simplicity of his verse conceals numerous wry subtleties. A metropolitan, he had a particular genius for providing engaging portraits of contemporary London, and focused sympathetically upon the everyday details of human life. 'Schola rhetorices', for example, recalls the gossiping fishwives of Billingsgate, 'Cantatrices' depicts two ballad singers at Seven Dials, and 'Ad Davidem Cook' is an affectionate reminiscence of the Westminster nightwatchman. All these are rendered with a painterly eye for detail, and Bourne's love of art is visible in his several poems on painters and paintings, foremost among which are his hendecasyllables on Hogarth ('Poems', 190). The artist, whom Bourne calls 'derisor lepidus' ('elegant mocker') and 'facete censor' ('witty critic'), is an apt recipient of his praise: while the poet lacked some of his addressee's satire, he shared his interests, and was doubtless aware that the same tags could be applied to himself. A certain discontent lies just below the surface of much of his poetry, and sometimes comes to the fore. The epitaph Bourne composed for himself seals this impression: 'in silentium quod amavit descendit' ('he has descended into the silence that he loved'). Moreover, in a letter to his wife written shortly before his death (first printed in the 1772 edition of 'Poematia'), he reveals that he refused to enter holy orders from a fear of his own insufficiency, and felt dissatisfaction with his life. Bourne died at Westminster on 2 December 1747, and was buried at Fulham. 
Vincent Bourne was one of the most popular English Latin poets of the eighteenth century, but he has not won universal praise. His choice of homely matter and unwillingness to poeticize have led some critics to treat him high-handedly, while others have recognized that he managed to unshackle neo-Latin verse from outright imitation of the classics. The endurance of his fame has largely been due to the translations of his work by Cowper and Charles Lamb, but he merits nevertheless a central place in discussions of Anglo-Latin literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 3011


Bourne, William (c.1535-1582), writer on mathematics, was born at Gravesend, the son of John Bourne (died 1560), who owned property in the town. His exact date of birth is not known. He was appointed a jurat, or town councillor, of Gravesend under the charter of incorporation in 1562 and in 1571-2 served as port-reeve, the equivalent of mayor. In 1573 he made a will, from which it is evident that he had at that time four young sons. He had married Dorothy Beare, a widow with three sons of her own. As well as the four sons mentioned in the will, William and Dorothy Bourne also had a daughter, who was only a child when her mother died in December 1582, also leaving a will. 
From both wills it is clear that Bourne and his wife owned considerable property in Gravesend, and lived prosperously. Bourne himself refers to 'the profittes of my houses and Tenements' (Bourne, appx) as sufficient for his wife to bring up the children and give them a good education. He had also inherited from his father a 'tyde', which brought in an income from the service of barges, known as tide barges, plying between the city of London and Gravesend. A residents' list for Gravesend of 1572 records him as serving again as a jurat, and states that he had paid for freedom of the Mercers' Company. A document in his own handwriting (15 March 1571) includes the name of Mr Bourne, port-reeve, as one of fourteen persons fined for selling beer in short measure. One account of his life regards this as conclusive evidence that he was an innkeeper, but it is more likely that the offence was committed by a tenant or employee for whom he was responsible in law. 
An active and important citizen of a thriving Thames port, in middle life Bourne set about satisfying a demand for practical textbooks on navigation and gunnery. He was not a university-educated man, unlike other authors dealing with mathematical topics at this time, but he had, from boyhood, everyday contact with seamen, and had practised gunnery as a citizen volunteer with the garrison manning the defensive bulwark at Gravesend. His knowledge of mathematics, of which there is considerable evidence in his writing, must have been acquired through reading and determined study, and was sufficient for him to become a mathematical practitioner, dealing with almanac making, surveying, navigation, and gunnery. According to E. G. R. Taylor, he is 'the earliest unlearned English instructor and writer on mathematical practice known to us' (Taylor, 'Mathematical Practitioners', 176). 
Bourne's first book was an 'Almanacke and Prognostication for iii Yeres', printed in 1567, of which a second, updated version appeared in 1571. The almanac customarily contained astrological material, and there was a tradition, particularly on the continent, of including prognostications, often dramatic and alarming. Bourne thought such prophecies 'most vain and foolish', and in his typically practical way included in his almanac a pocket sea-manual, described as 'serten rules of navigation'. One can deduce that the navigational content of the almanac was well received, for probably in 1574 he published 'A Regiment for the Sea' (the first edition was not dated but contains a kalendar for 1574). This was his most extensive and important work. A second edition appeared in 1580, and the book went through five further editions after Bourne's death, the last in 1643; it was also translated into Dutch. 
The 'Regiment' was not, and did not pretend to be, an original work. Bourne's immediate inspiration came from the English translation, published under the title 'Arte of Navigation' by Richard Eden in 1561, of Martin Cortes' 'Arte de navigar'. Bourne was critical of some aspects of the Spaniard's book, and considered that he could produce a manual of more use to the practical seaman, as indeed proved to be the case. Among much advice to the seaman he describes in detail how to make observations of the sun and stars, using the cross-staff, how to measure the ship's way by log and line, and how to plot coastal features from the ship by taking bearings, using the method of triangulation. 
The year 1578 saw the publication of three books by Bourne. One, the 'Treasure for Traveilers', dealt with the practicalities of making measurements, both at sea and on land, including in the latter case methods of surveying. The second, 'The Arte of Shooting in Great Ordnance', drew on his own experience as a gunner. The last, 'Inventions, or, Devises', was the first version in English of a type of book made popular on the continent by authors such as Nicholas Tartaglia and Jacques Besson. In it are described novel devices, such as a geared ship's log, and suggestions for military and naval strategies. For what proved to be his last book, Bourne returned to the almanac form with which he had begun writing, and published in 1580 a ten-year almanac and prognostication. Among Bourne's patrons and dedicatees were: Edward Clinton, earl of Lincoln, lord high admiral; Sir William Winter, master of the queen's ordnance, under whom Bourne had learned his gunnery skills; and Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, general of the ordnance. 
Another notable public figure with whom Bourne had dealings was William Cecil, first Baron Burghley. A manuscript pamphlet by Bourne, 'The property or qualytyes of glaces' (written 'c'.1572 and addressed to Lord Burghley at Burghley's request), is an assessment of the claims for the discoveries of the effects of perspective glasses made by Leonard Digges, which were published after Digges's death by his son, Thomas, in 'Pantometria' (1571). Bourne claims that Burghley made this request because he had, seven years earlier, received from Bourne a paper on buoyancy in water, as affecting the draught of ships. The pamphlet shows that Bourne had some practical knowledge of concave and convex mirrors and their effects, but he disclaims any first-hand experimental information on the crucial aspect of Digges's claim, namely, that a combination of concave mirror and convex lens would produce a telescopic effect. The manuscript was published in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and used as an argument for the existence of an Elizabethan telescope. However there was neither the conceptual framework nor the technical capability to make such an instrument during this period. 
Bourne was a popular author in the very practical sense that he explained technical matters in a comprehensible way for the 'unlettered' man. He owed his success in part to the fact that he lived at the time when the oceans were being opened up to exploration, and the ever-present threat of war with Spain ensured keen interest in all matters military and naval. He died in Gravesend and was buried there on 22 March 1582. 


@@@@@


doc= 3012


Bourne, William Sturges (1769-1845), politician and poor-law reformer, was born on 7 November 1769 as William Sturges, the only son of the Revd John Sturges DD (1736/7-1807), prebendary of Winchester, and his wife, Judith, daughter of Richard Bourne, of Acton Hall, Worcester. Educated first at a private school in Winchester, he entered Winchester College in 1782 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in Michaelmas term 1786, taking his BA in 1790 and his MA in 1793. In 1831 he was created DCL. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 23 November 1793, and practised in king's bench and on the western circuit. At Oxford a lifelong friendship with George Canning was cemented. Canning thought him 'very clever' ('The Letter-Journal of George Canning, 1793-1795', ed. P. Jupp, 1991, 26), and secured him election as member of parliament for the Treasury borough of Hastings in July 1798. Although Sturges was offered the under-secretaryship at the Home Office in Addington's administration, loyalty to Canning led him to decline. By 1802 he had added George Rose to his circle of political intimates, and was returned with Rose as MP for Christchurch that year. 
In 1803 Sturges inherited $2000 p.a. from his uncle Francis Bourne, and happily concurred with the stipulation that he take the name Bourne, whereupon Canning promptly dubbed him 'Scroggs', by which nickname he became generally known in Canningite circles. When Pitt returned to office in 1804 Sturges Bourne became secretary to the Treasury. Relinquishing office in January 1806 following Pitt's death, he returned to public office under Portland as a lord of the Treasury from March 1807 to September 1809, eventually following Canning out of office. On 2 February 1808 he married Anne, daughter of Oldfield Bowles of North Aston, Oxfordshire. Their only child, Ann, was born a year later. After the general election of 1812 Sturges Bourne found himself without a seat, and became increasingly active in county politics in his native Hampshire, serving as chairman of the Hampshire quarter sessions between 1817 and 1822. His return to parliament was again secured by Canning, who insisted that he become a privy councillor (10 August 1814), and an Irish borough open to government nominees, Bandon Bridge, returned Sturges Bourne on 24 March 1815. He held the seat until 1818, when he was again returned for Christchurch. Although loyal to Canning, and firmly committed to Catholic emancipation, he was a comfortable supporter of the Liverpool administration. From September 1814 he served as an unpaid commissioner on the Board of Control, and in June 1818 he was elevated to a salaried commission, an office he held until February 1822. 
Between 1817 and 1819 Sturges Bourne was responsible for the most ambitious attempt to reform the poor laws undertaken between 1601 and 1834. As early as November 1801 he had introduced a bill to end the badging of paupers, and in 1807 he successfully opposed Samuel Whitbread's elaborate scheme to reform the poor laws and popular education. In 1817 Sturges Bourne was nominated to a select committee on the poor laws, and in February 1818 assumed its chairmanship. The committee's reports stopped short of recommending abolition of poor relief, the currently orthodox view among political economists, and instead recommended major reform. Although the government was opposed to reform, in 1818 and 1819 Sturges Bourne sponsored a series of bills transforming the administration of poor relief and parish government. Two acts facilitated the appointment of salaried assistant overseers, the establishment of select vestries, and regular minute-keeping in all parish vestries. An act passed in 1819 transformed the local franchise, awarding ratepayers one vote for the first $50 of rateable value and an additional vote for each further $25 of rateable value, up to a maximum of six votes. The 'Sturges Bourne Acts' remained the basis of parish government until the passage of the 'Parish Councils Act' in 1894. 
In 1822 Sturges Bourne succeeded to a substantial fortune, and resigned from both the Board of Control and the chairmanship of Hampshire quarter sessions. He remained politically active, serving on the 1824 select committee on artisans and machinery which paved the way for the abolition of the 'Combination Acts', and sat as MP for Ashburton from 1826 until 1830. Sturges Bourne's lifelong association with Canning reached its climax when Canning appointed him home secretary (he served from April to July 1827). Sturges Bourne's reluctance to accept major office was notorious, and he accepted the seals after prevaricating for a fortnight with Canning's insisting to him on 26 April 1827 that, 'My Administration WHOLLY depends on your helping me for two months as Home Secretary of State' (Aspinall, 'Formation of Canning's Ministry', 186). Sturges Bourne was as good as his commission, moving to the Office of Woods and Forests when Lansdowne joined the administration. On Canning's death the king sent for Goderich, as his principal political associate, and for Sturges Bourne, Canning's most intimate friend. As Goderich vainly sought to construct a viable administration, the chancellorship of the exchequer was offered twice to Sturges Bourne, who turned it down, much to the dismay of Huskisson, who even accused him of destroying the chances of forming a coherent ministry. Sturges Bourne resigned woods and forests when Wellington assumed the premiership in February 1828. Although he supported Catholic emancipation, and moderate parliamentary reform, he nevertheless opposed the scale and tendency of the 'Whig Reform Bill', and resigned his seat (Milborne Port, which he had held since 1830) in March 1831. His daughter described his resignation as the product of 'his reluctance to oppose Government in a measure on which their existence, and perhaps our very safety depend, and an equal reluctance to give up the opinions of a lifetime' (Ann Sturges Bourne to Marianne Dyson, 7 March 1831, Hampshire RO, Sturges Bourne-Dyson correspondence, 9M55/F). 
Resignation from parliament did not involve retirement from public life. Between 1832 and 1834 Sturges Bourne was an active member of the royal commission on the poor laws, did much to diminish hostility to poor-law reform in London vestries, and finally returned to active involvement in the Hampshire quarter sessions after 1835. He thought Peel's behaviour in office 1834-5 'very judicious'. Although a liberal tory, Sturges Bourne was deeply hostile to whigs and whiggism, even describing Lord Althorp as a republican at heart. In his diary for 18 April 1833, E. J. Littleton recalled that Sturges Bourne 'was a great alarmist. His friend Canning used to invent absurd stories to excite his apprehensions' (Aspinall, 'Three Early... Diaries'). Sturges Bourne died at Testwood House, near Southampton, on 1 February 1845 and was buried in Winchester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 3013


Bowtell, Elizabeth (1648/9-1714/15), actress, was the second daughter of Christopher Davenport and his wife, Frances Ridley. Some time after October 1669 she married Barnaby Bowtell, one of ten children of Barnaby Bowtell of Parham Hall, Suffolk. Mrs Bowtell's husband was commissioned a lieutenant in the Holland regiment of William III on 2 December 1681, a position he retained until 24 January 1705. 
The beginnings of Mrs Bowtell's career are hazy. John Downes suggests that she began acting 'some few Years after' the Restoration, and he lists her in three revivals of pre-Commonwealth plays, all most likely produced during the 1663/4 season. Certainly by 1667 Elizabeth Davenport (as she then was) was an active member of the King's Company: in March she played the exuberant ingenue Sabina in Dryden's 'Secret Love'. Her career spanned three decades. After 1678 she left the stage for ten years, claiming during that time to have lived 'in a Monastery in France where shee was a Pensioner' (Milhous, 126). She returned to London in spring 1688, performing with the United Company until 1690. In 1692 she surfaced in a Benedictine convent in Paris (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 2.261). By the autumn of 1695 Mrs Bowtell was acting with Thomas Betterton's new company at Lincoln's Inn Fields, but she appears to have left the stage permanently after November 1697 to join her husband in the Netherlands. She spent her final years in Middlesex, a prosperous widow who benefited from inheritances on both sides of her family and perhaps from liaisons with lovers. 
Mrs Bowtell was a talented actress, popular with audiences and dramatists alike. Dryden wrote several roles for her, aside from Sabina in 'Secret Love': Donna Theodosia in 'An Evening's Love' (1668); Benzayda in 'The Conquest of Granada' (1670/1671); Melantha in 'Marriage a-la-mode' (1671); Laura in 'The Assignation' (1672); and Cleopatra in 'All for Love' (1677). William Wycherley gave her two of his greatest female roles, Margery Pinchwife in 'The Country Wife' (1675) and Fidelia in 'The Plain Dealer' (1676). Other notable Restoration playwrights, such as Thomas Shadwell, Nathaniel Lee, and Thomas D'Urfey also created roles for Mrs Bowtell, while still others commented upon her skill. In the dedication to his play 'The Roman Empress' (1671) William Joyner praised her performance as Aurelia, 'which, though a great, various, and difficult part, was excellently performed' (sig. A2'v'). 
Whether deserved or not, Mrs Bowtell had a reputation for promiscuity. One lampoon called her 'chestnut-maned Boutell, whom all the Town fucks' (Wilson, 'Court Satires', 206). Edmund Curll, in his memoir of Thomas Betterton, noted that 'besides what she saved by Playing, the Generosity of some happy Lovers enabled her to quit the Stage before she grew old' (Curll, 21). Her stage roles also capitalized on her sexual appeal. In Thomas Duffett's play, 'The Spanish Rogue' (London, 1674), her character is told she should 'know, you'r beauty can Command so large a pow'r ore any heart' (ibid., 16). Curll says 'she was low of Stature, had very agreeable Features, a good Complexion, but a Childish Look. Her Voice was weak, tho' very mellow; she generally acted 'the young Innocent Lady' whom all the Heroes are mad in Love with' (ibid., 21). This latter statement best describes the roles of her youth. After 1670 Mrs Bowtell turned to a wider range of parts: cuckolding wives and tragic heroines, especially meek, virtuous women caught up by larger forces, such as Cyara in Lee's 'The Tragedy of Nero' (1674). Several times she was coupled with Rebecca Marshall, who played the villainess to Bowtell's innocent. Mrs Bowtell nevertheless continued to play youthful roles, including breeches parts, through her forties. Clara in Joseph Harris's play 'The City Bride' (1696) is an unmarried young woman, and Mrs Fantast in Shadwell's 'Bury-Fair' (1689) is the 'Daughter to my Lady Fantast by a Former Husband'. She also played parts more suitable to her age: Aurelia in Thomas D'Urfey's 'A Fool's Preferment' (1688) is a basset-playing wife who 'rules' her 'half-witted Country-Gentleman' husband. 
Mrs Bowtell's life was not without hardship: her sister Frances Davenport, also an actress with the King's Company in its early years (Pepys on 7 April 1668 called her 'a very bad actor'; Pepys, 9.156), died insane in 1696; and Mrs Bowtell was caught up in several legal disputes. Her final years, however, bespeak a fate more clement than that faced by some seventeenth-century actresses. She died between 2 November 1714, when she made her will, in which she was able to leave bequests worth $830 and in which she asked to be buried at Winchester, and 1 September 1715, when it was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 3014


Boutell, Charles (1812-1877), writer on heraldry and antiquities, was born on 1 August 1812 at Pulham St Mary, Norfolk, the son of the Revd Charles Boutell (1771-1855), perpetual curate of Repps-with-Bastwick, Norfolk (1808-48), and his wife, Mary Elizabeth ('nee' Day). He entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1829 and graduated BA in 1834. In 1836 he was incorporated at Trinity College, Oxford, took his MA degree, and the same year was ordained as deacon at Ely. He was briefly curate at Hemsby, Norfolk, and then curate at St Leonards, Sandridge, Hertfordshire (1837-46), where he took priest's orders in 1839. In 1847 he returned to Norfolk as rector of Downham Market (1847-50) and vicar of St Mary Magdalen, Wiggenshall (1847-55), before becoming ('c'.1851) curate at Litcham to assist his aged father, who was the incumbent. After moving to London in 1855 he held various positions, including reader at St Luke's, Lower Norwood (1860-67). On 17 April 1838 Boutell married Mary, daughter of the Revd Dr John Chevallier of Aspall Hall, Suffolk, and his first wife, Caroline. They had four sons, two of whom died young, and two daughters. 
Boutell wrote extensively on architecture, brasses, and heraldry. In 1845 he was a founder member and joint secretary of the St Albans Architectural Society; he also acted as the society's treasurer, but was far from reliable. The following year he contributed the text of Britton's 'Illustrations of the Early Domestic Architecture of England'. His next work was 'Monumental Brasses and Slabs' (1847), 'still an important pioneering work' (Busby, 1996, 10), which was followed two years later by 'Monumental Brasses of England'. In 1855, after moving to London, Boutell became a founder member of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society; on 23 July 1857 he was appointed secretary (against the advice of the Revd Thomas Hugo, a principal trustee). Four months later, on 27 November, at a special meeting, he was dismissed and required to repay the sum of $56 15's'. This was not his first or his last financial embarrassment, but his antiquarian zeal appears to have been unimpaired, and 'A Manual of British Archaeology' was published in 1858, with illustrations by Orlando Jewitt. 'A Manual of Heraldry, Historical and Popular' was an immediate success in 1863 and a second edition was called for in two months, and published as 'Heraldry, Historical and Popular'; further editions followed in 1864 and 1867. 'Boutell's Heraldry', as it became known, was his most popular and enduring work, and revised editions were published at intervals up to 1983. In 1891 John Evans praised Boutell 'for popularising heraldry' (Levine, 91). Boutell helped Mary, his elder daughter, to publish 'Picture Natural History, Including Zoology, Fossils, and Botany' (1869) while completing 'Arms and Armour in Antiquity and in the Middle Ages', his translation of J. P. Lacombe. 
In the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1866) Boutell wrote a series of articles on 'Our early national portraits'; he also contributed to the journals of the British Archaeological Association and the Archaeological Institute, and to 'Notes and Queries'. The Robinson Library, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, houses a series of his manuscript notebooks (1865-71), and the British Library has two notebooks on misericords (1872; Add. MSS 32135-32136). 
After two years of declining health Boutell died of a ruptured heart on 31 July 1877 at 18 Portsdown Road, London; he was buried on 4 August at Paddington old cemetery, Kilburn. His wife died in 1885. His life was described as 'one of continuous trouble' ('DNB'), but while this may describe his personal life his public persona was different. His financial embarrassments included being 'a prisoner for debt' in 1868 (Busby, 1999, 13); his bankruptcy was announced in 'The Times' on 23 December that year, when he was described as 'late of Jermyn Street'. None of this did anything to reduce his considerable popularity as a lecturer or his reputation as an antiquary. He was clearly personable; the obituary in the 'Art Journal' states, 'His varied information... always conveyed with great fluency of speech and clearness of description... and his most courteous manners, rendered him at all times a very agreeable companion' (Busby, 1999, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 3015


Boutflower, Henry Crewe (1796-1863), Church of England clergyman and headmaster, was the son of John Johnson Boutflower, surgeon, of Salford, and was born there on 25 October 1796. The Boutflowers were an important clerical family in the Manchester area. Henry was educated at Manchester grammar school, and in 1815 entered St John's College, Cambridge. In 1816 he gained the Hulsean theological prize with an essay on the atonement published in 1817. He graduated BA in 1819 and MA in 1822. He was ordained in 1821, when he became curate at Elmdon near Birmingham, having previously acted as assistant master at Manchester grammar school. 
In 1823 Boutflower was appointed headmaster of Bury School, Lancashire, and held that position until 1859. On 21 June 1825 he married his cousin, Harriet, daughter of Henry Johnson Boutflower. In 1832 he was presented to the perpetual curacy of St John's Church in Bury. Though during his time Bury School lost prestige -- Boutflower being seen as scholarly but ineffective -- he was highly respected as an able and conscientious clergyman and a good preacher. 
In 1857 Boutflower returned to Elmdon as rector, remaining there until his death, which took place on 4 June 1863, while on a visit to West Felton vicarage, Shropshire. He was buried at Elmdon. He collected materials for a history of Bury, which he left in manuscript, and published a number of sermons, including one on the death of William IV (1837). 


@@@@@


doc= 3016


Bouverie, Edward Pleydell- (1818-1889), politician, the second son of William Pleydell-Bouverie, third earl of Radnor (1779-1869), and his second wife, Anne Judith (1790-1851), third daughter of Sir Henry St John Mildmay, bt, was born on 26 April 1818. Educated at Harrow School and at Trinity College, Cambridge, he graduated MA in 1838, and became a precis writer to Lord Palmerston at the Foreign Office from January to June 1840. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 27 January 1843, and in the following year he was returned to parliament as Liberal member for Kilmarnock, sitting until his defeat there in 1874. He was a prominent figure in the House of Commons. From July 1850 to March 1852 he was under-secretary of state for the Home department in Lord John Russell's administration, and from April 1853 to March 1855 he was chairman of committees, while Lord Aberdeen was prime minister. In March 1855, when Palmerston became premier, Bouverie was made vice-president of the Board of Trade, and in August was transferred to the presidency of the poor-law board, a position he held until 1858. In 1857 he was appointed one of the committee of the council on education. He was second church estate commissioner from August 1859 to November 1865, and from 1869 he was one of the ecclesiastical commissioners for England. In 1862 he proposed in the Commons the abolition of tests for admission to fellowships in Cambridge. 
Though a staunch Liberal, Bouverie belonged to the old whig school, and in his last parliament he often found himself unable to agree with Gladstone's policies. In 1872, when a charge of evasion of the law was made against Gladstone in connection with the appointment of W. W. Harvey to the rectory of Ewelme, Bouverie expressed regret 'that the prime minister should amuse his leisure hours by driving coaches-and-six through Acts of Parliament' ('Hansard 3', 209.1711). 
When the 'Irish University Bill' was introduced, Bouverie finally broke with Gladstone (March 1873). He denounced the measure as miserably bad and scandalously inadequate to its professed object. He voted against the second reading on 10 March, when the government was defeated. During the course of his career Bouverie addressed numerous letters to 'The Times' under the signature of 'E. P. B.', and subsequent to this occasion his letters to the newspaper continued his attacks on the measure and its framers. After his retirement from parliament he became in 1877 associated with the corporation of bondholders of the Egyptian and Turkish debt, and was soon made its chairman. Under his guidance the debts of many countries were readjusted; and the corporation's scheme for dealing with the Turkish debt was confirmed by the sultan's irade of January 1882. Bouverie was also director of the Great Western Railway Company and of the Peninsular and Oriental Company. 
Bouverie married, on 1 November 1842, Elizabeth Anne, youngest daughter of General Robert Balfour of Balbirnie, Fife, and had two sons and three daughters. He died at his London home, 44 Wilton Crescent, on 16 December 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 3017


Bouverie, Sir Henry Frederick (1783-1852), army officer, third son of the Hon. Edward Bouverie (1738-1810) -- son of Jacob Bouverie, first Viscount Folkestone ('c'.1694-1761), MP for Salisbury (1761-71) and Northampton (1790-1810) -- and his wife, Harriet (died 1831), only daughter of Sir Everard Fawkener, sometime ambassador to the Porte, was born on 11 July 1783. In 1811 Bouverie's widowed mother married Lord Robert Spencer, son of the third duke of Marlborough, but had no further children. Edward (1767-1858) and John (1779-1855) were Bouverie's brothers; Henrietta (died 1810), Frances, Mary (died 1816), Jane (died 1865), and Diana his sisters. Bouverie went to Eton College in May 1793, and on leaving about 1798 joined the 2nd dragoon guards at Hertford before moving to London as an ensign in the Coldstream Guards on 23 October 1799. He advanced to lieutenant and captain in the Coldstreams (19 November 1800) and served in Ireland, where he was adjutant to a detachment at Bandon. He went with his regiment on Lieutenant-General Sir Ralph Abercromby's expedition to Egypt, landing under heavy fire with its light company at Abu Qir Bay on 8 March 1801. He saw further action on 13 March, and commanded a company during the battle of Alexandria on 21 March. Homeward bound in May, his ship was captured and Bouverie taken prisoner. Swiftly exchanged, before the close of 1801 he was in Scotland as aide-de-camp to Major-General Lord Rosslyn, his sister Henrietta's husband. After the peace of Amiens (March 1802) he travelled to Russia on a military mission, but was recalled to Ireland, once more as aide-de-camp to Rosslyn, when hostilities were resumed (May 1803). In 1806 he accompanied Rosslyn (then lieutenant-general) on a mission to Portugal and was with him the next year during the bombardment of Copenhagen (September 1807). 
On 31 December 1808 Bouverie embarked for Portugal with the Coldstreams' 1st battalion, on 27 April 1809 being appointed aide-de-camp and assistant military secretary to Lieutenant-General Sir Arthur Wellesley. He was with Wellesley at the crossing of the Douro (12 May) and battle of Talavera (27-8 July), where he was wounded above the right knee and temporarily deafened after being knocked off his horse. To his mother Bouverie described Talavera as 'the most desperate battle that ever was fought' (Hammersley, 4). On advancing to captain and lieutenant-colonel (28 June 1810), Bouverie went back to the Coldstreams' depot in England, returning to Portugal with regimental reinforcements on 25 December 1811. Shortly after taking part in the successful siege of Badajoz (April-May 1812), Bouverie became assistant adjutant-general to the 4th division, with which he was present at the battles of Salamanca (22 July 1812), Vitoria (21 June 1813), the Nive (10 December 1813, where he was mentioned in dispatches), and Orthez (27 February 1814), as well as the siege and storming of San Sebastian (July-August 1813). After the fighting ended, he was named adjutant-general to a force for the war against the United States, but peace was signed (December 1814) before it sailed. 
Bouverie became an extra aide-de-camp to the prince regent and brevet colonel on 4 June 1814. He briefly commanded a Coldstream battalion in Brussels before being superseded by a more senior officer and therefore missing the battle of Waterloo, 'owing to which I am in all probability writing this journal' (Hammersley, 5). Meanwhile, on 2 January 1815, he had been appointed KCB, and for his services in the Peninsula he received the army gold cross and one clasp for Salamanca, Vitoria, San Sebastian, the Nive, and Orthez. Remaining in England, Bouverie obtained a majority in the Coldstreams (18 January 1820), but left the regiment on promotion to major-general (27 May 1825). On 8 July 1826 he married Julia, daughter of Lewis Montolieu and widow of Captain William Wilbraham RN, and they had two children: Henry Montolieu ('b'. 1831?), killed at Inkerman in 1854, and Henrietta ('b'. 1830?). Shortly after his marriage Bouverie commanded the brigade of guards with Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Clinton's expedition to Portugal in support of the young queen being threatened by Spanish-backed opponents. On its arrival in December 1826 the brigade stayed at Cartaxo, then Santarem, before marching to suppress riots in Lisbon. Bouverie left Portugal in April 1828, when the constitutional dispute had been solved. Meanwhile, on 2 February 1827 he had written to congratulate Wellington on his appointment as colonel of the Grenadier Guards, assuring the duke 'that the high character of that distinguished regiment' had been illustrated in the force under his command, however contriving also to inform the duke that his brigade 'is at present very much inconvenienced by the non-arrival of a paymaster' (Hamilton, 92). Three months later, on 8 May, Clinton expressed to Bouverie his 'real satisfaction... [at] the general good conduct and appearance' of the troops which he led (ibid., 93). 
From the end of 1828, for almost eight years, Bouverie commanded the northern district in England. Then a widower accompanied by two small children, on 1 October 1836 he was appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Malta, where he was credited with building several new roads, vastly improving the island's water supply, and, less profoundly, personally giving up snuff. Following the death of William IV, Queen Adelaide spent the winter of 1837-8 in Malta as Bouverie's guest and laid the foundation-stone of the first English church located outside the governor's palace. Bouverie received the GCMG on leaving Malta in June 1843. Promoted lieutenant-general (28 June 1838), he became colonel of the 1st West India regiment (13 May 1842), then of the 97th foot (21 November 1843), and was appointed GCB (18 June 1852). In 1846 he was approached to be commander-in-chief in Canada, 'but being grown old and puffy and blind, I wisely declined' (Hammersley, 5). The following year at Woolbeding, near Midhurst, in Sussex, where his clergyman brother John was rector, he declared himself 'blessed with children whom I dearly love... far happier than I deserve to be' (ibid., 5). As he was preparing to attend the duke of Wellington's funeral in London, Bouverie suddenly fell ill at Woolbeding House, bequeathed to his sister Diana (wife of the Hon. George Ponsonby) by their stepfather, and died there on 14 November 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 3018


Bouverie, William Pleydell-, third earl of Radnor (1779-1869), politician, was born on 11 May 1779 at 4 Grafton Street, Marylebone, Middlesex, the eldest son of Jacob Pleydell-Bouverie, second earl of Radnor (1750-1828), and his wife, Anne Duncombe (1759-1829), daughter of Lord Feversham. Viscount Folkestone, as he was styled until his father's death, witnessed the early stages of the French Revolution when sent to Paris as a boy to learn French. He was tutored at home and went for two years to the University of Edinburgh before commencing his studies at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1795. His education culminated in a grand tour of the northern capitals of Europe from 1797 to 1799. On 2 October 1800 he married Catherine (1776-1804), daughter of Henry Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, earl of Lincoln. She died giving birth to a daughter in 1804. Folkestone's father arranged for his return to the House of Commons for the family borough of Downton in March 1801, followed quickly by translation to the more prestigious Bouverie seat at Salisbury, which he held from 1802 to 1828. The young viscount precociously broke with convention by making his maiden speech within a week of entering the chamber and established himself as a gadfly of government. 
Although Folkestone aligned himself with the moderate William Windham during his first years in parliament, he quickly moved on to less conventional associations with Sir Francis Burdett and Samuel Whitbread. A pattern early emerged in his Commons career of impetuous and sometimes spiteful attacks on individuals such as lords Melville, Wellesley, Chatham, and members of the royal family. Folkestone rose to national prominence in 1809 as a principal prosecutor of the duke of York during a scandal involving the latter's mistress, Mary Anne Clarke, and the sale of military commissions, which led to the prince's resignation as commander-in-chief and personal disgrace. 
Unfortunately, Folkestone's own subsequent dalliance with Mrs Clarke became public knowledge and undermined his credibility and stature. He recovered some popularity with a spirited attack on the government's repressive legislation in the post-Waterloo years, when he personified his dictum: 'If a nobleman cannot perform his obligation, which is to protect the liberties of all the people, then he has no reason to take part in politics' (Huch, 80). On 24 May 1814 he married his second wife, Anne Judith (1790-1851), daughter of Sir Henry St John-Mildmay, third baronet. They had four daughters and two sons, including the politician Edward Pleydell-Bouverie. 
Folkestone succeeded his father as third earl of Radnor in January 1828, and in the House of Lords he supported parliamentary reform, the new poor law, the abolition of slavery, and repeal of the corn laws. He took the lead in the movement to accord full rights to non-Anglicans at Oxford and Cambridge, bringing in bills to abolish subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' (1835) and to revise college statutes (1837). He retired from politics in 1848, occupying himself with agricultural experimentation and philanthropy. Radnor died at his seat, Coleshill House, Berkshire, on 9 April 1869, and was buried at Britford, Wiltshire, on 15 April. 
Radnor frittered away his influence through intemperance and unwillingness to accept responsibility. He rejected offers of junior office in 1806 and twice declined inclusion in Grey's cabinet, in 1833 and 1834. Though friendly with many whigs, he distrusted all who sought power. His father's repressive influence and a long friendship with William Cobbett distorted Radnor's perceptions of political reality. His hauteur and humourless sanctimony vitiated his considerable talents as a speaker and popular agitator. Canning lampooned Radnor's oratory, delivered 'with all the contortions of a Sybil without her inspiration' (Huch, 105). Radnor's advocacy of universal manhood suffrage, the secret ballot, annual parliaments, and disestablishment of the Church of England made him genuinely radical. His strong evangelical Anglican faith led Radnor to declare the corn laws unchristian. He sought atonement by making 'good use of his riches' (Brent, 125). His uncritical discipleship of the classical economists was, like his radicalism, unusual among the great landed magnates of his era, but Radnor left little in the way of a lasting legacy, except perhaps for 'The Economist', which his generous financial support helped to survive its birth pangs. His mixture of progressive ideas and aristocratic paternalism was more gracefully and effectively espoused by other whig grandees. 


@@@@@


doc= 3019


Bouyer, (Reynold) Gideon (1741-1826), Church of England clergyman and educational reformer, was born in London on 24 December 1741 and baptized at the Huguenot church in Threadneedle Street, the son of John Baptist Gideon Bouyer (died 1748), who had been educated for the church in the Netherlands, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1794). After his father's death he was taken in by relatives for school and university education at Leiden, and then spent a period in Lausanne. He matriculated in 1761 at Trinity College, Cambridge, and was elected as a scholar in the following year before migrating to Jesus College two years later. Ordained deacon in 1764, Bouyer served as a curate at Burwell, Cambridgeshire. He interrupted his studies to act as tutor to Robert Bertie, second son of the third duke of Ancaster, who was then at Eton College; both the duke and duchess were courtiers and this period of residence at Eton brought Bouyer close to the family, and may have given him court connections. He returned to Cambridge to graduate LLB in 1769. In the following year he was made perpetual curate at Edenham, Lincolnshire, site of the Bertie seat; he was by then also domestic chaplain to the duke. Ordained priest in 1771, he was presented by Ancaster to the valuable livings of Willoughby-cum-Sloothby and Theddlethorpe St Helen, Lincolnshire, and on the strength of this, on 13 April 1771, he married Elizabeth Ponton (died 1831), of Little Ponton, Lincolnshire. In Willoughby, Bouyer became in effect a local gentleman -- the 'Universal British Directory' referred to the rectory as one of a small number of neighbourhood 'seats' -- and he might have passed his life there comfortably enough. However, in 1785, he was recommended by Queen Charlotte to the patronage of Shute Barrington, then bishop of Salisbury; Barrington made him a prebendary of Sarum and when he moved to Durham, also appointed Bouyer there: he was further made a trustee of Lord Crewe's charity. Much was expected of Durham prebends, and for the next decade and more Bouyer spent the winter and spring, and sometimes other intervals too, in Durham or elsewhere in the region (including around Bamburgh Castle, site of Crewe's estates and library). In 1803 he was appointed 'official' (the equivalent of archdeacon) for the scattered parishes of the dean and chapter's officialty, a position he retained until his death. From 1805 he served as subdean of the cathedral, and came to base himself entirely in the north-east, leaving his Lincolnshire parishes in the hands of curates -- though he resigned his posts there only in 1811. In 1810 he obtained the vicarage of Eglingham, Northumberland, which in 1814 he exchanged for that of Northallerton, north Yorkshire, which lay at the centre of a cluster of officialty parishes. In 1812 he was collated to the archdeaconry of Northumberland, to which position was annexed the rectorship of Howick. 
Given that Bouyer would establish himself as a local activist, his pastoral career got off to a slow start: though appointed to his Lincolnshire parishes in 1771, he seems not to have taken up residence in Willoughby until 1775. Thenceforth he conducted services at Willoughby and also acted as a local magistrate for South Lindsey. In 1780-81 he was away, following the early death of his former pupil, Robert Bertie, who had become fourth duke in 1778. The Bertie family regrouped around the fourth duke's sister's new husband, the MP Peter Burrell, and their newly rented home at Gunby Hall, close to Willoughby; Bouyer's life then stabilized. He continued to tap family support thereafter but, now aged forty, embarked on a pattern of public engagement -- directed first towards general utility, then church interests more specifically -- that lasted until his death. 
The first issues to engage Bouyer's attention were the state of the local economy and the costs of maintaining the relief-dependent poor. He contributed to a range of Lincolnshire efforts to promote wool production, the worsted industry, and local employment, first by persuading his fellow magistrates for the Louth and Spilsby division to direct overseers to make relief in general conditional on work, and relief for children on their having mastered knitting (by the age of six) and spinning (by the age of nine). Spinning schools were established at parish expense, with the encouragement of a subscription Society for the Promotion of Industry, led by Bouyer, which ran competitions to reward children's achievements. Bouyer publicized these efforts in a pamphlet of 1784, 'An Account... of the Society for the Promotion of Industry in the Southern District of Lindsey', updated in a second edition in 1786 and expanded three years later. He was also among the promoters of a spinning and weaving factory in Louth, later successfully redeveloped as a carpet factory, and in 1785, with his wife, he promoted a 'stuff ball' at Alford, open only to the society's subscribers, at which participants had to wear Lincolnshire woollens. The ball was relocated to Lincoln a few years later and became a fixture on the county calendar until 1938, though the requirement to wear wool was abandoned in 1827. 
Bouyer's spinning-school scheme attracted speedy imitation in Rutland and, within a few years, also in Essex. It was praised in Thomas Ruggles's 'History of the Poor' (1794), and came to the attention of George Rose, William Pitt's senior secretary to the Treasury, then engaged in assembling advisers to help Pitt revise the poor laws. Rose sought Bouyer's comments on a draft bill, whose provisions for the establishment of parochial 'schools of industry' drew on the Lindsey experiment. 
At this stage Bouyer was above all concerned to promote children's work. He argued that too much time was wasted teaching children to read, when this could easily be done much more quickly, perhaps just on Sundays -- though he was keen to see child spinners instructed in the catechism. As a Creweian trustee, he reconfigured a girls' school at Bamburgh Castle in the form of a school of industry. In 'An Earnest Address to the Parents, Guardians, or Other Friends of Such Children as Now Take, or Are Intended to Take, the Benefit of the Charity School, for Sixty Poor Girls, as It Has Been Lately Regulated at Bamburgh Castle' (1795) he defended the school's new emphasis on work, in preference to fractions; he wrote a report emphasizing its success in employing children for the Society for Bettering the Condition of the Poor (no. 37, 1798). In Lincolnshire, however, he encountered parental resistance and at Bamburgh enrolments plummeted -- though falling numbers were offset by the admission of poor girls from elsewhere as boarders, on which basis the school continued to operate until the later nineteenth century. 
Bouyer's subsequent ventures reflected his growing involvement with church government and politics. The later 1790s saw a sharp rise in tension between the established church and 'new' dissent, then being spread by itinerant preachers. Bouyer initiated collective action among the clergy of the Louth and Horncastle divisions of the Lincoln archdeaconry. Their survey of church attendance concluded that less than a third of the adult population attended church, and less than a sixth took communion. They resolved to set examples of religious living, and to try to increase religious commitment among parishioners; they also suggested that laws might be tightened to make it more difficult for 'fanatical' itinerants to gain licences. Bouyer forwarded the report to his bishop, George Pretyman, who as Pitt's former tutor had a hotline to government; he sent it on to William Grenville, Pitt's cousin and foreign secretary, who was moved to start work on an 'ecclesiastical plan' to reform the church, especially by promoting clerical residence. Bouyer was among those consulted on this plan as it developed. Though it fell by the wayside when Pitt resigned in 1801, it prepared the ground for later church reform measures. Meanwhile the report itself was published, as 'Report from the Clergy of a District in the Diocese of Lincoln, Convened for the Purpose of Considering the State of Religion in the Several Parishes in the Said District' (1800), and attracted a number of responses, including Joseph Benson's 'A Vindication of the People Called Methodists' (1800). Bouyer and his clerical colleagues continued their efforts to engage their parishioners with the Church of England, publishing in 1804 'Two Addresses to the Inhabitants of the Several Parishes in the Deanries of Louth-Esk, and Ludburgh, Calcewaith... One on the Duty of Family Prayer, and the Other on Reading the Holy Scriptures'. 
In the early nineteenth century educational effort was increasingly inflected by sectarianism, and Bouyer's energies were accordingly reoriented. Support from Durham was credited by contemporaries with helping to turn the tide in favour of the specifically church-oriented educational reformer Andrew Bell, as against the initially more prominent Quaker convert Joseph Lancaster. Barrington led efforts to extend school provision in the diocese, but with strong backing from Bouyer and other prebends, including Thomas Burgess and Robert Gray. On first introducing himself Bouyer had told Bell that he was keen to share with him his own sketches and plans, and he subsequently established Bell's 'Madras system' in Durham Blue Coat and Sunday schools, and later in his parishes of Eglingham and Northallerton. Bouyer's appointment as archdeacon in 1812 enabled him to promote this work across Northumberland. 
Having established himself as an activist in the cause, Bouyer was drawn into the metropolitan circle dedicated to its promotion. In the wake of Herbert Marsh's famous sermon to the annual meeting of charity schools in St Paul's in 1811, calling for 'national education', he joined a small group including Andrew Bell, the archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Manners-Sutton, and the high-churchman and leader of the Hackney Phalanx, Henry Handley Norris. They agreed that Bouyer's charge of that year, 'A Comparative View of the Two New Systems of Education for the Infant Poor', should be publicized alongside Marsh's sermon to prepare the ground for the launch of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church. Warning against non-denominational education, Bouyer argued here that orthodox dissenters and members of the Church of England had a common interest in opposing proposals to educate children in any and every faith. Later he would challenge further metropolitan plans: he argued that the new society should not follow the old metropolitan committee/provincial correspondent model of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), but should assign the provinces a greater role; he sought the prime minister's support for his position. Plans for the society were reconfigured in the light of his and others' protests. Bouyer seems to have been content to accept the marginalization of industry in the new scheme: the society's position was that schools of industry might be affiliated with it (as the Bamburgh Castle school came to be), but that the society would leave to local decision whether or not to combine book learning with hand work. 
Bouyer went on to help with the reconfiguration of the SPCK itself. As archdeacon he promoted a drive to establish district committees, initially in Alnwick and Bamburgh, then more generally in his archdeaconry and in north Durham. When he failed to persuade these committees to contribute to a general scheme for parochial libraries, he took responsibility on his own shoulders. Having no children to whom to leave his fortune, he poured about $1400 into purchasing books for every parish in Northumberland, to a total of more than 30,000 volumes. 
Bouyer showed loyalty to his family. His mother lived at Willoughby both before her second marriage (to John Chevalier, master of St John's College, Cambridge) and from his death until her own in 1794. Bouyer made his nephews -- sons of his sister Perigal -- his curates at Willoughby, and secured the preferment of the second surviving son, Charles, to the valuable living of Ellingham, Northumberland, which he held between 1803 and 1854. In later life, as a public figure and wealthy man, he was frequently called upon to support desert of various kinds. Beneficiaries of his efforts included the artist Edmund Hastings and the Polish dwarf Jozef Boruwlaski. 
Bouyer died at Durham on 30 January 1826, and was buried in Durham Cathedral. According to the preacher of his funeral sermon, 'simplicity of heart, singleness of object' were his predominant features. His will (of 1821) thanked God for great blessings spiritual and temporal beyond all expectation or desert. The bells of Willoughby rang a dumb peal for a day to mark his passing. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 August 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 3020


Boevey, Catherina (bap. 1670, d. 1726), benefactor, was baptized on 1 May 1670 in the parish of St Laurence Pountney, London, the first child of John Riches (1628-1718), a merchant and landowner, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Thomas Davall (1619-1663), a merchant, and Anne Potts (1620-1700), daughter of Thomas Potts, gentleman. Catherina's father was a naturalized Dutchman, originally from Amsterdam. The most notable member of her mother's family was Catherina's uncle, the MP Sir Thomas Davall. Catherina had one sister, Anne 
(Hannah; 1671-1689)
, and one brother, John Riches (died 1676). 
As a child, Catherina Riches lived in St Laurence Pountney, the London parish in which her father was active and to which she was assigned the grant and demise of the rectory, tithes, advowson, and hereditaments in 1704 (Crawley-Boevey, 70). In 1685, aged only fifteen (though officially claiming to be 'about eighteen'), she married William Boevey (1657-1692), merchant, son of James Boevey (1622-1696), an Anglo-Dutch merchant and lawyer, and his wife, Izabella de Visscher. Thereafter Catherina lived out her life on William's estate at Flaxley Abbey, Gloucestershire, while also keeping a town house in Duke Street, Westminster. 
Little is known of Boevey's brief married life. The couple had at least two servants, Rachel Vergo and Matthew Stephens. A female friend of Richard Steele claimed that Catherina suffered her husband's 'excesses both in debauch and ill-humour like a martyr, cheerful under her very feelings' (Manley, 3.209). In 1692, when Catherina was twenty-two, William died of dropsy. In the inscription on his tomb in Flaxley church, Catherina described him as 'a man most distinguished for faithfulness and good repute; not sparing of aught that was his own; not covetous of aught that was another's; known to no one by wrong done, known to countless persons by kindness wrought'. They had no children. 
The sole heir to her father's considerable wealth, and left $1000 in trust by her stepgrandfather, the military engineer Sir Bernard de Gomme, in 1685, Boevey inherited on her husband's death the Flaxley estate, despite the fact that her father-in-law, James Boevey, contested the will. When her own father died in 1718 Catherina also inherited his 'real and personal estate in the counties of Kent, Surrey, London, and Middlesex'. 
Although well acquainted with one of her neighbours, John Kyrle (Pope's 'Man of Ross'), and often courted, Catherina never remarried. Instead she devoted her life to charitable work and so 'in every minute particular fulfilled the character of a woman of nice honour and strict virtue' (Manley). She was the centre of a circle of female philanthropic friends, such as Mrs Cowling, Margaret Barrow, Grace Butler, and in particular Mary Pope of Twickenham, with whom Boevey had agreed to be buried in the same vault after their deaths. Other members of her circle included Dorothy Bayley (died 1727), of Fretherne, Gloucestershire, and Susanna Lloyd, wife of John (friends of Catherina's distant relation Bishop Thomas Ken), who was godmother to Marie Renouard, wife of Colonel St Pierre of the Royal dragoon guards. 
Boevey's charity extended from lending money to those in distress to inviting six poor children to her house every Sunday for dinner and religious instruction. By 1695 her philanthropic activities had involved her with the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) founded by Thomas Bray. Like Bishop Ken, she founded and maintained one of the earliest catechetical schools in the parish of Flaxley. With Bishop Robert Frampton she helped the mission of the Revd John Talbot and the Revd George Keith in New England, including the endowment of St Mary's Church at Burlington, New Jersey. The silver chalice Boevey presented to the church in 1708 was still in use in 1876. In addition she contributed a subscription of $500 to a college established to train missionaries in the Bermudas, following Dean Berkeley's 'Proposal for the better supplying of churches in our foreign plantations, and for converting the savages to Christianity' (1724). This sum was originally donated by 'a Lady who desires to be unknown' (Anderson, 3.476), and the identity of the benefactor was only disclosed by Mary Pope after Boevey's death. Her religious sympathies lay with the nonjuring bishops of the Church of England, like Thomas Ken. Two who accepted her offer of shelter at Flaxley Abbey were Frampton and George Hickes, the titular bishop of Thetford, whose 'Linguarum septentrionalium thesaurus' (1705) was written with Boevey's financial support. Other beneficiaries included the Three Choirs Festival, of which she was a founder, held at Hereford, Worcester, and Gloucester from 1715. 
Boevey's philanthropy and widowhood went hand in hand with a love of fashionable clothes. Her female servant, who was also her milliner and mantua maker, claimed that 'Mrs Boevey frequently called for her charity account book to see if it kept pace with her expenses in dress, which was always very handsome' (Crawley-Boevey, 113-14). Certainly she was well known for her fine appearance and beauty. Hickes, for example, described her as the 'Christian Hypatia of our England' (Hickes, 1.xlvii). To Delarivier Manley she was Portia in the third volume of her 'The New Atalantis: Memoirs of Europe towards the Close of the Eighth Century'. Manley saw her as: 'one of those lofty black and lasting beauties that strikes with reverence, and yet delight. There is no feature in her face, nor anything in her person, her air and manner, that could be exchanged for any others, and she not prove a loser. Then as to her mind and conduct, her judgment, her sense, her stedfastness, her reading, her wit, and conversation, they are admirable, so much above what is lovely in the sex; shut but your eyes, and allow for the music of her voice, your mind would be charmed as thinking yourself conversing with the most knowing, the most refined of ours. Free from all levity and superficialness her sense is solid and perspicuous. She is so neat, so perfect an economist, that in taking all the greater beauties of life she does not disdain to stoop to the most inferior. In short, she knows all that a man can know without despising what as a woman she should not be ignorant of. (quoted in Crawley-Boevey, 86)' Richard Steele likewise praised her: 'aspect and mien which draw the attention and expectation of all who converse with you, and a wit and good sense which surmount the great conceptions your person raises in your beholders, [yet] those perfections are enjoyed by you like gifts of common acceptation; that lovely and affable air expresses only the humility of a great and generous heart; and the most shining accomplishments, used by others to attract vulgar admiration, are serviceable to you only as they adorn piety and charity. ('Lady's Library', vol. 2, 21 July 1714, dedication)' Three years earlier Boevey's combination of virtue, piety, and beauty had placed her at the centre of a series of articles about Platonic love which appeared in Steele's and Addison's 'The Spectator' (nos. 113, 115, 118, 517). According to Arthur W. Crawley-Boevey, Catherina was the inspiration for the character of the 'perverse widow' -- beautiful, confident, but inaccessible -- sought by the lovelorn Sir Roger de Coverley. 
In the words of Mary Pope's half-sister, Margaret Barrow, Boevey was taken 'with a most violent colick' on 18 January 1726 (Fosbrooke, 2.179). She died between 11 a.m. and noon on 21 January 1726 from, according to her servant Rachel Vergo, a bowel complaint (Crawley-Boevey, 115). She was buried on 23 January at Flaxley church alongside her friend Mrs Cowling (died 1719), and later her friends Grace Butler (died 1763) and Mary Pope (died 1747). A few years after Catherina's death Mary Pope had a monument, designed by James Gibbs, erected to her in Westminster Abbey; this formed the backdrop to Sir Elton John's rendition of 'Goodbye England's Rose' at the funeral of Diana, princess of Wales, in September 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 3021


Bovill, Sir William (1814-1873), judge, was born on 26 May 1814 at All Hallows Barking, Essex, a younger son of Benjamin Bovill, corn merchant, of Durnford Lodge, Wimbledon. He did not go to university, but began his legal career in articles with solicitors in the city of London. He then practised as a special pleader below the bar, but soon joined Middle Temple. He was called to the bar in 1841, joining the home circuit. On 20 August 1844 he married Maria, eldest daughter of John Henry Bolton, of Lee Park, Blackheath; they had many children. 
Bovill's familiarity with solicitors helped him at the bar. Another connection, with a firm of manufacturers in the East End of London, gave him some knowledge of engineering, which led to a considerable patent practice, in addition to the commercial cases which were his bread and butter. He became a QC in 1855 and was elected MP for Guildford in 1857, though he was not active in the House of Commons for several years. He did, however, take an interest in legal reform, and was responsible for two acts, the 'Petition of Right Act' and the 'Partnership Law Amendment Act'. In 1865 he pressed for the amalgamation of all the law courts into one building, and in 1866 for a better library at the Patent Office. On 6 July 1866 he was appointed solicitor-general in Lord Derby's last administration; but he held office for only five months. In November 1866 he succeeded Sir William Erle as chief justice of the common pleas, Sir John Karslake replacing him as solicitor-general. He had been elected treasurer of the Middle Temple a few months earlier, but resigned on being raised to the bench. In 1870 he was made honorary DCL of the University of Oxford, and was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Bovill became famous throughout the country as judge in the first Tichborne trial, one of the most celebrated cases of the Victorian period, when he ordered the plaintiff, who claimed to be Roger, the long-lost son of the Tichbornes, to be indicted for perjury. He was much criticized for failing to appear impartial at the trial and was widely believed to have expressed his opinion against the claimant at a lord mayor's dinner before the trial opened. Bovill's admirers claimed that no judge was more learned, forceful, or acute, though even they admitted that he lacked eloquence. He was also praised for his memory and industry, and for scrupulously returning briefs if he did not feel that he could give them due attention. But he was widely believed to leap to conclusions before hearing all of the evidence, and the publicity which was given to his most controversial case continued to tarnish his reputation in public eyes. It was rumoured that he begged people not to mention the case to him, saying 'It weighs upon me' (Woodruff, 393). He fell ill in 1873 and was thought to be recovering when, at noon on 1 November 1873 he died of apoplexy at his home, Coombe House, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. He had been appointed a member of the judicature commission in the same year, but his work on the midland circuit and then ill health prevented him from taking much part in its activities. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 3022


Bowack, John (fl. 1705-1737), writing master and topographer, was for many years a writing master at Westminster School. In 1705, when living in Church Lane, Chelsea, he began to publish, in folio numbers, 'The Antiquities of Middlesex', which contained a description of the church monuments in the county with a historical account of each church and parish, and the seats, villages, and names of the most eminent inhabitants. Two parts of this work appeared in 1705-6, comprising the parishes of Chelsea, Kensington, Fulham, Hammersmith, Chiswick, and Acton. A third part was promised, which would have covered Ealing, New Brentford, Isleworth, and Hanwell; but, lacking encouragement, Bowack proceeded no further. His skill in ornamental handwriting is demonstrated in BL, Harleian MS 1809, a thin vellum book containing two neat drawings in Indian ink and various kinds of English text and print hands. This was sent to Lord Oxford in December 1712 with a letter, in which Bowack expressed the hope that his little work might find a place in his lordship's library. 
In July 1732 Bowack was appointed clerk to the commissioners of the turnpike roads, and in 1737 assistant secretary to the Westminster Bridge commissioners, with a salary of $100 a year. The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 3023


Bowater, Sir Edward (1787-1861), army officer, was descended from a Coventry family, members of which were established in London and at Woolwich during the eighteenth century. From one of the latter, a wealthy landowner, the government purchased most of the land subsequently occupied by the artillery and others at Woolwich. Sir Edward was the only son of Admiral Edward Bowater of Hampton Court and his wife, Louisa, daughter of Thomas Lane and widow of G. E. Hawkins, sergeant-surgeon to George III. He was born in St James's Palace on 13 July 1787, was educated at Harrow School, and entered the army in 1804 as ensign in the 3rd foot guards, with which he served in the Peninsula from December 1808 to November 1809, in the Peninsula and south of France from December 1811 to the end of the war, and in the Waterloo campaign. He was present at the passage of the Douro, the capture of Porto, the battles of Talavera, Salamanca, and Vitoria, the sieges of Burgos and San Sebastian, the passage of the Bidassoa, and the battles of Quatre Bras and Waterloo, and was wounded at Talavera and at Waterloo. 
In 1837 Bowater left the Scots Fusilier Guards, after thirty-three years' service, on promotion to major-general; he was made a KCH the same year. On 22 May 1839 he married Emilia Mary, daughter of Colonel Michael Barne of Sotterley and Dunwich, Suffolk, sometime MP for Dunwich; they had one daughter, Louisa Mary Knightley. Soon after the arrival of Prince Albert, Bowater was appointed his equerry; in 1846 became lieutenant-general and groom-in-waiting in ordinary to Queen Victoria, and in 1854 was promoted full general. 
In 1861 the queen's youngest son, Prince Leopold, then eight years old, accompanied Bowater and his family to the south of France. Bowater, whose health had been failing, died at Cannes, aged seventy-three, on 14 December 1861, the day of Prince Albert's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 3024


Bowden, John (d. 1750), Presbyterian minister, may have been the brother of Samuel Bowden (fl. 1733-1761), physician and poet, of Frome, Somerset, but he also has been identified by Walter Wilson with the Bowden who studied under Henry Grove at Taunton. This is apparently an error, however, for Bowden was settled at Frome before 1700 as assistant to Humphrey Philips, who had been silenced at Sherborne, Dorset, in 1662, whereas Grove did not set up his academy until 1706. Bowden became sole minister on Philips's death in 1707, and the meeting-house in Rook Lane was built for him that year. According to Evans's list he had 1000 hearers in 1717, among whom was Elizabeth Rowe, the dissenting poet, whose funeral sermon he preached in 1737. Bowden himself was a poet: although he does not seem to have published any separate volume of poetry, he contributed two poems to the collection of 'Divine Hymns and Poems on Several Occasions' (1704) by Philomela (probably Elizabeth Rowe) and 'several other ingenious persons'. During the last nine years of his ministry Bowden was assisted by Alexander Houston (1741), Samuel Blyth (1742), Samuel Perrott, and Josiah Corrie (1750), who succeeded him. 
Bowden published four separate sermons, including 'A Sermon Preached at Taunton before an Assembly of Ministers' (1714). With its provocative emphasis on reason, individual judgement, and moral duties, the sermon clearly demonstrates his support for the ideas of the most liberal wing of dissent, which developed into the non-subscribing party after the Salters' Hall controversy. His 'Exhortation' at the ordination of Thomas Morgan was published in 1717, together with the sermon preached on the occasion, 'The conduct of ministers', by Nicholas Billingsley, minister of Ashwick, Somerset. Henry Chandler, minister at Bath and father of Samuel Chandler, added a preface to the work which was published under the title 'A Sermon Preached at the Ordination of Mr Thomas Morgan', and this reached a third edition in 1719. Morgan was Independent minister at Bruton, Somerset, and afterwards at Marlborough, Wiltshire, and an active pamphleteer for the non-subscribers' cause. After being forced from his ministry for heresy, he published the notorious deist work 'The Moral Philosopher' (1737). That Morgan, an Independent, went to Frome for Presbyterian ordination has been treated as an indication of the theological divergence of the two bodies, but Bowden's confession of faith appears strongly trinitarian and Calvinistic. It does, however, reveal a fascination with Newtonian science, which suggests his receptivity to the latest intellectual trends. 
Bowden's involvement with the future deist Morgan, and with the Arian Billingsley, who sheltered the heterodox Hubert Stogdon and James Foster at his home, provides a clue to his own sympathies. In 1718 he was to participate, again with Billingsley, in the more controversial ordination of Stogdon himself at Shepton Mallet, when it appeared that the Exeter assembly would not approve him. Bowden and Billingsley were greatly blamed by the orthodox ministers in Devon for their involvement in this affair, which prompted a flurry of anxious letters to London lamenting the defection of many younger ministers to Arianism. The controversy culminated in the Salters' Hall debates. Underlying the willingness of Bowden and Billingsley to flout the orthodoxy imposed by the subscription party was a more fundamental commitment to scripture as the only rule of faith, and a consequent antipathy to that 'tyrannical, anti-Christian tenet' which allowed any men to 'domineer and dictate in matters of conscience' (Billingsley, 'Sermon... Hubert Stogdon', 32; J. Bowden, 'Sermon Preached at Taunton', 1714, 24). For them, the partisan divisions engendered by the imposition of human creeds threatened to undermine Christianity itself. Bowden also worked closely with Nicholas Billingsley's nephew and eventual successor at Ashwick, Samuel Billingsley, whose ordination sermon he preached in 1725; this was printed for another Somerset friend, Samuel Chandler, then a bookseller, as well as a minister, in London. Bowden's sermon 'The Vanity of All Human Dependence' (1727) was dedicated to the liberal (and heterodox) Benjamin Avery, to whom he was under 'particular obligations'. 
Bowden died in Frome on 8 January 1750. A tablet on the front of his meeting-house commemorates him as 'a learned man, an eloquent preacher, and a considerable poet'. Subsequent lines refer to rising 'storms about the good man', which may allude to a Trinitarian secession from his ministry, a charge given weight by Josiah Thompson, who wrote that the meeting at Frome divided as a result of disputes under Bowden's ministry (James, 676; Thompson, fol. 176'r'). Little is known of Bowden's family except that his wife survived him. In January 1750 one Anne Yerbury of Bradford sent his widow a consolatory letter praising Bowden's poetical powers. Bowden was possibly the grandfather of Joseph Bowden, minister at Call Lane, Leeds, for over forty years, from about 1778, who published 'Sermons Delivered to the Protestant Dissenters at Leeds' and 'Prayers and Discourses for the Use of Families, in Two Parts' (1816). 


@@@@@


doc= 3025


Bowden, John William (1798-1844), ecclesiastical writer, was born in London on 21 February 1798, the eldest son of John Bowden, a director of the Bank of England, and his wife, Mary Anne. In 1812 he went to Harrow, and in 1817 entered Trinity College, Oxford, at the same time as J. H. Newman. From their first meeting, the day after Newman's arrival, they were inseparable companions throughout their undergraduate career. Together they wrote and published 'St Bartholomew's Eve' (1818), a poem in two cantos with a romantic plot of young love thwarted by a scheming priest, and edited 'The Undergraduate', a short-lived periodical that ran to six weekly numbers in 1819. Bowden took mathematical honours in 1820, and proceeded MA in June 1823. In the autumn of 1826 he was appointed a commissioner of stamps and held the office for fourteen years. On 6 June 1828 he married Elizabeth, youngest daughter of Sir John Edward Swinburne, bt, of Capheaton. The poet Algernon Swinburne was her nephew. 
From 1833 Bowden was a fervent adherent of the Tractarian movement. To H. J. Rose's 'British Magazine' he contributed six of the 178 hymns later published under the title 'Lyra apostolica' (1836). His contributions are signed greekLetteralpha. He was one of Newman's first collaborators on the 'Tracts for the Times', to which he himself contributed numbers 5, 29, 30, 56, and 58. Between 1836 and 1841 he published four major articles in the 'British Critic': 'Rise of the papal power', 'On Gothic architecture', 'On British association', and 'On the church in the Mediterranean'. 
In the spring of 1839 Bowden felt the first symptoms of the tuberculosis which five years later proved fatal. In the autumn of 1839 he went abroad with his family and spent the winter in Malta. In the spring of 1840 he published his 'Life of Gregory the Seventh', a work first suggested to him by Hurrell Froude. The last work published during his lifetime, 'A Few Remarks on Pews' (1843), was an eloquent protest against a practice he denounced as unchristian and discriminatory. 
During the summer of 1843 Bowden's health began to fail rapidly. Newman, then on the brink of his Rubicon, could not bring himself to disturb his friend's peace of mind by discussing his dilemma, but was his constant companion in his last days. Bowden died at his father's house in Grosvenor Place on 15 September 1844 and was buried at Fulham, his childhood home. Though he died in full communion with the Church of England, his widow followed Newman into the Roman Catholic church in July 1846, together with her children. Her two sons later became priests of the London Oratory, and the elder, John Edward, was the biographer of F. W. Faber. One of her two daughters became a nun. She herself lived to attend Newman's funeral. John Bowden's posthumous 'Thoughts on the Work of the Six Days of Creation' (1845) was prefaced by a short biographical notice contributed by Newman, who also evoked their friendship in his 'Apologia' (1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 3026


Bowden, Samuel (fl. 1733-1761), physician and poet, of Frome, Somerset, the dates of whose birth and death are not known, was the author of two volumes of poetry, 'Poetical Essays on Several Occasions' (2 vols., 1733, 1735) and 'Poems on Various Subjects. With some Essays in Prose, and a Treatise on Health' (1754). A footnote in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', presumably by John Nichols, the editor of the periodical, states that Bowden 'was a worthy physician and ingenious poet of Frome, a particular friend of Mrs. Rowe (being of the same communion, and living after her death in the same house,) Lord Orrery &. Two volumes of his poems were published by subscription, and several of his pieces have appeared occasionally in our miscellany [the 'Gentleman's Magazine']. ('GM', 1st ser., 48, 1778, 485)' The word 'was' in the description of Bowden gives a 'terminus ad quem' of his life. One piece in Nichols's 'miscellany' appeared in the number for September 1776, a poem titled 'On his Majesty's Intended Marriage to the Princess of Mecklenberg, and her Arrival in England' ('GM', 1st ser., 46, 1776, 424). The poem, in undistinguished couplets, was from Frome and dated 5 September 1761, making it an occasional poem, as George III was married on 8 September of that year. Bowden's poem begins: '
Britannia's monarch, whom three realms obey, 

And the more spacious kingdoms of the sea, 

' with its unabashed borrowing, in the opening line, from Pope's 'Rape of the Lock': 'Here Thou, Great 'Anna', whom three Realms obey'. The reference to Mrs Rowe in the 1778 'Gentleman's Magazine' is to the nonconformist poetess Elizabeth Rowe, who was buried in the meeting-house at Frome. James Theobald, earl of Orrery, was one of her correspondents. The Presbyterian minister John Bowden (d. 1750), thought to be Samuel's brother, was in Frome prior to 1700, and it was for him that the meeting-house in Rook Lane was built in 1707. It was he who preached Mrs Rowe's funeral sermon in 1739. In the 1750s a Mrs John Bowden kept lodgings in Bath, where the second of Bowden's works was published, suggesting the possibility of a familial connection. 


@@@@@


doc= 3027


Bowdich, Thomas Edward (1791?-1824), writer and traveller in Africa, was born in Bristol, probably on 20 June 1791, though birth dates of 1790, 1792, and 1793 have also been suggested. His father, Thomas Bowdich, was a hat manufacturer and merchant there, and his mother was one of the Vaughans of Painscastle, Radnorshire. He was educated at Bristol grammar school, and (from the age of nine) at Corsham grammar school, Wiltshire, where he soon became head boy. He was keener on classics than mathematics and was noted for his literary style and his skill as a rider. He was originally intended for the bar, and it was much against his wishes that his father put him to the family trade, and for one year, 1813, he was partner in the firm of Bowdich, Son, and Luce. In the same year on 9 January, at the church of St Mary, Newington, London, he married Sarah, daughter of John Eglonton Wallis, of Colchester ['see 'Lee, Sarah], and entered himself at Oxford, though he never matriculated. In 1814, with the help of his uncle, a Mr Hope Smith, governor-in-chief of the settlements belonging to the Royal African Company, he secured a writership in the service, and subsequently left England for Cape Coast Castle. His wife followed him soon afterwards, but on her arrival she found he had returned to England for a time. In 1816 the African Company planned a mission to the Asante, and initially contemplated appointing Bowdich to lead it. On reaching Cape Coast Castle the second time, he was judged too young and Frederick James (governor of Fort Accra) was appointed to lead the expedition. In the course of the journey, however, Bowdich superseded his chief (a bold step afterwards sanctioned by the authorities), and, through negotiations which subsequently proved controversial, formed a treaty with the king of the Asante, which promised peace to the British settlements on the Gold Coast in return for commercial and political co-operation. In 1818 he returned to England in poor health, and in the following year published a detailed account of his expedition, 'A Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee'. This work, with its glowing account of Asante society and culture, attracted considerable interest. Bowdich presented a small collection of African objects and specimens to the British Museum. 
However, Bowdich's apparent success did not meet with the reward he anticipated. His writings and letters continually speak of unmerited disappointment; the net reward for his great mission amounted to only $200, and it cost him half of this to return home; while a rival, Joseph Dupuis, was appointed consul at Coomassie (Kumasi) with $600 a year. In 1819 he published 'The African Committee', an attack on the corruption and inefficiency of the African Company, and the ensuing controversy resulted in the transfer of the company's forts to the crown. Disappointed by his reception in London, Bowdich left for Paris, where studied mathematics, physical science, and natural history. Soon after, he gained the Cambridge prize of $1000 for a discovery which was dependent on mathematics. In Paris, Humboldt, Cuvier, Denon, Biot, and other eminent savants gave Bowdich a generous reception, and a public 'eloge' was pronounced upon him at the Institut de France. Not only were he and his wife introduced to Cuvier and his circle, but for three years Cuvier's extensive library and splendid collections were made available to them as their own. The French government offered him an appointment on generous terms, which Bowdich felt unable to accept, apparently on patriotic grounds. Early in 1820 he wrote an angry response to 'the geographer of the Quarterly Review' (presumably John Barrow) who had published a critical article on his 'Mission to Ashantee'. His other writings in Paris included a translation of 'Travels in the Interior of Africa to the Sources of the Senegal and Gambia, by G. Mollien' (1820); an account of 'British and Foreign Expeditions to Teembo, with Remarks on Civilization' (1821); an 'Essay on the Geography of North-Western Africa' (1821) accompanied by a large lithographed map, compiled from his own discoveries; and an 'Essay on the Superstitions, Customs, and Arts Common to the Ancient Egyptians, Abyssinians, and Ashantees' (1821), an audacious study which was the first full-length study of west African culture and history. He also published several works on natural history, including 'An Introduction to the Ornithology of Cuvier' (1821) and 'Elements of Conchology' (1822), both illustrated by numerous lithographs prepared by his wife. 
The success of these publications enabled Bowdich and his wife to embark upon a second African expedition, and in August 1822 they sailed from Le Havre to Lisbon. Here, from various manuscripts, Bowdich compiled a complete history of all the Portuguese discoveries in south Africa. They continued to Madeira -- where they remained for some months, collecting geological, geographical, and botanical information -- and then travelled to the Gambia, where Bowdich began a trigonometrical survey of the river. His enthusiasm for scientific observation was said to have cost him his life there, for while taking astronomical observations at night he caught cold, which was followed by fever, resulting in his death, at the early age of thirty-three, on 10 January 1824. The published account of his last expedition was edited and illustrated by his wife. 
Though small in stature, Bowdich was an energetic man. He was an excellent linguist, a graphic writer, and an ardent conversationalist. His reputation as a scholar, enhanced by his association with Cuvier and Humboldt, still survived in the late twentieth century. He left a widow and three children, one of them named after the two companions of his Asante mission. 


@@@@@


doc= 3028


Bowdler, Henrietta Maria (1750-1830), writer and literary editor, was born in Conington, Huntingdonshire, the daughter of Thomas Bowdler ('bap'. 1719, died 1785), and his wife, Elizabeth Stuart Bowdler, nee Cotton (d. 1797). She was one of six children, all of whom were raised in Bath and educated by their literary mother; their father's carefully excised readings of Shakespeare in the evenings also had a considerable influence on the minds of the Bowdler children. Her siblings included Jane Bowdler (1743-1784), John Bowdler (1746-1823), and Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), the last of whom possessed, until late in the twentieth century, the entire credit (or blame) for the expurgation of Shakespeare that Henrietta Bowdler had in fact originated. 
Henrietta Bowdler's first publication was her edition of her sister Jane's 'Poems and Essays, by a Lady Lately Deceased' (1786). Jane's health had been ruined by bouts of measles and smallpox, and the volume was originally published for the benefit of the hospital at Bath. It was popular in the region, and had run into seventeen further editions by 1830. It was the 'Sermons on the Doctrines and Duties of Christianity' (1801), however, which established Henrietta Bowdler's literary reputation. Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, 'was so struck with their merit', that, believing the volume to have been written by a clergyman, he 'offered through the publisher to confer a benefice on the author' (Gorton). This work passed through nearly fifty editions in almost as many years, and Henrietta Bowdler soon became something of a force in contemporary literary and religious circles: 'half the leaders of high-minded thought in England were in correspondence with her, and many had visited the salon she kept in Bath' (Perrin, 69). 
Gilbert Elliot, earl of Minto, describes the young Henrietta Bowdler: 'She is, I believe, a blue-stocking, but what the colour of that part of her dress is must be mere conjecture, as you will easily believe when I tell you that... she said she never looked at [the dancers in operas] but always kept her eyes shut the whole time, and when I asked her why, she said it was so 'indelicate' she could not bear to look. (Perrin, 69)' It was this delicacy of mind that led Henrietta Bowdler to produce the work for which her brother assumed the credit, and for which she is known today, 'The Family Shakespeare' (1807). Originally published at Bath in four volumes, it contained expurgated versions of twenty Shakespeare plays, from which the editor had 'endeavoured to remove every thing that could give just offence to the religious and virtuous mind' ('Preface', 'The Family Shakespeare', 1807). Henrietta also cut scenes that she deemed trivial or uninteresting, but the excisions primarily consisted of sexual material, or those Roman Catholic references which a good protestant might find distasteful or disturbing. Thomas Bowdler, who later produced a fuller edition of his sister's expurgation in 1818, was in many ways more faithful to the original, restoring the unobjectionable scenes, and confining himself to sexual and religious allusions (although he detected many more of these than his sister had felt necessary to expunge). Henrietta Bowdler's edition of 1807 was published anonymously, but her brother had taken on the mantle of editorship by 1809: an unmarried woman of her stature and beliefs could hardly then acknowledge publicly that she knew enough about sexual impropriety to edit Shakespeare effectively. The later edition of the complete plays that he produced reinforced the notion that he had originated the idea. 
Henrietta Bowdler turned to literary projects of other kinds. She edited the 'Fragments in Prose and Verse by the Late Elizabeth Smith' (1810), and attached to it a memoir of Smith, an impressive scholar and translator with whom Henrietta Bowdler had shared a long-standing correspondence. The volume was popular in religious circles, and ran into several editions. Henrietta Bowdler has also been credited with the anonymously published 'Creation' (1818). She later wrote a novel, 'Pen Tamar, or, The History of an Old Maid' (1831), a work that while 'ostensibly defending both virtue and single women,... excuses the hero's prejudice against old maids with one hateful example and harshly penalizes him and the heroine for their filial obedience' (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.'). Henrietta Bowdler died at Bath on 25 February 1830. She never married. 
Henrietta Bowdler's creation of 'The Family Shakespeare' brought a more general movement of literary expurgation into play. It is true that her small provincial edition caused little immediate stir on its publication, and her brother's substantive ten-volume revision (retitled 'The Family Shakspeare') also passed largely without comment in 1818. But three years after this second edition appeared, a war of words concerning its merit between 'Blackwood's Magazine' and the 'Edinburgh Review' caused sales of 'The Family Shakspeare' to soar, and the revised work passed into general circulation. The delicacy of mind that had in the late eighteenth century been an object of gentle ridicule from such as the earl of Minto found a more appreciative forum in a growing and varied nineteenth-century reading public, an audience for whom a certain responsibility was felt by the class to which the Bowdlers belonged. As Noel Perrin puts it: 'the gentleman, moved by 'noblesse oblige', kindly sets out to save his inferiors from temptation. 'He' can be trusted to read 'Hamlet', but a newly educated grocer will pick up bad ideas' (Perrin, 20). 'The Family Shakspeare' ran into many editions and for generations influenced how Shakespeare was edited and read. By 1850 there were seven expurgated editions of Shakespeare on the market, and by 1900 that number had increased to fifty (ibid., xiii). Although the verb that resulted from the Bowdler surname, along with all of its negative connotations, was linked to Thomas Bowdler alone for almost 150 years, it must also be associated with Henrietta Bowdler's literary legacy. 


@@@@@


doc= 3029


Bowdler, Jane (1743-1784), poet and essayist, was born on 14 February 1743 at Ashley, near Bath, the eldest child of Thomas Bowdler ('bap'. 1719, died 1785) and his wife, Elizabeth Stuart Bowdler, nee Cotton (d. 1797). She was the sister of John Bowdler the elder (1746-1823), religious pamphleteer, Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), editor of Shakespeare, and Henrietta Maria Bowdler (1750-1830), religious poet and Shakespearian editor. Throughout her life she suffered from ill health; in 1759 she had a severe attack of smallpox, and from 1771 until her death was a confirmed invalid. She died in the spring of 1784 at her home in Ashley, and was buried in the family vault at the church of St George the Martyr in London. 
A selection of the poems and essays that Jane Bowdler had written in her later years was published at Bath for the benefit of the local hospital in 1786 under the title of 'Poems and Essays, by a Lady Lately Deceased', edited by her sister Henrietta Maria. Addressing such subjects as sensibility, politeness, candour, and the pleasures of religion, this volume became extraordinarily popular. Seventeen editions were published at Bath in rapid succession between 1787 and 1830. Other editions appeared at Dublin, in London, and in New York, where the first American edition (from the tenth Bath edition) appeared in 1811. Queen Charlotte is said to have found the poems so comforting that she read them three times. A few of Jane Bowdler's pieces, not previously printed, appear in Thomas Bowdler's 'Memoir of the Life of John Bowdler' (1824). 


@@@@@


doc= 3030


Bowdler, John (1783-1815), religious writer, was born in London on 4 February 1783, one of ten children of John Bowdler the elder (1746-1823), religious pamphleteer, and his wife, Henrietta Hanbury. Thomas Bowdler (1782-1856) was his brother. 
Bowdler attended Sevenoaks grammar school and Hyde Abbey School before entering Winchester College. Although he wanted to follow his brother to university, or alternatively to be a barrister or join the army, his father had him placed in a London solicitor's office in 1798. Finding the work tedious, he entered Lincoln's Inn and was called to the bar in 1807. Bowdler was a prominent member of the evangelical Clapham Sect, and planned to enter parliament. 
However, in 1810 signs of consumption appeared, and Bowdler spent the two following years in the south of Europe with his uncle. (His sister Elizabeth died just weeks after his departure.) He finally settled with an aunt near Portsmouth in 1812. Most of his published work was written while he was ill, in 1812-13, and took the form of contributions to the 'Christian Observer', often under the pseudonym Crito. Bowdler never recovered his health, and died in Grosvenor Square, London, on 1 February 1815. His father collected and published his 'Select Pieces in Prose and Verse' in two volumes in 1816; they were reprinted three times by 1819. His brother Charles later published 'The Religion of the Heart as Exemplified in the Life and Writings of John Bowdler' (1857). 


@@@@@


doc= 3031


Bowdler, John (1746-1823), Church of England layman and religious writer, was born at Bath, Somerset, on 18 March 1746, the eldest son of Thomas Bowdler ('bap'. 1719, died 1785) and Elizabeth Stuart Bowdler, nee Cotton (d. 1797), religious writer. He was given a strict Anglican religious upbringing by his mother, and at the age of eight was sent to the school kept by Mr Graves at Claverton, near Bath. For unknown reasons he was moved to an academy at Brompton, Middlesex, where he struggled with Greek but learned much about accountancy. In 1762 he was placed under the private tuition of the Revd Nicholas Brett, of Spring Grove, Wye, Kent, only surviving son of the Revd Thomas Brett, the celebrated nonjuring divine. On his death, in 1776, Brett left his pamphlets (many on the nonjuring controversy) and papers to Bowdler. 
In November 1765 Bowdler entered the London legal office of Mr Barsham, a special pleader. Between 1770 and 1780 he engaged in the study of law, practising as a chamber conveyancer. During these years his closest friend, or soulmate, was Robert Cobb of Lydd, Kent, with whom he delighted to engage in lengthy discussions of law and theology. He was the victim of frequent bouts of serious ill health during this period. On 28 January 1778 he married Henrietta, eldest daughter of John Hanbury, vice-consul of the English factory at Hamburg, and his wife, the sister of Thomas Lawrence (1711-1783), physician and friend of Dr Johnson. They had ten children, six of whom survived infancy. They included Thomas Bowdler the younger (1782-1856) and John Bowdler (1783-1815). Bowdler's elder sister Jane Bowdler died in 1784. On his father's death, in May 1785, Bowdler inherited a small family fortune, which enabled him to retire from the legal profession and move from London to Kent, first, on a seven-year lease, to a house adjacent to Knowle Park, in Sevenoaks. In 1793 he moved from Sevenoaks to Pickhurst Farm, in the parish of Hayes, near Bromley, and finally, about 1806, he moved to Eltham. 
Bowdler became part of a distinguished coterie of Anglican high-churchmen that included John Bowles, Charles Daubeny, William Stevens, and, later, Joshua Watson and others. Looking back to the theology of the Laudian and later Caroline divines and nonjurors they emphasized the apostolical authority and descent of the Church of England and the paramountcy of church unity, as well as the divine-right basis and patriarchal rather than contractual origin of the state. Bowdler can be placed in that tradition of high-church Anglican lay spirituality associated with the name of the one-time nonjuror Robert Nelson (1656-1715), of whose devotional writings he was a fervent admirer. Most of his friends were associated with a nucleus of London high-churchmen commonly known as the Hackney Phalanx. Many of them were also members of an influential high-church Anglican dining club known as the Club of Nobody's Friends, founded by the layman William Stevens, the original 'nobody', in 1801. Bowdler was an intimate friend of Stevens and attended him on his deathbed, in 1807. 
Bowdler 'admired the principles of the Nonjurors, and held their memory in great veneration' but was 'never disposed to follow them to the extent to which some of them carried those principles' ('Memoir', 79). None the less he appears not to have doubted the validity of later nonjuring consecrations, and he was in close attendance, in November 1779, on Robert Gordon, the last of the nonjuring bishops, through a fatal illness. He was a firm opponent of the principles of protestant dissent and strongly disapproved of the Anglican evangelical Sir Richard Hill's 'An Apology for Brotherly Love' (1799) for its partial justification or extenuation of dissent. Though he declined an offer to review it Bowdler warmly approved Charles Daubeny's uncompromisingly high-church 'Guide to the Church' (1798), with its strictures on the sin of schism, against which Hill's 'Apology' was a low-church response. He recommended the publishing of an abridgement of the 'Guide', 'in order to procure for it a more general perusal' (ibid., 165). Bowdler planned, but did not complete or publish, his own defence of Daubeny's 'Guide' and critique of the Methodists and Hill's 'Apology' -- a move that was also partly occasioned by the publication of the moderate evangelical William Wilberforce's highly influential 'Practical View of the Prevailing System of Professed Christians' (1797). Bowdler also corrected drafts of Daubeny's follow-up 'Letters to Sir Richard Hill', published as 'Appendix to the Guide to the Church' (1799), although the author complained that Bowdler had carried the principle of 'removing everything harsh-sounding' 'a little too far' (Daubeny to Boucher, 22 Feb 1799, Boucher MS B/5/6). 
Bowdler's high-church principles also found expression from 1806 in his growing interest in, and support for, the once persecuted and downtrodden episcopal church in Scotland, and he became an active member of a committee formed to raise subscriptions for it. His attempts to place the Church of England and the non-established Scottish episcopal church on an apparently equal ecclesiastical footing were privately criticized even by the moderate high-church bishop of Bangor, John Randolph, who complained that Bowdler's view on the subject had 'not a little spice of the nonjuror in it' (Randolph to Thomas Lambard, 15 Feb 1807, Randolph papers, Bodl. Oxf., MS top. Oxon. d.356, vol. 6, 50'v'). 
Bowdler was an outspoken and stern moralist and a fierce critic of the social and moral ills of contemporary society. His high-church defence of the spiritual rights of the church co-existed with withering denunciations of economic abuses and moral irregularities and strictures on clerical dancing, card-playing, and sabbath profanation that matched those of his Anglican evangelical contemporaries. In 1796, in published addresses to the archbishop of Canterbury, he proposed that those found guilty of adultery be rendered infamous and incapable of marrying and inheriting land. He also recommended that gaming be punished by imprisonment and new laws introduced to enforce public observance of the Lord's day. Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, responded sympathetically but regretted that several of Bowdler's remedies for moral evils were impracticable and could not be enforced. In 1797 Bowdler again sought to expose what he regarded as the immorality and irreligion of the nation with a strongly worded and lengthy pamphlet, 'Reform or Ruin: Take your Choice'. He enunciated the doctrine of apostolic succession but was scathing about what he regarded as abuses in the contemporary church and state. At the root of his panaceas for economic, social, and ecclesiastical reform lay a belief that conduct and principles had first to be reformed. 
It is significant that Bowdler's rigid high-church principles did not preclude him being on close terms with prominent Claphamite evangelicals, notably Henry Thornton and his wife, whom he commended for their 'parental' kindness towards his own son John ('Select Pieces', xx). His own style of churchmanship and spirituality is evident, nevertheless, in the fear that he expressed in his memoir of his son (published in 1816), that readers might suspect that the younger John Bowdler's 'piety bordered on enthusiasm'. He made clear his own position: 'Although no one can be less disposed than myself to become the advocate of enthusiasm, properly so called, for I well know the dangers which attend it, and the dreadful consequences to which it leads; yet, bad as it is, its opposite is surely worse. (ibid., xvii)' The generosity of Bowdler's charitable benefactions was legendary. He was particularly generous in his support for church-building; he was an early advocate of church extension and of the better provision of church accommodation of the poor, and in 1813 responded with enthusiasm to a letter from the banker and Hackney Phalanx ally William Cotton, suggesting the foundation of a church building society. Bowdler helped to form the committee that in 1815 lobbied the bishop of London and then, in 1816, the government, to erect additional churches in the populous parts of England out of public funds. The Church Building Society, formed in July 1817 and formally launched in February 1818, was the fruit of these endeavours. Bowdler was at the forefront of plans to raise $1 million by subscription. He admired Daubeny's appropriation of seatings for the poor at Christ Church, Bath. However, in view of Victorian high-church associations with rich church decoration and furnishings his recommendation of a 'simple, chaste' style of building 'free from all useless or expensive decoration' ('Memoir', 252) is significant in the light of later perceptions of high-churchmanship. 
Bowdler was an early riser and a man of strict devotional habits, being particularly assiduous in the practice of family prayers. He was zealous and could be stern, formidable, and overbearing in his dealings with others, but he also possessed a warm, affectionate personality and made friends easily. As a young man he excelled in boxing, fencing, and horsemanship; he was also an excellent arithmetician and an early advocate of decimalization. His daughter Elizabeth died on 4 December 1810, followed by his son the poet John Bowdler on 1 February 1815. Bowdler developed dropsical symptoms in his last days, and died at Eltham on 29 June 1823, of a 'slight paralysis of the lower abdomen, followed by water effusion'. He was buried at Eltham church, in a vault adjacent to his old friend Bishop George Horne. He was outlived by his younger brother Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), famous as the author of the expurgated, or 'bowdlerized', 'Family Shakspeare' (1818), and by his younger sister, Henrietta Maria Bowdler, who originated it. 


@@@@@


doc= 3032


Bowdler, Thomas (1754-1825), writer and literary editor, was born on 11 July 1754 at Ashley, near Bath, the younger son of Thomas Bowdler ('bap'. 1719, died 1785) and his wife, Elizabeth Stuart Bowdler, nee Cotton (d. 1797). His father, a gentleman of independent fortune, was descended from an ancient family originally settled at Hope Bowdler, Shropshire, and his mother was the second daughter and coheir of Sir John Cotton of Conington, Huntingdonshire, the last baronet in the line of Bruce Cottons. His mother, an accomplished and educated woman, was the first instructor of her six children, who included Jane Bowdler (1743-1784), John Bowdler (1746-1823), and Henrietta Maria Bowdler (1750-1830). 
Thomas Bowdler is said to have suffered much from a serious accident when he was nine, which required operations and an extended convalescence. It was about that time, however, in 1765, that he went to Mr Graves's school at Claverton, near Bath, and first met William Anne Villettes, who was to become a military officer and a lifelong friend. In 1770 Bowdler went to study medicine at St Andrews University, and then moved to Edinburgh, where in 1776 he graduated MD and published his thesis 'Tentamen medicum inaugurale de febrium intermittentium natura et indole'. He spent the next four years travelling in Europe, where in Lisbon in 1781 he caught a fever from a friend whom he attended during a fatal illness. He returned to England in broken health, with his 'physical aversion to sick people' (Perrin, 69) accentuated. Despite being elected a fellow of the Royal Society and a licentiate of the College of Physicians on 9 April 1781, Bowdler retired from the practice of medicine on the death of his father in 1785. 
Thomas Bowdler settled in London, where he lived until 1800. He obtained an introduction to Elizabeth Montagu, 'Queen of the Blues', and became part of a literary and philanthropic circle which included bishops Hinchcliffe and Porteus, Elizabeth Carter, Hester Chapone, and Hannah More. Bowdler devoted himself to charitable work: he acted for many years as chairman of St George's vestry, and was a member of the committee in charge of the Magdalen Hospital. He was also active in the Proclamation Society, formed in 1787 to enforce a royal proclamation against impiety and vice. In 1781 he became a commissioner with Sir Gilbert Elliot and Sir Charles Bunbury to examine the state of the penitentiaries, and he remained an active proponent of prison reform, inspecting gaols throughout the country in 1790. Beginning to feel some disenchantment about the slow progress of his proposed prison reforms Bowdler visited the Low Countries in 1787 and wrote a detailed account of the revolution there in 'Letters Written in Holland in the Months of September and October, 1787' (1788). He also travelled in France in 1788. 
In 1800 Bowdler left London, partly because of the failure of his prison reform project. The economic advantages of the new scheme of transporting prisoners to Australia meant that parliament lost any interest that Bowdler had been able to generate for reform. He moved to St Boniface, in the Isle of Wight, where he lived for ten years, leasing a country estate. On 13 September 1806, aged fifty-two, he married Elizabeth Frevenen or Trevennen, the widow of a naval officer. The marriage was unhappy, however, and after a few years they lived apart. The relationship was never again mentioned by the Bowdler family, even in the posthumous biography of Bowdler by his nephew, Thomas Bowdler (1782-1856); as a result, Thomas Bowdler is usually assumed to have been a bachelor. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1814 Bowdler visited Geneva to settle the affairs of his old friend Lieutenant-General Villettes, who had died in Jamaica in 1807, and he also wrote 'The Life of Villettes', published in 1815. In the same year he published 'Observations on emigration to France, with an account of health, economy, and the education of children', which warned Englishmen against France, and English invalids against French watering-places, recommending Malta instead, which he had visited with a nephew in 1810. His 'Observations' was eventually appended to later editions of the biography of Villettes. 
It was in 1818, however, that Thomas Bowdler produced the work for which he is best-known, 'The Family Shakspeare', an edition of the complete plays best described by its subtitle: 'in which nothing is added to the original text; but those words and expressions are omitted which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a family'. This notion of reading aloud was key, as his own father's reading of Shakespeare had had a formative influence on the young Thomas Bowdler. As he later put it: 'In the perfection of reading few men were equal to my father; and such was his good taste, his delicacy, and his prompt discretion, that his family listened with delight... without knowing that those matchless tragedies contained words and expressions improper to be pronounced... It afterwards occurred to me, that what my father did so readily and successfully for his family, my inferior abilities might... be able to accomplish for the benefit of the public. I say, therefore, that if 'The Family Shakspeare' is entitled to any merit, it originates with my father. (preface, 'The Family Shakspeare', 1843, viii)' The edition published by Longman in 1818 was not the first expurgation for which Thomas Bowdler accepted responsibility. His sister Henrietta Maria Bowdler had originated the project at Bath in 1807, with the publication of the first edition of 'The Family Shakespeare' (spelt differently in his sister's edition). It had contained only twenty plays, avoiding such perilous works for the editor as 'Hamlet', and throughout had excised sexually explicit passages and religious references which might offend the Anglican reader. Thomas Bowdler had assumed the credit for this edition by 1809, probably in order to protect the reputations of his sister and the family. His own fuller edition of the plays operated on much the same principles as his sister's: in the preface he writes of Shakespeare's language that '[m]any words and expressions occur which are of so indecent a nature as to render it highly desirable that they should be erased' (p. viii). He also complains of the unnecessary and frivolous allusions to scripture, which 'call imperiously for their erasement' (p. ix). But Thomas Bowdler was in some respects more faithful to the original text than his sister had been. While it is true that he detected and excised more religious references than she had felt necessary, he also restored scenes that she had cut because she had found them trivial or uninteresting. As Noel Perrin puts it: 'He substituted very few of his own words for Shakespeare's, and he neither abridged nor (with rare exceptions) added commentary. That is, he treated Shakespeare rather as an unusually scrupulous television producer might now. His sister, who started expurgating Shakespeare ten years before he did, used a similar approach, but also often cut 'an uninteresting or an absurd scene', even though she considered it decent. That is, she treated Shakespeare rather as a normal television producer would. (Perrin, xii)' Neither the Bath edition of 1807 nor the London edition of 'The Family Shakspeare' (1818) caused much of a stir on publication. In 1821, however, 'Blackwood's Magazine' roundly criticized Bowdler's edition, and the 'Edinburgh Review' published a defence of his aims and achievement written by Lord Jeffrey, which went so far as to state that all other editions of Shakespeare had been rendered obsolete. The controversy led to increased sales for 'The Family Shakspeare', and it became a best-seller -- Lord Jeffrey's review served as a frontispiece to subsequent editions for over sixty years. Bowdler's expurgation ran into many editions, and as late as 1860, when it came out of copyright, demand for it was running high enough for another publisher to bring out a rival edition to Longman's. 
During the final years of his life Bowdler wrote 'A Short Introduction to a Selection of Chapters from the Old Testament' (1822), intended for a Sunday school society at Swansea, and he also continued his editorial work, attempting to purify Gibbon's 'History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'. This was completed just before 'a cold... falling on his lungs' caused his death at Rhydings on 24 February 1825 (Bowdler, 326). Bowdler was buried in Oystermouth parish churchyard, near Swansea. His expurgation of Gibbon was published by Longman in the following year, proclaiming itself to be 'for the use of families and young persons, reprinted from the original text with the careful omissions of all passages of an irreligious or immoral tendency'. In his preface Bowdler declared himself confident enough in the worth of his project to assert that Gibbon himself would have approved of it, and he also expressed his hope that his altered work might form the basis for future editions. Bowdler's nephew adds in a note that 'it was the peculiar happiness of the writer' to have so purified Shakespeare and Gibbon that they could no longer 'raise a blush on the cheek of modest innocence nor plant a pang in the heart of the devout Christian' (T. Bowdler, 'Note', 'Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire', ed. T. Bowdler, 1826, xiii). 
Bowdler's editing has come in for much criticism for almost two hundred years. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' summarized the view which has largely prevailed by commenting that 'Bowdler's prudery makes sad havoc with Shakespeare's text', and by calling attacks on the edition 'deserved'. Most illustrative of this view of his edition is the word 'bowdlerize', derived from the Bowdler surname. The 'Oxford English Dictionary' defines this word as 'to expurgate (a book or writing), by omitting or modifying words or passages considered indelicate or offensive', but goes on to offer the secondary, more editorial definition of 'to castrate'. First used in print as early as 1836, and still used to denigrate acts of censorship, the verb encapsulates the commonly held view of Bowdler's editorial philosophy and methods. 
It is generally acknowledged that Bowdler's treatment of Shakespeare's text was unacceptable, and its influence can certainly not be denied. His sister's original expurgation and Bowdler's elaboration of her work set a more general movement of literary expurgation into play, and although 'The Family Shakspeare' ran into many editions, more importantly it affected how Shakespeare was edited and read for generations. By 1850 there were seven expurgated editions of Shakespeare on the market, and by 1900 that number had increased to fifty (Perrin, xiii). Bowdlerization, however objectionable on intellectual grounds, clearly had a readership. And a defence of Bowdler's effect on the young reading public, if not of his larger philosophy, came from a quarter as unexpected as Algernon Charles Swinburne: 'More nauseous and more foolish cant was never chattered than that which would deride the memory or deprecate the merits of Bowdler. No man ever did better service to Shakespeare than the man who made it possible to put him into the hands of intelligent and imaginative children; it may well be, if we consider how dearly the creator of Mamillius must have loved them, that no man has ever done him such good service. (Swinburne, 'Social verse', 'Works', 15.278)' 



@@@@@


doc= 3033


Bowdler, Thomas, the younger (1782-1856), Church of England clergyman, the eldest son and heir of John Bowdler (1746-1823), and his wife, Henrietta, 'nee' Hanbury, was born on 13 March 1782. John Bowdler (1783-1815) was a younger brother. He was educated at Hyde Abbey School, Winchester, and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he proceeded BA in 1803 and MA in 1806. On 22 July 1806 he married Phoebe, daughter of Joseph Cotton. They had nine children, four of whom died in infancy. Bowdler was appointed curate of Leyton, Essex, in 1803, and after holding the livings of Ash and Ridley, and Addington, Kent, became incumbent of St Bartholomew's, Sydenham, in 1834. He was a high-churchman of the old school, and opposed both the Romanizing tendencies of the Tractarians, and the evangelicals' attacks upon them. In 1846 he became secretary of the Church Building Society, which his father had been instrumental in founding. On 7 December 1849 he became a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral. Bowdler was the author of a large number of published sermons, with collected editions in 1820, 1834, and 1846. He wrote a memoir of his father in 1824, and edited with Launcelot Sharpe the Greek version of Bishop Lancelot Andrewes's 'Devotions'. He was the editor of the 'Bowdlerized' edition of Edward Gibbon prepared by his uncle, Thomas Bowdler the elder. Bowdler died on 12 November 1856 at 2 Onslow Square, Brompton, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 3034


Bowen, Charles Synge Christopher, Baron Bowen (1835-1894), judge, was born on 1 January 1835 at Woolaston, Gloucestershire, the eldest son of the Revd Christopher Bowen (1801/2-1890), clergyman, an Irishman from co. Mayo, and Catherine Emily Steele (1807/8-1902), whose father, Sir Richard Steele, of the 4th dragoon guards, was an Irish baronet, and whose mother was of mixed Austrian and Irish parentage. Edward Ernest Bowen, schoolmaster, was his younger brother. After attending school in Lille, France, and at Blackheath, Kent, Bowen entered Rugby School at the age of fifteen, already a precocious scholar: he was discovered on his first day reading Euripides' 'Alcestis' for 'amusement' (Cunningham, 18). The masters found him 'delightfully clever' (ibid., 17), and the perennial prize-winner was also popular as an outstanding all-round athlete. Well built, outgoing, and adventurous, he was at one point sorely tempted to join the army. In 1853 he won a scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford. His glittering attainments included the Hertford scholarship for Latin, the chancellor's prize for Latin verse, the Ireland scholarship for classics, and the Arnold historical prize. In 1857, while still an undergraduate, he was elected a fellow, subsequently obtaining first-class honours in 'literae humaniores', and graduating with a BA. He was president of the Union in 1858. 
The same year, Bowen began to read for the bar as a student at Lincoln's Inn. The contrast with Oxford he found deeply depressing: so painful was the memory of that time that in after years he would avoid the very vicinity of his former chambers. In 1860 he suffered the first of many breakdowns in health that were to dog his entire career. Very soon after being called to the bar in January 1861, he became engaged to Emily Frances (died 1897), eldest daughter of James Meadows Rendel, a civil engineer; he joined the western circuit in October and on 7 January 1862 the couple married. Marriage was a bold, perhaps a reckless step for a man without private means who, at twenty-seven, had still to make his way, and who, his constitution already undermined, henceforth enjoyed precarious health, suffering further breakdowns in 1865 and 1868, by which time he had two sons and a daughter. After an unpropitious start on the circuit, he gained the friendship of one of the leaders there, John Duke Coleridge, later lord chief justice, who invited him to join his chambers. With his help, Bowen gradually acquired a reputation for perception and thoroughness. In 1868 he was appointed secretary to the Totnes bribery commission, in 1869 a revising barrister, in 1870 a member of a commission to investigate the operation of the 'Truck Acts', and later that year he was made recorder of Penzance. 
From 1871 to 1874, throughout the protracted hearings of the Tichborne case, Bowen was active as junior counsel for the defendants against the claimant Orton. His senior, John Duke Coleridge, always stressed the immense debt which he owed to Bowen, who, with a diligence and pertinacity which Coleridge classed as 'superhuman' (Cunningham, 133), and aided by a prodigious memory, made himself master of every detail of the case, and who, by painstakingly testing the claimant's minutest allegations, enabled Coleridge successfully to rebut them and to expose Orton as an impostor. Bowen is thought to have devised the preamble much used by Coleridge as a means of avoiding a leading question: 'Would you be surprised to hear that -- ?' ('DNB'). At Orton's subsequent trial for perjury Bowen was appointed one of four prosecuting counsel. But the cumulative strain proved too much, and he again collapsed. The celebrated Tichborne case later (1998) became the subject of a film. 
When Coleridge became attorney-general, he appointed Bowen as junior counsel to the Treasury in 1872. In this capacity Bowen appeared for the crown in many important common-law and commercial cases and rapidly acquired a large commercial clientele. In 1878 his health once more broke down, and he took a tour through Russia to Constantinople. In 1879 he was knighted, and Lord Chancellor Cairns appointed him a judge of the Queen's Bench Division. A year later he again fell seriously ill. In June 1882 he was raised by Lord Chancellor Selborne to the Court of Appeal, where he served for nine years. In Lord Davey's words: 'it is upon his work there that his judicial reputation will rest' (Davey, 215). 
According to his entry in the 'Biographical Dictionary of the Common Law', Bowen 'does not rank as one of the greater of the Victorian judges'. This verdict is somewhat harsh. Sir Frederick Pollock considered Willes, Macnaghten, and Bowen 'the greatest English judges I have known' (Pollock, 172); and C. H. S. Fifoot held that a Court of Appeal of which Bowen, Lindley, and Lord Justice Fry were members 'challenges comparison with any before or since' (Fifoot, 20). Liberal and open-minded, Bowen was a reformer, rightly impatient of legal technicalities which impeded justice. His views on the function of law in society were dynamic: 'it changes, it must change, it ought to change' (Bowen, 'Administration of the law', 329); and his judicial activism is exemplified in the case of the armament manufacturer Nordenfelt (1892), where he held that a worldwide covenant in restraint of trade -- prima facie void -- was enforceable in the public interest. In 'The Mogul Steamship Company v. McGregor' (1889), he ruled that the elimination of commercial competitors, however robust the means employed, as long as they are not unlawful, is not actionable. 'Thomas v. Quartermaine' (1887) remains an authority on contributory negligence and the maxim 'volenti non fit injuria'. 
Bowen was ever the scholarly Oxonian, 'precise, scrupulous, even fastidious, in the spoken and in the written word' (Fifoot, 40). Observers noted his deferential mildness as an advocate, 'that extremely polite and lady-like manner for which he was famed' (Williams, 223) and his 'ineffectiveness' when addressing juries (Lord Justice Mathew, in Coleridge, 2.404). A self-deprecating irony sometimes misfired. In an early case, he prosecuted a burglar who had been apprehended on the roof with the tools of his trade. 'If, gentlemen of the jury', Bowen is supposed to have said: 'you think that the accused was on the roof of the house to enjoy the midnight breeze, and, by pure accident, happened to have about him the necessary tools of a housebreaker, with no dishonest intention of employing them, you will, of course acquit him. (Fifoot, 20)' The jury took him at his word.Bowen's legal reputation owed more to his intellectual finesse than to his style of advocacy: another contemporary described him as 'a legal archangel who danced with ease on the point of a needle' (Smith, 129). But the ease was deceptive: his forensic triumphs were the hard-earned fruit of strenuous lucubrations, of a self-doubting and almost morbid perfectionism in preparing his cases. 'Cases', he said, 'are won at chambers' (Cunningham, 135); and the fine points which he successfully pleaded were drafted and redrafted beforehand 'with the finest camel-hair pencils' (Smith, 129). Members of his chambers, who included H. H. Asquith, had a very high regard for him. On the bench he demonstrated the same meticulous attention to detail, the same 'mastery of the law, expressed in fastidious prose' (Fifoot, 20), and the same anxious, to some over-anxious, solicitude for justice which characterized what Lord Esher called his 'intense sense of duty' (Davey, 216). 
But his heart was not altogether in the law. 'Professional life', he confessed, 'is not worth the sacrifices it entails' (Cunningham, 193). In early years he admitted to hating the law; and for one whom some thought 'perhaps the most brilliant man of his generation' (Biron, 89), ceaseless toil in an essentially uncongenial calling sapped his vitality and was perhaps the underlying cause of his chronic ill health. Even promotion to the bench -- which curtailed his hopes, probably illusory, but long nurtured, of a parliamentary career -- left him 'a bitterly disappointed man' (Graham, 111). A lifelong friend of Benjamin Jowett, master of Balliol, he might have been happier as a don or man of letters. 'He might have been a poet', Lord Justice Davey reflected, 'as he might have been a good many other things' (Davey, 231). Poetry, classical and English, he relished both as reader and practitioner. He published a verse translation of Virgil's 'Eclogues' and the first six books of the 'Aeneid' in 1887, and almost his last composition was an exquisite Latin rendering of Landor's valedictory quatrain 'I strove with none'. 
To write a legal textbook Bowen dismissed as a task too ephemeral to be worth the effort. In 1868, however, he published a pamphlet advocating Anglo-American arbitration in the 'Alabama' dispute; and he wrote several pieces relating to the administration of justice: in 1886 on the effects of the 'Judicature Acts'; in 1887 on law reform across the reign of Victoria. In 1892, having served on a unique committee of judges charged with reviewing the administration of the courts, he compiled and published its far-reaching recommendations; and in 1893, as chairman of a Home Office commission set up following rioting at Featherstone colliery in Yorkshire, he produced a report on the citizen's duty to lend assistance in time of public disturbance. All these writings are compendious, perspicuous, judicious, and authoritative. 
Having been snubbed as a young barrister in his first appearance before Lord Justice Cockburn, Bowen never forgot that wounding experience, and he was always gracious and courteous on the bench. Out of court he was remarkably relaxed, companionable, and expansive, 'bright and youthful', as Mr Justice Mathew observed, 'ready to discuss any subject' (Cunningham, 155). He was much sought after for his ready wit, full of whimsy and repartee, often preceded by a misleadingly solemn air. His fellow judges, drafting an address to Queen Victoria, objected to the phrase 'Conscious as we are of our shortcomings'. It was Bowen who demurely suggested: 'Conscious as we are of one another's shortcomings' (Cunningham, 183). Throughout his life Bowen retained his youthful looks and remarkably fine eyes. But his friendly mien and sense of humour concealed a spirit sometimes despondent and sceptical. Behind the kindly smile ran a vein of melancholy, a sense of life's brevity and vanity. Relief and diversion were afforded by the purchase of a country house at Colwood in Sussex, by travel at home and abroad, including a journey across Canada with Lord Coleridge in 1883, which, however, exhaustion obliged him to cut short. 
Bowen was an active member of the Council of Legal Education. He was a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1879. Oxford granted him a DCL (1883), Balliol elected him its visitor (1885). He was a fellow of the Royal Society (1885) and a trustee of the British Museum. He was elected to a number of clubs, including the Athenaeum (1878), the Literary Society and Grillons (1880), the 'Dilettanti', and 'The Club'. Lord Chancellor Herschell appointed him a lord of appeal in ordinary as Baron Bowen of Colwood in August 1893; but since 1890 illness had again supervened, and after only a few months in the upper house, he died of abdominal cancer on 10 April 1894 at his home at 13 Princes Gardens, Knightsbridge, aged fifty-nine. He was buried in Slaugham churchyard, Sussex, near his country home. A marble tablet was raised to his memory in the vestibule of Lincoln's Inn chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 3035


Bowen, Emanuel (1693/4-1767), engraver and map maker, was the son of Owen Bowen (died 1730), gentleman, of Talley, Carmarthenshire, South Wales, and his wife, Anne (died 1721). On 7 September 1709 he was apprenticed to Charles Price, globe and instrument maker and a member of the Merchant Taylors' Company, and this date suggests that Bowen was born about 1693/4. Price, also from Carmarthenshire, had been apprenticed to John Seller senior. 
Bowen married Elizabeth Boreman on 6 February 1714 and their daughter Sarah was born about 1719. During his apprenticeship he engraved maps for George Willdey's 'Atlas of the World' (1717). 1720 saw the publication of the 'Britannia depicta', a popular reduced version of John Ogilby's road atlas augmented by fifty-four county maps and historical notes by John Owen. Simultaneously, Bowen was engraving and selling prints and in 1722 one of these, a portrait of the bishop of Rochester, a Jacobite sympathizer, led to his being falsely accused of stirring up 'the minds of the Vulgar to Disaffection against the Government'. 
During this period Bowen became a freemason and in 1723 was listed as senior warden of the Newgate Street Lodge in London. Three years later he appeared as master of a newly established lodge meeting at the Naggshead and Starr in Carmarthen and this continuing link to his home locality is significant in that 'A new and accurate map of South Wales... delineated from an actual survey and admeasurement by Eman. Bowen' appeared in 1729. This six-sheet map, superior to previous ones of the region, contains a decorative baroque dedication panel to George, prince of Wales, and topographical views of five towns. Its 500 subscribers were mostly south Wales gentry whose houses are also indicated on the map. The subscribers' list locates two Bowens in his home area and a number of members of the newly formed Carmarthen Lodge. Large-scale maps of Norfolk and Huntingdonshire and 'A new and accurate map of England and Wales' (1734) soon followed. The latter, a large display map with borders containing the coats of arms of 205 MPs who voted against the 'Excise Bill' of 1733, is described by Shirley as a 'tour de force of its kind'. In 1732 and 1735 Bowen took on two apprentices, Thomas Kitchin and Thomas Jefferys, who also became eminent map makers. It was about this time that his son Thomas Bowen ['see below'] was born. 
Between 1721 and 1750 Bowen engraved charts for some of the leading hydrographers of his day, including Joseph Avery, Samuel Fearon and John Eyes, Nicholas Dobree, and Murdoch Mackenzie. His prolific output for British periodicals (1736-63), rivalled only by John Lodge and Thomas Kitchin, includes seventy-six British and foreign maps in the 'General Magazine of Arts and Sciences', the foreign ones illuminating subjects of contemporary interest. In 1763 Bowen produced 'An accurate map of North America describing... the British, Spanish and French dominions as defined in the treaty of Paris 1763'. This four-sheet map, engraved by John Gibson, was reissued a number of times. 
Bowen's contribution to eighteenth-century world and British atlases was substantial. Consulting a wide range of contemporary sources, he drew and newly engraved seventy maps for his 'Complete System of Geography' (2 vols., 1744-7), most being reissued in his 'Complete Atlas' (1752) and 'The Maps and Charts to the Modern Part of the Universal History' (published in 1766 under Thomas Kitchin's name). He produced maps for John Harris's 'Navigantium atque itinerantium bibliotheca' (1744-8), and all twenty-two new plates in the final edition (1754) of Patrick Gordon's 'Geography Anatomized' were also his. Over the period 1749-60, together with Kitchin, who had married his daughter Sarah in 1739, Bowen used the most recent surveys to compile and engrave a set of county maps for his 'Large English Atlas' (1760). The commercial success of this important and influential work, the first to cover England and Wales on a large scale, led to the maps being reduced and modified by Bowen and Kitchin for their 'Royal English Atlas' ('c'.1763) and then by Emanuel and Thomas Bowen for 'Atlas Anglicanus' (1767-8), published after Emanuel Bowen's death by Kitchin. All three works are characterized by detailed texts in the spaces surrounding the maps and by elegant rococo decoration, which became the hallmark of his engraving. 
Initially located Next the Stairs in St Katharine's, his address in 1742 was the Progress of the Ship, Clerkenwell. His very active involvement in the affairs of the nearby Barbican Baptist chapel up to a year before his death suggests that he remained in that same area of London. Reporting that he had died in London on 8 May 1767, the 'London Magazine' for July 1767 draws attention to 'his reduced circumstances by family extravagances' and reports that he was 'almost blind through age' (July 1767, 372). As a compiler and engraver rather than a publisher of maps, the valuable copperplates he worked would have been owned by others. It is, however, still difficult to understand why he died penniless, since he was industrious and able and had the distinction of being geographer to George II from about 1747 and, according to many sources (particularly Chubb), geographer to Louis XV of France. 


The next fifteen years, as Bowen became more established as an engraver and compiler of British and foreign maps and charts, were his most productive. Among the British maps he engraved are 'A new and correct map of the countries twenty miles round London' (1770); nine, which include five road maps, in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1773-9); eight in the 'Survey and Maps of the Roads of North Britain or Scotland' (1776) by George Taylor and Andrew Skinner; and 'A map of Great Britain' in Charles Burlington's 'Modern Universal British Traveller' (1779). His substantial foreign map output includes three charts relating to James Cook's voyages, jointly engraved with John Gibson for John Hawkesworth's 'An Account of the Voyages Undertaken... for Making Discoveries'; a large single-sheet 'Map of the province of South Carolina' and his extension to eleven sheets of the 'Chart of part of the West Indies... by... Joseph Speer', all published in 1773. Numerous maps and further charts by Thomas Bowen are also found in Charles Theodore Middleton's 'A New and Complete System of Geography' (1777-9) and Jonathan Carver's 'The New Universal Traveller' (1779). Later single works include the three-sheet map of Morea by Peter Bell (1785), and 'A new and complete chart of the world', drawn and engraved by him for 'Bankes's New System of Geography' (1790). 
Although his output was not as extensive as that of his father, Thomas Bowen's maps and charts, with their simpler post-rococo decoration, made a valuable if modest contribution to the cartography of the last part of the eighteenth century. He spent most of his working life in Clerkenwell, his last recorded address being 9 Charterhouse Lane, and died there in the workhouse in early 1790. It is, again, difficult to understand why he, like his father, should have ended his days in poverty, as the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of March 1790 records his death under 'Considerable Persons' and refers to him as 'an eminent engraver of charts... the son of Emanuel B. esq. engraver to his late Majesty' (p. 374). 


@@@@@


doc= 3036


Bowen, Sir George Ferguson (1821-1899), colonial governor, born in Ireland on 2 November 1821, was the eldest son of Edward Bowen, later rector of Taughboyne, co. Donegal. He was educated at Charterhouse School and as a scholar of Trinity College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 June 1840. He was twice president of the Oxford Union. In 1844 he took a first class in classics, was elected a fellow of Brasenose College, and, on 27 May, entered Lincoln's Inn as a student; he never practised law, however. Bowen took his MA in 1847 and became for four years president of the Greek University of Corfu, from where he began a series of travels and publications reflecting his devoted interest in Greece and its surrounds. His 'Ithaca in 1850' (1850) was accepted by contemporary Homeric scholars, including W. E. Gladstone, as proving Ithaca to be the island of Odysseus. His reputation was enhanced by 'Mount Athos, Thessaly, and Epirus: a Diary of a Journey from Constantinople to Corfu' (1852). Knowledge of the region and its history was put to unusual and effective purpose in 'Murray's Handbook for Greece' (1857). Nor were his activities merely literary: in 1848 he witnessed the capture of Vienna by the imperial troops, and in 1849 journeyed across Hungary, and thence, taking the risk involved in escorting refugees, to Constantinople; he also toured Albania and Montenegro. 
In Corfu, Bowen became critical of the constitutional reforms instituted by the then lord high commissioner, Lord Seaton, attacking them in 'The Ionian Islands under British Protection' (1850), a considerable work, and in the 'Quarterly Review' (1852); following the latter, Seaton contemplated legal action. Approving rather of the controversial policies of Sir Henry Ward in the protectorate, Bowen (back at Brasenose since 1852, supporting university reform and Gladstone's re-election, and contributing leading articles to 'The Globe' and other papers) was in 1854 appointed chief secretary to the lord high commissioner, and arrived in Corfu in March. Already fluent in Italian and ancient Greek, he mastered also modern Greek. Ionian agitation for incorporation with the Greek kingdom was then rife. On racial and cultural grounds, Bowen advocated cession of the southern islands to Greece and conversion of Corfu and Paxo into crown colonies; he wrote in this sense the relevant parts of a secret dispatch in 1856 from Sir John Young to Henry Labouchere, a copy of which, stolen from the Colonial Office in October 1858 and published in the 'Daily News' in November, became a serious embarrassment to the British government, and to Gladstone, who was then on a mission to report on Ionian grievances. In 1855 Bowen was created CMG, and in 1856 KCMG (raised to GCMG in 1862). Also in 1856 he married the Countess Diamantina Roma, the daughter of the president of the Ionian senate, Count Candiano Roma of Zante, and related to Prince Danilo of Montenegro. This, as well as his views on Corfu, earned him a reputation of being involved to an unseemly extent in Ionian politics. 
Bowen thus lost any prospect of realizing his ambition of becoming British minister in Athens; during Gladstone's mission he was even suspected, briefly, of giving information to newspapers. Instead, he was precipitated into a long career in the colonial service, which marks him as perhaps the most notable example of the professional governors who became the rule rather than the exception in the colonial empire in the second half of the nineteenth century. After looking first at Ceylon or Mauritius, and narrowly escaping Dominica, he was sent 'to preside over rising communities of my own countrymen' (Bowen to Gladstone, 21 April 1859, BL, Add. MS 44391), for, on 3 June 1859, thanks to Gladstone and his 'official friends' (ibid.), the secretary of state, Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, appointed him first governor of Queensland. Bowen landed at Brisbane on 10 December 1859. Though preparing for responsible government, for the first three months he administered Queensland virtually as a crown colony, assisted by an official seconded from New South Wales and an executive council of three. He began also a seven-year association with Robert G. W. Herbert (later permanent under-secretary in the Colonial Office), who had travelled with him from England; the latter became colonial secretary and, on the election of the parliament in April 1860, the first premier of Queensland. 
In Queensland, Bowen began to display the qualities which both distinguished and bedevilled his reputation. His attention to public business was constant, his capacity for administration (so far as that was required under responsible government) clear. His public utterances were lucid and usually edifying, if orotund. He dealt comfortably with ministers in ordinary circumstances. Government House hospitality was well maintained; in this he was much helped by the personality and talents of Lady Bowen. In touring over a large territory he was acutely observant as well as sociable, and in both dispatches and private letters he made much of classical and other historical parallels and comparisons: Homer and Horace, as well as seventeenth-century Virginia, provided him with descriptions of the landscape and squatters of Queensland. Public and political affairs engaged a perceptive and enquiring mind reinforced by wide reading in modern as well as ancient works. Bowen had, however, some less edifying qualities. He tended towards the pompous and egotistic, often to a fault. Some colonists regarded him less than respectfully, especially in times of political difficulty. In the Colonial Office he became known as 'an officer who is always obtruding and exaggerating his own merits and claims' (Sir F. Rogers, November 1865, TNA: PRO, CO 234/13). Robert Herbert, who maintained a certain friendship with Bowen (and was godfather to his son, George William Howard Bowen, born in Brisbane in 1864) in Queensland and later as head of the Colonial Office, was both amused and irritated by his 'eccentricities' (Knox, 'Queensland Years'). Bowen was notable also for his propensity to cultivate and advertise acquaintance with the great and powerful (chiefly, at least until 1874, on the liberal side of politics). For one who was absent from England from 1859 to 1875, such acquaintance could only be made in correspondence. His surviving letters are ample evidence of his ability in this regard. A certain garrulousness and sycophancy aside, they contain much that is insightful and shrewd. 
Bowen's success in his first government owed much to Herbert's ability to remain in office for six years. Their accord was especially valuable shortly after Herbert's retirement. In July 1866 a financial crisis struck Queensland as a result of the failure of a London bank. Heavily dependent on borrowed money, the government was unable to meet a range of commitments. The ministry proposed measures to which, Bowen informed them, his instructions forbade him to assent. Ministers resigned, and Bowen called Herbert to form a temporary administration. The crisis was survived by orthodox means, but, though the secretary of state approved, Bowen and Herbert encountered serious popular protests in Brisbane. 
Late in 1867 Bowen was promoted to the government of New Zealand, where he assumed office on 9 February 1868. War with the Maori was still in progress. Bowen met chiefs in conference, made official tours through both islands, and received addresses and gave answers in patriarchal style; he perceived a parallel between the social condition of the Maori highlands and that of the Scottish highlands in the first part of the eighteenth century. He pursued a policy of conciliation, endeavouring to promote good feeling between the Maori and the settlers, hoping to mitigate the damage done by government confiscation of Maori land before and during the wars. His relations with the home government were less happy. In 1869 the Gladstone government decreed the removal of all British troops from New Zealand. Bowen strongly objected, in principle and on behalf of his government; in defiance of instructions he delayed the departure of the last regiment. He was rebuked by Lord Granville, the colonial secretary. The changed Colonial Office environment under Lord Kimberley, with Herbert as permanent under-secretary, helps explain why Bowen was nevertheless made, in 1873, governor of Victoria. 
The governor's position in Victoria had been difficult ever since the start of the contests -- essentially 'property and intelligence' against 'democracy' -- between the houses of the legislature in 1865. Sir Charles Darling had been recalled for his partisan behaviour in relation to the 'deadlock', and serious differences had emerged between the colonial and British governments; more recently, Viscount Canterbury had disagreed with premier C. Gavan Duffy over a dissolution of the assembly. Bowen set out to establish harmonious relations between himself, his ministers, and the legislature, as well as with the population generally. In this, as in Queensland, he had the valuable assistance of Lady Bowen. He benefited also from becoming, in 1876, the first occupant of a new Government House which enabled the governor to entertain the political and social leaders of Victoria in unprecedented style; Bowen could boast that his residence was larger than its equivalents in either Calcutta or Dublin, and its ballroom larger than that in Buckingham Palace. He spent 1875, on his first furlough since 1859, visiting England, where he received the honorary degree of DCL from the University of Oxford on 9 June, and touring the United States and Canada. He met Sir John A. Macdonald and formed views on the differences between Canadian federation and any such development in Australia. 
Bowen returned to a troubled colony. In 1877 the ministry attempted to provide 'payment of members' by 'tacking' the item to the general appropriation bill. The council, unable to amend such a bill, rejected it. Faced with serious financial deficiency, the government advised Bowen to sign orders dismissing large numbers of civil servants. Bowen relied on the opinion of Robert Herbert, who privately told him that he could accept the advice of his ministers, whatever it might be, even in financial matters. In Victoria, though a compromise was arranged, he was attacked by opponents of the ministry. Early in 1878, moreover, Lord Carnarvon resigned as secretary of state, and his successor, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, agreed with those who said that Bowen had been too ready to assist his ministers in a dubious policy. 
Bowen's term of office in Victoria ended on 31 March 1879. He perceived his transfer to the governorship of Mauritius, rather than to Sydney, to which he had laid serious claim, to be a consequence of Hicks Beach's disapproval. After arriving in Port Louis on 4 April, he found that his administrative talents were in demand in a crown colony whose largest problems arose from the importation and employment of indentured Indian labourers. His and Lady Bowen's social activities continued, in a society which in some ways he found more cultivated than that of Victoria. 
On 28 December 1882 Bowen was appointed to Hong Kong. In two years he reconstructed the colonial legislature, concerned himself with public works, and paid visits to China and Japan; the Franco-Chinese war of 1884-5 occurred during his term of office. In 1885 ill health compelled him to return to Europe, and in 1887 he retired from the colonial service. In 1886 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Cambridge University and, on 26 November, was sworn of the privy council; in December 1887 he was appointed head of a royal commission sent to Malta to report on the arrangements connected with its new constitution. Bowen had been elected a member of the Royal Geographical Society in 1844, and served on its council from 1889 to 1892. He was a member of the Royal Colonial Institute, to which, in 1886, he read a paper, 'The federation of the British empire', which was published as a pamphlet and ran to two editions. 
Bowen and his wife had a son and four daughters. The first Lady Bowen died on 17 November 1893; on 17 October 1896, at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, Bowen married (Letitia) Florence, the daughter of Thomas Luby and the widow of Henry White. Bowen died at the Hotel Metropole, Brighton, on 21 February 1899, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 25 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 3037


Bowen, James (bap. 1718, d. 1774), painter and topographer, was baptized on 29 January 1718 at St Chad's, Shrewsbury, the son of John Bowen and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Wilding. He collected substantial materials for a history of Shropshire, having taken notes on churches, sketches of monuments, and transcripts of records when he was accompanying John Mytton through the county. One of Bowen's works is a view of the church of Mary in the Battlefield, Shrewsbury (Gough, 2.184), and he produced also some useful maps (ibid., 185). Gough bought all the genealogical and topographical materials which Bowen had amassed, and they form part of the manuscripts which Gough bequeathed to the Bodleian Library, Oxford. James Bowen was the father of the painter and genealogist John Bowen (1755/6-1832). James Bowen died at Shrewsbury in 1774. 


@@@@@


doc= 3038


Bowen, James (1751-1835), naval officer, was born at Ilfracombe. He first went to sea in the merchant service, and in 1776 he commanded a ship in the African and West India trade. Shortly afterwards he entered the navy as a master, and he served in that capacity on board the 'Artois' with Captain Macbride during 1781-2, being present in the battle of the Dogger Bank on 5 August 1781. He continued with Captain Macbride in different ships until 1789, when he was appointed inspecting agent of transports in the Thames. Following the outbreak of the French Revolutionary War Lord Howe requested Bowen to go with him as master of his flagship, the 'Queen Charlotte', and he had thus the duty of piloting her into the battle of 1 June 1794. It is reported that on Howe's giving the order 'Starboard!' Bowen ventured to say, 'My lord, you'll be foul of the French ship if you don't take care'. 'What is that to you, sir?' replied the admiral, sharply; 'starboard!' 'Starboard!' cried Bowen, muttering by no means inaudibly, 'Damned if I care, if you don't. I'll take you near enough to singe your black whiskers'. He did almost literally fulfil this promise, passing so close under the stern of the French flagship 'Montagne' that the French ensign brushed the main and mizen shrouds of the 'Queen Charlotte' as she fired her broadside into the French ship's starboard quarter. For his conduct Bowen was made a lieutenant on 23 June 1794. After the action off Lorient on 23 June 1795, in which he was first lieutenant of the 'Queen Charlotte', he was made commander, and on 2 September of the same year he was advanced to the rank of captain. During the two following years he commanded the 'Thunderer' in the West Indies. In 1798 he commanded the 'Argo' (44 guns) in the Mediterranean, and took part in the capture of Minorca by Commodore John Duckworth; and on 6 February 1799, after a brilliant chase of two Spanish frigates of nearly equal force, he succeeded in capturing one of them, the 'Santa Teresa' (42 guns). 
For the next three years Bowen was employed in convoy service, in the course of which he was officially thanked by the court of directors of the East India Company, and presented with a piece of plate worth $400 for his 'care and attention' in convoying one of their fleets from England to St Helena. In 1803 he was appointed to command the 'Dreadnought' (98 guns), but shortly afterwards, at Lord St Vincent's suggestion, he was nominated a commissioner of the transport board. As first lord of the Admiralty (1802-4) St Vincent relied heavily on Bowen's practical advice. He was sent to Ireland in 1803, on the outbreak of war, to improve the local naval defences. In 1805 he had the charge of laying down moorings for the fleet in Falmouth harbour, and in the following year he served as captain of the fleet to Lord St Vincent off Brest. In January 1809 he superintended the re-embarkation of the army at Corunna, for which he received the thanks of both houses of parliament. He was appointed one of the commissioners of the navy in February 1816, and continued in that office until August 1825, when he was retired with the rank of rear-admiral. He died on 27 April 1835. 
Bowen's brother Richard also served in the navy. As captain of the 'Terpsichore' in July 1797 he was involved in the attack on Santa Cruz and earned Nelson's commendation as an 'enterprising, able, and gallant officer' ('Dispatches and Letters', 2.423). Another brother, George, also a captain in the navy, died at Torquay in October 1817. No details remain of Bowen's marriage but his eldest son, James, died captain of the frigate, 'Phoenix', on the East India station, in 1812; and another son, John, also a captain, died in 1828. Both sons had been promoted captain in 1805. According to Sir John Barrow, then second secretary of the Admiralty, the elder's promotion was the result of his being mistaken for his father. James Bowen's youngest son, St Vincent, was a clergyman. He had also a daughter, Teresa, who died in 1876. 
Bowen was an outstanding seaman, as his selection by Howe in 1793 testifies. His resolute conduct during the battle of 1 June 1794 earned him a place on the quarter-deck, and his ability an early rise to captain. He was equally effective in administrative posts, and St Vincent's support is evidence of his all-round ability at the higher level. 


@@@@@


doc= 3039


Bowen, John (1755/6-1832), painter and genealogist, was born in Shrewsbury, the eldest son of James Bowen (bap. 1718, d. 1774), painter and topographer, of that town. He studied the local antiquities under his father, who had compiled notes and sketches towards a history of Shropshire during his travels with John Mytton. Bowen traced out the pedigrees of Shropshire families and became especially skilful in deciphering and copying ancient manuscripts. He almost certainly used his own and his father's materials to compile much of 'The History and Antiquities of Shrewsbury' that was published under the name of Thomas Phillips in 1779. He contributed to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' drawings and accounts of the seals of the town of Droitwich and of Shrewsbury exchequer. Four of his drawings of views of Shrewsbury were engraved by Vandergucht and his engraving of some Roman inscriptions was published in 'Philosophical Transactions' (49.196). He died in Shrewsbury on 19 June 1832, aged seventy-six. 


@@@@@


doc= 3040


Bowen, John (1815-1859), bishop of Sierra Leone, son of Thomas Bowen, captain in the 85th regiment, and his third wife, Mary, daughter of the Revd John Evans, chaplain to the garrison at Placentia, Newfoundland, was born at Court, near Fishguard, Pembrokeshire, on 21 November 1815. At twelve years of age he was sent to school at Merlin's Vale, near Haverfordwest, and in 1830 he continued his studies under the Revd David Adams. He emigrated to Canada in April 1835, and had a farm at Dunville, on the shores of Lake Erie. He served in the militia during the rebellion of 1837-8. On Sunday 6 March 1842 he heard a sermon in the Lake Shore church which led him to prepare for the ministry. Disposing of his farm on favourable terms, he returned to England, and in January 1843 entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1847, and LLB and LLD ten years later. 
Bowen was ordained deacon at Ripon Cathedral on 20 September 1846, and his first appointment was as assistant curate of Knaresborough, Yorkshire, in 1848. An uncle had left him an estate at Haverfordwest, and while at Knaresborough, Bowen asked the Church Missionary Society to allow him to visit its many foreign stations. The society suggested that he go to Jerusalem, confer there with Bishop Gobat, and then visit the missionary stations at Syros, Smyrna, and Cairo; then journey to Mount Lebanon, Nablus, and other places in Syria, and on to Mosul by Constantinople and Trebizond; and finally return by Baghdad and Damascus to Jerusalem. Bowen succeeded, despite many hardships and dangers, and returned to England in December 1851. In 1853 the marquess of Huntly named him rector of Orton-Longueville with Botolph Bridge in Huntingdonshire. With permission from his bishop Bowen again left England, in September 1854, and stayed in the East until July 1856. There he learned Arabic well enough to preach fluently in it. 
On 10 August 1857 Bowen was consecrated the third bishop of Sierra Leone by the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishops of Peterborough and Victoria. On 24 November 1857 he married Catharine, daughter of George Butler, the dean of Peterborough. He sailed for his new diocese two days later, on 26 November. Both of his predecessors had died at their posts; Bowen's wife died after giving birth to a stillborn son on 4 August 1858 and Bowen himself died of yellow fever on 28 May 1859, at Freetown. In his short term Bowen served the Yoruba mission, Yorubaland (where Africans had been ordained in 1854), reached the delta of the Niger, and encouraged missionaries to learn the languages of the local people. 


@@@@@


doc= 3041


Thomas Bowen (1732/3-1790), engraver, was indentured on 7 February 1748 to his father, Emanuel Bowen. This suggests that he was born about 1732/3. In the decade following the end of his apprenticeship he engraved a few maps for the 'General Magazine of Arts and Sciences' but, in general, he was overshadowed by his father. Of five maps he engraved in British periodicals, two were by the elder Bowen and two of the three county maps by Thomas Bowen in 'The Royal English Atlas' were 'revised, corrected and improved by Eman. Bowen'. After his father's death Thomas informed the subscribers of 'Atlas Anglicanus' that, having worked alongside his father in its preparation, he was competent to complete the task. When it appeared in 1768 most of the maps were attributed jointly to them. The same year saw the publication of Philip Morant's 'History of Essex', to which father and son contributed two and four maps respectively. On 25 December of that year Thomas was married to Alice Downes, thought to be from an engraving family, at St John, Clerkenwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 3042


Bower, Alexander (1774-1837), writer and minister of the Relief church, was born in Edinburgh on 18 March 1774, the son of John Bower, weaver, and Janet Matthew. The elder Bower, according to a relative, John Campbell (1766-1840), was an elder in the Relief church, and Alexander, following attendance at classes at Edinburgh University between 1787 and 1794, trained to be a clergyman. He was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Armagh, before being received as a probationer by the Relief Presbytery of Edinburgh on 23 May 1799. He married, in Edinburgh on 29 December 1799, Miss Addison Henderson; they had at least two children. He became minister of the Relief congregation of Shiprow church, Aberdeen, on 6 November 1799, but rapidly lost the confidence of a large section of his congregation and in the summer of 1805 attempts were made to have him removed. He resigned on 6 September 1806 and probably moved to Edinburgh shortly thereafter. In the years following 1810 he was employed by both the Advocates' Library and Edinburgh University Library as a cataloguer. In a letter dated 26 November 1813, to an unknown correspondent, Bower declared that 'my life has been devoted to literature' (Edinburgh University, MS La II.501, fol. 336), but in the following year he unsuccessfully attempted to be recognized by the Relief Presbytery of Edinburgh as a probationer. He appears to have sunk further and further into poverty as he got older, and died, probably in Edinburgh, on 23 February 1837. 
Bower first appeared in print with 'An Address to the Inhabitants of the North of Scotland, upon the Threatened Invasion' (1803), and this was followed by his edition of 'An Essay on the Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures' (1806), by an unknown author. His most substantial works are biographies of James Beattie (1804) and Martin Luther (1813) and a 'History of the University of Edinburgh' (3 vols., 1817-30). These have long been superseded, apart from some incidental biographical detail in the first- and last-named. He also produced histories of Scotland and Ireland for children (both 1819), as well as 'The Edinburgh Student's Guide' (1822) and 'A letter to the... lord provost... upon the subject of providing dead bodies for the students of medicine' (1823). 


@@@@@


doc= 3043


Bower, Archibald (1686x8-1766), religious controversialist and historical writer, was born either on 17 January 1686 or on 17 January 1687 or in September 1688, at or near Dundee. His parents' names are unknown. According to his own account he was descended from an ancient family that had for several hundred years been possessed of an estate in Forfarshire, but as the 'Dictionary of National Biography' remarks 'all his statements concerning himself must be received with extreme caution'. 
In October 1702 Bower was sent to the Scots College at Douai before going on to Rome, where he entered the Society of Jesus on 9 December 1706. After two years of novitiate and of attending lectures in philosophy at the Roman College he was appointed to teach at the Jesuit colleges at Fano (1712-13) and Fermo (1714-16). From 1717 to 1721 he studied theology at the Roman College, during which time he was ordained, in 1719 or 1720. He was then sent to lecture in philosophy at Arezzo in 1721, at Macerata in 1723, and at Perugia in 1725. He was professed at Florence on 2 February 1723. 
In 1726 Bower left Perugia for reasons that are less than clear. Those whom he later considered to be his enemies alleged that he had been discovered in a love affair with a nun. He himself described how he escaped from Perugia on account of 'the hellish proceedings' of the inquisition in which, he said, he was a consultor, or judge. In fact the Jesuit records show that he was sent away to England in 1726, perhaps with the hope of enabling him to make a fresh start; if he was truly penitent he could have continued as a Jesuit. He arrived in England in July 1726. The Jesuit records show that as late as 1729 he was in London, nominally as a member of the Jesuit mission to Scotland. To begin with he was in touch with fellow Jesuits but by November 1726 he had abandoned the Jesuits and the Catholic church. Two accounts of his 'flight' from Perugia were published, one by Richard Baron -- 'A faithful account of Mr Archibald Bower's motives for leaving his office of secretary to the court of inquisition' (1750) -- the other by Bower himself, 'Mr Bower's Answer to a Scurrilous Pamphlet' (1757). 
In England Bower made the acquaintance of Dr Edward Aspinwall, a former Jesuit who was at that time prebendary of Westminster and who introduced him to Dr Samuel Clarke; he also met George Berkeley, dean of Londonderry and later bishop of Cloyne. He said that he found a system of religion for himself and was for six years a protestant of no particular denomination. Eventually he conformed to the Church of England. To earn his living he taught the classics and Italian to students, and read the classics with Lord Aylmer, former MP and equerry to George I, to whom he had been introduced by Dr Thomas Goodman, the king's physician. Aylmer in turn introduced Bower to George Lyttelton, who proved to be a steadfast friend when almost everybody else had deserted him. For a year he undertook the education of the son of Mr Thompson of Cooley, in Berkshire, but after a period of ill health he was again employed by Lord Aylmer, this time as tutor to two of his children. 
While Bower was living in Aylmer's household he wrote the monthly review 'Historia Litteraria, or, An exact and early account of the most valuable books published in the several parts of Europe' which was published from 1730 to 1734. From 1735 to 1744 he was employed by a consortium of London booksellers that was undertaking an ambitious and costly project to publish in monthly instalments a history of the world. One of a group of writers engaged on the history that included George Sale and George Psalmanazar, Bower's contribution to 'An Universal History, from the Earliest Account of Time to the Present' was the history of ancient Rome, which came to occupy one third of the seven folio volumes that dealt with ancient history. The final volume of the ancient history appeared in 1744 and the modern history was not completed until 1765; in the interim an octavo edition had appeared and the work had been translated into French, Italian, and German. Bower received $300 for revising the second edition of the 'Universal History' but he apparently undertook the task in 'a slovenly and careless manner' ('DNB'). Despite such failings the 'Universal History' was a celebrated publishing enterprise that was widely read throughout Europe. Its significance is amply demonstrated by the fact that the writers of the 'Encyclopedie' drew on many of its articles in preparing the entries for that publication. 
Letters to Jesuits in London from their superior-general in Rome between March 1730 and February 1734 reveal that Bower during these years was nibbling at the idea of returning to the Catholic church and to the Society of Jesus. Then, in 1744, he met the Jesuit Philip Carteret, who in 1745 reconciled him to the church and readmitted him to the society. It was understood that he would go into the country, be provided with books by the Jesuits, and devote himself to writing. A few years before this, wishing to invest his savings ($1100) rather than leave them in the funds and not being able to persuade any of his protestant friends to burden his estate with a life-rent or to find another form of investment, he had transferred his money through Mr Wright, a Catholic banker, to a Mr Hill. Hill was in fact John Hill, the financial agent of the English Jesuits, who gave him for his $1100 (with a further $250) a generous 7 per cent, that is to say $94 10's'. a year. This financial negotiation later proved very damaging to his reputation. His opponents believed that he made this arrangement to recommend himself to his superiors and to prove his sincerity. But Bower did not break with his protestant friends, and in 1745 he was engaged in a treaty of marriage that in fact did not take place. He decided to break his vows a second time, and corresponded with Henry Sheldon, provincial superior of the Jesuits in England, asking for the return of his money, which he duly received on 20 June 1747. At St Benet Paul's Wharf, London, on 20 August 1749 Bower married Dorothy Conner, the daughter of a Church of England clergyman and a niece of Bishop William Nicolson. A widow, she brought Bower a fortune of $4000 and a child from her former marriage. 
In March 1747 Bower issued proposals for printing by subscription 'History of the Popes' 'by Archibald Bower Esq., heretofore public professor of rhetoric, history and philosophy in the universities of Rome, Fermo and Macerata' -- a violent attack on papal supremacy 'well qualified to serve the interests of Protestantism' ('GM', 60/2). He announced that he had begun the work to support the doctrine of papal supremacy but that his researches had led him to change his mind on the subject. In 1748 he presented the first volume to George II, and through the influence of Lyttelton, a commissioner of the Treasury and a friend of the prime minister, Henry Pelham, was appointed keeper of Queen Caroline's library and, in 1754, clerk of the buck-warrants, 'an office of no great emolument' ('European Magazine', 25.261). The second volume (with a lengthy list of subscribers) and the third appeared in 1750 and 1754, respectively, the fourth in 1759. The final three volumes were rushed through the press in the 1760s, and the recent history of the popes covered in a superficial manner: the period 1600 to 1758 occupied a mere twenty-six pages of the seven volumes. To the fifth volume Bower attached an appendix of 180 pages: 'A summary view of the controversy between the papists and the author... the cruel and unjust persecution which the author of the present history has undergone, in this protestant kingdom, from the Jesuits, encouraged and aided by a protestant clergyman, and the wicked measures, which they have jointly pursued to force him back to the idolatrous church and antichristian order he had left'. 
The first serious attack on the 'History of the Popes' was made in a pamphlet by the Revd Alban Butler published anonymously at Douai under the title 'Remarks on the two first volumes of the late lives of the popes, in letters from a gentleman to a friend in the country' (1754), which exposed in 100 pages the author's plagiarism and literary ill faith. This may have had little effect, but about 1750 there had come into the hands of Sir Henry Bedingfield, a Catholic, the letters that Bower had written, signed A -- D B -- R, to Sheldon during the period of his last coquetting with Catholicism. These letters were written about the time when the prospectus for the 'History of the Popes' was issued. While in the prospectus Bower posed as one who had fervent zeal for the protestant faith and was about to publish the results of twenty years of hostile criticism of the papacy, he was writing confidential and respectful letters to Sheldon about the return of his money. Bower maintained that the letters were forgeries designed to destroy his reputation with his protestant friends and produced by the Jesuits in revenge for his attack on the frauds of the priesthood. 
One of those who believed the letters were genuine was David Garrick, who had been Bower's friend, and he informed Lyttelton (who took no action) of his belief. Later Garrick threatened to write a farce in which Bower would be introduced as a mock convert and the profligacy of his character exposed. Another who saw the letters was the writer Nathaniel Hooke, who talked of the matter with John Douglas, chaplain to Lord Bath and afterwards bishop of Salisbury, who had already detected the fraud of William Lauder in regard to Milton. Douglas met the historian Dr Thomas Birch, who knew Bower's hand, and he and one Morgan, who had a portfolio of Bower's writings, became convinced, with Douglas, in February 1756 that the letters were genuine. 
Sir Henry Bedingfield defied Bower to bring the matter to public trial but Bower replied by asserting that the letters were forgeries and declared that he had had no intercourse with the Jesuits for thirty years; in June he issued a pamphlet entitled 'Mr Bower's Affidavit in Answer to the False Accusation Brought Against him by Papists'. The reply by Douglas, published in the same month, was 'Six letters from A -- d B -- r to Father Sheldon, provincial of the Jesuits in England; illustrating with several remarkable facts tending to ascertain the authenticity of the said letters and the true character of the writer'. Douglas found that the letters revealed that in the summer of 1746 and in early 1747, after Bower had been readmitted by the Jesuits, he was writing to Sheldon on matters arising from his return to the society and asking for $500 to pay to a woman for what was later found to be breach of promise. Douglas's tract was a powerful denunciation of Bower and proved the letters were genuine; it showed that want of veracity was not the only defect in Bower's character and that he was as little remarkable for his probity as for his love of truth. He was plainly trading, under false pretences, on the respect of protestants for him and his writings. Douglas also drew attention to the evidence of Mrs Hoyles, a lady converted to Roman Catholicism by Bower years earlier. Her evidence made it clear that Bower was ready to support in secret the church that, for self-interested ends, he was publicly denouncing. 
Bower replied to Douglas with his 'Answer to a Scurrilous Pamphlet Intituled 'Six Letters from A -- d B -- r to Father Sheldon'', published in two parts, in January and February 1757, respectively, arguing that the Jesuits had asked for his money and that he had agreed because he thought that they were good business people. 'Fancy', said Douglas, 'a deserter from Catholicism, a fugitive from his Order depositing his money with the Jesuit Provincial, that is with the representative of all that he had flouted and injured' (Pollen, 301), whereupon he wrote a second pamphlet, 'Bower and Tillemont Compared' (1757), showing how the 'History of the Popes' -- the first volume especially -- was chiefly a translation of a work of the French historian Sebastien Le Nain de Tillemont. Douglas added 'some further Particulars relating to the true character and conduct of the Translator'. In his reply to 'Bower and Tillemont Compared' and in two other pamphlets Bower attempted in 1757 to refute the criticism of his character made by Douglas, who in return published 'A Full Confutation of All the Facts Advanced in Mr Bower's Three Defences', which drew from Bower 'Mr Bower's Reply to a Scurrilous Tract Intituled A Full Confutation' (1757). Douglas then wrote 'A Complete and Final Detection of A -- d B -- r' (February 1758), to which Bower made no reply. 
During his life and after his death there were many who approved of Bower's writings; his views were acceptable to a section of public opinion at that time. In his last years he continued his attacks on his enemies and his attempt to recover his reputation. He published the last volumes of 'History of the Popes', and in 1757 brought out an abridgement of the first four volumes in French. He died on 3 September 1766, probably in London, and was buried in Marylebone churchyard. His widow, to whom he left all his property, wrote from Woodstock Street on 10 October 1766 that during the seventeen years that she had constantly been with him he had always professed himself a protestant. The epitaph on his tomb described him as a man exemplary for every social virtue, justly esteemed by all who knew him for his strict honesty and integrity, a faithful friend, and a sincere Christian. 


@@@@@


doc= 3044


Bower, George (d. 1690), medallist, was active from 1660 in London. His first recorded medals commemorated the restoration of Charles II, and were followed by several on the royal marriage in 1662 between Charles and Catherine of Braganza. In 1664 he was appointed embosser-in-ordinary, which provided much work in the Royal Mint. During the course of the reign he executed many commissions, often portraits or the commemoration of specific events. Nor was he politically biased: the duchess of Portsmouth (1673), Sir Samuel Moreland, Sir Edmund Godfrey, the acquittal of the earl of Shaftesbury, and the Rye House plot all received his attention. 
Bower continued to work under James II, commemorating the royal accession, the battle of Sedgemoor, Monmouth's execution, the duke of Albemarle's exploits in search of treasure ships, and the birth of Prince James. However, in 1688 he produced medals depicting the landing of William of Orange, the destruction of Catholic chapels in London, and the coronation of William and Mary. Indeed, he was appointed chief engraver at the mint in 1689, his first official post on the mint establishment, and struck the official coronation medal handed out to the participants. He also worked until February 1690 on patterns for the new monarchs' copper coinage. He died on 1 March 1690. Examples of his work are in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 3045


Bower, Walter (1385-1449), abbot of Inchcolm and historian, was born at Haddington. Nothing is known of his parentage, though he may have been related to a John Bowmaker who served as a bailie and custumar at Haddington in the late 1390s. In 1436 he was represented at the Roman court by a John Bowmaker, the rector of a Stirlingshire church; and in 1437 he was a mandatory for a papal provision to an Alexander Bowmaker, an Augustinian canon at St Andrews and teacher of law in the new university there. But no family relationships can be proved. 
Since Bower's chronicle contains many references to events over the years in and around Haddington, it may be assumed that he grew up there and afterwards kept in touch. It would be about 1400 that he joined the community of Augustinian canons who served St Andrews Cathedral, for he appears to write about Bishop Walter Trail (died 1401) from personal knowledge. He certainly trained as a novice from 1400 onwards under Prior James Biset, who held office from 1394 to 1416 and was one of the founders of the university at St Andrews. Bower himself describes vividly the celebrations surrounding the arrival in February 1414 of various bulls of privileges for the new university from Benedict XIII, the Avignon pope who was then recognized in Scotland. He was surely an eyewitness. And by 29 November 1417 he had qualified as a bachelor of canon law, when provided on that day by Pope Benedict as abbot of the Augustinian monastery on the island of Inchcolm in the Firth of Forth. He was blessed as abbot by his diocesan, the bishop of Dunkeld, on 17 April 1418. By 22 November 1420 he was claiming to hold the further university degree of bachelor of theology. There is no record of his ever having studied abroad, and so it is presumed that he earned his degrees at St Andrews. At any rate these degrees are a guide to the kind of intellectual training according to scholastic method that is reflected in his writing. 
Some evidence survives regarding the measures which he took as abbot between 1420 and 1435 to secure his abbey's property. With papal backing for several years he forced the bishop of Dunkeld to compromise in a dispute over the appropriated vicarage of Dalgety nearby in Fife. He took the trouble to obtain a papal protection for the abbey's property on 27 February 1430: as a monastic superior qualified in law, he knew what had to be done to guard the abbey's possessions. 
As it turned out Bower was to remain abbot of the modestly endowed abbey on Inchcolm for more than thirty years until his death. He twice became involved in attempts to move to the wealthier house of his order at Holyrood, near Edinburgh. His first attempt was as early as 1420, but his hopes were dashed in 1423 when a candidate supported by the governor of Scotland at the time (Murdoch Stewart, duke of Albany) secured the office. When that abbot quarrelled with one of his canons in 1436-7, Bower was given papal authority to sort things out at Holyrood; yet the main body of canons were successful in having his powers cancelled. Inchcolm remained his base, within sight of Edinburgh. 
As abbot even of that small house Bower ranked as one of the ecclesiastical magnates of Scotland, and after the return of James I from captivity in England in 1424 he was presumably a regular attender at the king's councils and parliaments. He was certainly engaged on duties within the royal administration from time to time. He served several times as a collector of taxes -- first for two years from May 1424 to raise funds to pay the king's ransom, and then for other purposes in 1431 and 1433. He tells himself in his book of how unpopular these unfamiliar levies were among all sections of the community. In late 1431 he had to provide custody on Inchcolm for the countess of Ross, the mother of Alexander MacDonald, lord of the Isles, whose power the king was intent on curbing. 
In at least one parliament, that which met in January 1435, he was appointed to a committee to hear 'causes and complaints', and in the absence of similar records for other parliaments we may assume that with his legal training he regularly served in this way. But only once do we have information (provided by Bower himself) about his participation in practical politics. This is found in his report of a debate at a council general in October 1433 to discuss a response to a peace embassy from England. Bower was involved in collecting and summing up the views of the majority in favour of rejecting the English advances because of Scotland's prior commitment to France; and he tells with some satisfaction that the abbot of Melrose, who had spoken in favour of peace with England, was soon afterwards forced to recant his opinions when challenged by the inquisitor of heretical deviation. Bower was apparently in favour of an authoritarian alliance of church and state, a stance which he was to develop more theoretically when he came to write his great work. He was clearly a man with considerable administrative and political experience, not a man of the study. 
If he had views of this kind about strong government, it is understandable why Bower went to such lengths in his book to lament the murder of King James in 1437. Not much is known about his activities in the first years after the king's death; but by the early 1440s at any rate he can be seen to be involved in the troubled affairs of the minority government of the young James II, attending general councils on 3 April 1441 and 9 February 1442, and serving again as an auditor of causes and complaints in the parliament of July 1445. He had his reward from the government on 8 June 1441, when a crown charter erected the lands of Inchcolm Abbey into a barony to help his community to recover from damage done by pirates. 
It was while Bower was still engaged on such public duties as well as heading his monastic community that, without any known previous experience as a writer, he half unwillingly composed his 'Scotichronicon', the most elaborate work of Latin literature to survive from medieval Scotland. This came about when he was asked by a neighbouring laird, Sir David Stewart of Rosyth, to transcribe the chronicle and annals composed some eighty years earlier by John Fordun, and on the basis of the annals to continue the chronicle from the year 1153 (where Fordun had stopped) to his own day. Between November 1441 and October 1445 Fordun's five books were expanded to sixteen. Bower took the chance to insert in the first five books some passages derived from his own reading, which were carefully distinguished from Fordun's original work; and then he greatly expanded the coverage of the annals with less and less regard for Fordun's text, until by books 15 and 16 he was writing contemporary history of his own down to the king's murder in 1437. 
Bower's working fair copy, intended to be kept on Inchcolm, still exists (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 171), and it shows how he latterly had his scribe make many marginal additions with extra material, all of which after his death came to be incorporated in the main text of all five of the surviving copies which were made in the next sixty years for various other monasteries and individuals. One of the copyists was 
As early as 1444 Bower was working also on a shortened version of his main chronicle (now represented by a later copy, NL Scot., MS Advocates 35.1.7), which contains some extra items as well as Bower's own literary improvements. After a period of failing health he died on 24 December 1449. The whole corpus of his two books has been published in Latin and in English translation with commentary. 
Besides handing on Fordun's work, Bower preserves with convincing reliability a wide range of supplementary information about people and events in Scotland between 1153 and 1437. But his didactic aims (not least with the training of the young James II in mind) led him to expand the scope of the book to include discussion of many other matters. He thought, for example, that his Scottish readers should be better informed about developments on the continent from Roman times onwards, and in general he gave more space to people and events in France than in England. This reflects the experience and intellectual outlook of his putative teachers in St Andrews, who had been students at Paris. He drew on his academic training also for literary allusions and parallels from the works of classical and medieval writers to illumine Scottish history by putting it into proportion in a larger intellectual context. Such features in his book are the product of the culture of fifteenth-century Scotland, and his work (including various later summaries of it) helped to perpetuate this attitude well into the sixteenth century. 
Bower shared Fordun's hostility to English aggression and enthusiasm for Scottish liberty, while at the same time he added warning passages of political reflection on how all kinds of people in authority should conduct themselves. His advice was not merely theoretical, but based on personal experience, especially in the light of the factional rivalries in the years following the death of James I which were harming the country as he was writing; and as a practised preacher he knew how to engage the interest of his readers by inserting pithy stories with a moral. His declared intention, indeed, was to entertain, though as a churchman he did not fail to paint the horrors of hell, and particularly those that awaited sinners in high places who disobeyed the laws of the church. He was not just a chronicler preserving all that he could find about the past: he was a sage through whose wide-ranging reflections much can be learned about the customs and attitudes of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 3046


Bowerbank, James Scott (1797-1877), geologist and zoologist, was born on 14 July 1797 in Sun Street, Bishopsgate, London, the fourth of six children of Edward Bowerbank, distiller, and his wife, Fanny. He went to Dr Kelly's school in Finsbury Square, and is said to have developed a love of nature from studying the plants growing alongside the River Lea. He started work in his father's distillery, Bowerbank & Co., at the age of fifteen, and he and his brother Edward became joint heads of the family firm on the death of their father. Bowerbank gained a reputation in the City for being a careful and attentive man of business. He remained associated with the firm until 1847. 
In spite of the demands of the family firm, Bowerbank always found time for scientific research. He joined the Spitalfields Mathematical Society in 1818 and soon became one of its most active members, giving lectures on botany in the winters of 1822-4, and on human osteology in 1831. His earliest independent scientific researches were made with a microscope and related to the fine structure of the insect wing. He enjoyed microscopical work throughout his life, and owned many fine instruments. He was one of the founders of the Microscopical Society of London in 1839, and was its president in 1846-7. 
Bowerbank lived in Hoxton as a young man and started collecting fossils from the London Clay, particularly the fossil seeds and fruit to be found on the Isle of Sheppey. He joined the Geological Society in 1832, and in 1836, with several geological friends, he founded the London Clay Club, whose members used to meet regularly to display and discuss the fruits of their collecting. In 1840 he published the first, and only, part of a projected monograph on the 'Fossil Fruits of the London Clay', which remained a standard work for many years. This same year Bowerbank moved to Islington where he married Caroline; the couple had no children as far as is known. In 1846 they moved to 3 Highbury Grove, a spacious house with room for Bowerbank's growing geological collections. He was an enthusiastic collector in many branches of geology, and his museum eventually amounted to 100,000 specimens. 
Bowerbank was a sociable man, and used to hold 'open house' on Monday evenings, to which young beginners in geology and microscopy were especially welcome. The idea of the aquarium was developed at his house as he experimented with growing algae, other plants, and fish in a large jar. The secretary of the Zoological Society saw what he was doing and adopted the idea, on a much larger scale, for the London Zoo in 1853. The house became celebrated as a scientific centre in London, and is depicted in a lithographed cartoon, 'Highbury Grove in 1846'. 
In 1847, after the reading of a paper by Joseph Prestwich at the Geological Society, Bowerbank invited the assembled geologists to meet him in the tea-room. He there proposed the establishment of a society for the publication of undescribed British fossils. This suggestion, which was supported by William Buckland, Henry De la Beche, William Fitton, and others, was the origin of the Palaeontographical Society. Bowerbank served the society first as honorary secretary and later as president. He was also, in 1844, one of the founders of the Ray Society, and was treasurer from 1845 until 1860, when he did not stand for re-election following criticism of the annual accounts. In 1842 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and he was awarded an honorary degree of LLD by the University of St Andrews in 1857. 
A visit to Brighton after a storm in 1841 allowed Bowerbank to collect a large number of fresh sponges, and led to a lifelong interest in the group. He studied the fine structure, and the classification and nomenclature of both living and fossil sponges. He became interested in silicification as a geological process, and developed the idea that most, if not all, flints are composed of sponge material. He published papers on sponges in the 'Annals of Natural History', the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society', and the 'Microscopical Society Transactions'. His 'Monograph of the British Spongiadae' was published by the Ray Society in four volumes between 1864 and 1882, being edited and completed after his death by the Revd A. M. Norman. 
Bowerbank retired from business in 1847. About 1860, concerned for his wife's health, he bought a house in St Leonards, Sussex, and they spent part of each year there. In 1864, apparently after his wife's death, he sold the house in London to move permanently to Sussex. He sold the most important parts of his fossil collection to the British Museum in 1865 and had the remainder auctioned by J. C. Stevens in November of that year, keeping only the sponges. His friends formed a testimonial fund committee which subscribed for a marble bust by Peter Slater, which was presented to the Geological Society in 1865. Bowerbank retained an interest in science throughout the remainder of his life, and continued working on his Ray Society sponge monograph until a few days before his death. He died at his home, 2 East Ascent, St Leonards, Sussex, on 8 March 1877, and was buried in Hollington churchyard. His valuable collection of sponges was acquired by the British Museum in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 3047


Bowers, George Hull (1794-1872), dean of Manchester, born in Staffordshire, was the son of Francis Bowers. He was sent to the Pembroke grammar school, and from there proceeded to Clare College, Cambridge, in 1819 as a 'ten year man', graduating BD in 1829 and DD in 1849. Ordained in 1819 he was appointed perpetual curate of Elstow, Bedfordshire, and was a tutor in the family of the duke of Bedford, who appointed him to the rectory of St Paul's, Covent Garden, in 1832. He was select preacher of his university in 1830 and was elected FSA in 1836. He was twice married; his elder son, Francis, was born in 1829. 
Bowers was one of the collaborators with the Revd Charles Eaton Plater (1798-1854) in the establishment of a public boarding-school, with modest fees, chiefly for sons of clergymen. He published a scheme for such an institution in 1842; Marlborough College, Wiltshire, opened in the following year. He resigned as honorary secretary of the school in 1844 following evangelical criticisms of its Tractarian tendency. He then became involved with Rossall School, founded at Fleetwood, Lancashire, in 1844 by the Revd St Vincent Beechey (1806-1899) as a safer protestant alternative for clergy sons. Among the early pupils was Bowers's younger son, George Henry Bowers, who entered the church. He also assisted in the foundation of Haileybury College (1862). 
In June 1847, following the death of Dean Herbert, Bowers was nominated by Lord John Russell to the deanery of Manchester, an office which he held until 26 September 1871. He was not a frequent preacher in Manchester, but his pulpit discourses were at once simple and scholarly, and his delivery effective. He was a warm advocate of the 'free and open church movement', attacking pew rents in addresses and sermons. He was for this reason instrumental in the erection of St Alban's, Cheetwood, and various addresses which he delivered there were printed. On his resignation of the office of dean of Manchester he retired to Leamington, where he died on 27 December 1872. He bequeathed $300 for the support of the special Sunday evening services at Manchester Cathedral, where a window and a brass were placed by his widow to his memory. One of his daughters, Georgiana Bowers ('b'. 1836), was a noted illustrator of scenes of hunting and country life in 'Punch'. 


@@@@@


doc= 3048


Bowes, Elizabeth (bap. 1505, d. in or before 1572), protestant exile, was baptized in August 1505 at Aske in Richmondshire, North Riding of Yorkshire, the daughter of Roger Aske (died before 1510), son of William and Felicia Aske, and Margery Wycliffe (died before 1510). By 23 July 1521 she had married Richard Bowes ('c'.1497-1558), youngest son of Sir Ralph Bowes of Streatlam, and had been granted the lands of her grandfather, father, and mother, and of a certain William Curtes, which she inherited with her sister Anne, wife of Ralph Bulmer. Elizabeth and Richard Bowes had five sons and ten daughters; their sons included the soldier Sir George Bowes (1527-1580) and the ambassador Robert Bowes (d. 1597). 
By 1546 Richard Bowes was commander of Norham Castle near Berwick on the Scottish border. Three years later John Knox, the Scottish reformer, assumed responsibilities at the parish church of Berwick, where Elizabeth Bowes made his acquaintance. Their friendship is documented in twenty-nine letters from Knox to Bowes preserved in a manuscript transcription of 1603 along with the dedicatory letter to Bowes that prefaces Knox's 'Commentary on the Sixth Psalm' (U. Edinburgh L., MS La. III. 345; published in 'Works of John Knox', 3.111-56; 3.337-402; 4.217-18). Although Bowes's letters to Knox are not extant, their substance can be reconstructed from his replies. Throughout 1552-3, when the majority were written, Bowes was troubled by doubts regarding her salvation. Her letters contained pointed questions on difficult passages in the 'Bible', confession of specific temptations and sins, and expressions of anxiety over her status as one of the elect. In response, Knox provided biblical expositions, urged her to regard struggles with sin as a mark of salvation, not damnation, and assured her of the indelible tokens of election. Although Knox assumed the role of mentor, he acknowledged the mutual spiritual benefits of their relationship, noting that Bowes was 'a verie mirrour and glass whairin I beheld my self' ('Works of John Knox', 3.338). Furthermore, her questions forced him to clarify his own understanding of various doctrines. 
By 1553 Knox had contracted to marry Elizabeth Bowes's fifth daughter, Marjorie ('b'. 'c'.1534), but the accession of Mary Tudor altered his status from respected court preacher to renegade reformer. As a result Richard Bowes and his brother, Sir Robert Bowes, withdrew their permission for the marriage. Despite opposition from their family, Elizabeth Bowes and her daughter left England for Scotland in 1555; Marjorie and Knox were probably married near the end of that year. In July 1556, however, all three left for the continent, and on 13 September arrived in Geneva, where they remained until the accession of Elizabeth. The rift between Richard and Elizabeth apparently went unhealed: he died in 1558, but neither his wife nor Marjorie is mentioned in his will, and his remaining daughters are strictly forbidden to marry against their brothers' wishes upon pain of forfeiting their inheritance. In 1559 Elizabeth returned to England, while Marjorie joined her husband in Scotland, where they resided until her death in 1560. In 1562 Elizabeth Bowes received permission to travel to Scotland to care for her two grandsons and her son-in-law. When Knox married Margery Stewart in 1564 she returned to England. 
The intensity and duration of Bowes's friendship with Knox provoked rumours of an illicit relationship, which Knox refuted in a letter appended to his last work, 'An Answer to a Letter of a Jesuit Named Tyrie' (1572). There he notes that their 'great familiaritie and long acquentance... was [based upon] nether fleshe nor bloode, but a troubled conscience' ('Works of John Knox', 6.513). His further comment that despite the comfort of her friendship 'it was not without some croce: for... my mynde was seldome quyet, for doing somewhat for the comfort of her troubled conscience' (ibid., 6.514), has led some to dismiss Bowes as a spiritual hypochondriac, obsessively attached to her own sins. But her religious anxieties can better be understood within the context of the religious upheavals of the time, and the opposition of her family and community to her fervent protestantism. The assertion by Robert Surtees that Elizabeth Bowes died in Edinburgh in 1568 has been found incapable of substantiation; she certainly died some time before Knox's death in 1572. 


@@@@@


doc= 3049


Bowes, Sir George (1517-1545), soldier and rebel, was a posthumous son of the landowner Sir Ralph Bowes ('c'.1455-1516) and Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford. His wardship was sold to William Eure, Lord Eure, whose daughter Muriel he married. The couple had three daughters: Elizabeth, Anne, and Dorothy. He also had one illegitimate son, Robert. The family owned property in co. Durham and the North Riding, and Bowes was serving in the garrison of Barnard Castle when it was surrendered to the host of the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536. Like many members of the northern gentry, Bowes himself joined the rebel army. Following the collapse of the rebellion he benefited from the patronage of his influential uncle Sir Robert Bowes, and was presented to Thomas Cromwell as a young man anxious to devote his youth to the king's service. 
Bowes's opportunity came with the war against Scotland in 1542. Surviving the defeat at Haddon Rigg on 24 August 1542, he soon established his reputation as a capable soldier and was entrusted with negotiating with Archibald Douglas, earl of Angus. He also took part in the 1544 expedition to Lothian and was knighted at Leith on 11 May by Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford. Later that year he led a series of brutal forays into Scotland. Jedburgh was sacked, Broom Tower stormed and its occupants massacred, and Dryburgh was burnt to the ground. In November 1544 Bowes seized Coldingham Priory. This was the zenith of his military career and the king agreed to grant him the barony of Coldingham. His ambitions were thwarted, however, when he was taken prisoner outside Dunbar in January 1545. Although he was appointed captain of Norham Castle on his release in March, the barony was withheld, and he does not appear to have played any further prominent role in the war. He died on 26 December 1545 and was buried at Alnwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 3050


Bowes, Sir George (1527-1580), soldier and administrator, was the eldest surviving son of Richard Bowes, esquire ('c'.1497-1558), soldier, and his wife ['see 'Bowes, Elizabeth (bap. 1505, d. in or before 1572)], the coheir of William Aske of Aske in the North Riding of Yorkshire. In 1534 he was contracted to Dorothy (died before 1558), the daughter of Sir William Mallory of Studley, near Ripon in Yorkshire. They had married by 1541 and had seven children, including Sir William Bowes, the heir. George Bowes became head of the Streatlam lordship in co. Durham upon the death of his father in October 1558. He was to prove himself a loyal servant of the crown throughout his career, the high point of which was, undoubtedly, his staunch defence of Barnard Castle, co. Durham, during the northern rising of 1569. 
The Bowes family of Streatlam had long participated in the military defence and administration of the Anglo-Scottish border regions and George Bowes was to follow in this tradition. He first gained experience of border conflict during the Scottish wars of the 1540s, with his participation being noted in a raid upon Teviotdale in 1546. Like others of his family he showed particular aptitude in this sphere and he commanded 100 cavalry garrisoned at Douglass in Lothian in 1549. His military capabilities were commended in a dispatch to the privy council that year. During the years of truce, in the early 1550s, Bowes retained his connection with the borders and was named on the commission appointed to oversee the refurbishment of the border fortresses in 1555. Upon the outbreak of war with France in 1557, the government of Mary I took his experience and loyalty into account when considering the state of the once-more vulnerable frontier regions and in January 1558, Bowes was appointed marshal of Berwick. He was knighted there in April 1560. 
Border service apart, Bowes's political career remained relatively quiet during the years of the Marian regime. In the summer of 1558 he, now a widower, did seek to advance his prospects through an advantageous marriage on 1 July with Jane Talbot, daughter of Sir John Talbot of Albrighton and Grafton, Worcestershire; they had eight children. She was a kinswoman of the earl of Shrewsbury, lord president of the council of the north. Despite this marriage, his family's close association with protestantism probably inhibited Bowes's political prospects at this time. His uncle, Sir Robert Bowes (1493?-1555), had been a member of the extreme reformist administration led by John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, during the reign of Edward VI. Moreover, the Streatlam family's close relationship with the charismatic Scottish reformer John Knox (who had married Bowes's sister, Marjorie, probably in 1555), undoubtedly heightened, further, its identification with overt protestantism. 
The accession of Elizabeth I, however, brought about an upturn in George Bowes's political fortunes. Indeed, the decision of the new regime to enforce a protestant settlement of religion, as enshrined in the statutes passed in 1559, provided the staunchly protestant Bowes with the opportunity to prove his indispensability in the administration of the north -- a region noted for its strong attachment to the 'old religion'. From the early 1560s, his rise to the upper echelons of northern politics was remarkable. In 1561 he was appointed to the council of the north and the ecclesiastical high commission for the province of York. In the following year he was named JP and of the quorum for the bishopric of Durham and the North Riding of Yorkshire and was also appointed sheriff of Yorkshire (1562-3). When, in 1568, Bowes was detailed to attend the 'conduction' of Mary, queen of Scots, from Carlisle to Bolton Castle in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Sir Francis Knollys noted, in a letter to Sir William Cecil, the principal secretary, how Bowes, 'is also a good Protestant, and his brother [Robert] lykewyse, which is a rare matter in this country' (Sharp, 379). 
The government's faith in Bowes was well placed, as his loyalty during the rising of the northern earls, which erupted in November 1569, was to demonstrate. Indeed, Bowes's heroic defence of Barnard Castle, of which he held the stewardship, did much to provide a focus for loyal northern sentiment in a region that was out of control for several weeks. Moreover, although he was forced to surrender the castle to the rebels after a siege lasting almost two weeks, Bowes's steadfast loyalty was in contrast to that of some of the other leading members of the Durham political elite who fled the bishopric. At the outset of and during the rising Bowes was subjected to threats regarding his safety and it is clear that the rebels regarded him with great animosity. As a result they laid waste to several of his properties, including Streatlam Castle. The destruction was considerable and Bowes later complained that, in terms of goods, corn, and cattle, he had lost more than $4000. In the wake of the rising he was appointed by Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, as his deputy in co. Durham and Richmondshire and provost marshal. As provost marshal Bowes was responsible for the execution of those rebels condemned to die within the localities. The reputation for cruelty he acquired as a result of this was, largely, undeserved; he may in fact have mitigated the severity of the privy council's original orders. Nevertheless, there is little doubt that he carried out his duties with the diligence of a loyal servant of the crown. 
Despite his loyalty, Bowes gained scant reward from the crown for his services. Moreover, the losses he incurred during the rising served only to exacerbate the increasing financial difficulties of his later years. Nevertheless, he continued his career in public life up until his death in 1580, retaining his membership of the council of the north and the northern high commission. He was elected to the parliaments of 1571 and 1572, sitting for the boroughs of Knaresborough, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and Morpeth, Northumberland, respectively, and in 1576 was appointed sheriff of co. Durham. He was added to the commissions of the peace of the East and West Riding of Yorkshire, Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmorland in 1573. In 1579 he assumed temporary control of Berwick, thereby relieving his brother Robert Bowes (d. 1597), who, as treasurer of the town, undertook day-to-day management of the garrison. However, once more George Bowes's dedication to duty was to cost him dearly, not only in terms of his financial interests but also in terms of his health for he seems to have been dogged by illness for much of his stay in Berwick. Bowes died at Streatlam on 20 August 1580, remaining to the last 'the surest pyllore the Quens Majestie had in these partes' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1580-1625', 17). He was buried in the family vault of Barnard Castle church. 


@@@@@


doc= 3051


Bowes, Sir Jerome (d. 1616), diplomat and glass maker, was the son of Sir John Bowes, landowner, of Elford, Staffordshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Richard Huddleston of Lancashire. For a man of his prominence and considerable notoriety, Bowes is rather an elusive person. He had a sister, Elizabeth, and three brothers, Sir Edward, Sir John, and Ralph Bowes (will, R. Bowes, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/91, fols. 368-9). In 1557 and 1558 a Sir Jerome Bowes was listed together with Ralph Bowes among gentlemen who accompanied Edward Fiennes de Clinton, first earl of Lincoln, on his expedition to France. Since Bowes was knighted at Carlisle by Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, on 28 August 1570, this means that either the earlier knighthood was conferred on a different person and namesake or that the note was made after 1570. On 12 August 1562 Bowes married Jane, daughter and coheir of Roger Rookwood of Euston, Suffolk, and widow of Christopher Calthrop of Cockthorpe, Norfolk. She predeceased him. On 14 February 1569 he was granted the wardship of his stepson, James Calthrop, heir of Christopher Calthrop, with an annuity of $2 2's'. 8died calculated from 11 April 1562. 
In the early 1560s Bowes was one of Elizabeth I's household servants and in 1571 acted as surety for a disputant in a property disagreement that was to be settled in combat. The plaintiff belonged to the household of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, but Bowes was called to the proceedings after the queen's interference in the dispute. In 1577 he was 'banished Court for a slanderous speech of my Lord Leicester'. The substance of the slander at that time is unknown but, according to Jerome Horsey, Leicester was again furious with Bowes in 1585 when he seems to have been raking up the old rumour concerning the death of the earl's wife, Amy Robsart. 
Bowes's diplomatic career began in 1577 when he was among those who accompanied Sir Philip Sidney in his mission to Rudolph II. In the late 1570s and early 1580s he was in France taking part in the marriage negotiations between Elizabeth and Francois Valois, duke of Alencon. Although his precise role is unknown, he appears to have been resident in Paris for some time and assisted Sir Edward Stafford on his arrival there. In December 1582 Bowes was still in Paris, and the queen instructed Sir Henry Cobham, her resident ambassador in France, to take counsel with him as to how best to proceed in his own mission. Presumably while in France, Bowes had translated into English a book that was published in London in 1579 as 'An apology or defence for the Christians in France which are of the evangelicall or reformed religion'. 
In June 1583 Bowes was appointed Elizabeth's ambassador to Ivan IV, tsar of Russia. The apocryphal stories about this mission survived until the end of the seventeenth century and references to them can be found in a number of treatises on Russian history published in London between 1671 and 1699, as well as in Samuel Pepys's diary. In these stories Bowes appears as a valiant subject of the queen who fearlessly defended his sovereign before Ivan the Terrible. His irascibility was admired by the tempestuous Russian tsar who, after many a stormy scene, finally satisfied all the demands presented by the ambassador. Bowes himself had always insisted that the collapse of his mission was brought about by the death of Ivan. This understanding of his mission to Moscow became accepted even at the time although the Muscovy Company, on whose behalf it was undertaken, constantly accused Bowes of mishandling the negotiations. Neither he, nor the company, nor later historians were correct in their interpretation of affairs. Bowes was given the impossible task of procuring the most advantageous trading privileges for the English without giving the tsar anything in return. During the negotiations which lasted from 18 October 1583 until 17 February 1584, Bowes had fourteen audiences with Ivan and his ministers. Termed a plenipotentiary ambassador in the queen's letter, he had no power to conclude anything and was instructed to take away from the tsar even that little which had been given to him during the preceding negotiations with the Russian ambassador in London. He had to bluff his way through the negotiations, which he also sustained by that 'want of temperance' so deplored by the company. On 14 February 1584 he was dismissed by Ivan with these words: 'Since you came to us with nothing, we will send you back with what you brought us.' Bowes was given an official leave on 17 February by the tsar's councillors. Thus his mission was finished a month before Ivan's death on 19 March. Bowes was caught in the turmoil which took place in Moscow after the tsar's death. His relations with Ivan's councillors were extremely strained during the negotiations. Bowes's continuous accusations that they were hampering the talks brought Ivan's wrath on several of them. After the tsar's death, Bowes was placed under house arrest and stood in real fear of his life for some six weeks before he was finally allowed to depart. 
In January 1588 Bowes was appointed to command 'some 50 or 60 men... all pikes and cavaliers' during the expedition into Scotland led by Henry Radcliffe, fourth earl of Sussex ('Rutland MSS', 1.238). The encounter turned out to be more peaceful than had been anticipated. Bowes and his men met with no resistance and the armour was returned to the royal armoury in Newcastle. 
Bowes's involvement in commercial enterprise began in 1576 when, as a royal pensioner, he was given a patent for playing cards which he shared with Sir Henry Bedingfield. According to W. H. Price, such patents were given to the household servants in lieu of salaries. Bowes was in perpetual financial trouble and endlessly petitioned for arrears to be paid to him or for a postponement of a debt repayment. In February 1592 he was given a patent for the manufacture of drinking glasses in consideration of his personal services to the crown. The patent was for twelve years, but it was renewed on 5 October 1606. The glass house was situated at Blackfriars, London. The enterprise, unprofitable even at the time of Bowes's entry into it, was further handicapped by an exclusive patent for the use of sea coal in glass making given to Sir Edward Zouch and others. In his commercial enterprise, as in his diplomatic mission to Russia, Bowes gained more notoriety than note. He was continuously involved in disputes with the farmers under his patent and other glass makers. A copy of 'Purchas, his Pilgrims' (1626) belonging now to the library of the Academy of Science in St Petersburg contains a piece of doggerel on one of its margins: 'God made men; & men made mony. God made bees; & bees made hony. God made owles, & apes, & asses: God made Sir Jerome Bowes, & Sr Jerome Bowes made Glasses' (J. S. Lure, 'An Unpublished Epigram on an English Ambassador to Russia', Oxford Slavonic Papers, new ser., 5/7, 1974, 14). 
Bowes was an MP for Lancaster in 1601 and for Reading in 1604. He probably owed his election to Sir Robert Cecil, principal secretary, or to Sir John Fortescue, chancellor of the exchequer, and he was reasonably active in parliament. He was appointed to the quorum for Middlesex in 1601 and carried the canopy at the queen's funeral in 1603. 
On 20 February 1607 (NS) a murder was committed in Bowes's house near Charing Cross, Westminster. The account of this event, attributed to Bowes, was published in 1607. A female servant of Bowes was killed by the two thieves who came to rob him of his possessions. The thieves were later apprehended in Chester, brought back to London, and eventually executed. 
In accordance with Bowes's will, his estate was to be divided between his nephews, nieces, and a god-daughter. His main legatee was 'John Bowes, the sonne of my brother Sr Edward Bowes knight', and the executors of his will were his nephews, Sir Peter Manwood and Sir Percivall Hart (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/128. sig. 105). Bowes died between 25 and 28 March 1616, when he was buried at Hackney church, Middlesex. A portrait of him was painted in the year of his embassy to Russia: it presents a very tall man of imposing appearance, probably in his mid-thirties. 


@@@@@


doc= 3052


Bowes, John, Baron Bowes of Clonlyon (1691-1767), lord chancellor of Ireland, was born possibly either in Surrey or in Ware, Hertfordshire. He was the second son of Thomas Bowes of Bishopsgate Street, London, a member of the Turners' Company; his mother's surname was North. He entered the Inner Temple in 1712 and was called to the bar in 1718. He went to Ireland in 1725 'in the train of' the new lord chancellor, Richard West, and enjoyed the patronage of Philip Yorke, subsequently Lord Hardwicke, with whom he had studied law (Duhigg, 307). Bowes was called to the Irish bar in Michaelmas 1725 and appointed third serjeant in 1727. At this time he seems to have seen Irish office as a stepping-stone to advancement in England, and complained particularly of the lack of conversation in a society where 'drinking is the business of their leisure hours' (Bowes to Sir Dudley Ryder, 12 July 1727, PRONI, T 3228/1/1). He became second serjeant in 1728, solicitor-general in 1730, and in 1731 MP for Taghmon, co. Wexford. When the lord chancellorship fell vacant in 1739 Bowes was one of two candidates recommended by Archbishop Boulter and by Henry Boyle, who cited his parliamentary services. However Sir Robert Walpole and Hardwicke chose Robert Jocelyn, whom Bowes succeeded as attorney-general. He became chief baron of the exchequer in 1741 and lord chancellor in 1757. In 1758 he was created Baron Bowes of Clonlyon, co. Meath. He served as a lord justice in 1765 and in 1766. 
Bowes was a strong supporter of the English interest in Ireland, hostile to Jonathan Swift and later to Charles Lucas. In the Dublin riot of 3 December 1759 the crowd tried to force on him an oath to oppose the rumoured union of Ireland and Great Britain; he subsequently pressed for the city authorities to be punished for their inaction. When a new dispute arose in 1760-61, about the transmission of finance bills from England, Bowes sharply criticized what he saw as the opportunism of leading politicians, and blamed the money bill dispute of 1753-6 for unsettling the government of the kingdom. In 1757 he opposed proposals to register Roman Catholic clergy on the grounds that this would imply legal recognition. His much quoted judgment, that the law did not suppose any such person to exist as an Irish Roman Catholic, was delivered about 1759 in the case of a Roman Catholic merchant, Laurence Saul, prosecuted for harbouring a woman from relatives who wished to make her conform to the Church of Ireland. 
Bowes was regarded as a highly effective speaker, both in court and in the Commons. His performance as prosecutor in the trial for murder of Lord Santry in 1739 was particularly praised. The dedication prefacing a new edition of the Irish statutes in 1762 commended him for making the court of chancery 'a terror to fraud and a protection and comfort to every honest man', while John Scott exempted him from the criticisms he directed at other lord chancellors (Ball, 2.172). By contrast B. T. Duhigg, writing forty years after Bowes's death, in the context of a polemic against the eclipse of Irish lawyers by English placemen, condemned him as the partial tool of political faction. An anonymous poem published in 1730 mocked him as: '
a great beau 

that here makes a show 

and thinks all about him are fools 
(Ball, 2.111)' Bishop Edward Synge of Elphin described him as 'an old fop' (to Alicia Synge, 27 June 1752, in 'The Synge Letters', ed. M.-L. Legg, 1996, 424). He suffered badly from gout; in 1759 he was said to be in 'a miserable state of health, with legs bigger considerably at the ankle than at the calf' ('Autobiography and Correspondence of... Mrs Delany', 3.554). He died, unmarried, on 22 July 1767 and was buried in Christ Church, Dublin. His brother Rumsey Bowes of Binfield, Berkshire, erected a marble monument to him in the cathedral's crypt. 


@@@@@


doc= 3053


Bowes, John (1804-1874), preacher and author, was born on 12 June 1804 in Swineside, Coverham parish, Yorkshire, the son of a farmer. Bowes joined the Wesleyan Methodists in 1817 but, while working for a brewer in Leyburn, he transferred to the Primitive Methodists because of their revivalist successes, becoming a circuit preacher in 1822. He married Susannah Bellwood, a farmer's daughter, on 26 September 1826 and they had several children. One son, Robert Aitken Bowes (1836-1879), became editor of the 'Bolton Guardian'. Bowes was assigned to the church's Edinburgh mission, where he became embroiled in a local dispute over the order in belief of faith and reason: he gave priority to the former. Deciding that all religious denominations were sectarian, Bowes helped form the Christian Mission, becoming pastor of its Dundee congregation in 1830. His book 'Christian Union' (1835) showed his increasing undenominationalism. After attempting union with various free methodist bodies, he moved to Liverpool to assist the Revd Robert Aitken, but this association was short-lived. In 1839 he made contact with the (Plymouth) Brethren, and adopted their ecclesiology. Bowes's pamphlet 'A Hired Ministry Unscriptural' (1842) showed his extreme anticlericalism, and he became dependent on free-will offerings for his income. Possessing a strong physique and a powerful voice, he was frequently in conflict with the authorities over his street preaching. A tireless itinerant, he devoted the rest of his life to travelling throughout Britain and to pastoring churches in Aberdeen (1841-4), Manchester (1844-52), Cheltenham (1852-9), and Dundee (1859-74). 
A vigorous controversialist, Bowes held public debates with, among others, the secularist G. J. Holyoake, the freethinker Charles Bradlaugh, the Swedenborgian Woodville Woodman, and the Church of Christ leader T. H. Milner. He published his debates as well as strictures on movements such as Mormonism and socialism. He espoused pacifism, total abstinence, vegetarianism, and other adjuncts to healthy living. He denied any ecclesiastical affiliations and when challenged to declare his church he claimed, 'No section, I belong to the whole church' ('Truth Promoter', 1, 1851, 166-7). However, many of Bowes's concerns can be paralleled among individuals such as Joseph Barker and William Trotter in England and Hugh Hart and J. A. Begg in Scotland. A number of the congregations with which he was in contact in the north of England and in Scotland were assimilated into the Open Brethren movement. He was part of the democratization of popular religion which led to a greater desire for ecclesiastical autonomy and, as such, he was an important pioneer of the Brethren among the lower-middle and working classes. 
Bowes wrote some 220 tracts during his life (most of them no longer extant). He published two journals, the 'Christian Magazine' (1842-51) and the 'Truth Promoter' (1849-75). He also translated the 'New Testament' from Greek into English (1870), although it is uncertain how full his knowledge of Greek was, and published an 'Autobiography' (1872). He died of bronchitis on 23 September 1874 in Dundee, where he was buried in an unmarked grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 3054


Bowes, Marmaduke (d. 1585), Roman Catholic martyr, is of unknown parentage. He was a substantial Yorkshire yeoman of Angram Grange, near Appleton, in Cleveland. He experienced great personal conflict on religious issues, but refused to declare himself a Catholic, although he sympathized strongly with the Catholic cause. According to the recollections of Grace, wife of Sir Ralph Babthorpe of Babthorpe, Yorkshire, Bowes was married, and 'kept a schoolmaster to teach his children' (Morris, 244). There are several accounts of how Bowes came to be arrested. In one, this tutor, himself a Catholic, was arrested, and subsequently apostatized. The tutor then reported to the queen's council of the north at York that Bowes was known to entertain Catholic priests. Bowes was summoned to answer this complaint, and was ordered to appear at the August assizes of 1585, where he was indicted, condemned, and hanged. In another version, Bowes heard that his friend Hugh Taylor, a Catholic priest who had stayed with him in the past, had been arrested; when Bowes appeared at the York assizes to try to free Taylor, the layman was immediately apprehended, tried, and condemned. His execution took place so quickly that when he was hanged he was still wearing the boots and spurs in which he had ridden to York. What is certain is that Bowes was executed at the same time as Taylor, on 26 November 1585, the first person to be punished under the 1585 statute against harbouring priests. A contemporary report says 'he died very willingly and professed his faith [was openly converted to Catholicism], with great repentance that he had lived in schism' (Morris, 244). He was beatified on 22 November 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 3055


Bowes, Sir Martin (1496/7-1566), goldsmith and mayor of London, was born in York in the parish of St Cuthbert, Peaseholme. Despite his disclaimer in 1549 that at the time of his going thirty-eight years previously to London at the age of fourteen (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 1.469) he had been of 'small substance' (Raine, 5.19-20), he came in fact from a family of some prominence, his great-grandfather having been mayor and his grandfather sheriff of York. His father was probably Thomas Bowes, goldsmith, who became free of the city in 1498 and who seems likely to have been related to the man of the same name, who also originated from St Cuthbert's and who went on to pursue an active career at the mint, serving between 1468 and 1476 as attorney to Warden John Wode and then from 1476 until his death on 14 September 1479 as joint warden. 
In 1513 Bowes was apprenticed to the prominent London goldsmith Robert Amadas, court supplier and future master of the jewels, under whom he learned the assaying skills that were to be the mainspring of his highly successful career. Made free in 1521 and a liveryman of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1525, he went on to become not just remarkable in his own generation, but perhaps the most remarkable member of the company in the entire Tudor period. Having served as fourth warden in 1532-3, third warden in 1534-5, and second warden in 1535-6 he was elected prime warden on 17 September 1537. Chosen twice more during the years 1540-42, he subsequently occupied the position on no fewer than ten further occasions -- 1549-51, 1553-7, 1558-62 -- and by so doing achieved almost uninterrupted control. Even after he had lain down office for the last time, in 1562, Bowes's influence remained undiminished for, time and again, decisions were taken by his successors only after his wishes had first been ascertained. 
Closely allied with his Goldsmiths' connection was Bowes's link with the mint, which also began with Amadas -- this time through Amadas's being with Ralph Rowlett, deputy to Master Worker William Blount, Lord Mountjoy. Bowes was Amadas's deputy by 1526 and grew so quickly in importance that when, in 1530, Mountjoy called his deputies to account Bowes was accused with them of defrauding him of his rightful profits. Despite their protestations of innocence the deputies were replaced by Hugh Welshe, also a goldsmith, and it was not until his death in 1532, the year in which Amadas also died, that Bowes and Rowlett had the opportunity of returning to the mint. By offering a chain of gold worth $30 to Cromwell to assist their cause and paying dearly for Mountjoy's agreement to surrender his patent, they achieved their end, being appointed joint master workers in April 1533. Surviving an adverse inquiry into mint operations in 1534, Rowlett continued in office until his death in March 1543 and Bowes until the reorganization of the mint in 1544. On 3 June he was appointed under-treasurer of the principal mint in the Tower and remained in control of this, the most important of all the eight mints operating during the debasement of the coinage, until September 1550 when he was pensioned at 200 marks. As a commission of inquiry set up on 3 February 1550 revealed, his stewardship of the mint had left much to be desired. All in all, by virtue of arrears on his accounts, profits arising on bullion provisioning, making coin worse than standard, and profiting from moneys that had not been paid over as promptly as they should have been, Sir Martin was found to be in debt to the tune of $29,762. It is a measure, first, of his massive liquidity that he was able in a matter of months to pay off $22,762 of this and, second, of his standing that he could find sureties for the repayment of the remaining $7000 over the next ten years. In the event, $2000 was remitted by the crown in order to secure more prompt repayment of the rest. 
In this year, 1554, Bowes married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Harlow and widow of William Billingsley of London. By this and two earlier marriages -- (by 1526) to Cecily Eliott and (by 1538) to Anne (died 1553), daughter of John Barrett of Belhus in Aveley, Essex -- he had eighteen children, two of whom, Thomas, the eldest son (died 1591), and Martin, the second son (died 1573), served under him at the mint, the first as teller (1545-50), the second as surveyor of the meltings (1547-51). Thomas married Cecily, widow of Thomas Haynes, overseas factor to Sir William Bowyer and merchant adventurer of London, while Martin took as his first wife Frances Scrope, the granddaughter and heir of Robert Amadas. Although both sons were free of the Goldsmiths' Company neither practised the craft, preferring instead to make their way in London as merchants. In his will of 1565 Sir Martin divided his possessions in three, according to the custom of London: one part going to his wife, Elizabeth, one part to William and Charity his orphans (both minors), and one part for the performance of his legacies. Martin inherited Sir Martin's mansion house in Lombard Street and half his household goods in London, the other half going to Dame Elizabeth as part of her portion. After appraisal all Sir Martin's household goods at Woolwich, North Cray, Kent, and Mile End were to pass to William and Charity as part of their legacy. Thomas enjoyed the cancellation of all the debts he owed his father, a blessing indeed, because, as Sir Martin opined, he had cost him 'four times more than ever his part should come to' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/49). By an earlier will of 1562 Sir Martin had defined his legacy to his company as tenements in Lombard Street, Scalding Alley, St Matthew's Alley, and St Botolph without Bishopgate besides a great messuage and twenty-two gardens in the same parish. 
During the time when he controlled and benefited from the mint Bowes cut an impressive figure in the city. A commoner in the ward of Langbourn, then alderman from 1536 until his death, he was auditor in 1536, sheriff in 1540-41, the year in which he was knighted, and mayor in 1545-6. In this capacity he participated in the trial of the heretic Anne Askew. In 1547, due partly to the wardens' urging the livery 'by all means to give their whole election' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 1.470) to him, he was returned as MP for London. According to the limited surviving evidence Bowes was supportive in this, and in the further five parliaments in which he represented London, of the interests of York and, especially, London. Outside parliament the same was true. In 1549 he remembered his northern origins by presenting York with 'a fair sword with a sheath of crimson velvet garnished with pearl and stone set upon silver and gilt' (Raine, 5.20). And it was in the parish of St Cuthbert that, in 1557, he proposed to establish a chantry, possibly an indication of his attachment to the old religion. When, at the accession of Elizabeth, Catholicism was once again eclipsed, his endowment was transferred to poor relief. As far as the metropolis was concerned, Bowes showed similar generosity, presenting in 1558 a jewel of gold embellished with pearls and stones to hang from the mayor's collar. He had similar sympathy for London's poor, endowing five almshouses at Woolwich and playing the key role in the establishment of five hospitals -- St Bartholomew's, St Thomas's, Bethlem, Bridewell, and Christ's -- of which he became comptroller-general when the scheme was finalized in 1557. 
Rich and influential, Bowes was also active in government outside his company and the city. Between 1538 and his death he served on a variety of commissions but made his most continuous contribution as a JP for Kent and Middlesex. Bowes died on 4 August 1566, and was buried in St Mary Woolnoth, Lombard Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 3056


Bowes, Mary Eleanor, countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne (1749-1800), heiress and victim of kidnapping, was born on 24 February 1749, the only child of George Bowes MP (1701-1760), of Streatlam Castle and Gibside, co. Durham, and his second wife, Mary (died 1781), heir of Edward Gilbert, of St Paul's Walden in Hertfordshire. Her father, a landowner and successful businessman, brought her up at Gibside House, near Rowlands Gill, where she was educated. He had never forgotten his long-dead first wife, Eleanor Verney, whom he had married when she was only fourteen. She had been a prodigy of learning and he was determined that his daughter should emulate her. Fortunately, Mary Eleanor was intelligent. By her own account she could read fluently at the age of four, had a gift for languages, and took a great interest in botany. 
Mary Eleanor's father died when she was eleven, leaving her his vast wealth, whereupon her mother promptly took a house in London, first at no. 13 and then at 40 Grosvenor Square. Small and shapely, with dark brown hair, a rather large nose, and a determined chin, Mary Eleanor was soon the centre of attraction for impoverished aristocrats and unscrupulous fortune hunters. Nominally chaperoned by her easy-going aunt, Jane Bowes, she enjoyed a series of flirtations until, at the age of sixteen, she fell in love with 'the beautiful Lord Strathmore', as contemporaries called him (Arnold, 23). 
By the time Mary Eleanor was twenty-four she had three sons and two daughters, and was finding domestic life unbearably dull. Lord Strathmore had contracted tuberculosis and spent an increasing amount of time away from home, in search of a cure. To amuse herself, Mary Eleanor wrote a poetical play in five acts, entitled 'The Siege of Jerusalem', full of high drama and unrequited love. After the excitement of its publication in 1769, she embarked on a series of affairs. Unscrupulous adventurers were all too ready to divert a bored, wealthy wife, and in 1774 George Grey insinuated himself into her affections, plying her with poems of his own composition. His origins were obscure, but he claimed to have made a fortune in India. They began to meet secretly, and in February 1776 they became lovers. A few weeks later, on 7 March 1776, Lord Strathmore died at sea, 'en route' to Lisbon, leaving his wife a farewell letter criticizing her 'extreme rage for literary fame' and her propensity for making ill-natured remarks 'for the sake of sporting a 'bon mot'' (Arnold, 41). 
Somewhat sobered, Mary Eleanor revived her botanical interests. She purchased Stanley House in Chelsea, built hothouses, and commissioned William Paterson the botanist to collect plants for her in southern Africa. When people enquired about her personal life, she spoke vaguely of marrying Grey, and indeed became engaged to him. However, twice that year when she found that she was expecting his child she had the pregnancies terminated, and in the late autumn she fell in love with Andrew Robinson Stoney (1747-1810), a widowed lieutenant on half pay in the 30th regiment. Undeterred by tales of his ill-treatment of his wealthy first wife, and by the fact that she was once more expecting Grey's child, Mary Eleanor married Stoney on 17 January 1777, in St James's, Piccadilly, London. Mary, her daughter with Grey, was born that summer. 
Mary Eleanor and Stoney, now known as Bowes, later had a son, William, but by then her married life was miserable. A few days after their marriage, Bowes discovered that she had signed an antenuptial trust preventing him from having any control over her fortune. Furious, he forced her to revoke the deed and began to abuse her. The servants often saw her bruised and bleeding. In February 1785 she managed to escape, finding refuge in a lodging-house in Holborn under the name of Mrs Jefferies. She raised an action for divorce on the grounds of her husband's ill-treatment and adultery, but on 10 November 1786 he had her abducted. She was carried off to the north of England and held in wretched conditions until she was finally rescued by several local men near Darlington. 
Bowes and his accomplices were sentenced to three years in prison and fined $300. Mary Eleanor regained control of her estates, was granted a decree of divorce on 2 March 1789, and spent the rest of her life quietly, in Fludyer Street, London, and then at Purbrook Park, near Cosham, Hampshire. She died at Christchurch, Hampshire, on 28 April 1800, and was buried in her magnificent first wedding dress in the south cross of Westminster Abbey, London, on 10 May. Her story reads like a historical novel, and indeed Thackeray is said to have based Barry Lyndon on Bowes, but the problems caused by her frustrated intelligence and her great wealth were all too real. 


@@@@@


doc= 3057


Bowes, Paul (d. 1702), lawyer and antiquary, was born at Great Bromley, Essex, the second son of Sir Thomas Bowes (died 1676), witch persecutor, and Mary ('b'. 1608), third daughter of Paul Dewes (1567-1631) ['see under 'Dewes, Garrat]; his parents had married on 4 December 1626. After being educated at the school at Moulton, Norfolk, he was admitted pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 21 December 1650. He took no degree; indeed, he does not appear to have matriculated. He chose a career in law, and on 12 May 1654 entered the Middle Temple. He was called to the bar on 10 May 1661 and became a bencher on 24 October 1679. By late 1669 he had married Bridget (died 1706), daughter of Thomas Sturges of the Middle Temple. They had three sons, of whom the eldest, Martin, was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, in April 1686 aged sixteen, and two daughters. 
Bowes was an enthusiastic antiquary, and collected enough books to divide them eventually between his first two sons. His interest in the history of parliament led to his judicious and careful edition of the manuscript work of his celebrated uncle, Sir Simonds D'Ewes. Entitled 'The journals of all the parliaments during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, both of the House of Lords and House of Commons', it was published in 1682, with later editions in 1693 and 1708. Bowes was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1699. 
Bowes died in June 1702 and was buried on 3 July at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street. His will, dated 5 August 1699, was proved by his widow and sole executor on 16 July 1702. He had made two codicils (dated 17 April and 12 August 1701), the first of which was needed chiefly because of his disappointment with his third son, Francis, who preferred life at sea to the place his father had found for him in chancery. He possessed property in Lincolnshire, Suffolk, Dorset, London, and Essex. Bridget Bowes died in 1706. Their son Martin married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward Thurland of Reigate, Surrey, and afterwards settled at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, where he died in 1726, and their second daughter, Anne, became in 1732 the wife of Philip Broke MP, of Nacton, Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 3058


Bowes, Sir Robert (1493?-1555), soldier, lawyer, and rebel, was the second surviving son of Sir Ralph Bowes of Streatlam, co. Durham (died 1512), and Marjorie (died 1524), daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Conyers of South Cowton, North Riding of Yorkshire. He married Alice, a daughter of Sir James Metcalfe of Nappa, in Richmondshire; they had several children, all of whom died young. He became head of the Streatlam family following the death of his nephew Sir George Bowes (1517-1545). His background and experience in border defence and administrative affairs made Robert Bowes an ideal candidate for royal service in the north, a region where Tudor monarchs struggled to impose their authority. Like other members of his family Bowes had a natural aptitude for border warfare and gained early experience in this sphere during the Anglo-Scottish war of 1522-3. Moreover, he gained wide-ranging expertise and an understanding of the wider political nation as a result of his education at Lincoln's Inn (admitted on 4 May 1511) and his pursuit of a legal career. In 1528 he was noted as a master of the court of requests. 
The close connections between royal personnel and the Durham administrative elite provided the channel by which Bowes was first able to enter royal service. He seems to have been a member of the episcopal council of Thomas Wolsey, bishop of Durham from 1523 to 1529, and was appointed escheator for the bishopric in 1529. His appointment to the council in the north in 1525, resurrected under Wolsey's auspices as the duke of Richmond's council, provided Bowes with the initial vehicle for his advancement in royal service. However, his career was undoubtedly furthered as a result of his participation, on the rebel side, in the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536. In joining the rebellion Bowes was motivated by political considerations: it appears that he, in company with other members of the northern gentry, had become increasingly alienated by the intrusions of central government in the affairs of the region. There is nothing to suggest that he rose in defence of the old religion. Bowes's role in the pilgrimage propelled him into the political limelight and to the notice of the crown, which quickly came to recognize his abilities in the spheres of both law and border defence. Following the breakdown of the rebellion Bowes was quickly reconciled with the Henrician regime, and thereafter began his rise as a faithful servant of the royal administration. 
Bowes's legal and administrative expertise ensured his presence on the council in the north after its revitalization in 1537. He retained his seat on that body, serving in his later years as vice-president, until his death in 1555. He was knighted in 1539 and in the same year entered parliament as a knight of the shire for Yorkshire. His growing prominence in the political arena ensured his subsequent return as a member of parliament for Yorkshire in 1542 and for Newcastle upon Tyne in 1545, Westmorland in 1547, and Middlesex in 1553. At the same time his experience of border warfare ensured that he played a prominent role in the Anglo-Scottish hostilities of the 1540s. In 1545 he was appointed warden of the middle marches, and in 1548 his remit was extended to the east marches. In terms of border affairs, he became the acknowledged expert of his generation. His detailed survey of the state of the borders, drawn up in late 1550 or early 1551, is still highly regarded by historians for the insight it gives into the nature of frontier society in the sixteenth century. 
By this time Bowes, whose family had become closely associated with the charismatic Scottish reformer John Knox, had become part of the reformist administration of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland. In terms of his legal career this connection enabled Bowes to reach the top of his profession with his appointment as master of the rolls in 1551. In the same year he became a member of the privy council, thus signalling his rise to the highest echelons of political society. Border service, however, remained the recurring theme throughout his career. In the closing years of his life when, following his support for the doomed attempt to settle the crown on the protestant Lady Jane Grey, Bowes was forced to resign his higher offices, the new Marian regime still had need of his expertise in Anglo-Scottish affairs. He died at Berwick on 28 February 1555 while reviewing the defences of the garrison there. 


@@@@@


doc= 3059


Bowes, Robert (d. 1597), diplomat, was the fifth but second surviving son of Richard Bowes (died 1558), soldier, of Norham, Northumberland, and his wife, Elizabeth Bowes (bap. 1505, d. in or before 1572), protestant exile, daughter and coheir of Roger Aske of Aske, North Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife, Margery. His only surviving brother was Sir George Bowes (1527-1580), who acted as Elizabeth I's marshal in the suppression of the northern rising of 1569-70. His sister Marjory Bowes (died 'c'.1560) married John Knox. The family was experienced in dealing with border warfare, as Richard Bowes had served Henry VIII, leading a force across the Scottish border in August 1542 following the breakdown of Anglo-Scottish negotiations, but was defeated at Haddon Rig. Robert Bowes matriculated at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1547 but took no degree. He probably attended Lincoln's Inn in 1549. He married first his cousin Anne (died in or before 1566), daughter and coheir of Sir George Bowes of Dalden. They had at least one child, Ralph Bowes (died 1623). In 1566 he married again; his second wife was Eleanor, daughter of Sir Richard Musgrave of Eden Hall, Cumberland. They had no children. 
Bowes was sheriff of co. Durham in 1564 and again in 1569, in which capacity he assisted his brother in defending Barnard Castle against the northern earls. Following this he was put in command of a mounted force whose purpose was to maintain and enforce order on the western border. He was JP for co. Durham from 1561 and for the North Riding from 1569. In addition to his house at Berwick, Bowes held the manor of Great Broughton, Yorkshire, the extensive improvement of which he later claimed cost him $2300. He was MP for Knaresborough in 1563 and appointed to the succession committee in 1566. He was MP for Carlisle in 1571 and Appleby in 1572, owing his return to the patronage of leading noblemen, and was active in parliament. 
Henry capitalized on the disarray of the Scots following the battle of Flodden in 1513 by establishing a system of diplomatic espionage, continued by his daughter Elizabeth. Bowes's position as treasurer of Berwick from 1576 placed him ideally for employment on diplomatic missions, and in the periods when he served as resident English ambassador at the Scottish court he watched over the queen's interests and was briefed to gather and maintain a party of men who supplied information and were in the pay of the English sovereign. He was a member of the queen's council in the north from 1574 and JP for Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmorland, and the East and West ridings from 1577. The purpose of Bowes's actions regarding Scotland was to weaken any inclination by James VI's government to form ties with France and to unite factions of the Scottish nobility favourably disposed towards England. The course of his diplomatic career may be traced through the many letters that survive. 
James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, was established as regent of Scotland in 1572 with the task of administering government for the young king, but his position was challenged in the late 1570s; Bowes recorded the first signs of significant opposition in a letter to Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, dated 28 June 1577. He noted the formation of a party headed by John Stewart, fourth earl of Atholl, William Grey, fourth Lord Ruthven, and Patrick Lindsay, sixth Lord Lindsay. He suggested that steps were being taken to end the dispute between Atholl and Colin Campbell, sixth earl of Argyll, in the hope of adding Argyll to the coalition aimed at increasing their political influence. 
Bowes attempted to broker an accord between the leaders of the two factions and was present at a meeting of Morton, Atholl, and Argyll at Morton's residence at Dalkeith in 1578. In his correspondence Bowes states that the three noblemen agreed to share power amicably, but Morton left for Stirling ahead of the others to take possession of the young king. Such was the tension between the two factions that Argyll and Atholl met Morton, at the head of their respective forces, in the field at Falkirk in August 1578. It was Bowes, in his capacity as English ambassador, who by May 1579 had mediated the truce between the two sides and induced the adversaries to settle their differences without recourse to arms. Nevertheless, it is clear from his correspondence that he seriously doubted whether a formula for peace could be devised. The problem for Bowes was that Elizabeth and her privy council had miscalculated how unpopular Morton's Anglophile regime had become and their mediation, intended to prop the earl up, only worsened their situation and undermined further the Anglo-Scottish amity. 
By autumn 1579 a new threat to Morton materialized in the person of Esme Stewart, seigneur d'Aubigny, who reached Scotland from France in September. Backed by the Guise family, d'Aubigny seems to have been motivated by personal opportunism rather than by a desire to promote Catholicism. He used his French support to appeal to Scottish Catholics and was quick to establish a personal rapport with the thirteen-year-old James, already resentful of Morton's authority. In alliance with James Stewart, captain of the king's guard, d'Aubigny increased his influence at court and drew in Morton's enemies such as Atholl and Argyll. The threat posed to England by a dominant Catholic faction at the Scottish court that could look for support from either France or Spain was not lost on William Cecil, Baron Burghley, lord treasurer, and Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary. In April 1580 Bowes, at that time treasurer of the garrison at Berwick, received $500 and instructions to travel to Scotland, where he was to make use of the money to shore up Morton's crumbling regime. 
Bowes arrived in Edinburgh on 27 April and his reports to Walsingham indicate that he found Morton's position very fragile, given that d'Aubigny's assiduous attendance at court strengthened his hold on the king. Bowes suggested the provision of financial support for John Erskine, second or eighteenth earl of Mar, and Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus (both more favourably disposed to England), in order to counter this influence. Before departing for Berwick the ambassador sought to secure further support for Elizabeth with the payment of bribes to the captains of Dumbarton and Edinburgh. Upon his return he sent a barrage of messages to Walsingham stressing that immediate action was needed to save the English party in Scotland, but the queen's attention was elsewhere and his proposals seemed too costly, so his pleas were ignored. Verbal assurances of support had lost their appeal to Morton, who sent word to Bowes through Angus that only a pension of 500 marks to him and 2000 marks to the king could save the situation. So far had Morton's faith in Elizabeth evaporated that towards the end of July he was making overtures to d'Aubigny, despite remonstrations from Bowes. When d'Aubigny took Dumbarton, described by Bowes as the gateway of France into Scotland, the English envoy was sent back to Scotland to do what he could, short of using force. 
With such restrictions imposed upon him, Bowes's mission was fraught with difficulty. It was complicated further by the fact that Elizabeth was still negotiating with the French, obliging the English envoy to avoid openly antagonizing d'Aubigny. Forbidden to offer more than verbal encouragement and the promise of the queen's approval, Bowes's efforts to discredit the royal favourite were hindered by James's refusal to hear criticism of d'Aubigny unless he was present to defend himself. Bowes nevertheless did what he could to undermine d'Aubigny by spreading rumours that he was planning to abduct James to France. Beyond the court Bowes also made unsuccessful attempts to arrange a meeting of Anglo-Scottish commissioners to discuss border problems, causing him to send a very pessimistic report concerning control of the marches. This stalemate led to his recall from Scotland at the end of October. Clearly frustrated that the duties of his office were so ill-rewarded, he petitioned the queen in 1582 about his expenses and on 14 December wrote to Walsingham asking to be released from service, a request that was denied. 
Dissatisfaction with d'Aubigny, created duke of Lennox in August 1581, increased dramatically in the following year, even though Morton had finally fallen and been executed in June 1581. On 7 August, Walsingham wrote to Bowes that he should inform the duke's opponents that Lennox had discovered a plot against him. There followed the Ruthven raid, in which the sixteen-year-old James was tricked into going from Perth to Ruthven Castle, Perthshire, by the earls of Gowrie (Ruthven), Mar, and Lindsay. Bowes was dispatched by Elizabeth to Scotland in order to convey her support and approval. However, the queen was still not prepared to add weight to her words with firm offers of pensions or financial aid, despite his strenuous declaration that all the benefits of the raid would be lost otherwise. He discovered that James was still favourably disposed towards Lennox and that the Ruthven raiders lacked a following. Mar and Thomas Lyon, master of Glamis, he reported, were trustworthy, but the loyalty of the others to the English cause would have to be bought. News that the French ambassador Bertrand de Salignac de la Motte-Fenelon was travelling to Scotland prompted Bowes to work hard for Lennox's departure before the envoy arrived in January 1583. Bowes's fear was that Motte-Fenelon would try to negotiate a French marriage for James and establish a French party to the prejudice of English interests. During his brief sojourn the envoy was able to achieve little, and English concerns over French influence in Scotland were further calmed when Lennox, having alienated the Scottish church's presbyterian leaders, was forced to flee the country in December 1582. 
In June 1583 James, with the aid of James Stewart, earl of Arran, Robert Stewart, earl of March, and Patrick Adamson, archbishop of St Andrews, escaped from Ruthven Castle to St Andrews. Bowes conceded that he was taken completely unawares by the king's flight, in no small part because James had repeatedly assured the envoy of his devotion to England and the protestant cause up to the moment of his departure from Ruthven. Having received the information from Bowes on 31 July that the king's affection for Elizabeth was greatly abated, a panicked Walsingham travelled north to Berwick and proceeded with Bowes to Scotland, where they were coolly received and kept waiting until 9 September, when they were granted audience with James at Perth. The king heard their remonstrations, but was in no mood to change course, and Bowes was withdrawn from Scotland shortly after Walsingham's departure. 
Bowes continued to be involved in Scottish politics and was at Berwick in March 1584 trying to further the plotting of Mar, Angus, and Gowrie against Arran, but he seemed not to know how to influence James, fruitlessly believing that Mary had a strong sway over her son and could be used to help direct his policy. Bowes was MP for Cumberland in 1584, 1586, and 1589, through the patronage of Henry Scrope, ninth Baron Scrope of Bolton. Again, he was an active MP. His diplomatic activity became mundane following James's assumption of personal power, and his long royal service brought him little reward. 
On 18 January 1596 Bowes wrote from Edinburgh to his nephew, Sir William Bowes, stating that he was suffering much from ill health and from the broken state of his affairs. He was indebted heavily to the crown and became increasingly inactive. On 15 November 1597 he died at Berwick and was buried there on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 3060


Bowes, Thomas (fl. 1579-1589), translator, was educated at Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1579-80 and MA in 1583. Bowes translated the first two volumes of Pierre de la Primaudaye's 'Academie Francoise' (1577 and 1583): the first volume, dedicated to Master John Barne, was issued in 1586; the second, printed in 1594 (entered in the Stationers' register in 1589), is dedicated to Sir John Puckering. The contents of the books are accurately summarized by their full titles: 'The French academie, wherin is discoursed the institution of maners, and whatsoever els concerneth the good and happie life of all estates and callings, by preceptes of doctrine, and examples of the lives of ancient sages and famous men' and 'The second part of the French academie, wherein, as it were by a naturall historie of the bodie and soule of man, the creation, matter, composition, forme, nature, profite and use of all the partes of the frame of man are handled, with the naturall causes of all affections, vertues and vices, and chiefly the nature, powers, workes and immortalitie of the soule'. While the second volume is almost exclusively concerned with the powers and nature of the body and the soul, the first deals with a much wider range of subjects. It contains discussions of the vices and virtues; counsel and counsellors; forms of government; the education of princes and children; death; and various facets of duty, including one's duties to God, to one's community, fellows, and family, as well as the specific duties of princes, magistrates, and soldiers. This moral and philosophical encyclopaedia, written as a dialogue, is a storehouse of exempla, quotations, proverbs, and maxims. Both volumes went through several editions. The 'Academie' was pilfered by many subsequent readers and writers, such as Robert Greene and the author of 'Boke his Surfeyt', as cited by Jane Anger (Magnusson, 311-14). Bowes was a devout puritan and condemned literature as dangerous and evil: he denounced plays, mummings, and masks (1.202), and the press is generally rebuked for printing 'lewde and wanton bookes... Termed Stage-playes and Theaters... [and] the Legend of lies, Huon of Burdeaux, King Arthur, with the rest of that rabble' because they are 'the soveraigne place of Satan', responsible for 'the upholding of Atheisme' and possessing 'the force to mainteine Popery in the dayes of ignorance' (vol. 2, 'Epist. to reader'). The date and circumstances of Bowes's death are unknown; it is possible that he was the Thomas Bowes, gentleman, of East Bergholt, Suffolk, whose will was proved in 1598. 


@@@@@


doc= 3061


Bowes, Sir William (c.1389-1465), soldier, was the son of Sir Robert Bowes (died in or before 1410), of Streatlam, co. Durham, and was said to be of full age in 1410. John Leland, writing about 1540, recorded what had by then seemingly become established in family lore: that Bowes served in France for seventeen years under John, duke of Bedford, whose chamberlain he became, and grew so rich that on his return he was able to rebuild his manor house at Streatlam. Further tradition asserts that it was the loss of his wife, Jane, daughter of Ralph, Lord Greystoke, in the first year of his marriage, that prompted him to serve in the wars, and that he was captain of Chateau Gaillard in Normandy. Evidence in support of these particulars is scant. In 1413 the name of Bowes's wife was recorded as Elizabeth, and there is no known record of his having either been captain of Chateau Gaillard or associated with Bedford. Following the latter's death in 1435, Bowes's name was not included in the list of the duke's commanders and retainers in France. The issue is further confused by the existence of others of the same or very similar name, including Sir William's own son. 
Bowes is not listed in the roll of arms of those present at the battle of Agincourt in 1415. He may have been identical with the William Bowes who mustered in the retinue of the earl of Northumberland, to accompany the latter to France in 1417. And by March 1418 he was certainly in France, acting on behalf of the duke of Clarence at the surrender of the castle of Courtonne, and in September was empowered to receive all brigands and others wishing to perform homage to Henry V in Normandy; he was probably knighted in that year. He joined the spring campaign of 1420 as a captain, departing from Southampton and arriving at Harfleur in May. There is some evidence that Bowes did profit from his part in the wars. Although he was himself a prisoner in France in November 1422, in the following March his prisoner Philippe de Monstreuil was given a safe conduct to travel to France, presumably to arrange for a ransom. And in 1427 a like safe conduct was issued for another prisoner, Thomas Syras, enabling him to go to Scotland, there to raise his ransom due to Bowes. 
By the mid-1420s Bowes was back in England, where he played a minor part in the affairs of the north. On 5 April 1424 he and two other commissioners received at Melrose the oath of James I, king of Scots, to observe the conditions of his recent release from English captivity. In 1426 he was licensed to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and may well have completed the journey, as he was certainly abroad in June of that year. In 1434 he was reportedly at odds with the vicar of Gainford, a few miles east of Streatlam; this did not prevent Bishop Langley's appointing him sheriff of Durham in 1436. From this point it becomes impossible to be certain whether all references to William Bowes are to him, or to his son, or to others of the same name. A William Bowes mustered in the retinue of Henry Bourchier, count of Eu, in March 1441, and in 1448 either the same man or a namesake received protection, as he was going to France in the company of Sir Richard Vernon. The Sir William Bowes who fought at Ludford Bridge in 1459, who held Alnwick for Edward IV in 1461, and who received a border commission in 1464, may have been the son of the warrior of forty years earlier. But it was presumably the father whose inquisition post mortem records him as having died before 11 October 1465. 


@@@@@


doc= 3062


Bowet, Henry (d. 1423), archbishop of York, was apparently a member of a Cumbrian gentry family who rose to local prominence in the second half of the fourteenth century, making two advantageous marriages (in which Bowet himself had a hand) and producing an MP for Cumberland. His mother was buried at Tupholme in Lincolnshire, but most of his known connections were with the area round Penrith, where kinsmen lived, the family owned land, his father was buried, and many of his servants and officials originated. His educational career suggests that he was born before the mid-1340s. He had probably received a licentiate in laws from Cambridge University by 1368, and his doctorate in canon and civil law from Bologna in 1382. A royal clerk by 1372, and an official of the bishop of Ely in the mid-1370s, by about 1380 he had entered the service of Henry Despenser, the warlike bishop of Norwich, for whom he probably negotiated papal authorization for the Flemish crusade of 1383. As commissary-general to the bishop, he organized the recruitment and finances of the crusade, a role that led to his commitment to the Tower of London when it ended in military fiasco amid charges of corruption. Brought before parliament, Bowet cleared Despenser of the charge of receiving bribes from the French, at the risk of inculpating himself. He was rewarded with his first major preferment, to the deanery of Dublin. 
Between 1384 and 1392 Bowet served as royal proctor at the papal court. His courage in remaining with the pope after riots at Lucera in 1385, in which another Englishman was killed, earned him appointment as auditor of causes at the papal court; and his good standing with both the pope and Richard II led to his employment as ambassador between Rome and Westminster on several occasions. In 1387, during Richard II's struggle with the appellants, he acted as his agent in negotiations with pope and emperor which, though ostensibly directed against schismatics, may have been designed to secure aid against the king's domestic enemies. Nothing came of this scheme, but it earned Bowet the enmity of the appellants, who excluded him from the pardon issued at the end of the Merciless Parliament in 1388. He was stripped of his deanery of Dublin and of the archdeaconry of Lincoln granted him by the king in 1386. After Richard II's resumption of the reins of government in 1389 Bowet recovered his preferments and was reappointed proctor at the papal court in 1390. But early in 1392 he left Rome for the last time and returned to England to enter the service of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. In 1393 he was appointed to negotiate with the king of Castile, and in 1394 he sailed with John of Gaunt for Gascony, where he led the negotiations to secure recognition of Gaunt as duke of Aquitaine by the Gascon estates. By July 1396 he had been appointed constable of Bordeaux, and on 19 July 1397 was made chief justice of the superior court of Aquitaine. In the same year he was sent on an embassy to Aragon to negotiate, among other matters, a marriage alliance between Isabella of Aragon and Gaunt's eldest son, Henry Bolingbroke. 
In 1398, however, Henry Bolingbroke was banished from England, and Bowet followed him into exile, having first secured for him permission to appoint a proxy to receive his inheritance in the event of the death of his father, Lancaster. When Lancaster died, however, on 3 February 1399, Richard II revoked his grant, and procured Bowet's condemnation in the committee of parliament at Shrewsbury. As the counsellor and abettor of Bolingbroke, Bowet was declared a traitor, and sentenced to execution, a sentence commuted to perpetual banishment in consideration of his clergy. His archdeaconry was again taken away from him. However, after the accession of Bolingbroke as Henry IV in September 1399, Bowet became one of the new king's inner circle of counsellors. He was immediately reappointed constable of Bordeaux. His loyalty was rewarded by restoration to his old preferment at Lincoln, by prebends at London and York, by extensive grants in Aquitaine, and by his appointment in May 1400 as one of the four regents in Aquitaine. His presence there helped to quell a rebellion at Bayonne and to pacify the duchy, shaken by the Lancastrian usurpation; but as soon as quieter circumstances permitted he returned to England, in December 1400, taking care to secure papal absolution for his part in warlike acts, homicides, and mutilations. At the king's insistence he was promoted to the first important bishopric to become vacant, despite opposition from the pope and the Commons, who preferred Richard Clifford (died 1421). Bowet was provided to Bath and Wells, which had been vacant for eighteen months, on 19 August 1401 and consecrated at St Paul's on 20 November. 
Bowet initially made an effort to run his diocese from his house near Westminster; but the appointment of a suffragan in June 1402 showed that he was still mainly devoted to cares of state. On 27 February 1402 he became treasurer, though he held that post for only eight months. Between 1402 and 1408, however, he was continually employed by Henry IV in various capacities, and frequently in his company, retained as his personal counsellor. His name appears constantly in the proceedings of the privy council. In 1403 he led an embassy to France and accompanied the king on his Welsh expedition on his return. In 1404 he negotiated with Castile; in 1405 with Scotland. In 1403, 1404, 1406, and 1407, he was a trier of petitions. In 1404 he was one of the king's council nominated in parliament, and in 1406 he swore to observe Henry's settlement of the succession. That same year he accompanied the court to Bishop's Lynn, and was thence dispatched on an important mission to Denmark, to escort Philippa, the king's daughter, to the home of her intended husband, Erik, the heir of the famous Margaret, who had united the three Scandinavian kingdoms. His report of the young king's character and the condition of his country is full of interest. It was his last major diplomatic mission. 
Bowet had scarcely returned from his Danish embassy when he was translated by papal provision to York -- the archbishopric had been unoccupied for two and a half years since the execution of Richard Scrope on 8 June 1405. His appointment was a victory for the king and his servant and a defeat for the pope, who had pressed the candidature of Robert Hallum (died 1417). Bowet was enthroned on 9 December 1407. With increasing age, and with important duties in the north, Bowet seems henceforth to have had less to do with the court, though, significantly, he was appointed to the council when Henry IV reasserted his control over the government in November 1411, and he was one of Henry IV's executors, and sat on a commission appointed to pay his debts. He was still often in parliament, where in 1413, 1414, 1415, and 1416 he was again trier of petitions; but he was employed on no more embassies, and his name appears less often in the proceedings of the council. In 1409 and 1410 he conducted a thorough primary visitation of his diocese and henceforth resided in the diocese for long periods. His register, though lacking documents of great public interest, is testimony to an orderly and careful administration. Bowet was on good terms with his canons, officials, and suffragans, and had no trouble with convocation after his early years. He built the great hall at Cawood and a new kitchen at Otley, and was a liberal benefactor to his cathedral. He acquired a great reputation for hospitality and sumptuous housekeeping that consumed 80 tuns of claret yearly. The inventory of his property shows him to have been possessed of very considerable wealth, much of which was distributed among his entourage. His rule contributed significantly to the stability of his province after years of turmoil. 
In 1410 Bowet showed his zeal against Lollardy by acting as one of Arundel's assistants at the trial of Badby, and in 1421 he wrote a strong letter to the king against another heretic named John Tailor, or Bilton. One of his final public acts was characteristic. In 1417 the Scots profited by Henry V's absence in Normandy to invade England. Bowet, though probably already in his seventies and so infirm that he could only be carried in a litter, 'put himself in great peril' once more for the Lancastrians and accompanied the army with his clergy. His bravery, patriotism, and loyalty largely encouraged the English to victory. He died on 20 October 1423, and was buried at the east end of York Minster, in the fine tomb he had built during his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 3063


Bowie, James (c.1789-1869), gardener and botanist, was born in London, son of an Oxford Street seedsman. From 1810 he was employed at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. In 1814 he was chosen by Sir Joseph Banks, with Allan Cunningham, to collect plants for Kew, and set sail for Brazil with the promise that he would enjoy 'the afternoon of life... in ease, comfort, and respectability' (Banks to Bowie, 18 Sept 1815, RBG Kew, 'Kew collectors'). He was ordered two years later to South Africa, where he arrived from Rio de Janeiro in November 1816. He explored the Cape, travelling by 1821 as far east as the Great Fish River. In 1823, however, he was recalled home and dismissed. In part this was due to 'liberal tory' fiscal retrenchment, which in 1822 halved the sum which parliament had annually voted since 1814 for Kew's botanical collectors, but Bowie was also thought to have been dilatory in crown service. He certainly gave false locations for plants, perhaps to ensure that, when his poorly paid and dangerous post finished, his services would remain valuable. He returned permanently to the Cape in 1827, writing that it offered a quality of life 'which did not often fall to the lot of the working classes in Europe' ('Relative merits of the Cape, America and Australia for emigration', 'Gardener's Magazine', 7, 1831, 490-96). 
Bowie wrote the earliest guide to the Cape flora printed in South Africa (1829), and his botanical knowledge was famous: he was thought able to identify any plant presented to him, giving its local and Latin names, history, and uses. He advised on gardens, notably Baron Ludwig's botanical collection, and hunted plants with such success that W. H. Harvey considered him to have enriched Europe's gardens with more succulents than any other individual. His feats were honoured in the genera 'Bowiea', named by Harvey, and 'Bowiesia', named by R. K. Greville, but he enjoyed few more tangible rewards, growing old in poverty, an alcoholic dependent on charity. He died at Claremont, outside Cape Town, Cape Colony, on 2 July 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 3064


Bowlby, Thomas William (1817-1860), journalist, son of Thomas Bowlby, a captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, a daughter of General Balfour, was born at Gibraltar. When very young, Bowlby was taken by his parents to Sunderland, where his father became a timber merchant. Bowlby's education was entrusted to Dr Cowan, a Scottish schoolmaster living in Sunderland. After leaving school he trained as a solicitor under his cousin Russell Bowlby of Sunderland. On completion of his time he went to London and spent some years as a salaried clerk in the office of a large firm in the Temple. In 1846 he began practising in the City as junior partner in the firm of Lawrence, Crowdy, and Bowlby. In his early legal career, Bowlby enjoyed a fair practice, but the law proved uncongenial, and through his many literary acquaintances he felt increasingly drawn to a career in writing. Although remaining a member of the firm until 1854, he went to Berlin as special correspondent of 'The Times' in 1848 to report on the continental revolutions. Bowlby married Frances Marion, daughter of Pulteney Mein and sister of his father's second wife, who inherited a considerable fortune on the death of her father. During the railway mania Bowlby got into financial difficulties, which caused him to leave England for a short time, but he made arrangements for the whole of his future earnings to be applied in liquidation of his debts. On returning to England he was associated for some time with Louis Antoine Jullien (1812-1860), the musical director and composer. He next went to Smyrna, where he was employed in connection with the construction of a railway. In 1860 he was engaged to travel to China as the special correspondent of 'The Times'. Lord Elgin and Baron Gros were fellow passengers in the steamship 'Malabar', which was lost at Point de Galle on 22 May 1860; his graphic narrative of this shipwreck was considered one of his best pieces of work. His China dispatches were informative and popular with readers of 'The Times'. After the capture of Tientsin (Tianjin) on 23 August 1860, Bowlby accompanied Admiral Sir James Hope and four others to Tang-chow to arrange the preliminaries of peace. They were captured and imprisoned by the Tartar general, Senggerinchin. Bowlby died on 22 September 1860 at Tang-chow, from the effects of the treatment he received in prison. His body was afterwards surrendered by the Chinese and buried in the Russian cemetery, outside the Anting (Anding) gate of Peking (Beijing), on 17 October 1860; he left a widow and five young children, among them Sir Anthony Alfred Bowlby, first baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 3065


Bowle, John (d. 1637), bishop of Rochester, was born in Lancashire. His father, Richard Bowle (died 1626), auditor to the earl of Bedford, settled at Chesham, Buckinghamshire, where his wife, Marie, died in 1607. John was sent to Westminster School; from there he was elected head of his year to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1593, matriculating and becoming a scholar in 1594. He graduated BA in 1598 and proceeded MA in 1601, BD in 1608, and DD in 1613, incorporating at Oxford in 1605 and 1615. He became chaplain to Lord Treasurer Salisbury, whose last illness in 1612 he attended and chronicled, and was rector of St Michael-le-Querne, London, from 1 March 1608, vacating by 2 April 1619. On 1 June 1609 he was dispensed to hold additionally the rectory of Upminster, Essex. He acquired the Berkshire rectories of Bradfield and Tilehurst in 1613, and that of Eynsford, Kent, in 1614. 
From 1610 Bowle was a regular Lent preacher at court, and in 1615 and 1616 published sermons preached respectively at the funeral of Henry Grey, earl of Kent, and at the request of Sir Richard Blount. His appointment as dean of Salisbury was known by 20 March 1620; he was instituted on 28 July. That September he was a royal chaplain-in-waiting, and the following year published an address to the convocation of Canterbury. Advancement to the see of Rochester was predicted on 16 November 1629; Bowle having meanwhile successfully petitioned to retain Tilehurst, assent was given to his election on 8 January 1630 and he was consecrated on 7 February. 
During Bowle's first summer as bishop he was forced by plague to vacate the episcopal seat at Bromley, retreating to Berkshire. In 1631 and 1632 he sat frequently in the court of high commission. Concerned at this time to maintain clerical control of church furnishings, he warned that provision of church seating would 'hatche a lay presbyterye' (Gardiner, 307), although his father had made just such improvements to Chesham church. Bishop Bowle promoted the erection of altar rails but he was a resolute protestant, to whom the pope was 'vicar of hell' (ibid., 227). The papal agent Panzani judged him 'puritanissimo' (Albion, 414). In October 1632 it was rumoured that Bowle would be translated to Lichfield. He preached at Archbishop Abbot's funeral at Croydon on 3 September 1633. He was prompt to commend the 1633 reissue of the 'Book of Sports', and suspended clergy who would not read it, but told Laud later that year that his visitation of Rochester Cathedral had been impeded by the dean and chapter on a technicality. The remaining years of his episcopate were inactive through illness, described by Laud as 'palsy' ('Works', 5.324, 345). One Edward Parsons repeatedly abused him as 'a sot' ('CSP dom.', '1631-3', 460, 467). 
Bowle and his wife, Bridget, sister of Sir George Coppin, had several children including Richard and Mary, and probably also George, Brigitt, and Anne, buried at Chesham within a fortnight in 1614. Bowle promoted his nephew Richard Chase to two of the richest livings in his diocese, later regretting his generosity. He died in London on 9 October 1637 and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 3066


Bowle, John (1725-1788), literary editor, was born on 15 October 1725 at Idmiston, near Salisbury, Wiltshire, the eldest of the four children of John Bowle ('c'.1700-1743), gentleman, and his wife, Sarah (1700-1785), daughter of the Revd Thomas Westley, rector of Brockley, Somerset. A descendant of Dr John Bowle, dean of Salisbury and bishop of Rochester, he was educated at Oriel College, Oxford, where he took his MA in 1750 and, after ordination, became vicar of Idmiston, where his family had long been established. On 7 November 1754 he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Elliott, of Winterbourne Cherburgh, Wiltshire. She died in 1759, leaving two daughters, the elder of whom died in 1769. Bowle was elected FSA in 1776. 
Already in his mid-twenties Bowle was acknowledged by the Revd John Douglas, in his 'Milton Vindicated from the Charge of Plagiarism' (1751), as the 'Original Detector' of the spurious evidence adduced by William Lauder. His continuing interest in English literature is seen in his publication, in 1764, of the anonymous 'Troublesome Raigne of King John', of 1591, together with various works by John Marston, as also in his contributions to Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry' and the 1778 Johnson-Steevens edition of Shakespeare. Bowle read Richard Farmer's 'Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare', wrote to Edmond Malone about Edward Capell, praised the 'judicious editor' (Thomas Tyrwhitt) of the 1775 'Canterbury Tales', and applied to Cervantes Warton's words on Shakespeare in his 'Observations on Spenser': 'If Cervantes is worth reading, he is worth explaining'. This conviction led him to produce the first fully annotated edition of 'Don Quixote'. 
Bowle received strong encouragement for this undertaking from Thomas Percy to whose 'Reliques of Ancient Poetry' Bowle made contributions. Cervantes, according to Percy, was their 'favourite author'. Percy built up a substantial 'Quixotic Library', consisting largely of romances of chivalry, on which he originally proposed to draw for 'an improved Translation [of the 'Quixote'] with large Notes and Illustrations: as well containing... Extracts from the old Romances by way of a Key to [Cervantes's] satire' ('Cervantine Correspondence', 13). This aim (without the translation) became Bowle's own. He thus produced for the 'Quixote', in the same conviction as had animated Lewis Theobald in editing Shakespeare, an edition adorned with a learned apparatus of a kind hitherto generally reserved for classical texts. To this long task of the 1770s Bowle brought wide-ranging literary learning that embraced French and Italian as well as Spanish and English, his own classical education, and an untiring dedication to literary research. His library, at his death, consisted of well over 12,000 works and editions. His edition of 'Don Quixote' was published at Salisbury in 1781 at the price of 3 guineas. 
Bowle's 300 pages of annotations on Cervantes' text underlie all subsequent work of the kind and have brought him, with time, the highest praise in Spain. In England, in his own time, the reception of his edition brought him disappointment and pain. The auctioneers of his library offered unsold copies at half price and less. Beyond the fact that Bowle's extensive critical apparatus is entirely in Spanish, his scholarly approach to what was seen as an essentially comic masterpiece would have struck many as misconceived. This view was destructively deployed against Bowle by Giuseppe Baretti ('Joseph Baretti') -- long resident in London and an associate of Samuel Johnson -- in his 'Tolondron: Speeches to John Bowle about his Edition of Don Quixote' (1786), where he presented Bowle as a linguistically incompetent pedant. Bowle thus paid a high price for having written disparagingly about Baretti in his 'Letter to the Reverend Dr Percy' (1777) announcing his 'new and classical edition' of the 'Quixote' to the world. Baretti subsequently made common cause with Captain John Cruickshank RN, whom Bowle had failed to thank in the preliminaries to his edition, even though Cruickshank had, in the mid-1770s, been a warm friend and supportive collaborator. Bowle responded to their criticism of himself and his edition in letters of 1784-5 to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and finally in his 'Remarks on the extraordinary conduct of the knight of the ten stars '[Cruickshank]' and his Italian squire '[Baretti],' to the editor of 'Don Quixote': in a letter to the Rev. J. S., D. D.' [probably Joseph Simpson] (1785). It was this that unleashed Baretti's 'Tolondron'. 
One who had known Bowle since 1760 -- perhaps the Revd J. Baverstock -- commented, in an unsigned note, after the death of 'my old friend' that Bowle's 'great error both as an editor and a Critic, was too fond an acquiescence in his first thoughts and a stubborn unyielding temper that would not allow him to submit to the slightest Retractation'. On the other hand, 'it may be truly asserted that Baretti's 'Tolondron' was the efficient cause of the Death of poor John Bowle' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. misc. d. 244, fol. 108). His final years were further saddened by the death of his young son-in-law, who left Bowle's daughter with two small children. A member of the Essex Club established in 1784 to cheer Dr Johnson in his last days, Bowle himself died on 26 October 1788 at Idmiston, and is buried in the church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 3067


Bowler, Thomas William (1812-1869), landscape painter and printmaker, was born in Tring, Hertfordshire, on 9 December 1812, the son of William Bowler, a labourer, and Sarah Butterfield. He worked for three years in London as a solicitor's clerk, but in 1833, on the recommendation of a local squire, Dr John Lee FRS, who had noticed his talents, he obtained a post as servant and assistant to Thomas Maclear, newly appointed astronomer royal at the Cape of Good Hope. He was employed at the Cape Town observatory from 1834 until July 1835, when he was dismissed. Until 1838 he was tutor to the children of Captain Richard Wolfe, commandant of the prison settlement on Robben Island in Table Bay. He subsequently established himself successfully in Cape Town as a landscape painter and drawing-master; he taught at the South African College (1842-66) and the Diocesan College. He was self-taught as an artist, but in 1854, on a visit to Britain, he studied under James Duffield Harding; in 1857 he published 'The Students Hand-Book Intended for those Studying Art, on the System of J. D. Harding', the first book on the subject to be produced in South Africa. 
Influenced by the early works of J. M. W. Turner, Bowler painted sea-, land-, and townscapes, notably a panorama of the Cape Town district (1852); many of his works were purchased by visitors to the Cape. He published 'Four Views of Cape Town' (1844); 'South African Sketches' (1854), a series of ten lithographs of scenes at the Cape of Good Hope; 'The African Sketch Book' (1855); and 'The Kafir Wars and British Settlers in South Africa' (1865), a series of twenty views, with descriptive letterpress by W. R. Thomson. He was a committee member of the Cape Town Exhibitions of Fine Arts (1850-59) and won a gold medal at the first exhibition in 1851; he introduced the Art Union of London to the Cape (1851) and became its first secretary in 1853. He received an honourable mention at the British Institution (1857); he also exhibited a drawing of the Royal Observatory, Cape Town, at the Society of British Artists (1857) and two views of Cape scenery at the Royal Academy (1860). Many of his sketches were published as wood-engravings in the 'Illustrated London News'. 
In 1838 Bowler married Jane Hawthorne, with whom he had four sons and two daughters. His wife died in 1849, and on 26 February 1851 he married Maria Jolly; they had four daughters. He travelled widely in the Cape and Natal, and in 1866 and 1868 visited Mauritius, where he made a number of drawings, but the malaria he caught there weakened his health. He died of bronchitis at the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 24 October 1869. Bowler executed some 800 watercolours, a few oils, and numerous lithographs; there are examples of his work in the Africana Museum, Johannesburg, and the William Fehr collection, Cape Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 3068


Bowles, Edward (bap. 1613, d. 1662), clergyman, was baptized on 8 February 1613 at Sutton, Bedfordshire, the son of Oliver Bowles (died in or before 1646), clergyman, author and member of the Westminster assembly. In 1628 Bowles was admitted to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he studied under Richard Sibbes and Ralph Brownrigge; he graduated BA in 1633 and proceeded MA in 1636. 
Bowles supported parliament in the civil war. At one point chaplain to the second earl of Manchester, from November 1642 to July 1643 he served in the parliamentary army as chaplain to Sir John Meldrum's regiment of foot. In 'Plain English', issued in early January 1643, he criticized parliament for its peace proposals to the king, which had caused divisions and defections and affected morale. Unbreakable guarantees were necessary before peace could be agreed. Religion was in great danger as 'a temporal tyranny is a great step to ecclesiastical; and especially in our Kingdom, where our religion is fenced in with positive law', while peace must provide 'a settlement of the power of the Kingdom, principally of the ships, forts and arms in the hands of them who are known friends of public safety or liberty' but he doubted whether the king would accede to all this, for bad advisers told him 'there can be no new power but what is cut out of his' (pp. 4, 12-13). Bowles urged the founding of an association of counties, based in the south and east, for the maintenance of religion and the army 'by purse and person against the opposite faction'. Although this 'hath been more fully studied by others, than my desire of practice will for the present allow me to do', he thought an association would be 'a good second string in case the Parliament should unhappily miscarry' (pp. 27-8). Bowles also wrote 'A letter from a minister... to a brother... from my lord general's quarter before Reading, April 18 1643', as Essex's artillery pounded the town. His next work, 'The Mysterie of Iniquity' (1643), praised puritans and parliament as 'tenacious of just liberty and true religion' (pp. 9-10) and denounced the royalist army as staffed 'from the barren mountains of Wales, Cornwall and the north' (p. 14), that is, 'the dark corners of the land... most void of the knowledge of God... by papists, prelates, courtiers, superstitious clergy-men, dissolute gentry, and a herd of prophane ignorant people' (p. 30). 
In the spring of 1644 Bowles wrote newsletters from the Scottish army at Sunderland and gave accounts to parliament of the Scottish army and the battle of Naseby. He was twice voted $100 for his services. He was paid as Sir Thomas Fairfax's chaplain from April to December 1645, writing several news reports of the western campaign of the New Model Army. By 18 January 1646, he had left for York, where he was appointed a minister, and was replaced in the army by William Dell. Bowles published 'A Plain and Short Catechism', of which the first extant edition is dated 1647, in which 'the doctrine of the Trinity can hardly be said to be expressly declared... whilst it is wholly free from the tremendous declarations of the confession of the Westminster assembly' (James, 118). 
It was probably in the late 1640s that Bowles married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1619, died 1662), widow of John Robinson of Deighton and daughter of Sir Thomas Hutton of Nether Poppleton; they spent most of the rest of their lives in York. Appointed by the council of state to go to Scotland on 6 February 1649, Bowles did not fulfil the commission. The following year he was one of four ministers at York Cathedral paid a total of $450 out of the proceeds of the dean and chapter lands for the nine months from 25 March 1649. In 1654 Bowles was appointed an assistant to the commissioners for the ministry in the North and West ridings of Yorkshire, and was named for the East Riding on 14 January 1658. The leading presbyterian minister at York, Bowles was a very political divine and may have acted as a link between the city fathers and the government. On 29 December 1657 he wrote to Thurloe from York 'some account of the Christmas spirit that I perceive stirring in this and other places'. One Geldart had preached that it was 'a schismatic who did not observe Christmas day' and 'unless some way is found to purge cities and considerable places of such persons and practices, they will in a short time set all on fire' (Thurloe, 711). In 1660 there was 'a convention of twenty three ministers at Bradford in January under Bowles's leadership' (Woolrych, 506). 
Bowles played an important role in helping to facilitate the advance into England of the forces under General George Monck. In late 1659 Monck sent his brother-in-law Thomas Clarges to 'concert definite plans for a rising with Fairfax, Bowles, Colonel Rossiter and other leaders of the Presbyterian gentry' (Woolrych, 487). Convinced by Clarges as to the need for working with the republicans, Bowles took Monck's message to Fairfax at Nun Appleton. It has been remarked that if Fairfax 'leaned on anyone it was on the minister Edward Bowles, whose judgement in counsel and negotiation he trusted far' (ibid.). He instructed Bowles to persuade the royalist Sir Philip Monckton to stay in the background; for Fairfax 'did presently foresee that it was more fit for me to stay with Mr Bowles in York... for some of the Army that joined with him did highly cavil at some old cavaliers' ('Monckton Papers', 30). In late December, Bowles met Fairfax's cousin Bryan Fairfax in York to hear him rehearse a message from Fairfax to Monck asking him to advance should Major-General John Lambert intervene in Yorkshire. On the day of Fairfax's final advance on the city Bowles, 'who had been menaced by a patrol of horse that if he stirred out of his house he should die', nevertheless went to Philip Monckton's house and requested him 'to send to the citizens to rise which I did' (ibid., 32). The convergence of large numbers upon the minster and two other churches hastened the peaceful surrender of York. With the city occupied by troops loyal to Fairfax, Monck crossed the Scottish border, arriving on 11 January. 
During Monck's five-day stay at York, after a dinner with Lord Fairfax, he conferred with Bowles and then told Dr Price that 'Mr Bowles has pressed me very hard to stay and declare for the King, assuring me that I shall have great assistance', but denied he had made any such promise (F. Drake, 'Eboracum', 173). According to one historian: 'It is likely enough that Fairfax urged the almost universal desire for a free parliament, and perhaps he was frank about its inevitable consequence, a return to monarchy. Price's story that Bowles pressed Monck to stay in York and declare at once for the King is not incredible. (Woolrych, 499)' According to Baker, Monck 'very civilly acknowledged Mr Bowles's diligent and industrious acting in his concerns' (R. Baker, 'A Chronicle of the Kings of England', rev. edn, 1670, 594). 
Bowles did not much profit from his services to the restored Stuarts. Excluded from the minster, he continued to preach at Allhallows, and lectured at St Peter's. In April 1661 the aldermen and other leading parishioners unsuccessfully petitioned the king for his appointment to the vicarage of Leeds. Richard Baxter thought Bowles 'honest and judicious', and in a letter to Clarendon refusing the bishopric of Hereford, listed him among those who should be considered for the place; Baxter also wrote that Bowles was offered but refused the deanery of York (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.14). Edmund Calamy reported that the eminent clergymen John Tillotson and Edward Stillingfleet unsuccessfully attempted to induce Bowles to conform. The story is told that Bowles's last social call before leaving London was to his old acquaintance, Monck, now the duke of Albemarle: 'My Lord I have buried the good old cause, and am now going to bury myself. I never expect to see your grace more in this world.' And he proceeded to berate Monck for having failed in his duty to help establish a godly commonwealth -- 'all this you have given up for a feather in your cap' -- predicting the early failure of his line and the extinction of his title; the same day, 'the good man went homewards and was met at Doncaster by several of the ministers in that county' (Bradbury, appx, 33-4). Calamy gives Bowles as one of the silenced ministers, but he was buried at Allhallows Pavement in York on 22 August 1662, just before the 'Act of Uniformity' came into force; the funeral sermon was preached by Josiah Hunter. Bowles's wife had been buried on 20 February 1662 at Allhallows Pavement and by his will, signed from the cathedral close on 29 July 1662 and proved at York on 13 October, Bowles left substantial property to his young children Samuel, Thomas, John, Jonathan, and Mary, and to Elizabeth and Anne Robinson, daughters of his late wife by her first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 3069


Bowles, Sir George (1787-1876), army officer and courtier, was born at Heale House, Wiltshire, the second son of William Bowles of Heale House, and Dinah Frankland, daughter of Admiral Sir Thomas Frankland, bt. William Bowles was his elder brother. He entered the army as an ensign in the Coldstream Guards in 1804, and served in Germany under Lord Cathcart in 1805-6, at Copenhagen in 1807, in the Peninsula from 1808 to 1814, and in the south of France and Flanders from 1814 to 1818. He was present at the passage of the Douro, the battles of Talavera, Salamanca, and Vitoria, the capture of Madrid, the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajos, Burgos, and San Sebastian, the passages of the Nive, Nivelle, and Adour, the investment of Bayonne, the battles of Quatre Bras and Waterloo, and the occupation of Paris. When a brevet major he served as military secretary to the duke of Richmond in Canada in 1818-20, and as deputy adjutant-general in the West Indies from 1820 to 1825. While with his battalion of the Coldstream Guards in Canada, as lieutenant-colonel and brevet colonel, he commanded the troops in the Lower Province during the rebellion of 1838. 
Bowles retired on half pay in 1843, and took the post of comptroller of the viceregal household in Dublin under Lord Heytesbury. In 1845 he was appointed master of the queen's household, succeeding Sir Charles Murray, whom Prince Albert had considered incompetent. The household arrangements had recently been reformed, and Bowles took control of the entire domestic establishment. He was promoted major-general in 1846, lieutenant-general in 1854, and general in 1862. He was colonel of the 1st West India regiment from 1 September 1855, and on resigning his appointment in the royal household in 1851 owing to ill health was made KCB and appointed lieutenant of the Tower of London. Prince Albert commented that 'One General Wood, the Lieutenant of the Tower, with $700 a year, has been so good as to die, and Bowles is in rapture at being nominated his successor' (Martin, 2.382-3). He became GCB in 1873. Bowles died, unmarried, at 9 Berkeley Street, Berkeley Square, London, on 21 May 1876. 


@@@@@


doc= 3070


Bowles, Phineas (d. 1722), army officer, was the only son of Phineas Bowles (1647-1714) of the Chatham branch of the Bowles family. His father was a long-serving official at the Navy Board who briefly held the post of secretary to the navy (1689-90); little is known of his mother, Katherine, or of his three sisters. He was commissioned an ensign in the Queen Dowager's regiment, later the 2nd (Queen's Royal) regiment, on 3 October 1688, in Captain Charles Wingfield's company, and was raised to lieutenant on 21 March 1689. In May 1689 the regiment was sent as part of the expedition to raise the siege of Londonderry under the command of its colonel, Major-General Kirke. Later that year it was charged with the defence of the entrenchments at Dundalk. George Story, in his 'A True and Impartial History', relates that, in December 1689, Bowles, along with two other lieutenants from Kirke's regiment, was court-martialled and shot for killing two ship's masters. However, there must have been some misapprehension, for Bowles was promoted captain-lieutenant on 12 February 1692. By then the regiment was in Flanders, having served through the wars in Ireland until shortly after the second siege of Limerick (1691). In 1693 Bowles's regiment was part of the reserve at Landen, where it suffered slight losses, and in 1695 it was present at the siege of Namur. In March 1696 it was ordered home for duty at the Tower of London following the discovery of a plot against King William, but it returned to Flanders in May before the conclusion of the war by the treaty of Ryswick (1697). 
In the general reduction of regimental establishments which followed the peace it is likely that Bowles was himself disbanded -- for there is no record of him until 5 February 1705, when he was commissioned colonel of a regiment of foot (the late Colonel Caulfeild's regiment). Originally raised in Ireland in 1703, Bowles's regiment was embarked for Spain in 1705 with the expedition to Catalonia under the command of the earls of Peterborough and Galway; it took part in the siege and capture of Barcelona that September. In October 1706 Bowles was placed in command of a small force at the town of Elche, while the main column retired towards Alicante. On 21 October the French commander, Freville, appeared before the town with a force of 5500 men. Without artillery, Bowles held out for two days, but he was compelled to yield on the 23rd and was taken prisoner. However, his exchange must have been arranged speedily, for he is reported to have been present and in command of his regiment the following April (1707), when he was again forced to surrender at the bloody battle of Almanza. 
Narcissus Luttrell reports that Bowles returned to England on parole on 18 September 1707. In December 1708 his regiment was in receipt of a large draft of prisoners to restore it to full strength. Luttrell also relates that, in April 1709, having rebuilt his regiment, Bowles was ordered to Plymouth to join Admiral Baker's squadron, 'supposed to recover our settlements in Newfoundland' (Luttrell, 6.427). This was more than likely a ruse, since Bowles's regiment returned to Spain and distinguished itself at the victory of Saragossa (August 1710). 
Bowles was sent home with the captured French colours, and returned via Italy. However, he was left to pay his own expenses and memorialized the Treasury for recompense. In his absence his regiment was one of those British units surprised, surrounded, and eventually captured by superior French forces at Brihuega in December 1710. The regiment was finally disbanded in Ireland after the treaty of Utrecht in 1713. 
On 12 February 1711 Bowles was raised to the rank of brigadier-general, a non-regimental commission. He remained unemployed until the Jacobite rising in 1715, when he was commissioned in July to raise a corps of cavalry, which became the 12th lancers (later the Prince of Wales's Royal regiment of lancers). Bowles was the regiment's first colonel. Quartered in Berkshire, Bowles's new regiment played little part in the suppression of the rebellion, although in October it escorted some Scottish prisoners to the Tower. Between 1716 and October 1718 it was stationed in the west country, after which it was embarked for Ireland and placed on the Irish establishment. 
Bowles married Elizabeth Robinson in 1718. They had one daughter, Elizabeth, who was reported to be living, unmarried, in 1750. In March 1719 Bowles was transferred to the colonelcy of the 8th hussars and on 30 May 1720 was appointed quartermaster-general of Ireland. In May 1722 he was made controller of army accounts. He died intestate on 15 November 1722; administration was granted to his widow in May 1723. 
Bowles was described as 'a warm hearted loyalist distinguished for his attachment to the House of Hanover, who had acquired a reputation at the head of a regiment of foot in the Wars of the Spanish Succession' (Cannon, 9-10), but it is as the founder of the 12th lancers that he is chiefly remembered. 
Bowles's cousin and namesake, 
Bowles settled in Ireland for the remainder of his life. His marriage in 1724 to Alethea Maria (died 1771), the daughter and heir of Samuel Hill, recently deceased, of Kilmainham, Dublin, brought with it a large Irish estate. Upon Alethea's marriage, portions of the estate were settled absolutely on Bowles and the rest was entailed strictly on the male issue of the marriage, an arrangement which was to cause much family argument and a long-running lawsuit after Bowles's death. 
Between 1735 and 1741 Bowles was MP for Bewdly. He had been put in by his elder brother, William, who held a controlling interest. At a time when the Hanoverian succession was being relentlessly buttressed, Bowles's loyalty to the whig administration ensured rapid military promotion. In December 1735 he was raised to brigadier-general, and in 1739 he was promoted major-general and appointed governor of Limerick. In 1740 he was transferred to the colonelcy of the Carabiniers (later the 6th dragoon guards), and in 1745 he was raised to the rank of lieutenant-general and appointed governor of Londonderry and the Culmore forts. 
Bowles lived at his town house in Dublin and his county seat, Beaulieu, near Drogheda, where he was falsely reported to have died in 1746. In fact he lived a further three years, and died in his sixtieth year at Bath on 22 October 1749. By his will of 11 September 1749 he left an estate valued at $200,000. 
Phineas and Alethea Maria Bowles had two sons, William Phineas and Richard, and a daughter, Anna Maria, who married Lieutenant-Colonel Nathaniel Haywood of the Coldstream Guards. William, the eldest, died unmarried a few years after his father, in 1760, leaving an illegitimate son. The younger son, Richard, then a captain in the Horse Guards, inherited the Irish estates but soon moved to Sayes Court, near Chertsey. For the rest of his life Richard was involved in litigation with his brother's son, a residuary legatee under the father's will, who claimed a portion of the Irish estate and only succeeded in establishing his claim after Richard's death in 1798. 


@@@@@


doc= 3071


Phineas Bowles (bap. 1690, d. 1749), army officer and politician, was the third son of Phineas Bowles (1664-1718) of Loughbrough House, a partner in the family glass works at Southwark, and his wife, Margaret Dockwra (1665-1740), whose family were London merchants -- another branch owned the Putteridge estate in Hertfordshire. Phineas was baptized at St Michael, Crooked Lane, London, on 24 January 1690. In March 1710 he was commissioned a captain in the 27th (Inniskilling) regiment of foot, which between October 1709 and November 1710 was quartered at Alicante before being sent to Minorca for garrison duty. The regiment remained there until 1717, but in 1713 Bowles transferred to the 3rd foot guards (later the Scots Guards), as captain and lieutenant-colonel. In 1715 he was reported to be employed in suppressing the Jacobite rising, and in March 1719 he succeeded his cousin as colonel of the 12th lancers, stationed in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 3072


Bowles, William (1705-1780), naturalist, was born in a village near Cork. He was destined for the legal profession but gave it up, and in 1740 went to Paris, where he studied natural history, chemistry, and metallurgy. He subsequently travelled through France, investigating its natural history and mineral and other productions. In 1752 he became acquainted with Don Antonio de Ulloa, afterwards admiral of the Spanish fleet, who persuaded him to enter the Spanish service; Bowles was appointed to superintend the state mines and to form a collection of natural history and establish a chemical laboratory. He first visited the mercury mines of Almaden, which had been seriously damaged by fire but which were successfully brought back into service using his plans. He afterwards travelled through Spain, investigating and collecting specimens of its minerals and natural history, living mainly at Madrid and Bilbao. He married the German Anna Regina Rustein de Clausthal Hartz Hansen, who was pensioned by the king of Spain after her husband's death. Bowles is described as tall and fine-looking, generous, honourable, active, ingenious, and well informed. From at least 1777 he was infirm and confined to his bed. He died at Madrid on 25 August 1780 and was buried in the parish church of San Martin in that city, being an ardent Roman Catholic. 
Bowles's principal work was 'Introduccion a la historia natural y a la geografia fisica de Espana' (1775). It is not systematically arranged, but has very considerable value as being the first work of its kind. He was an acute observer and Irish naturalists have found particularly interesting his comparisons of the two countries' flora and fauna (Lusitania and the south-west of Ireland have very similar flora and fauna, a vestige of preglacial connections). Others, too, long found value in his work: the United States Entomological Commission reprinted in 1880 his observations on locusts which had ravaged crops in Spain as in the USA. The second edition of the 'Introduccion' (1782) was edited by Don Jose Nicolas de Azara y Perera (1730/31-1804), who helped the author prepare the first edition. It was translated into French by vicomte de Flavigny (1776). An Italian edition, much enlarged by Azara, then Spanish ambassador at Rome, was published in two volumes at Parma in 1784. A microfiche edition was published as late as 1994 and a paper edition in 1982. Bowles was also the author of 'A brief account of the Spanish and German mines' published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (56), and of a letter on the sheep of Spain and other Spanish topics, originally sent to the botanist Peter Collinson and later published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 34, 1764, 203-6; 206-70). He continued his work on sheep in a volume on merino sheep published in Spanish and English (1811). Sir John Thomas Dillon's 'Travels through Spain' (1781) is very largely an adaptation of Bowles's first work. Ruiz and Pavon called a genus of Peruvian plants 'Bowlesia' in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 3073


Bowles, William Lisle (1762-1850), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born at Kings Sutton, Northamptonshire, on 24 September 1762, the son of William Thomas Bowles (died 1786), vicar of Kings Sutton from 1760 to 1773, and his wife, Bridget, daughter of Richard Grey, rector of Hinton, Northamptonshire. In 1776 he was placed at Winchester School, under Joseph Warton, who, discerning his taste for poetry, did his best to foster it; on the death of his old master, Bowles wrote a monody which expressed his regard for his character. On leaving Winchester in 1781 he was elected a scholar of Trinity College, Oxford, of which Joseph Warton's brother, Thomas Warton -- professor of poetry at Oxford and eventually poet laureate -- was the senior fellow. In 1783 Bowles won the chancellor's Latin verse prize for his poem 'Calpe obsessa, or, The siege of Gibraltar'. After leaving university in 1787 Bowles experienced two thwarted engagements, and turned for consolation to poetry. His first collection, 'Fourteen Sonnets Written Chiefly on Picturesque Spots during a Journey', was published in 1789, and was an immediate success, owing to his ability to harmonize the moods of nature with those of the mind. It attracted the attention of the young Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who paid tribute to Bowles in later years in a sonnet. Having entered holy orders Bowles first officiated as curate of Donhead St Andrew in Wiltshire. In 1792 he was appointed to the rectory of Chicklade in Wiltshire, which he resigned in 1797, on being presented to the rectory of Dumbleton in Gloucestershire. In the same year he was married to Magdalene (died 1844), daughter of Dr Charles Wake, prebendary of Westminster, whom he survived. In 1804 he became vicar of Bremhill, Wiltshire, where he lived until shortly before his death. 
In 1806 Bowles published the work for which he is best known: a ten-volume edition of the work of Alexander Pope with a sketch of his life and strictures on his poetry. His comments on the poet's life were written in a severe, even hostile spirit. Bowles's estimate of Pope as a poet gave rise to a long controversy, in which much bitterness was displayed; Byron, for example, attacked him severely in both verse and prose. While his best work was in the field of poetry. Bowles displayed competence in other areas. He was an antiquary, and in 1828 published a volume entitled 'Hermes Britannicus'. He also wrote on ecclesiastical matters, crime, education, and the condition of the poor. His sermons are notable for their dignity and simplicity of style. He was also an active but lenient magistrate. Several honours were bestowed upon Bowles during his lifetime: he was appointed chaplain to the prince regent in 1818, and canon residentiary at Salisbury Cathedral in 1828. 
In character Bowles seems to have been ardent and impulsive, but genial and humane. The journal of the poet Tom Moore contains some allusions to him which illustrate his keen susceptibility to impressions, his high-church principles, his love of simple language in the pulpit, together with certain eccentricities, such as his constant refusal to be measured by a tailor. His health had failed some time before his death, which occurred when he was eighty-eight at the close, Salisbury, on 7 April 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 3074


Bowley, Robert Kanzow (1813-1870), music administrator, was born on 13 May 1813, the son of a bootmaker at Charing Cross. He initially learned his father's trade. At an early age he joined the Benevolent Society of Musical Amateurs, and later became its conductor. He was a member of the committee of the amateur musical festival held at Exeter Hall in 1834, and about the same date was appointed organist of the Independent Orange Street Chapel, Leicester Square. Bowley joined the Sacred Harmonic Society in 1834, and was librarian from 1837 to 1854 and treasurer from 1854 to the year of his death. He published 'The Sacred Harmonic Society' (1867). 
In 1856 Bowley came up with the idea of celebrating the centenary of Handel's death with a grand musical celebration. A preliminary festival was held in 1857, with a choir of two hundred and an orchestra of 396, and the first large festival took place in 1859. It was a three-day event, held in the Crystal Palace at Sydenham, with 'Messiah' performed on the first day and 'Israel in Egypt' on the third. From then on Handel festivals were held every three years, conducted from 1859 to 1877 by Michael Costa. In 1858 Bowley was appointed general manager of the Crystal Palace, a post he continued to hold until his death. He committed suicide on 25 August 1870 by jumping into the Thames from a steamboat at Greenwich. He left a widow, Margaret. 


@@@@@


doc= 3075


Bowly, Samuel (1802-1884), slavery abolitionist and temperance advocate, the son of Samuel Bowly, a miller at Bibury, Gloucestershire, was born in Cirencester on 23 March 1802. During his youth he attended a Quaker school at Nailsworth and then worked at his father's flour mill. In 1827 he married Jane Shipley, the daughter of John Shipley of Shaftesbury. In 1829 Bowly moved to Gloucester and set up business as a cheese factor. He became chairman of many local banking, gas, railway, and other companies, and for the last twenty years of his life he was looked upon as a leader in commercial circles and affairs. An active participant in the agitation against the corn laws, he also opposed all taxes on essential items. It was one of his endeavours to give the people cheap and universal education, and he was not only one of the founders of the British and ragged schools in Gloucester, but a consistent advocate of a national system. During the early stages of the Crimean War he became involved in the peace movement. Like his father, he belonged to the Society of Friends; throughout the 1850s he spoke at the yearly meetings and in 1863 he was made a minister. 
Bowly took an active part in the anti-slavery movement. An effective public speaker, on several occasions he debated with the pro-slavery lecturer Peter Borthwick. He was one of the deputation which went to Downing Street on 14 November 1837 to interview Lord Melbourne concerning the cruelties exercised towards the slaves under the apprenticeship system introduced in 1834, and the following year he took an active part in the formation of the Central Negro Emancipation Committee, which was ultimately instrumental in bringing about full emancipation in 1838. 
It was his advocacy of temperance which made Bowly best known. On 30 December 1835 he signed the pledge of total abstinence, and went on to help establish temperance societies and Bands of Hope in the villages around Gloucester. He promoted temperance among the members of his own religious society, and in 1851 he helped found the Friends' Temperance Union. As the leading amateur temperance lecturer in the 1850s and 1860s he specialized in addressing the affluent in drawing-room meetings. Bowly was president of the National Temperance League, a director of the London Temperance Hospital from its foundation, and a director of the United Kingdom Temperance and General Provident Institution, in which roles he was able to draw the attention of scientific men to the damaging physical effects of alcohol. On behalf of the National Temperance League he attended and addressed 107 meetings during the last year of his life, travelling many hundreds of miles. Although he chaired the first public meeting of the United Kingdom Alliance in October 1853, he later moved away from the advocacy of prohibition. 
Bowly's first wife, Jane, died in 1868; on 6 August 1873, in Devizes, he married Louisa Cotterell, the widow of Jacob Henry Cotterell of Bath, especially known for his connection with the Rechabite Friendly Society. Bowly published several addresses on anti-slavery and temperance themes, including 'Total Abstinence and its Proper Place' (1863). The eightieth anniversary of his birth was celebrated in Gloucester in 1882, and he died there on Sunday, 23 March 1884, his eighty-second birthday. He was buried at Gloucester on 27 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 3076


Bowman, Eddowes (1810-1869), teacher and classical scholar, eldest son of John Eddowes Bowman the elder (1785-1841), and Elizabeth Eddowes (1788-1859), his cousin, was born at Nantwich on 12 November 1810. He was educated chiefly at Hazelwood, near Birmingham, by Thomas Wright Hill, father of Rowland Hill; the latter was his teacher in mathematics. After leaving school he entered the Eagle foundry, Birmingham, with the intention of becoming an engineer. He became, about 1835, sub-manager of the Farteg ironworks, near Pontypool. Here his educational work among the local population revealed a natural aptitude for teaching. On the closing of the Farteg works in 1840, Bowman undertook further study, graduating MA at Glasgow University. He attended lectures at Berlin, acquiring several modern languages and mastering various branches of physical science. In 1842, while at Glasgow, he engaged in a pamphlet dispute with John Taylor, a Unitarian minister, as to whether the sabbath rested on divine authority. 
In 1846 Bowman succeeded F. W. Newman to the classical chair in the Manchester New College, and he held that post until the removal of the college to Gordon Square, London, as a purely theological institution, in 1853. He strongly opposed the move and remained in Manchester where, although he had private means, he continued to be an active teacher. He took a particular interest in the education of girls. As the natural sciences came to be his major interest, he delivered several courses of lectures, at the Manchester Royal Institution and elsewhere, on optics and acoustics. For the study of astronomy he built for himself an excellent observatory; he was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1864. From 1865, when the Owens scholarship was founded in connection with the Unitarian Home Missionary Board, he was one of the examiners. He was a man of undemonstrative disposition, of wise kindness, and of cultural philanthropy. His chief publication was a learned monograph 'On the Roman Governors of Syria at the Time of the Birth of Christ' (1855), reprinted from the 'Christian Reformer' (October 1855), a magazine to which he was a frequent contributor. He died, unmarried, at Victoria Park, Manchester, on 10 July 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 3077


Bowman, Henry (fl. 1674-1680), composer and music copyist, is of unknown parentage, but he may have been related to the booksellers Francis and Thomas Bowman, of St Mary the Virgin parish, Oxford. The earliest reference to 'Mr Bowman' is dated 5 February 1674, when his 'new Ayres' were first performed at the Oxford music school (Bodl. Oxf., MSS mus. sch. D.241-244). 
Probably during the 1670s Bowman copied a number of manuscripts mainly devoted to the Italian and English vocal music then popular in Oxford. The manuscripts Christ Church Mus. 623-626 contain anthems by Edward Lowe, professor of music at Oxford, while BL, Add. MS 30382 is an early source of two vocal duets by Purcell. Several of Bowman's own vocal compositions, which reflect the influence of the Italian works he transcribed, also appear in the latter manuscript. Some loose autograph papers, now bound in Bodl. Oxf., MSS mus. sch. C.203 and C.204, were performing material for the music school, and other works in the same collection, including the ayres in D.241-244, were copied by Lowe, in some cases in collaboration with Bowman. 
In 1677 Bowman's 'Songs for One, Two and Three Voices' was published at Oxford, engraved in a style modelled on his distinctive musical handwriting. All copies seem to have been produced with a decorative engraved title-page giving only the composer's name and a short title; some also have a printed title-page, dated 1678, identifying Thomas Bowman as publisher. Copies without this extra page also lack the imprimatur of 12 June 1677 and are assumed to have been issued in that year. A second, corrected, edition was published by Richard Davis in 1679, and a further impression was advertised in 1683. Bowman's songs are notable for the quality of their verses by Abraham Cowley and other poets; the high standard of their engraving, at a time when most London music prints used the Granjon moveable typeface; and their inclusion of some symphony songs possibly earlier than any works in this genre by Blow or Purcell. 
The printed title-pages of 'Songs' describe Bowman as 'Philo-Musicus', which may indicate that he was not a professional musician. There is no record of his having held an official post in Oxford, but he appears to have had a close relationship with Lowe and to have contributed significantly to Oxford's late seventeenth-century flowering as an independent musical centre with a tendency to cultivate its own musicians and a local if limited tradition of music publication. He is last mentioned in Lowe's comment that Bowman's act song 'My Lesbia, let us live and love' was composed for Saturday 10 July 1680 but not performed (Bodl. Oxf., MS mus. sch. C.120). 


@@@@@


doc= 3078


Henry Bowman (1814-1883), the second son of John Eddowes Bowman, was an architect in Manchester. With James Hadfield he was joint author of the 'Ecclesiastical Architecture of Great Britain, from the Conquest to the Reformation' (1845), and with his partner, J. S. Crowther, of 'The Churches of the Middle Ages' (1857). He died at Brockham Green, near Reigate, on 14 May 1883. 


@@@@@


doc= 3079


Bowman, John Eddowes, the elder (1785-1841), naturalist, was born on 30 October 1785 at Nantwich, where his father, Eddowes Bowman (1758-1844), was a tobacconist. A studious child, he was educated at grammar school. His father gave him a taste for botany, and his friend Joseph Hunter (1783-1861), a fondness for genealogy. He initially worked in his father's shop, becoming manager of the manufacturing department, and later traveller. Having been dissuaded by his father from becoming a minister of the Unitarian church, to which his family belonged, in 1813 he joined, as junior partner, a banking business which his father had entered. Its failure in 1816 left him penniless, and he became manager at Welshpool of a branch of the bank of Beck & Co. of Shrewsbury. In 1824 he became managing partner of a bank at Wrexham, and was able to retire from business in 1830. 
From 1837 Bowman lived in Manchester, where he pursued his interests in science. He was a fellow of the Linnean and Geological societies, and one of the founders of the Manchester Geological Society. He was chiefly interested in mosses, fungi, and parasitical plants. A minute fossil, which he detected in Derbyshire, is named after him 'Endothyra bowmanni'. In the latter part of his life he devoted himself almost entirely to geology. 
On 6 July 1809, Bowman married his cousin, Elizabeth (1788-1859), daughter of W. Eddowes of Shrewsbury. The couple had a daughter who died in 1838 and four sons, Eddowes Bowman (1810-1869), Henry Bowman ['see below'], William Bowman (1816-1892), and John Eddowes Bowman the younger (1819-1856). Bowman died on 4 December 1841 in Manchester. 




@@@@@


doc= 3080


Bowman, John Eddowes, the younger (1819-1856), chemist, was born at Welshpool in north Wales on 7 July 1819, the fourth son of John Eddowes Bowman the elder (1785-1841), banker and naturalist, and his wife, Elizabeth Eddowes (1788-1859), daughter of William Eddowes of Shrewsbury. An older brother was Sir William Bowman, ophthalmic surgeon. Bowman was educated at Hazelwood School, Birmingham, and Mr Beard's school, Manchester. A career in the cotton industry was curtailed, in 1839, by persistent lameness. Following initial chemical instruction in Manchester, in 1842 he became a pupil of J. F. Daniell at King's College, London. He then spent a short time at the laboratory of Dumas in Paris, before returning to Manchester to practise as a chemist. He joined the Literary and Philosophical Society and lectured before the Royal Manchester Institution on steam boiler explosions, in 1845. 
On 5 January 1844 Bowman married Ellen (1814-1868), daughter of Thomas Paget, surgeon, of Leicester. They had three children: Edith, John Herbert, and George Cyril. In January 1845 Bowman joined the Chemical Society of London and from October of that year he was demonstrator of chemistry in King's College, in succession to W. A. Miller. There he taught practical chemistry to medical and applied science students. 
To facilitate this teaching, Bowman wrote 'An Introduction to Practical Chemistry, Including Analysis' (1848) and 'A Practical Handbook of Medical Chemistry' (1850), updated after his death (until 1885 and 1862 respectively) by C. L. Bloxam. Bowman became professor of practical chemistry at King's College in 1851 and was assisted by his demonstrators, T. F. Hardwich (1851) and Bloxam (1854). His publication of original papers had ceased in 1846, and he was known mainly for his teaching because his frail health precluded active laboratory work. Bowman died, following an attack of influenza, at his home, 5 York Villas, Campden Hill, Kensington, on 10 February 1856 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on the 15th. 


@@@@@


doc= 3081


Bowman, Walter (1699-1782), tutor and antiquary, was the son of Walter Bowman of Logie in Fife. He travelled extensively in Italy, both on his own and with successive pupils. He was tutor to Samuel Rolle on the latter's grand tour of 1724-5, and was enrolled at Padua University each September from 1725 to 1727. From 1730 to 1734 he accompanied Simon Harcourt, later first Earl Harcourt, on a grand tour of France, Italy, and Austria; a journal of his travels in France, dating from August 1732, is in the collection of the Voltaire Foundation, Oxford. By April 1743 he had returned to London, and he lived for many years at East Molesey in Surrey. He undertook his final tour abroad in 1764-5, when he travelled as tutor to Francis Seymour-Conway, later second marquess of Hertford. He was rewarded with the place of comptroller of the port of Bristol. A zealous collector and virtuoso, he corresponded with fellow antiquaries and made detailed notes of his travels which survive in manuscript volumes in the Biblioteca Nazionale in Florence and in the National Library of Scotland. In 1735 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and in 1745 of the Royal Society. He contributed several papers, chiefly on classical antiquities, to the former society; three of these were printed in volume one of 'Archaeologia'. His only published communication in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (46, 684) was an eccentric letter addressed to Dr Stephen Hales on an earthquake felt at East Molesey on 14 March 1750. He was also a member of the Society of Dilettanti, and a friend of Horace Walpole. 
Bowman, who did not marry, spent his last years at Egham in Surrey and died in February 1782. In his will he left singularly minute and meticulous instructions regarding the arrangement and preservation of his fine library at Logie. 


@@@@@


doc= 3082


Bowman, Sir William, first baronet (1816-1892), ophthalmic surgeon and anatomist, was born at Sweetbriar Hall, Hospital Street, Nantwich, Cheshire, on 20 July 1816, the third of the four sons (there was one daughter) of John Eddowes Bowman the elder (1785-1841), a banker as well as botanist and fellow of the Linnean Society, and his wife and cousin, Elizabeth (1788-1859), daughter of William Eddowes, a bookseller of Shrewsbury. His brothers were Eddowes Bowman, Henry Bowman ['see under 'Bowman, John Eddowes, the elder], and John Eddowes Bowman (1819-1856). At the age of ten he was sent to Hazelwood School, near Birmingham, run by Thomas Wright Hill, father of Sir Rowland Hill. This was a progressive school that had abolished corporal punishment and was regulated by rules drawn up and enforced by the students themselves. At about the age of sixteen Bowman was apprenticed to W. A. Betts of the Birmingham Infirmary, and worked under Joseph Hodgson, later founder of the Birmingham Eye Hospital. 
In 1837 Bowman went to London and joined the medical department of King's College, University of London. In the following year he visited seventeen hospitals in the Netherlands, Germany, Austria, and France, travelling with Francis Galton, who had been a fellow pupil under Hodgson. Galton's account of their journey is entertainingly told in his 'Memoirs of my Life' (1908). When King's College Hospital was founded in 1839, Bowman was elected to the staff as assistant surgeon, and in the same year he was also appointed junior demonstrator of anatomy and curator of the museum at King's College, working closely with Richard Partridge, the professor of anatomy. On 28 December 1842 Bowman married Harriet Paget (died 1900), fifth daughter of Thomas Paget, a surgeon of Leicester. They had seven children. 
In 1846 Bowman was appointed assistant surgeon to the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital, Moorfields, becoming full surgeon in 1851; he remained there until mandatory retirement at the age of sixty in 1876. Elected joint professor of physiology and general anatomy (with Robert Bentley Todd) at King's College in 1848, he became an honorary fellow in 1855 and a member of the council in 1879. He became full surgeon to King's College Hospital in 1856, and though the claims of private practice (necessitated by his growing family) compelled him to resign this office in 1862, he maintained his interest in the institution until he died. He continued in private practice until the age of seventy and participated in scientific meetings for several years after that. 
Bowman was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1841, at the unusually early age of twenty-five, and subsequently served on the council and as one of the vice-presidents. He was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1844. In 1867 the degree of MD 'honoris causa' was granted him by the University of Dublin, and in 1880 the University of Cambridge awarded him the degree of LLD. In 1884 he was made a baronet. 
Bowman became the leading ophthalmic surgeon in London after the death of John Dalrymple in 1852. At the Great Exhibition of 1851, held at the Crystal Palace in London, Bowman met Albrecht von Graefe and Frans Cornelius Donders, and their enthusiastic exchange of ideas regarding ophthalmology and their lasting friendship were a great influence on his professional life. Bowman was among the first in England to become expert in the use of the ophthalmoscope. In 1857 he employed and advocated strongly von Graefe's treatment of glaucoma by iridectomy, and he was busy during the years 1864 and 1865 with new methods of treating cases of detached retina and cataract. 
In 1880 Bowman was elected the first president of the Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom, having played a large role in its founding. During the three years that he held this post, he liberally supported the society through money for its library. A few years later the society established an annual Bowman lecture in his honour; and when in 1965 the society decided to acquire armorial bearings, the arms embodied references to Bowman, including the bowman at the crest. In 1888 the Bowman Testimonial Fund commissioned his portrait to be painted by Walter William Ouless; it was subsequently exhibited in the Royal Academy. 
Bowman took a considerable interest in nursing, a concern apparently stimulated by his friendship with Florence Nightingale, whose first nursing post was at the Harley Street Establishment for Gentlewomen during Illness, where Bowman was a surgeon. They remained friends, and some of their correspondence has been preserved. In conjunction with Robert Bentley Todd and others, Bowman established the St John's House and Sisterhood, an institution which provided trained nurses for the sick and poor, and a few years later he was able to aid Florence Nightingale by sending out trained nurses to the East during the Crimean War. 
Bowman's work divides itself sharply into two periods: one of pure anatomical research, the other concerned with the practice of ophthalmic surgery. His anatomical and physiological investigations were chiefly carried out in the years 1839-42. Many of them were prepared as entries for Robert Bentley Todd's illustrated 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology' (5 vols., 1836-59) and read before various meetings of the Royal Society. Muscle tissue was the first structure he minutely examined with his microscope, and this work was followed by a histological study of the kidney, for which he was awarded the Royal Society's medal in 1842. He also collaborated with Todd in producing 'The Physiological Anatomy and Physiology of Man' (2 vols., 1843-56). Both works contain numerous illustrations by Bowman himself, who combined accomplished artistic skills with mastery of the microscope. While preparing entries for these two publications, Bowman discovered many new anatomical structures, at least six of which still bear his name, such as the 'capsula glomeruli', still called 'Bowman's capsule'. In 1847 he presented an important paper on the mechanism of accommodation to a meeting in Oxford of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, at which he demonstrated simultaneously with, but independently of, Ernst Willhelm Brueke (1819-1892) the structure and function of the ciliary muscle. After 1850 Bowman's attention turned solely to ophthalmic surgery. 
Bowman died of pneumonia at his large country house, Joldwynds, between Dorking and Guildford, Surrey, on 29 March 1892, and was buried on 1 April in the neighbouring churchyard of Holmbury St Mary. To his widow he bequeathed his country estate of Joldwynds, his London residence (since 1850) at 5 Clifford Street, parish of St James, and other properties in London, as well as an estate valued at over $100,000. Bowman had been close friends with the artist George Frederic Watts, and possessed several paintings by Watts, including his own portrait painted in 1865, Watts's portraits of Alfred Lord Tennyson, and Donders, and Watts's self-portrait (the latter now in the Tate collection). Bowman's widow commissioned John Cother Webb to make an engraving of his portrait by W. W. Ouless, copies of which she then distributed to all subscribers to his collected ophthalmological works, which were assembled by friends and published in two volumes in 1892. 
Bowman made fundamental contributions to histology and to the knowledge of the structure of the eye, the kidney and striated muscle, and of other structures. These achievements are the more remarkable when it is recalled that he employed relatively simple techniques and that no highly accurate microtome or staining techniques were then available. Bowman profoundly influenced anatomical thinking and teaching by constantly relating minutely described anatomical structures to their physiological functions. Through his skills as an anatomist and microscopist he set a model for future research in physiology and histology. 
As an ophthalmic surgeon Bowman maintained a constant interest in new techniques and new technologies, and he modified or developed a number of surgical procedures, including the treatment of lacrimal obstruction, antiglaucoma iridectomy, and the removal of soft cataracts by a suction instrument (which he performed under chloroform anaesthesia). Well known for his manual dexterity, a remarkably light touch, and excellent operative skills, he developed a large private practice in addition to the patients he attended as part of his duties at Moorfields. As a conscientious committee member and organizer, he was noted for his powers of persuasion. A handsome and slender man, who rarely drank, never smoked, and was abstemious in eating, he exemplified certain Victorian virtues through his dignity and reserve, his early rising and constant hard work, and his religious piety (of a dissenting nature). Bowman did not write a book of his own, but through his twenty-three papers and his entries in anatomical encyclopaedias, he became one of the most important English figures of the nineteenth century in the fields of anatomy, histology, and ophthalmic surgery. 


