@@@@@


doc= 32241


Cairnes, William Elliot (1862-1902), army officer and military writer, was born at Galway on 18 September 1862, to an old family of Scottish descent, the son of John Elliot Cairnes (1823-1875), economist and professor at University College, London, and his wife, Eliza Charlotte, daughter of George Henry Minto Alexander. In 1872 Cairnes's father moved to Blackheath, having lived nearby since 1870; Cairnes attended Blackheath proprietary school, University College School (1877-9), and the International College, Spring Grove, Isleworth, a boarding-school emphasizing modern languages and science, which started with Cobdenite idealism but declined into indiscipline and violence. 
Cairnes entered the army through the militia 'back door', presumably attending a crammer. He was commissioned lieutenant in the militia (Royal Irish Rifles) on 16 September 1882, became lieutenant 3rd dragoon guards on 14 May 1884, and was transferred to the South Staffordshire regiment on 21 May; he was moved to the Royal Irish Fusiliers on 16 July, and served with the 2nd battalion at several home stations. He married in June 1884 Mary (Mamie) Elizabeth, daughter of M. McClelland of Glendarragh, co. Londonderry; she was to survive her husband, with one daughter, Dorothy Elliot. Having been promoted captain on 21 May 1890, Cairnes was adjutant of the 1st volunteer battalion, Yorkshire light infantry, at Wakefield, from 31 March 1897 to 30 March 1902. This prevented his going to South Africa with his regiment, whose regular battalions both served in the South African War. 
Cairnes's army career was undistinguished, with neither active service nor time at a staff college. In 1899 he was approaching middle age, and was stuck training part-time soldiers in a northern industrial town, while his fellow officers took their chances of distinction and dysentery. However, the South African War offered him new opportunity, as a part-time military journalist and writer. From November 1899 to April 1901 he was 'military correspondent' of George Newnes's prestigious, influential, but unprofitable Liberal evening paper, the 'Westminster Gazette', contributing daily articles on the war, considered among the best of their kind. The war aroused immense public and media interest, which, after the British blunders and defeats of 1899, turned to angry criticism and recrimination. 
Cairnes responded with 'An Absent-Minded War' (1900), published pseudonymously as a shilling cardback, its cover printed as if tied with red tape. The book was a polemical indictment of the 'system', the War Office -- 'that shrine of mediocrity and incompetence' (Cairnes, 'Absent-Minded War', 70) --, jobbery, the Staff College and its graduates, conspicuous uniforms and pipeclaying, and the failure to train and prepare for war. It alleged that there had been 'an army of lions led by ignoramuses' (ibid., 146), and criticized Buller, Warren, and other generals, but praised Roberts and Kitchener. It demanded army reforms for an 'up-to-date fighting machine' (ibid.). Much in it had been and was being asserted by others, and arguably it was the work of a resentful outsider. Yet it was vivid, sarcastic, quotable, and fitted the public mood, and because of it Cairnes became 'a well-known writer of books on military subjects' ('Annual Register', 123). Controversial, it provoked a pseudonymous reply by a retired colonel, James Edward Goodwyn, 'Unfounded Attacks on British Officers Made in 'An Absent-Minded War'... A Refutation' (1901), which, however, agreed with some of the criticisms in Cairnes's book. A German translation of the latter was published in 1903. 
Cairnes's pseudonymous 'Social Life in the British Army' (1900) was less polemical and more descriptive, and warned against admitting as officers men of lower social rank. His pseudonymous 'The Army from within' (1901) repeated some of his earlier criticisms, his warning against socially inferior officers, and his call for reforms. It also warned against 'hedgerow' defence by civilian riflemen against invasion. With Roberts's reputation at its zenith, Cairnes published a eulogistic and derivative biography, 'Lord Roberts as a Soldier in Peace and War' (1901), praising him as 'the greatest living soldier' (Cairnes, 'Lord Roberts', 331). Cairnes's 'The Coming Waterloo' (1901) was in the genre of purposive future-war fiction which had flourished since George Tomkyns Chesney's 'The Battle of Dorking' (1871). It described a war in 1903 in which Britain -- her army decisively improved after the South African War -- allied with Germany and Austria and defeated France and Russia. Its message was the need for army reform, the inconclusiveness of seapower, the dominance of infantry firepower, and the limited role of 'arme blanche' cavalry. Cairnes's books earned 'widespread acclaim' (Spiers, 'Late Victorian Army', 308). He also contributed to the 'National Review', 'Contemporary Review', 'Harper's Magazine', and occasionally 'The Times'. He was a clever draftsman, able to illustrate his articles, and he patented several inventions. 
In April 1901 a committee on officer education and training was appointed, with Aretas Akers-Douglas (later Viscount Chilston) chairman and Cairnes secretary. In their report in March 1902 the committee stated that Cairnes's knowledge, tact, and ability had greatly facilitated their inquiry. Cairnes was also secretary to the military court of inquiry into the remount department. These duties and his writing taxed his strength. He died of pneumonia at 15 Bury Street, London, on 19 April 1902. His army career was undistinguished: his notable achievement was as a military writer at the time of the South African War. Through his writings he was among those who contributed to the army reforms during and after that war, and so to the quality of the British expeditionary force in 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 32242


Cairns, David Smith (1862-1946), theologian, was born on 8 November 1862 at Stichill in Roxburghshire, the third of four children of the Revd David Cairns, minister of the United Presbyterian church there, and his wife, Elisabeth, daughter of the Revd Dr David Smith, of Biggar. After his schooling at Ednam and the high school, Kelso, he took his arts degree at Edinburgh University and studied theology at the United Presbyterian College in Edinburgh, of which his uncle, the celebrated John Cairns, was principal, spending one semester also at Marburg University, where he was influenced by the Ritschlian theologian Wilhelm Herrmann. 
Cairns was ordained in 1895 and became minister of the United Presbyterian church at Ayton, Berwickshire. In 1901 he married Helen Wilson (died 1910), daughter of Henry Hewat Craw, gentleman farmer, of West Foulden, Berwickshire. They had one daughter and one son, David Cairns, later professor at Christ's College, Aberdeen. In 1907 Cairns became professor of systematic theology in the United Free Church college, Aberdeen, known after the church union of 1929 as Christ's College. He became principal in 1929 and taught at the college until he retired in 1937 and went to live in Edinburgh. 
Cairns took an active part in the life of the church and in many public movements. He played an important role in the World Missionary Conference that met in Edinburgh in 1910, and also prepared its significant report, 'The Missionary Message in Relation to Nonchristian Religions'. Cairns also actively supported the growth of the Student Christian Movement. In addition he made a number of lecture tours both in America and in the Far East: he delivered the Deems lectures in New York University and Lafayette College after the First World War, and the Russell lectures in Auburn Theological Seminary in 1923. In 1927 he lectured in China and Japan. In 1932 he delivered the Baird lectures, later published as 'The Riddle of the World' (1937). This volume has been described as 'his maturest exercise in apologetics' (Needham, 117). 
In 1923 Cairns was elected moderator of the general assembly of the United Free church of Scotland. He received the honorary degree of DD from the universities of Aberdeen (1909), Debrecen (Hungary, 1929), and Edinburgh (1933), and of LLD from St Andrews (1937) and Aberdeen (1938). In 1918 he was appointed OBE in recognition of work done for the troops during the war. 
Cairns was above all a Christian apologist, interpreting the Christian faith to his age in the light of modern science and historical criticism. In his undergraduate days he had passed through a profound crisis of religious doubt, under which his health broke down, and he had to interrupt his studies for a period of foreign travel. At this time the poet Robert Browning became his main spiritual guide (as recorded in his autobiography, published in 1950). When his faith was restored he was committed to the lifelong enterprise of thinking it out and giving theological help to other questioners. This he did not only in a succession of theological works, but in many more personal contacts, for which his warm human sympathy well fitted him. His thought was dominated by the conviction, which found its most original expression in his most influential book, 'The Faith that Rebels' (1928), that the universe is not a closed system but a purposive universe, in which nothing is impossible to God, and therefore nothing is impossible to a human faith which absolutely trusted him, as Jesus did. It was along this line that he interpreted the miracles, and closely connected with this was his interpretation of the kingdom of God and its victory in this world, including the victory over disease and suffering. Cairns died in Edinburgh on 27 July 1946. 
D. M. Baillie', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32243


Cairns, Sir Hugh William Bell (1896-1952), neurosurgeon, was born on 26 June 1896 in Port Pirie, South Australia. His father, William Cairns (1868-1958), a carpenter and joiner, had emigrated from Glasgow in 1889 and married Amy Florence Bell (1867-1964), a local music teacher. In 1903 they moved to the small township of Riverton, where Hugh Cairns, their only child, had his early education before obtaining scholarships to the high school in Adelaide and the University of Adelaide. In May 1915, at the beginning of the fourth year of his medical course, he joined the Australian Army Medical Corps (AAMC) as a private and was posted to a general hospital on Lemnos during the Gallipoli campaign. He then returned to Adelaide to complete his medical studies, qualifying MB, BS in June 1917. Rejoining the AAMC as captain, he served in France until January 1919, and then entered Balliol College, Oxford, with a Rhodes scholarship. There he studied physiology under C. S. Sherrington, and anatomy, and rowed for the university in the 1920 boat race. House appointments followed at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, and at the London Hospital, where he became an assistant to Professor Turnbull in the pathology department. He passed the FRCS Eng. in November 1921; on 24 November he married Barbara Forster Smith (1896-1987), the youngest daughter of A. L. Smith (1850-1924), master of Balliol; they had two sons and two daughters. 
For the next three years Cairns worked as first assistant to several surgeons at the London Hospital and published original work in the genito-urinary field. He gave a Hunterian lecture in 1926 and was appointed honorary assistant surgeon to the London Hospital. Then, advised by the neurologist George Riddoch, he obtained a Rockefeller fellowship and spent a year in the USA, working under Harvey Cushing, the famous Boston neurosurgeon. On returning to the London, Cairns determined to specialize in neurosurgery, but remained responsible for some general surgical patients. A Medical Research Council 'Special Report' summarizing Cushing's methods brought him recognition; and, together with Geoffrey Jefferson in Manchester and Norman Dott in Edinburgh, he helped to lay the foundations of modern British neurosurgery. In 1931 he joined the staff of the Maida Vale Hospital as a neurosurgeon, while continuing his work at the London Hospital where he became a full surgeon in June 1933 and then practised neurosurgery exclusively. He also had a part-time appointment at the National Hospital, Queen Square, and was a consultant to the Queen Alexandra Military Hospital, Millbank. 
Cairns's reputation flowered. After a further visit to Cushing in 1935 he proposed plans for a medical school at Oxford. With the munificence of Lord Nuffield, and the support of Sir Farquhar Buzzard, and others, he provided much of the impetus that led the university to give its approval, and was appointed its first Nuffield professor of surgery in 1937. In April 1938 the department of neurological surgery was opened at the Radcliffe Infirmary; Cairns was awarded an honorary DM degree and became a fellow of Balliol. 
Following the Munich agreement in September 1938, Cairns ordered supplies of those neurosurgical instruments that the army would require in the event of war and, with Charles Symonds and George Riddoch, organized a hospital for head injuries in St Hugh's College, Oxford. Its importance during the subsequent war was paramount; its archives were later deposited in St Hugh's College Library. According to Charles Symonds, 'After Munich Cairns formed the idea of a special hospital for head injuries at Oxford and a project of this kind in his mind could not rest without action. As a planner he was supreme, nor did he ever hesitate to put his plans forward at the highest operative level. Thus in a very short time the war office decided to take over St Hugh's College as a hospital for head injuries. (Fraenkel, 140)' Cairns achieved the peak of his career during the Second World War. After a short time as an adviser to the Ministry of Health, he began work at the military hospital for head injuries based at St Hugh's, when it opened in February 1940. Beginning with 50 beds it eventually held 430 by the time of the invasion of Normandy. Among the hospital's staff were the neurologists D. Denny-Brown and W. Ritchie Russell, the pathologist Dorothy Russell, and the bacteriologist and bee-keeper G. T. 'Daddy' Western. St Hugh's became 'a bustling, keen, sort of place' (Fraenkel, 141), where Cairns was able to carry out research into the incidence of epilepsy after brain injury, the assessment of the psychological state of the brain-injured patient, and electroencephalography. Work was also carried out on the nature of concussion. The college gardens played an important part in helping patients to recuperate, and are discussed in Anthony Babbington's book 'No Memorial' (1954), which offers a patient's view of St Hugh's. 
In June 1940 Cairns was gazetted lieutenant, acting colonel RAMC, and later brigadier. In the same year he created the first of eight mobile neurosurgical units, to operate close to the action, and was also responsible for introducing specially designed crash helmets for army motorcyclists, thereby dramatically reducing their injuries. He set up rehabilitation centres for head-injured patients at Middleton Park, near Bicester, and Tusmore Park, and from at least 1943 worked with Howard Florey in assessing the value of penicillin in treating and preventing wound infection. Cairns was president of the section of neurology of the Royal Society of Medicine, and later presided over the Society of British Neurological Surgeons from 1945 to 1948, and the Association of Surgeons in 1947. 
It had been Cairns's intention that the Oxford medical school should be a centre of excellence, where selected graduates would be trained in research. However, with the onset of war it developed as an undergraduate school. Nevertheless, Cairns always hoped that his original idea might eventually be adopted. Teaching was always one of his prime concerns, and many of the next generation of neurosurgeons were trained by him according to the principles laid down by Cushing. 
Cairns was knighted (KBE) in June 1946. He was closely involved in post-war planning, on which he left his mark. He became the first Sims travelling professor of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1948 and lectured in New Zealand, Australia, and southern Africa. His association with Florey stimulated an interest in the treatment of infections of the central nervous system, particularly tuberculous meningitis, which occupied his attention for the rest of his life. He was also interested in the surgery of mental illness and the physiology of consciousness. Important work was being produced in these fields, when a lymphosarcoma of the caecum brought about his untimely death in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, at the age of fifty-six, on 18 July 1952. Four days later he was buried at Holywell church, Oxford, following a funeral service at the university church of St Mary. Memorial services were held at St Mary's, Oxford, and St Philip's, London Hospital. 
A handsome, rather tense man, Cairns possessed enormous energy and charm, and a tremendous drive that supported his ambition and ideas. He had a gift for attracting loyal and able co-workers, whom he led with imagination, sparing neither himself nor them, striving hard for whatever he wanted. His devotion to music and literature was stimulated and supported by Lady Cairns, who survived her husband. The Cairns Library at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32244


Caldecott, Sir Andrew (1884-1951), colonial governor, was born at Boxley, Kent, on 26 October 1884, the eldest son of the Revd Andrew Caldecott and his wife, Isobel, daughter of the Revd Stenning Johnson. He was educated at Uppingham and at Exeter College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar and later, in 1948, an honorary fellow. He was awarded a third class in classical honour moderations and, in 1907, a second class in 'literae humaniores'. In that year he joined the Malayan civil service and between then and 1935 he held a variety of posts including acting controller of labour, under-secretary Straits Settlements, commissioner of lands Federated Malay States, secretary for postal affairs, acting British resident Negri Sembilan and then Perak, British resident Selangor, chief secretary to government Federated Malay States, and colonial secretary Straits Settlements. In 1934 he was appointed officer administering the government of the Straits Settlements and high commissioner for the Malay states. In 1924-5 he had been Malayan commissioner at the British Empire Exhibition. The sympathy and understanding which accompanied his great administrative ability, and his wise and tactful handling of racial issues, earned him exceptional respect and popularity. 
In 1935 Caldecott was appointed governor of Hong Kong where he was equally popular, and he was also knighted. When in 1937 he was offered the governorship of Ceylon, strong representations were made for him to remain in Hong Kong. However, Caldecott was clearly sent to Ceylon to smooth the way for further advance at a time when agitation for constitutional reform was intense. In November 1937 he was instructed to sound opinion and to recommend amendments to the constitution. His 'reforms dispatch' of June 1938 was written with a vigour and directness unusual in official documents: it led to prolonged discussion in the state council, but to no general agreement, the basic difficulty, as always, being the question of minority representation. The outbreak of war halted consideration of constitutional advance, but Caldecott was convinced that if Ceylon's war effort were to be maintained a positive approach was required. On his recommendation the British government in 1941, and again in 1943, promised a commission on constitutional reform as soon as the war ended; and a commission was in fact appointed in 1944, the year in which Caldecott retired. 
In the meantime Caldecott set himself out to be a constitutional governor, an objective misunderstood by certain sections of the European community which failed to see, with his clarity, that early self-government was inevitable. His aims were more clearly appreciated by the local politicians, such as D. S. Senanayake and J. R. Jayewardene, and he soon earned their respect and confidence. That Ceylon remained stable during the critical war years was largely due to his leadership. The sudden appointment, after the fall of Malaya, of Admiral Sir Geoffrey Layton as commander-in-chief in place of the governor, nearly led to Caldecott's resignation; happily this step was not taken and the two men, temperamentally so different, worked harmoniously together to the great benefit of Ceylon. With Caldecott's consent King's Pavilion (the governor's house in Kandy) was taken over by Mountbatten when he was appointed supreme allied commander, south-east Asia command. This proved to be an ideal arrangement since Mountbatten had chosen Peradeniya, only a few miles away, as his headquarters in Ceylon. 
A brilliant, far-sighted administrator, but withal warm-hearted and with a quick intelligence tempered by a human sympathy and understanding, Caldecott was ideally suited for the task of helping to transform empire into Commonwealth. Ceylon owed to him much of her trouble-free progress towards the independence which she attained in 1948. His contribution to the development of the Commonwealth, and in particular of Britain's overseas services, continued after his retirement. Early in 1947, after failing to convince the Colonial Office of the necessity to create a colonial administrative service centrally controlled and hence able to make a positive contribution to the development of colonies achieving home rule, he resigned from the colonial service appointments board to which he had been appointed on retirement. A letter of his to 'The Times' in June 1947 gave widespread publicity to the urgent need for a true unification of the colonial service and for a central control over its cadre and rate of recruitment as each colony progressed along the road to self-government. It is fair to say that the creation of HM overseas civil service with effect from 1 October 1954 -- such a vital step in the smooth progress from colonies to independence -- owed much to the stand taken by such a respected former colonial governor as Caldecott. 
Artistically gifted, Caldecott painted, was a skilled pianist, had a happy talent for light verse, and in his Malayan days wrote several witty burlesques; he published two books of uneasy stories: 'Not Exactly Ghosts' (1947) and 'Fires Burn Blue' (1948). He was twice married: first, in 1918, to Olive Mary (died 1943), daughter of John Robert Innes, of the Malayan civil service, with whom he had a daughter and a son; and second, in 1946, to Evelyn May, widow of Dr J. Robertson and daughter of Canon H. Palmer. 
Caldecott was appointed CBE in 1926 and CMG in 1932, and was advanced to KCMG in 1937 and GCMG in 1941. He was made a knight of grace of St John of Jerusalem in 1936 and was awarded the Silver Wolf in 1943 for his services to scouting. He died on 14 July 1951 at his home, Pierpoint, Itchenor, Sussex. An unconventional portrait of him by David Paynter, the Ceylon artist, was presented by Caldecott to Queen's House, Colombo. A memorial window, commissioned by his widow, was installed in Itchenor church. 
John O'Regan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32245


Calderon, George Leslie (1868-1915), playwright, was born in St John's Wood, London, on 2 December 1868, the fifth son of the painter Philip Hermogenes Calderon, RA (1833-1898) and his wife, Clara Marianne, daughter of James Payne Storey. He was educated at Rugby School and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he gained a second in classics in 1891. He was called to the bar in 1894, but turned to literature and journalism for support. Calderon spent the years 1895-7 at St Petersburg, and he returned with a profound knowledge of Russian and a lasting bent towards Slavonic studies. In November 1900 he married Katharine, widow of his college friend Archibald Ripley, and daughter of John Hamilton, of Brown Hall, co. Donegal. The couple lived at Hampstead, and had no children. 
From 1900 to 1903 Calderon held the post of specialist in Slavonic literature on the library staff of the British Museum. During this period he wrote two stories in a vein of ironic extravaganza, 'Downy V. Green' (1902) and 'Dwala' (1904). In 1906 he spent several months in the South Seas, writing a collection of impressions called 'Tahiti by Tihoti', eventually published in 1921. 
Calderon was best known as a dramatist, and his first play, 'The Fountain', was produced by the Stage Society in 1909; it was followed by 'The Little Stone House' (1911), 'Revolt' (1912), and a few shorter pieces. Two volumes of his collected plays were published posthumously in 1922 by Grant Richards. Among these plays, in strong contrast with the rest, is a tragedy in blank verse, 'Cromwell: Mall o' Monks'. 
Calderon's gift as a dramatist inhered in a quick eye for modern character, and a remarkable command of vivid and expressive dialogue. Calderon's plays were carefully designed for the conditions of the stage, and it was perhaps an accident that none of them had a popular success. Nevertheless, 'The Times' wrote of his death as 'the heaviest blow which struck the English drama during the war'. 
Calderon's work was always to some extent hampered by his great versatility. He was primarily a man of letters; but he might equally have been a scholar, a publicist, an adventurer. He was an exceptional linguist, translating Chekhov's 'The Cherry Orchard' and 'The Seagull' into English for publication in 1912. He also took an active and enterprising part in various public affairs, and was especially known as the secretary and passionate campaigner for The Men's League for Opposing Women's Suffrage, whose arguments he promoted in lecture tours and in his book 'Woman in Relation to the State' (1908). 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Calderon was determined, in spite of his age, to reach the fighting line. He went to France as an interpreter, was wounded in the first battle of Ypres, and in May 1915 was sent, with a commission in the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry, to the Dardanelles, where he was attached to the King's Own Scottish Borderers. He was reported wounded and missing in the action of 4 June 1915, and was afterwards presumed killed on that date. 


@@@@@


doc= 32246


Calkin, John Baptiste (1827-1905), organist and composer, born in London on 16 March 1827, was the third son of the organist and teacher James Calkin (1786-1862). Reared in a musical atmosphere, he studied under his father, and when aged only nineteen was appointed organist, precentor, and choirmaster of St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, near Dublin, in succession to Edwin George Monk. St Columba's College was a school mainly for the boys of the upper classes and for candidates for the ministry of the Anglican church; music and the Irish language were prominent features in the curriculum. From 1846 to 1853 Calkin zealously maintained a high standard of choral music at St Columba's and began exploring his own powers of composition. From 1853 to 1863 he was organist and choirmaster of Woburn Chapel, London; from 1863 to 1868 organist of Camden Road Chapel; and from 1870 to 1884 organist at St Thomas's Church, Elm Road, Camden Town. In 1883 he became professor at the Guildhall School of Music under Thomas Henry Weist-Hill, and subsequently devoted himself to teaching and composing. He was on the council of Trinity College, London, a member of the Philharmonic Society (1862), and a fellow of the Royal College of Organists, incorporated in 1893. 
As a composer, Calkin tried his hand at many forms, but his sacred music is best known, especially his morning and evening services in B[flat], G, and D, his 'Te Deum in D', and a 'Magnificat in F'. He wrote various pieces for the organ, including numerous transcriptions, and he scored many string arrangements. Many of his anthems and hymn tunes gained an enduring popularity, while his setting of 'Fling out the Banner' (by Bishop G. W. Doane) became well known in America and the colonies, and was included in the Canadian 'Book of Common Praise', edited by Sir George Martin in 1909. His 'Agape' was composed specially for the 'Church Hymnary' of Scotland in 1871, to the words 'Jesu, most loving God', and was inserted in the 'Church Hymnal' of Ireland in 1874. 
Calkin died at 37 Hornsey Rise Gardens, Crouch End, London, on 15 April 1905, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32247


Callaghan, Sir George Astley (1852-1920), naval officer, was born in London on 21 December 1852, the third son of Captain Frederic Marcus Callaghan JP, of Lotabeg, co. Cork, and his wife, Georgina Frances, daughter of Captain James Hodgson, of the East India Company. He entered the Royal Navy in January 1866 on the 'Britannia', and was promoted sub-lieutenant in April 1872, lieutenant in 1875. His first appointment as lieutenant was to the 'Ruby', East India station. During this commission one of the ship's boats capsized in the Irrawady, and Callaghan earned Admiralty commendation by his gallant conduct, which saved the lives of several of the crew. He married in 1876 Edith Saumarez, daughter of the Revd Frederick Grosvenor, rector of Dunkerton, Bath. They had one son and three daughters. 
In 1880 Callaghan returned to Britain to qualify in gunnery, and was afterwards on the staff of the port gunnery schools. In 1885 he was again appointed to the 'Ruby', this time as first and gunnery lieutenant on the South American station. He was promoted commander in 1887, and in 1888 was appointed to the 'Bellerophon', the North American station flagship, in which he returned home in 1892. That year he was given the command of the 'Alacrity', yacht of the commander-in-chief, China station, and he was promoted captain in 1894. 
From then on Callaghan's rise was rapid. He served for three years (1894-7) as naval adviser to the inspector-general of fortifications at the War Office. In July 1897 he took command of the 'Hermione', first in the channel squadron and later on the China station, where he remained until 1901, having been given command of the 'Endymion', a first-class cruiser, in 1899. The Boxer uprising broke that year. Admiral Sir Edward Hobart Seymour was then commander-in-chief on the China station; and, on the decision of the powers to intervene, brigades were landed from various ships to relieve the legations in Peking (Beijing). This was found impracticable with the small force available, and Seymour returned to Tientsin (Tianjin). The following month a combined naval and military relief force was formed under Lieutenant-General Sir Alfred Gaselee. Callaghan was given the command of the British naval brigade which, after severe fighting and much hardship from the heat, succeeded in entering Peking in time to relieve the legations. He was mentioned in dispatches and received the CB (1900). 
After commanding the 'Edgar' in manoeuvres as senior officer of the cruisers, Callaghan was appointed to the 'Caesar', first-class battleship, on the Mediterranean station, at the time when Sir John Fisher was commander-in-chief. He returned in 1903 to be captain of Portsmouth Dockyard. This shore service lasted only one year, as, by his own request, he was sent again to sea so that his last year as captain should be spent in familiarizing himself with the most recent developments in the fleet. He commanded the 'Prince of Wales' in the Mediterranean during 1904-5 and was at this time also made aide-de-camp to the king. 
In July 1905 Callaghan was promoted rear-admiral, and hoisted his flag in the 'Illustrious' as rear-admiral in the Channel Fleet in 1906. From then he was in uninterrupted command afloat for eight years. The years immediately preceding the First World War were a time of strenuous activity in the navy. Fisher was carrying out his reforms and redistributions, shifting the centre of power from the Mediterranean, and forming new fleets in home waters. Callaghan was to play an important part in these schemes from the outset. In 1907 he was given the command of the new 5th cruiser squadron, the 'tip of the spear' as it was designated, hoisting his flag in the 'Leviathan', and afterwards transferring it to the newly built 'Shannon'. Having spent eighteen strenuous months in bringing his squadron up to high efficiency, Callaghan hoisted his flag in the 'Duncan' as second in command of the Mediterranean station (1908). During this command he was created KCVO (1909) and was also made grand officer of the Crown of Italy for his services in connection with the Messina earthquake. He became vice-admiral in 1910 and, on returning to home waters, immediately hoisted his flag in the 'King Edward VII', commanding the 2nd division of the Home Fleet. The next year he was made commander-in-chief, Home Fleets, with the acting rank of admiral. He retained this great command, of the largest naval fighting force which, up to that time, had ever acted under one flag, during the three years of incessant preparation for war, his appointment being extended in December 1913 for the further period of one year. Recognizing the impossibility of controlling such a large fleet by signals from his flagship Callaghan began to decentralize the command of his fleet, giving permission to his squadron commanders to act within general instructions. He was awarded the GCVO after the inspection of the fleet by King George V at Weymouth in 1912, and the grand cordon of the Legion d'honneur on President Poincare's official visit to the fleet in 1913. 
In July 1914 Callaghan was in command of the mobilized naval forces at Portsmouth on the occasion of another royal inspection, when 460 ships assembled under his flag. This great fleet was about to disperse when the European situation became critical. Callaghan was summoned to the Admiralty, while the fleet meanwhile left for Scapa Flow. At the Admiralty the disposition of the fleet and the plan of operations in the event of war were discussed with him. Sir John Rushworth (later Earl) Jellicoe had already been appointed to succeed Callaghan in December, when the latter's extension of command would be completed, and Callaghan welcomed the intimation that Sir John should immediately act as his second in command. But, after Callaghan had gone north, Winston Churchill and Prince Louis of Battenberg, the first sea lord, decided that, if war broke out, Jellicoe should at once take over the supreme command; they doubted that Callaghan's physical strength would stand the immense strain. Although he was sixty-two, however, he had shown no signs of ill health, unlike Jellicoe. Even if Jellicoe were the better man, the removal of so experienced and able an officer at the outbreak of war was an unnecessary risk. He should, in all conscience, have been left in command for the remainder of his term, saving Jellicoe much anxiety, and completing his education in fleet command. However, when Jellicoe left London for the fleet at Scapa Flow, he was given sealed instructions directing him to take over the command. Soon after midnight on 3-4 August, when war was certain, telegrams were sent to both admirals informing them of the decisions and instructing Callaghan to haul down his flag and hand over the command. Much sympathy was felt throughout the fleet for Callaghan, and protests were made by all the principal admirals who had served under him, and by Jellicoe himself. This last reflected a friendship of long standing, and mutual respect. Callaghan was loved by all who served under him. It was a bitter disappointment to Callaghan not to command in war the fleet to which he had devoted his energies and abilities for so long, and his departure saddened all those under his command. Although it was not his fortune to wield the weapon which he had brought to so fine an edge, he could at least lay it down knowing it was ready and in place to meet and repulse any enemy attack. Callaghan was immediately appointed for special service at the Admiralty and also first and principal naval aide-de-camp to the king. This was followed on 1 January 1915 by his appointment as commander-in-chief at the Nore, a post which he held until March 1918. He received the GCB in 1916, and in April 1917 he was promoted admiral of the fleet and flew his flag as such for one year, a unique record. 
When Callaghan hauled down his flag in March 1918, he had completed fifty-two years' service, of which only eleven had been spent in shore posts, and for the last twelve years he had kept his flag flying continuously, except for the few months at the beginning of the war. He was essentially a sea officer, with a remarkable knowledge, formed by continual and exceptional experience, of tactics and gunnery, and of cruiser and destroyer operations. His appreciation of new technology was very much of an 'empirical' nature. His fairness, judgement, common sense, equable temperament, modesty, and charm of manner, apart from his great fleet knowledge, rendered him a fine commander-in-chief. His successor in command of the Grand Fleet, Jellicoe, on many public occasions testified to the efficient state of the fleet when Callaghan was so abruptly replaced. After his naval service was ended, Callaghan was in 1919 appointed by the king Bath king of arms, and he officiated at the historic chapter of the Order of the Bath held in Westminster Abbey in the spring of 1920. 
Callaghan died at 11 Cadogan Court, Chelsea, on 23 November 1920 at the age of sixty-eight, and had a public funeral in Westminster Abbey. He was survived by his wife. Considered by all his contemporaries to be an outstanding fleet commander, Callaghan had a very human side that earned the love and loyalty of all those who served under him. He was an officer of high accomplishment in all branches of the service. He was able to rise above the jealousies and feuds of the Fisher era to play a vital role in building the fleet up to wartime efficiency. His supersession at the outbreak of war in 1914 denied him the opportunity to achieve greatness. 


@@@@@


doc= 32248


Callendar, Hugh Longbourne (1863-1930), physicist, was born on 18 April 1863 at Hatherop, Gloucestershire, the eldest son of Hugh Callendar, rector of Hatherop, and his wife, Anne (Annie) Cecilia Longbourne. From Marlborough College, where he ranked top in classics and mathematics and excelled at sports, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1882, obtaining a first class in the classical tripos in his second year and graduating as sixteenth wrangler in 1885. Later that year he arrived at the Cavendish Laboratory, then under J. J. Thomson, having done no serious reading in physics and lacking practical laboratory experience. Nevertheless Thomson considered that he was capable of experimental research and the accurate measurement of electrical resistance was selected as a suitable subject. Callendar's thesis on platinum thermometry was accepted, and he was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1886. 
The importance of Callendar's thesis led swiftly to its publication, 'On the practical measurements of temperature: experiments made at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge' ('PTRS', 1887, 161-230), and determined one of the two major lines of Callendar's subsequent work, the other being on the properties of steam. He was appointed professor of physics at Royal Holloway College, Englefield Green, in 1893 but stayed there only two terms before moving to Canada to take up the chair of physics at McGill University, Montreal, where he was in charge of the new Macdonald physics building. There Callendar found suitable apparatus on which he could pursue his plans for high-precision work based on electrical measures. He also studied engineering problems connected with steam turbines, and with John Thomas Nicolson determined the temperature of steam expansion behind a piston. In collaboration with Professor Howard Turner Barnes he began the study of the calorimetric properties of water. On 17 May 1894 he married Victoria Mary, eldest daughter of Alexander Stewart of Saundersfoot, Pembrokeshire. They had three sons and a daughter. In June that year he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. On leaving McGill his place was taken by Ernest Rutherford. Callendar returned to England in 1898 as Quain professor of physics at University College, London. In 1902 he succeeded Sir Arthur Rucker as professor of physics at the Royal College of Science, London, incorporated into the Imperial College of Science and Technology in 1907, where he remained until his death. 
Building on the work in 1861 of Ernst Werner von Siemens, Callendar developed the platinum resistance thermometer to the point where it provided a standard for the establishment of the thermometric scale. Platinum thermometers were appreciated in the laboratory where they were superior to the air thermometers in use hitherto, and they were also welcomed by engineers as convenient and practicable means of regulating heat in industrial operations. Among other inventions made in connection with his researches Callendar devised in 1887 an extremely accurate compensation bridge; the original, constructed in 1893, was used throughout his researches on steam. An important paper, 'Thermodynamic properties of gases and vapours deduced from a modified form of the Joule-Thomson equation' ('PRS', 67, 1900, 266-86) formed the basis of his subsequent work on steam, for in it he stated all the thermodynamic properties of steam by means of consistent thermodynamic formulae, leading to the formulation of his steam equation and the publication of his 'Callendar Steam Tables' (1915, 1922, 1927), giving the properties of steam up to and beyond the critical pressure. He also published 'The Properties of Steam' (1920). Callendar took part in the first International Steam Tables Conference, held in London in 1929 to co-ordinate research work in various countries. In 1899 Lord Rayleigh's committee of electrical standards accepted Callendar's proposals for a standard scale of temperature based on the platinum thermometer, and it continues to be relied on for temperatures between the boiling point of liquid oxygen (-182.97 degree C) and the melting point of antimony (630.5 degree C). 
Among his other projects Callendar directed and carried out, sometimes with collaborators, research on the specific heat of gases, the osmotic pressure of solutions (1908), the absolute expansion of mercury (1911), and the boiling point of sulphur (1890 and 1912). For the Air Ministry he investigated dopes and detonation (1925 and 1926), and in 1926, a keen motorist himself, he published on the cause of knock in petrol engines and the effects of anti-knock additives to petrol. In a completely different field he published 'A Manual of Cursive Shorthand' (1889), which came into fairly general use in some of the British colonies, and 'A System of Phonetic Spelling Adapted to English' (1890). 
Callendar received many awards and honours, among them the Watt medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers (1898), the Rumford medal of the Royal Society (1906), and the Hawksley gold medal of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (1915). He was president of the Physical Society of London in 1910, and their first Duddell memorial medallist in 1924. He was president of section A of the British Association in 1912 and was made CBE in 1920. Callendar's early passion for sport remained with him; when too old for tennis he enjoyed watching his wife and children play in tournaments. He was an excellent teacher and his dignified kindliness endeared him to his students. He died at 11 Grange Park, Ealing, London, on 21 January 1930. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32249


Callender, Sir Geoffrey Arthur Romaine (1875-1946), naval historian and museum director, was born at Didsbury, Manchester, on 25 November 1875, the elder son of Arthur William Callender, cotton mill owner, and his wife, Agnes Louisa, daughter of the Revd George Stephen Woodgate, vicar of Pembury, Kent. Educated in Oxford at St Edward's School and at Merton College, he was placed in the second class of the honours list in modern history in 1897. He was appointed in January 1905 to the new Royal Naval College, Osborne, where he embraced the study of naval history with characteristic enthusiasm. Finding no textbook suitable for naval cadets, he instantly set about producing his 'Sea Kings of Britain' (3 vols., 1907-11). He became head of the history and English department in January 1913, and thereafter the navy and its history were the guiding interests of his life. 
In 1921 Callender moved to the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, as head of the history department there, but he did not remain long. Experience gleaned from the First World War showed that a study of history was essential at all levels of naval education: a chair of history was therefore established in London at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where a staff college and a war college were also being formed. Callender was appointed first occupant in 1922 and it was there that he published his best-known work, 'The Naval Side of British History' (1924). Meanwhile (1921-4), the Society for Nautical Research was conducting its campaign to save HMS 'Victory'. Callender was already that body's honorary secretary and treasurer -- a dual post which he held continuously from 1920 until his death -- and he was largely responsible for the successful outcome of the campaign. 
Callender now embarked on his dearest project: the foundation of a museum which would assemble under one roof the priceless naval and maritime treasures of Britain. The co-operation of the Society for Nautical Research and beneficent sympathizers like Sir James Caird secured in 1928 the acquisition for the nation of the magnificent Macpherson collection of naval and nautical prints, to form, with the pictures and models already at the college, the nucleus of the new museum. The ideal site was Inigo Jones's Queen's House at Greenwich, then occupied by the Royal Hospital school; and on the latter's migrating to Holbrook, the last difficulty was overcome. The 'National Maritime Museum Act' was passed in 1934 and Callender became, as of right, the first director. Into the immense task of restoring the Queen's House, preparing the galleries, assembling the exhibits, and arranging them he threw his whole energy, and the museum was opened by George VI on 27 April 1937. Callender was knighted in the following year and spent the rest of his life improving and adding to the collections. He died, suddenly, but fittingly, in the museum on 6 November 1946. He was unmarried. Callender was a man of exceptional personality, a born conversationalist, and a brilliant lecturer, respected and beloved by several generations of naval officers, and possessed of an encyclopaedic knowledge of nautical antiquities. 


@@@@@


doc= 32250


Callow, William (1812-1908), watercolour painter, was born in Greenwich, Kent, on 28 July 1812, elder son of Robert Callow (1786-1848), a master builder, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1848). John Callow was his younger brother. William Callow showed an early talent for drawing and at the age of eleven was tinting prints for the engraver Theodore Fielding at his Newman Street studio, which was near to the Callow home in Tottenham Place, Camden Town, London. In 1825 Callow was formally articled to Fielding as a pupil in engraving and watercolour painting. Copley Fielding, future president of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, recognized potential in the young student and gave him advice and encouragement. 
In 1829 Callow was sent to work with Newton Fielding in Paris and was at once enchanted with France, where the essential pattern of his career evolved. In Paris he met Thomas Shotter Boys, from whom he assimilated a method of calligraphic brush strokes and a liking for picturesque city scenes. There was also a received influence from R. P. Bonington, whose luminous use of wash is reflected in the style of Boys. By 1833 Callow was independent of the Fieldings and established in his own atelier. He enjoyed a growing reputation as a watercolourist, and his studio attracted a flourishing circle of pupils, including members of the French aristocracy. The success of 'Vue du pont de Richmond', exhibited at the Paris Salon in 1834, led to Callow being asked to give lessons in watercolour painting to the family of King Louis Philippe. His daughter, Princess Clementine, was a pupil of Callow for seven years and became a lifelong friend. 
Callow's range of subject matter was broadened by a series of long walking tours through France, Germany, and Switzerland (1835-40). These were chronicled in detailed diary entries which appear in his posthumously published autobiography. Many finished watercolours were based on sketches made at this time. 
In 1838 Copley Fielding strongly supported the election of Callow as an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, although his work was virtually unknown in England. He was awarded a gold medal at the Paris Salon in 1840, but in the following year gave up an established career in France and returned to London, where he purchased 20 Charlotte Street (later Hallam Street), near Regent's Park, in 1842. Callow's watercolours proved to be an immediate success in England and he soon gathered another group of well-connected pupils, including two future viceroys of India and members of the Rothschild family. He was a tall, handsome man, with an air of French courtliness and a real love of teaching which made him one of the best-known drawing masters of the day. 
In 1843 the duke of Devonshire commissioned two watercolours from Callow as a gift for Queen Victoria, 'Chatsworth, the Garden Front' and 'The Great Conservatory', which are now in the Royal Collection at Windsor Castle (where in 1829 Robert Callow had superintended some building work). Callow was elected a full member of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1848 and was presented to Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at the 1852 exhibition and again in 1860. Prince Albert acquired two watercolours, of which 'The Bay of Naples, Early Morning' (1852) was later engraved in the 'Art Journal' in a series entitled 'The Royal Pictures' (Jan 1856, 16). Callow had first visited Italy in 1840, after which Italian scenes, particularly of Venice, were among his most popular subjects. An art critic in 'The Athenaeum' commented: 'Mr. Callow is beyond average in his clever, highly tinted architectural sketches' (1488, 3 May 1856, 559). Over fifty years of extensive travel is reflected in his continental street scenes of tall facades and bustling crowds, but tours of the British Isles are also represented, often in breezy coastal subjects, with shipping. 
On 2 July 1846 Callow married one of his fashionable pupils, Harriet Anne Smart (1818-1883), niece of the prominent musician Sir George Smart. The couple shared cultural interests: William delighted in music and Harriet was a talented amateur artist. As her health was delicate, the Callows moved out of London in 1855 to Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. There they built a large house, named The Firs, although Callow retained premises in London until he finally gave up teaching in 1882. He exhibited 1400 works with the Society of Painters in Water Colours (which became the Royal Society after 1881) and was a trustee (1861 to 1876) and secretary from 1866 to 1870. He painted some pictures in oils, mostly for exhibition at the Royal Academy, including 'Porta della Carta, Venice' (exh. 1854). He also showed with the British Institution and the Royal Liverpool Academy. Callow never deviated from traditional watercolour methods, in spite of a trend for experimentation, but some original purity of colour and clarity of line was lost in later over-elaboration. A convoluted monogram (which can be misread as CW) was used by Callow for a period in the mid-1830s, but W. Callow or Wm. Callow in back-sloping script is his most characteristic signature. 
In 1863 Princess Clementine (by then duchess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha) arranged for Callow to sketch at some of the German castles, including Rosenau, near Coburg. Queen Victoria was staying there at the time and received Callow in the garden, much admiring his work. He gave several lessons to the crown princess of Prussia during this tour and was entertained as a guest at Potsdam palace, where he again taught the princess in 1874. 
Harriet Callow died on 30 June 1883. Only six months later, on 8 January 1884, Callow, aged seventy-one, married Mary Louisa Jefferay (1857-1937), aged twenty-seven, daughter of a harness maker from Wendover, Buckinghamshire. There were no children of either marriage, but the second was one of special contentment. On his ninetieth birthday Callow was presented with a congratulatory address from the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, illuminated by the painter E. R. Hughes, a close friend, who always referred to Callow as 'the Maestro'. By now his sight was failing, but work from earlier portfolios continued to sell and a highly praised retrospective exhibition was mounted at the Leicester Galleries in 1907. A review in 'The Studio' declared that 'Mr. Callow has faithfully upheld the best tradition of the old British School of watercolour painting' (1907, 142). He was now the oldest living British artist, but retained remarkable stamina, walking 5 miles a day, until just before his death at The Firs, from pleurisy, following influenza, aged ninety-five, on 20 February 1908. The obituary in 'The Times' paid tribute to a celebrated artist who had progressed from boy apprentice to friend of royalty. A memorial plaque to Callow was placed in the church of St Peter and St Paul, Great Missenden, in the churchyard of which he had been buried on 25 February 1908. 
Two watercolours were donated to the Tate Gallery, London, in 1909, which purchased twenty-six of Callow's continental sketches in 1912. These spanned thirty years of his career, from 'Belfry Tower, Ghent' (1844) to 'Old Street, Prague' (1874). The Victoria and Albert Museum has thirty-three examples of his work, including 'Market Place, Frankfurt' and 'Leaning Towers, Bologna'. This prolific watercolour painter is represented in over sixty public collections, including the Musee du Chateau de Versailles. 


@@@@@


doc= 32251


Callwell, Sir Charles Edward (1859-1928), army officer and writer, was born on 2 April 1859 in London, the only son of Henry Callwell of Lismoyne, Ballycastle, co. Antrim, and his wife, Maud, fourth daughter of James Martin, of Ross, Connemara. He was educated at home by a German governess, at Haileybury College (1871-6), and at the Royal Military Academy (1876-7), Woolwich. In January 1878 he was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Field Artillery. After a short course for new officers at Woolwich and Shoeburyness, he travelled to India on HMS 'Serapis'. In March 1879 he joined F battery of the 3rd brigade stationed at Dinapore. He was later attached to 10/11 heavy battery, in which he served during the closing stages of the Second Anglo-Afghan War, when he marched through the Khyber Pass to join the Kabul field force. Following his return to India he enjoyed five months' medical leave in Kashmir, before rejoining F battery at Dinapore. Shortly afterwards this battery was ordered to south Africa: it landed at Durban in January 1881, just in time to take part in the final operations of the Anglo-Transvaal War. Callwell returned to Britain in December 1881. 
While stationed at Woolwich and then after being transferred to Aldershot, he began regularly contributing articles to the service press, notably the 'Proceedings of the Royal Artillery Institution', on a range of military issues, as well as preparing for the Staff College examination. In 1883 he returned to India with A/1 battery and was again stationed at Dinapore. In 1884 he passed comfortably first the entrance examination for the Staff College, Camberley, held at Jutogh, while still a subaltern. In the autumn of 1884 Callwell returned home and for the next two years studied at Camberley. While there he was promoted captain in March 1886 and later that year was awarded the gold medal for the Royal United Service Institution prize essay competition, with an essay on the lessons learned from British colonial campaigns since 1865. This established his reputation as a military theorist and was later translated into Italian. 
After the course Callwell was briefly posted to the garrison artillery at Portsmouth before being attached to an infantry and later a cavalry unit at Aldershot. He attended as an observer Italian army manoeuvres near Reggio. In October 1887 he was posted as staff captain to the intelligence branch of the War Office in London, as a result of his extensive knowledge of foreign languages and countries; there he was appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general. He joined section E, responsible for Austria-Hungary, the Balkans, Turkey, Egypt, and independent African states. Callwell proved highly successful and served in this post until September 1892, making several tours to Turkey, Greece, Algeria, and Morocco, and in Europe, to gather information. He returned to the garrison artillery at Sheerness before being appointed a year later brigade major of artillery to the western district at Devonport. In March 1896 he was promoted major and that year published 'Small Wars: their Principles and Practice', which became a standard text and firmly established his reputation as the army's foremost expert on colonial warfare, and was also translated into French. At the end of the year he was posted to Malta in charge of a garrison artillery company on coastal defence. Following the outbreak of the Graeco-Turkish War in 1897 he was attached as a military observer to the Greek army in the Near East while on leave, and was present at the battle of Domokos. He published 'The Effect of Maritime Command on Land Campaigns since Waterloo' (1897) and 'Tactics of Today' (1900). 
Following the disasters of 'black week' during the South African War, Callwell's company was sent in December 1899 to south Africa, where it was reorganized as a heavy battery. Callwell led his battery in Natal in support of operations under Sir Redvers Buller along the Tugela River, which led to the relief of Ladysmith on 28 February 1900, and then with the Natal army that crossed the Drakensbergs into the Transvaal. Callwell was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel in November 1900 and on 31 July 1901 was given command of a mobile column, operating under Sir John French, hunting down elusive, widely scattered Boer commandos in the western Transvaal and Cape Colony. He was not particularly successful in this role, and fell foul of Sir John French after letting a Boer commando under Van Deventer escape at Brand Kraal. Despite this setback, he remained a column commander until the war ended in 1902. When he returned to Britain he was stationed briefly at Cork and Dover in 1902-3, while also serving on a committee of senior officers to select a new heavy gun for the Royal Artillery. He was then appointed a deputy assistant quartermaster-general in the mobilization branch of the War Office, in the strategical section dealing with the British empire and general questions of imperial defence that he first served in and then led. In October 1904 he was promoted brevet colonel, made substantive shortly afterwards, and was created CB in 1907. He continued writing on military affairs and produced 'Military Operations and Maritime Preponderance' (1905), on joint operations between the army and the Royal Navy, and 'The Tactics of Home Defence' (1908). Following the end of this War Office appointment in 1907, Callwell went on half pay and worked for the 'Morning Post'. After being passed over for promotion by several contemporaries and being offered only minor staff appointments, a piqued Callwell finally retired from active service later in the summer of 1909. He turned to writing as full-time employment, specializing in military affairs and military history. He wrote articles, short stories, and books -- including humorous parodies of life in the army and of War Office routine -- in various periodicals, including the 'Cornhill Magazine' and 'Blackwood's Magazine'. These were later published in 'Service Yarns and Memories' (1912). Callwell's more serious published work during this period included a didactic account of the 1897-8 Tirah campaign, 'Tirah, 1897' (1911). 
Following the outbreak of war in August 1914, Callwell was recalled to active service and was appointed, with the temporary rank of major-general, to the influential post of director of military operations and intelligence at the War Office. With few trained and experienced staff officers remaining at the War Office, this was a particularly arduous appointment, and involved working closely with Lord Kitchener. Callwell was unwilling, however, to challenge the views of the overbearing new secretary of state for war, who misunderstood the role of the general staff and was reluctant to make full use of it. Instead, Callwell kept quiet and largely acquiesced in Kitchener's proposals. Perhaps most notably he did not actively seek an opportunity to put forward his personal views opposing a naval action at the Dardanelles, an operation he had studied in considerable detail in the intelligence department before the outbreak of war, and deferred instead to Kitchener's view. Despite his strong scepticism, Callwell was heavily involved in planning the Dardanelles campaign, for whose failure he was in small part to blame. Later Callwell drafted the memorandum that formed the formal basis for the recommendations of the new chief of the Imperial General Staff that Gallipoli should be evacuated. In December 1915 Callwell refused an offer from Sir Douglas Haig to be his military secretary. Callwell remained at the War Office until January 1916, when, following the appointment of Sir William Robertson as chief of the Imperial General Staff, the general staff underwent complete reorganization. Callwell was replaced when his post was split into two and new appointments were made for both positions. 
Callwell was sent on two special missions to Russia in January-February and March-May 1916 to discuss the supply of munitions and other issues concerned with Russian co-operation in the war. Following his return to Britain in the autumn of 1916, he served on the War Office's Russian purchasing committee, served in the Ministry of Munitions as an adviser on the supply of munitions to Russia and then other various entente armies, and finally sat on the Milner committee. In May-June 1917 he very briefly stood in for the deputy chief of the Imperial General Staff, was promoted substantive major-general, and created a KCB for his services. 
Callwell returned to his previous career as a journalist and writer following the end of the First World War. His post-war work included 'The Dardanelles' (1919), 'The Life of Sir Stanley Maude' (1920), and two humorous autobiographical volumes covering his early career and military service between 1914 and 1918. In March 1921 he was awarded the Chesney medal of the Royal United Service Institution for his services to military literature and continued until his death writing for various military periodicals, most notably the 'Journal of the Royal Artillery'. His later work included editing the autobiography of General Sir O'Moore Creagh and the memoirs of Sir Hugh MacCalmont and writing a tendentious two-volume biography (1920) of Sir Henry Wilson, whom he had known as a friend since boyhood. His last writing project was a history of the Royal Artillery, written in co-operation with Major-General Sir John Headlam, which appeared in 1937. Callwell died, unmarried, on 16 May 1928 at the Queen Alexandra Military Hospital, Millbank, London. 
Callwell was an accomplished linguist, a skilled intelligence officer, and a prolific writer of quality on a wide range of military affairs and on military history throughout his career. He acquired a reputation as a skilled theorist and, predominantly, as a staff officer. His only period of field command, however, was in south Africa, where he was not particularly successful. It was this failure and his passion for military writing that perhaps led to his being passed over and his early retirement from the army in 1909. Indeed, Callwell may well have been his own worst enemy by being indiscreet, having a sharp tongue, and writing parodies of military life and service at the War Office. Throughout his life, writing for the service press and military literature occupied a large part of Callwell's attention and he was perhaps more accomplished as a theorist than as a soldier. His 'Military Operations and Maritime Preponderance: their Relations and Interdependence' was arguably the best study of joint warfare ever written. It is for his 'Small Wars: their Principles and Practice', however, that Callwell is best remembered. It remained a standard textbook on the subject for the British army up to the Second World War and, in the view of several historians, established his credentials as the founding father of modern counter-insurgency. 


@@@@@


doc= 32252


Calman, William Thomas (1871-1952), zoologist, was born at 94 Nethergate, Dundee, on 29 December 1871, the only son and elder child of Thomas Calman (died 1877), a music teacher blind from childhood, and his wife, Agnes Beatts Maclean. His father's family had been in the shipping trade and were originally from the Anstruther district of Fife. A timid lad with no aptitude for games, Calman became an ardent amateur microscopist and student of pond life while still at Dundee high school, where his scientific interests were encouraged by Frank Young. At sixteen Calman was apprenticed in the Caledonian Insurance Company but was advised, when his term ended four years later, that his stammer made him unsuitable for the work. Meanwhile he had become an active member of the Dundee Working Men's Field Club and joined the Dundee Naturalists' Society, over which he was to preside in 1944. There he met the young professor of natural history at Dundee, D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson (whose notice he subsequently contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'), whose timely offer of a job as laboratory assistant was eagerly accepted since it enabled Calman to attend classes at University College, Dundee, without payment of fees. He graduated BSc with distinction in botany, physiology, and zoology in 1895. He also found time to learn several foreign languages and assisted with the classification of a large and varied assortment of animals obtained from all parts of the world for the departmental museum. He became interested chiefly, though by no means exclusively, in the crustaceans and published several scientific papers. One of these, which was soon to become a classic, was read before the Royal Society of Edinburgh just before he graduated. He was next appointed assistant lecturer and demonstrator in the natural history department, a post he held until 1903, obtaining his DSc in 1900. He was an excellent teacher and during Thompson's absences abroad was responsible for all the work of the department. In later years he served as external examiner to many universities. 
An invitation in 1901 to write the volume on the Crustacea for 'A Treatise on Zoology' edited by Ray Lankester marked another turning-point in Calman's career. In 1903 he moved to London to take up a temporary post at the British Museum (Natural History) and the following year he was placed in charge of the Crustacea and Pycnogonida, where he worked on specimens of these groups brought back by the 'Siboga' expedition (1899-1900), the British Antarctic 'Terra Nova' expedition (1910), and the 'John Murray' expedition (1933-4). In addition to his official duties he compiled the Arachnida and Crustacea parts of the 'Zoological Record' for many years. On 28 March 1906 Calman married Alice Jean, daughter of James Donaldson, timber merchant, of Tayport, Fife. She was one of the first women graduates in medicine of St Andrews and in due course their son and daughter both entered the medical profession. 
In 1921, the year in which he was elected FRS, Calman became deputy keeper of the department of zoology at the museum, and in 1927 he succeeded Tate Regan as keeper, a post which he held until his retirement in 1936. As a curator he kept the collections under his care in excellent order, while from 1904 onwards, until administrative duties claimed most of his time, he produced a steady stream of scientific papers of the highest order and became the leading carcinologist of his time. To a remarkably retentive memory was added a gift for winnowing the significant from masses of detail. The 'Treatise' volume, which specialists regard as his masterpiece, was published in 1909 and remained throughout the century as the best introduction to the subject. Much of interest which was unsuited to a textbook was included in his more popular book, 'The Life of Crustacea' (1911). In 1919 he published a report on marine boring animals injurious to submerged structures in the museum's economic series, ahead of his report for a committee of the Institution of Civil Engineers. 
Calman took a prominent part in scientific activities outside the museum. He was a member of the board of studies of London University and served on the council of the Royal Society from 1933 to 1935. He was president of the Quekett Microscopical Club (1927-9) and of the zoology section at the Bristol meeting of the British Association in 1930. As secretary of the Ray Society (1919-46) he edited its monographs. He was zoological secretary of the Linnean Society (1923-8), president (1934-7), and received its gold medal (1949). He was appointed CB in 1935 and made an honorary LLD of St Andrews and an honorary FRS (Edinburgh) in 1937. 
Somewhat below average height, Calman was a rather sedate, modest, kind, and sociable man, with a delightful sense of humour. His early appreciation of English literature gave him an unusual command of words and purity of style which were enhanced by the slight hesitancy of speech which replaced his stammer. He was impatient with inaccuracy in any form and as editor and administrator he set a very high standard. But this was no more than he always demanded of himself and his strictness was tempered by his kindly common sense. If he sometimes treated his younger colleagues with benign ferocity he taught them many things besides zoology. 
Three years after his retirement Calman moved to Tayport and during the war years he was a part-time lecturer in zoology at St Andrews and Dundee. A series of lectures delivered to his students, 'The Classification of Animals', was published in 1949. Following a serious illness he returned to London and died at Woodcote Grove House, his home at Carshalton, Surrey, on 29 September 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 32253


Calthorpe, Sir Somerset Arthur Gough (1864-1937), naval officer, was born in London on 23 December 1864, the second son of Lieutenant-General Somerset John Gough Calthorpe, seventh Baron Calthorpe (1831-1912) ['see 'Calthorpe family], and his wife, Eliza Maria (died 1919), daughter of Captain Frederick Chamier RN, and widow of Captain Frederick Crewe. He entered the navy as a cadet on the training ship 'Britannia' in 1878 and was promoted to lieutenant in 1886. In 1895 Calthorpe served in naval brigades landed for punitive expeditions on first the west and later the east coast of Africa and was specially promoted to commander for his services on 1 January 1896. In 1900 Calthorpe married Annie Euphemia (died 1952), daughter of Robert Dunsmuir of Victoria, British Columbia. They had no children. 
Calthorpe was promoted to captain in 1902 and was naval attache to Russia, Norway, and Sweden from 1902 to 1905, a period including the Russo-Japanese War, during which he concentrated on Russia. Calthorpe returned to command the armoured cruiser 'Roxburgh' and later the battleship 'Hindustan'. He was captain of the fleet and commodore first class to Admiral Sir William May in the Home Fleet (1909-10), and was promoted rear-admiral in 1911. He was then rear-admiral in the 1st battle squadron (1912-13), with his flag in the dreadnought 'St Vincent', and in 1912 was also an assessor on the wrecks commission inquiry into the loss of the 'Titanic' and a member of the Board of Trade committee investigating methods of stowing, launching, and propelling ships' boats. 
On the outbreak of the First World War Calthorpe was rear- and then vice-admiral commanding the 2nd cruiser squadron (1914-16), with his flag in the armoured cruiser 'Shannon'. He left the Grand Fleet in 1916 shortly before the battle of Jutland to become second sea lord. In December 1916 he was appointed admiral commanding coastguard and reserves. Calthorpe had until this date a worthy but certainly not a spectacular career and both inside and outside the navy there was a certain amount of surprise when in August 1917 he was named commander-in-chief of British forces in the Mediterranean. He has been described as 'conscientious and hard-working, a good all-round officer who held no aces' (Marder, 2.13). Moreover, his past experience as an attache and his Mediterranean command undoubtedly benefited from his fluency in French, the result of spending part of his boyhood in France. 
The British had actually left command in the Mediterranean to the French at the beginning of the war anticipating that the decisive naval battle would be fought in northern waters. This proved to be an untenable situation after the German submarine campaign began in earnest. There were simply too many British interests in the Mediterranean to leave it to the French and Italians, whose anti-submarine resources and methods proved woefully inadequate. The British of necessity shouldered the greater portion of the anti-submarine war in the Mediterranean and in 1917 the position of British Mediterranean commander-in-chief was revived, subject to the overall authority of the French commander-in-chief, at the time Vice-Admiral Gauchet. The latter, however, was preoccupied with the French battle fleet at Corfu guarding the entrance of the Adriatic against a sortie by the Austrian fleet. His control was increasingly more theoretical than real. Calthorpe's command was essentially shore based, its most important feature presiding over an inter-allied commission in Malta established to co-ordinate the campaign against submarines. The British with the greatest resources and shipping interests played the leading role although allied co-operation was less than perfect, the French and Italians having a tendency to follow their own interests. Nevertheless an elaborate convoy organization was gradually established and losses to submarines were brought down to acceptable levels, although always painful. Calthorpe, relatively modest and unassuming and reportedly a bit unsure of himself at first, had difficulty establishing his authority over the various British commands extending from the Aegean to Gibraltar as the local commanders-in-chief had become used to a good deal of independence. But Calthorpe gradually grew tougher and more assertive. In late 1917 he nearly made a major error of judgement suggesting he did not really understand the dynamics of the convoy system. Discouraged by persistently high losses, he considered strengthening the Otranto barrage at the expense of convoy escorts. This would have been a waste of resources for the barrage was ineffective, but fortunately these proposals were blocked by convoy advocates at the Admiralty. 
In the spring of 1918 the collapse of Russia created the danger that the Germans would gain possession of the Russian Black sea Fleet and French battleships were shifted to the Aegean giving a French admiral local command. This situation was unacceptable to the British government once Turkey seemed on the verge of collapse in the autumn of 1918 and Calthorpe was ordered to proceed to the Aegean and take personal command, reinforced by two dreadnoughts detached from the Grand Fleet. Consequently it was Calthorpe who, rigidly excluding the French from the proceedings, negotiated the armistice with the Turks signed at Mudros on 30 October. On 12 November Calthorpe, flying his flag in the dreadnought 'Superb', led the allied fleets through the Dardanelles to anchor off Constantinople the next day. Calthorpe was now, in addition to his naval duties, appointed British high commissioner at Constantinople responsible to the Foreign Office rather than the Admiralty. In this dual capacity for nine months he faced an incredibly complicated situation that included the Russian civil war and allied intervention in the Black Sea, allied rivalries over the remains of the Ottoman empire and the resurgence of Turkish nationalism. He was now at the height of his powers and proved to be a tough and shrewd negotiator who earned the appreciation of the Foreign Office by the time he relinquished his command in July 1919. The Foreign Office praised his clear political and economic reports on provinces outside of the allied occupation and his good relations with his allied colleagues. 
Calthorpe was commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, from 1920 to 1923, and was first and principal aide-de-camp to George V from 1924 to 1925. He was also the first British naval representative on the permanent armaments commission of the League of Nations. Calthorpe, promoted to admiral of the fleet in 1925, was placed on the retired list in 1930. He was awarded a number of British and foreign decorations; he was appointed KCB (1916), GCMG (1918), and GCB (1922). He died on 27 July 1937 at his home, Woodlands Vale, Ryde, Isle of Wight. 
Calthorpe was fated never to command a squadron or fleet in action. Nevertheless, when thrust into a position of great responsibility he performed far better than anticipated, particularly in confronting the diplomatic and political issues that went with his command. 


@@@@@


doc= 32254


Cam, Helen Maud (1885-1968), historian, the fourth of the nine children of the Revd William Herbert Cam and his wife, Katherine, daughter of George Erving Scott, was born at Abingdon, Berkshire, on 22 August 1885. Her early life was spent there and at Birchanger, Essex, where her father became rector when he retired from the headmastership of Roysse's Grammar School in Abingdon. She and three sisters were educated at home by their parents, an education which she delightfully described in a broadcast talk, 'Eating and drinking Greek', in 1964. With this grounding she won a scholarship in 1904 to Royal Holloway College, London, and gained a first in history (1907). In 1908 a fellowship in history took her for a year to Bryn Mawr College in the United States, where she worked on Anglo-Saxon and Frankish studies; the results were presented as a thesis for the MA degree at London University in 1909, and published in 1912 as 'Local Government in Francia and England, 768-1034'. 
For three years Helen Cam taught with great success at Cheltenham Ladies' College and in 1912 returned to Royal Holloway, first as assistant lecturer until 1919, then as staff lecturer. In 1921 she went to Girton College, Cambridge, where she became successively Pfeiffer research fellow (until 1926), fellow, and lecturer in history for the college, and for the university from 1929; she was also director of studies in history and law, and vice-mistress from 1944. In 1948 she left one Cambridge for the other on appointment as the first Zemurray Radcliffe professor at Harvard. This chair she held for six years with much enjoyment, greatly appreciated by the academic world of Harvard and other centres of medieval study in the United States. Retirement in 1954 brought increased opportunity to research, write, and lecture, as well as to contribute to historical studies as a member of councils of learned societies, especially as president of the International Commission for the History of Representative and Parliamentary Institutions from 1949 to 1960 -- in which capacity she was described as 'a great abbess'. She was editing the records of the eyre of London of 1321 for the Selden Society up to the time of her death, and a memoir by Professor S. F. C. Milsom, who completed the edition and saw the volumes through the press, gives a vivid picture of her at eighty-two, as enthralled by her subject as if she had been fifty years younger. 
When Helen Cam began historical research the principal interests of the great teachers of the day and of the immediate past were constitutional, legal, and administrative. To Stubbs, Maitland, and Vinogradoff she gave a lifetime's allegiance. With the exception of the paper 'Suitors and 'scabini'' read at Warsaw in 1933, her published work after 1912 was confined to English history, but was enriched by her continual contact with continental scholars and their work. 
After the publication in the 'English Historical Review' of a surprising short article, 'The legend of the incendiary birds' (1916), she produced an impressive series of articles and books on counties and boroughs based on the hundred rolls, with which her name will always be especially connected, on the 'quo warranto' rolls, and on the records of the general eyres. Her appreciation of the importance of topography as a key to some local problems was illustrated by the subtitle of the first group of her collected papers, 'Liberties and Communities in Medieval England: collected studies in administration and topography' (1944). Her feeling for the continuity of English institutions was brilliantly expounded in the John Coffin lecture of 1960, 'What of the middle ages is alive in England to-day?' Her second collection, 'Law Finders and Law Makers in Medieval England' (1962), included her inaugural lecture at Harvard in 1948, in which she reviewed the study of medieval history at the time, surveying also the contribution of Harvard's first professor of medieval history, Henry Adams, and the graduate school he founded, with tributes to and reminiscences of the historians who had been her teachers, guides, and colleagues. 
As a teacher Helen Cam herself gave her pupils contact with a great range of learning and an interest in them as marked as in the subjects of her own studies. As one said, 'Judgement might be severe but it was impersonal: no-one was more ready to respect the personalities of students.' To those past their undergraduate days and to those who consulted her she gave unstinted help in their fields of research. 
Nor were her interests and sympathies solely academic. A lecture to which she went as a student, impelled thereto by a tutor rather than of her own volition, converted her to the cause of women's suffrage though not to its militancy. She was also much concerned with the YWCA, and the provision of education for women who had to start earning their living after very limited schooling, and she gave every possible help to the residential centre which later became Hillcroft College, in conjunction with her contemporary at Royal Holloway, Miss Fanny Street. For some years she contributed a monthly page on novels, plays, and questions of the day to 'The Torch', a paper for those beginning to make increasing use of the free libraries. She was also an active member of the Cambridge Labour Party and Trades Council. 
Helen Cam had always greatly enjoyed historical novels, considering them a 'standing reminder that history is about human beings', and lectures on them resulted in the pamphlet 'Historical Novels' (1961). Nothing roused her wrath more than the attempted whitewashing of certain historical characters, especially Richard III. Among her other recreations was watercolour sketching, in which she had considerable talent. She is described in her thirties, as 'of serious and matronly mien', and during vacations spent at Oxford (whither, to Keble Road, her parents retired in 1926) she was to be seen in the Bodleian, 'sitting squarely by a window' in one of the carrels in Duke Humfrey's Library: 'sharp eyes, sharp nose, heavy eyebrows -- intent on her books, looking like a broody hen in a nesting box, placid and comfortable, but ready to peck if the occasion demanded. Some of her best articles must have been hatched there.' Helen Cam was a woman who by her learning, integrity, and warmth of personality contributed much to any group of which she was a member. Her importance as a historian was recognized by election to the British Academy in 1945, in which year she was the first woman to deliver the Raleigh lecture of the academy. She also received honorary doctorates at Smith College, Mount Holyoke College, the University of North Carolina, and, in 1962, Oxford; she became an honorary fellow of Somerville College in 1964. She was one of the first women to join the council of the Selden Society, of which she was vice-president in 1962-5. In 1958 she became a vice-president of the Royal Historical Society, and in 1963 honorary vice-president; she was also a corresponding fellow of the Medieval Academy of Arts and Sciences. Her work for the International Commission for the History of Representative and Parliamentary Institutions was commemorated by the 'Album Helen Maud Cam' (1960), two volumes presented to her for her seventy-fifth birthday, containing essays by scholars of many nations, a bibliography of her works to 1957, and an appreciation by an American colleague, Professor Caroline Robbins. Her public as well as her historical services were recognized by her appointment as CBE in 1957. She died in hospital at Orpington, Kent, on 9 February 1968. 
Kathleen Major', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32255


Cambridge, Alexander Augustus Frederick William Alfred George, earl of Athlone (1874-1957), army officer and governor-general of South Africa, was born at Kensington Palace on 14 April 1874, the third son of Princess Mary Adelaide Wilhelmina Elizabeth (1833-1897) and Francis, duke of Teck (1837-1900), and brother of the future Queen Mary. Originally styled his serene highness, Prince Alexander of Teck, he was known to his family as Alge. In 1917, in accordance with policy, he relinquished his titles and the name of Teck, and took the family name of Cambridge and the title of earl of Athlone. 
Prince Alexander was educated at Eton College and Sandhurst, was commissioned second lieutenant in the 7th hussars in 1894, joined his regiment in India, and thereafter received his promotion in the normal way. He served in the Matabele (Ndebele) campaign of 1896-7 and was mentioned in dispatches. He transferred to the Inniskilling dragoons in order to be able to serve in the South African War, during which he was mentioned again in dispatches and appointed to the DSO. He was spoken of as a capable and enterprising officer and a cheerful comrade, ever willing to endure and to share with his troops the discomforts of a nomad campaign. 
On 10 February 1904 Prince Alexander married Princess Alice Mary Victoria Augusta Pauline (1883-1981), daughter of Queen Victoria's fourth son, Prince Leopold, duke of Albany. On this occasion he was appointed GCVO. Their first child, May Helen Emma, was born in 1906; in the following year they had a son, Rupert Alexander George Augustus, later Viscount Trematon, who died as the result of a motor accident in 1928. A second son, Maurice Francis George, died in 1910 before he was six months old. 
The prince joined the Royal Horse Guards in 1904. In 1911, at the request of George V, he transferred to the 2nd Life Guards with the rank of major. At the coronation he was appointed GCB. In 1914 he was nominated governor-general of Canada but did not take up the appointment owing to the outbreak of war, in which he served as a lieutenant-colonel in the Life Guards. Later he joined the staff as general staff officer grade 2 and was attached to the British military mission to the Belgian army. He was promoted general staff officer 1 with the rank of brigadier-general in 1915 and received Belgian, French, and Russian decorations. He was twice mentioned in dispatches and in 1918 he joined the general headquarters staff. 
After the war Athlone (as he had become) retired from the army, and took an active interest in national and social work. A man of compassion, he was especially attracted to the work of institutions connected with the relief of human suffering. He had been chairman of the Middlesex Hospital since 1910, and in 1921 the minister of health appointed him chairman of a committee composed of the foremost doctors and surgeons of the day to investigate the needs of medical practitioners. Under his enthusiastic guidance the Athlone committee produced a comprehensive report which recommended the appropriation of substantial sums from public funds to finance the establishment of a postgraduate medical school (to be associated with the University of London and existing medical institutions) to promote postgraduate instruction and medical research. The work thus initiated by the Athlone committee was carried on by committees presided over by Neville Chamberlain and Arthur Greenwood. The British Postgraduate Medical School, subsequently attached to the Hammersmith Hospital, became one of the most famous institutions of its kind. Athlone took a special interest and pride in the school, which he visited frequently in later years. 
Athlone was closely identified also with the promotion of education. He was chancellor of the University of London (1932-55), taking office at a difficult time in the development of the university under its new statutes. He was an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple, a fellow of the Royal Society, vice-president of the Royal Academy of Music, an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, and a knight grand cross of the order of St John of Jerusalem. 
In 1923 Athlone was appointed governor-general of the Union of South Africa, and high commissioner, being appointed GCMG and promoted to the rank of major-general. He arrived in South Africa in time to open parliament in January 1924. Shortly afterwards J. B. M. Hertzog succeeded J. C. Smuts as prime minister. A difficult period followed. Racial antagonism between the British and the Afrikaners was inflamed by a Nationalist proposal to adopt a new flag for the union, omitting anything symbolic of the British connection. Athlone worked quietly behind the scenes to secure the inclusion of the union flag in the white central panel. His speech at the unveiling of this compromise flag in Cape Town did much to soothe and reconcile animosities. His frequent tours in the provinces enhanced his prestige and popularity and did much to bring the two white communities closer together. His patience, courtesy, and tact won the trust and esteem of the political leaders of all parties. He was appointed KG in 1928 in recognition of his services and his term of office was extended at the request of the government. 
At the conclusion of his very successful term of office, Athlone was sworn of the privy council in 1931 and appointed governor and constable of Windsor Castle. He and Princess Alice took up residence at Brantridge Park and afterwards transferred to Kensington Palace, which they decorated with trophies of their big-game hunting expeditions and paintings of African landscapes by local artists whom they had patronized and encouraged during their tour of duty. They continued their interest in South African affairs and personalities and resumed their social activities in England. Queen Mary and her brother had always been close companions and regular correspondents. After George V recovered from his serious illness he expressed the wish that Lord Athlone should, for family reasons, remain in England. 
In 1940 George VI showed his uncle a telegram from W. L. Mackenzie King, asking if he might submit Athlone's name for the governor-generalship of Canada. Greatly as he appreciated the compliment, Athlone thought a younger man should be appointed, but the king persuaded him to accept for a period of two years. In the event he served the full term of five years. He entered upon his new duties with his usual enthusiasm and took a keen interest in efforts to establish in the dominion various military training schemes and factories for the production of war materials. He travelled extensively at all seasons of the year to attend troop reviews and encourage munition workers. In addition he and Princess Alice were always ready to entertain members of official missions, including those of President Roosevelt and Winston Churchill, and they offered open hospitality to royalty and other distinguished exiles from allied countries under German occupation. Although Athlone had occasional differences with Mackenzie King, he had a natural gift for getting on with people and their personal relations always remained very friendly. Athlone's unsuccessful efforts to reconcile differences between the prime minister and his defence minister, J. L. Ralston, were a disappointment to him. 
Those who knew Athlone intimately and worked with him would agree that kindness was his outstanding characteristic. Yet, like many kind people, he had a quick temper which subsided as rapidly as it flared up. His military training had endowed him with an eye for detail and a keen perception of the manners and peculiarities of others upon which he liked to exercise his quizzical sense of humour. He gave the impression that he modelled his conduct on the precepts of Polonius -- especially those relating to manners and deportment. His dress was meticulous but never 'expressed in fancy'. He had an exact sense of symmetry and tidiness and would often adjust ornaments and pictures. His memory for names and faces was quite extraordinary and he was a good judge of character. In public affairs he was tolerant and strove to induce others to modify fixed or extreme opinions before giving expression to his own. His natural tact and intellectual modesty enabled him to impress his counsel upon ministers without provoking opposition or appearing to intrude upon their constitutional prerogatives. His command over the loyalty and affection of his staff was exceptional, and he delighted in renewing friendships with them in later years. At the conclusion of his term of office in Canada in 1946 he and Princess Alice made time to stay in Trinidad with their former secretary in South Africa. On his return to England Athlone resumed his interest in national affairs. In 1936 he had been appointed grand master of the Order of St Michael and St George, an order associated especially with the dominions, colonial, and foreign services. In that office he presided over the last tributes paid to many of Britain's most distinguished sons. On his death at Kensington Palace, on 16 January 1957, he received in his turn the homage of members of the order who, like himself, had faithfully and diligently served their country. The peerage became extinct. 
Bede Clifford', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32256


Cameron, Sir David Young (1865-1945), painter and etcher, was born on 28 June 1865 at 1 Queen's Terrace, Glasgow, the fourth of the nine children and elder surviving son of the Revd Robert Cameron (1825-1898), minister of Cambridge Street United Presbyterian Church in Glasgow, and his wife, Margaret Johnston ('bap'. 1839, died 1924), elder daughter of Donald Robertson, a surgeon in Perth, and his wife, Jessie. Cameron inherited his artistic ability from his mother, who was a talented amateur watercolourist, as did his younger sister Katharine Cameron (1874-1965), a watercolourist and etcher. From 1874 to 1881 he attended Glasgow Academy. In his final year he began classes at the Glasgow School of Art, which he continued when he began work as a clerk in a Glasgow iron foundry. After two years he left Glasgow for Perth, where he spent a further period working in the law office of his great-uncle David Hepburn. However, he loathed office work. In 1884 he finally decided to become a painter, despite his father's cool response to the idea, and enrolled at the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh, where he remained until 1887. His fellow students included William Miller Frazer, George Denholm Armour, Charles Mackie, James Pryde, and William Walls. In 1886 he exhibited for the first time at the Royal Scottish Academy and the Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts. On 30 April 1896 he married Jeanie Ure (1871-1931), the eldest of the three daughters of Robert Maclaurin, a partner in Archibald Orr Ewing & Co., and his wife, Margaret Anderson. They had no children. 
Cameron first came to prominence as an etcher. In 1887 George Stevenson, himself a talented amateur etcher and friend of the noted etcher Francis Seymour Haden, saw by chance some of Cameron's sketches, persuaded him to take up etching, and helped him to etch his first plates. Subsequently Cameron produced about 520 etchings and dry-points -- principally architectural subjects and landscapes -- in a career which spanned forty-five years, becoming with fellow Scots Muirhead Bone and James McBey one of the foremost British etchers of the etching revival of 1880-1930. On the strength of his print 'A Perthshire Village' (1888) he was elected an associate of the Society of Painter-Etchers in 1889 at the age of twenty-three, becoming a fellow six years later. He exhibited with the society each year until 1903, when he resigned along with William Strang in protest at its decision to admit reproductions to its exhibitions. Cameron held his first one-man show in the galleries of Van Baerle in Glasgow in 1891. Four years later he had his first exhibition in the United States, in the New York gallery of Frederick Keppel & Co. He was awarded medals for etching at expositions in Chicago (1893), Brussels and Dresden (1897), Paris (1900), and Munich (1905). His achievement as one of the foremost etchers of his day was recognized in 1911, when he was made an associate engraver of the Royal Academy. Five years later he was elected an associate painter, the only person to have achieved this double distinction. His prints were issued in small editions, averaging fifty impressions, almost invariably printed by Cameron himself. This led collectors in Britain and the United States to vie with each other to acquire his later prints, and resulted in relatively high prices at auction during the 'etching mania' of the 1920s. No plates were executed between 1918 and 1922, when he was busy completing his work as a war artist for the Canadian War Memorials Fund (1917-19). In 1932 he executed his last plate, 'The Broken Crucifix', seen by many as a poignant reminder of his wife's suffering before her death from cancer on 17 November 1931. They were a devoted couple; although he survived her by nearly fourteen years, he never got over her death. 
Cameron did not display the immediate brilliance which characterized the work of Bone and McBey. It took several years of steady development for him to reach a position of mastery in terms of technique and composition. His early etchings, which include the 'Paisley Set' (1887) and the 'Clyde Set' (1889), are little more than views, somewhat lacking in individuality of expression but occasionally displaying a hint of what was to come. 1892 marks a greater maturity, evidenced by several etchings in the 'North Holland Set' and 'A Rembrandt Farm', which signals his lifelong admiration of the great Dutch master. Other early influences were Maxime Lalanne, Haden, Whistler, and the French etcher Charles Meryon. 
From 1892, when he visited the Netherlands with the Glasgow photographer James Craig Annan, to the winter of 1908-9, when he visited Egypt, Cameron travelled regularly on the continent. Often his travels were followed by the issue of a set of etchings. The 'North Holland Set' (1892) was followed by the 'North Italian Set' (1896), the 'Paris Set' (1904), and the 'Belgian Set' (1907). The 'London Set' was issued in 1900, following a move to London in 1898. However, after a year the Camerons returned to Scotland, to Kippen, Stirlingshire, where they built a house, Dun Eaglais, in which they lived for the rest of their lives. 
Cameron developed great skill in the depiction of architectural subjects, conveying not only the beauty of a building but also something of its history and 'soul'. A master of detail and mood, of light and shadow, his notable plates include 'Newgate' (1899), 'Siena' (1900), 'Place Plumereau, Tours' (1903), and 'Thermae of Caracalla' (1923). He executed several atmospheric church interiors, such as 'St Laumer, Blois' (1903) and 'Notre Dame, Dinant' (1907) and culminating in 'The Five Sisters, York Minster' (1907), arguably his finest print. He had an acute sense of design in terms of structure, tone, and balance, which is particularly evident in his landscapes. Fine early examples include 'Landscape with Trees' (1892), 'A Border Tower' (1894), and 'The Meuse' (1907). From 1911 onward he produced a series of plates depicting the Scottish landscape, for which he is rightly renowned. They are noted for their simple design and wonderful quality of line, exemplified by prints such as the masterly 'Ben Ledi' (1911), 'Ben Lomond' (1923), and 'Balquhidder' (1931). 
In his painting in oil and watercolours Cameron executed mainly figure subjects and portraits until 1900. Stylistically they have an affinity with the later decorative phase of the Glasgow Boys or with Hague school painters such as Matthijs Maris. However, he was never entirely happy in his representation of the human form. Some of his figure paintings, such as his portrait 'Dorothy Maude Kay' (1898, priv. coll.), and his busy harbour scenes, are successful, but others are less so. In 1899 the London dealer Colnaghi mounted an ambitious one-man exhibition, but it was not as successful as Cameron might have wished. Henceforth he concentrated on architectural subjects and landscapes. 
During the first decade of the twentieth century Cameron's subjects were drawn from the landscapes and townscapes of the continent as well as from Scotland. 'Early Spring in Tuscany' ('c'.1901), 'Dark Angers' (1903, Manchester City Galleries), 'Glencaple' (1905, National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), 'Nightfall, Luxor' (1909, Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), 'Craigievar' (1909, Aberdeen Art Gallery), 'The Marble Quarry, Iona' (1909, Cartwright Hall, Bradford), and 'Old Paris' ('c'.1910, priv. coll., London) are some fine examples. From 1910 to about 1916 he concentrated on Scottish landscape. By 1910 he had developed an individual landscape style, which was to change little over the next thirty-five years, though his palette went through a number of phases, ranging from sombre browns, greys, and black to unrestrained blue, plum, pink, gold, and red. He used a strong line to build up the structure of a landscape and accentuated mass and tonal relationships. He tended to eliminate everything trivial or inconsequential, which gave many of his landscapes an austere beauty. His intense love and feeling for Scotland and its scenery are immediately apparent in works such as 'The Boddin, Angus' ('c'.1911, priv. coll., London), 'Cir Mhor' (1912, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum), 'The Hill of the Winds' ('c'.1913, National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), and 'Balquhidder' ('c'.1916, Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne). About 1916 Cameron began a series of architectural studies, including several powerful church interiors, exemplified by 'Cafe Leroux' (1918, priv. coll.), 'Durham' (1920, Royal Academy), and 'The Baths of Caracalla' (1924, Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston). His work as a war artist includes 'The Battlefield of Ypres' (1919, Imperial War Museum, London), 'Bailleul' ('c'.1919, Central Museum and Art Gallery, Dundee), and 'A Garment of War' ('c'.1926, City Art Centre, Edinburgh). 
In the 1920s and 1930s D. Y., as Cameron preferred to be called, was one of the best-known painters in England as well as Scotland. His work received great critical acclaim and was acquired by many public galleries in Britain and abroad. He was an academician of both the Royal Scottish Academy (1918) and the Royal Academy (1920), a member of the Scottish (1906) and English (1915) watercolour societies and the International Society (1901), and a founder member of the Society of Twelve (1904). 
Following a heart attack in August 1921, Cameron went to the south of France to recuperate. Influenced by the region's intensity of light, he produced on this and subsequent visits a body of work -- imbued with the most vibrant colour he had used thus far -- which must rank among his best. Typical examples are 'La rue Annette' ('c'.1922, National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh), 'Barlou' ('c'.1922, priv. coll.), and 'En Provence' ('c'.1926, National Gallery of Scotland). This use of rich colour was continued in his later Scottish landscapes, of which 'Wilds of Assynt' (1936, Perth Museum and Art Gallery) is a fine example. At times he appears guilty of exaggeration, but, to those who know the Scottish highlands well, reality bears out his extraordinary vision of colour and setting. 
In the latter part of his career Cameron's importance and influence in British art circles extended far beyond the boundaries of the studio. Between 1919 and 1945 he was associated with the British School at Rome, which he visited several times in the 1920s. In 1925 the speaker of the House of Commons asked him to choose and lead a group of eight painters for the decoration of St Stephen's Hall at Westminster. He played a similar role from 1927 to 1938 when the Bank of England was rebuilt. He served as a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission and was a trustee of the Tate Gallery (1920-27) and the National Galleries of Scotland (1920-45). He was knighted in 1924 and in 1933 was appointed the king's painter and limner in Scotland. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (1911), Manchester (1923), Cambridge (1928), and St Andrews (1936). 
Cameron was a squarish man of under medium height with blond hair and blue eyes. He did not look like an artist; his upbringing as a son of the manse was reflected in his preference for dark clothes. He was a man of firm convictions. The church was a very important element throughout his life and had a considerable influence on his art, especially in his later years. He was just as eloquent in his ardent appeals for a greater recognition of the arts by the Church of Scotland as he was in the interest of fine art. He gave advice to individual congregations on the redecoration of their churches and with Lady Cameron gave much time and many of their collected treasures and essential funding towards the renovation and decoration of their own church at Kippen. He also advised on the design of war memorials following the First World War. At the age of eighty, still carrying banners for art and for the church, he died of a heart attack on 16 September 1945, shortly after delivering a lecture, 'Beauty and worship', at St John's Kirk in Perth. Three days later he was buried beside Lady Cameron in the churchyard outside Kippen, overlooking his beloved Ben Ledi, which he painted many times. 
Cameron was not a trailblazer, but neither was he an imitator. Allied to superb draughtsmanship and technique, he had an individual conception and style, to which he remained true throughout his life. Many of his oils are impressive in their power and drama. However, it is in his watercolours -- fresh and spontaneous, rarely mannered or laboured -- and in his etchings and dry-points that his true ability can be seen. 


@@@@@


doc= 32257


Cameron, Sir Donald Charles (1872-1948), colonial governor, was born in British Guiana on 3 June 1872, the second son of Donald Charles Cameron, a sugar planter of Plantation Blankenberg and later of Georgetown, Demerara, and his wife, Mary Emily, daughter of Richard Brassington of Dublin. His mother died when he was a boy, and his father marrying again, Cameron was sent to England and later attended Rathmines School in Dublin, where he remained until he was eighteen. Unusually for one who rose so high in the ranks of the colonial service, he had no university or college education, and his sometime colleague Sir Philip Mitchell used to say he was largely self-educated. 
Cameron returned to British Guiana and began his career modestly enough in 1890 as a clerk in the inland revenue department. His ability soon earned him promotion to private secretary to the governor, then in 1900 to secretary and clerk to both the executive and legislative councils. In the following year he became principal clerk to the secretariat, under the acting governor, Sir Cavendish Boyle. Cameron's marriage to Gertrude, daughter of Duncan Gittens, a sugar planter of Barbados, took place in 1903. They had a son. When Boyle was appointed governor of Mauritius in 1904, Cameron followed him there in the same year as assistant colonial secretary. Boyle clearly thought well of him and he was acting colonial secretary on various occasions. His outspokenness caused him to run into some trouble with local opinion: in a council of government meeting he made some critical remarks about a section of the Mauritian public service. A protest motion in the council caused a public demonstration, and the elected members of the council requested the secretary of state to remove him. The governor agreed to Cameron's offer to go on leave so as not to embarrass the administration. Thus he left rather under a cloud, the only negative episode in an otherwise brilliant career. 
Cameron's next appointment, as assistant colonial secretary of the protectorate of Southern Nigeria in 1908, was something of a demotion. His ability soon showed through, however, and he acted as provincial commissioner on various occasions, and in 1912 twice acted as colonial secretary of Southern Nigeria. This was the time when Sir Frederick Lugard was bringing about the very important step of amalgamating the divisions of north and south administrations, as governor-general of Nigeria. He was a strong advocate of the practice of indirect rule, whereby the traditional rulers and native authorities were left with a considerable degree of autonomy in the day-to-day administration of their people, while colonial officers were intended to be advisers for the most part. Cameron became an ardent disciple of Lugard in this respect, and enthusiastically developed this policy in both Nigeria and Tanganyika. However, he was disappointed to be only made central secretary, a post which he thought gave him insufficient status, given his abilities and strong ambition. He became critical of Lugard's 'ad hoc' methods and unwillingness to deputize. The situation changed for the better in 1919 when Sir Hugh Clifford became governor and Cameron enjoyed a period of close collaboration with him. They reorganized the central administrative system including its functions, staffing, and salaries, and Cameron's work was recognized when he was appointed chief secretary to the government and knighted in 1923. On the three occasions when Clifford was away, Cameron acted as governor. 
The good record Cameron had built up was rewarded in 1924 when he was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of Tanganyika, arriving there in 1925. The former territory of German East Africa had been awarded to Britain by the League of Nations under mandate in 1922, but little development had taken place before Cameron took over. In developing indirect rule further, he gave the chiefs wide powers of administration, jurisdiction, and control of their own budgets, but at the same time he believed in firm central control of the main policy decision making process. Aware that indirect rule through chiefs might produce a static society, he also respected the terms of the mandate which stressed the need for social progress, education, and training for eventual self-determination. Thus he encouraged rapid growth in the education system through government schools and state-aided mission schools, and he supported the founding of Tabora School for the sons of chiefs, which became the leading secondary school, at which many future African leaders of Tanganyika received their education. 
Cameron created a new post of secretary for native affairs, which he filled successively with two very able men -- Charles Dundas and later Philip Mitchell. They were to travel round the country and Cameron himself believed in travel as a way not only to gain knowledge of the people but also to 'show' himself as governor (in full dress uniform) and talk to them -- a habit which gained him great popularity and respect. He established a legislative council in 1926 with twenty-three members, either officials or nominated members. British settlers and Indians were in it, though no Africans as yet, because Cameron considered their English insufficient. He believed in gradually building up a sense of responsibility in the native authorities, but distrusted ideas for more advanced ideas of democracy and 'exotic' devices such as the ballot box. Instead he wanted the growing African educated elite to gain experience first in the advisory councils of the chiefs -- a policy which critics might say ignored the possibility that the elite might become impatient with the methods of traditional rule. His creation of an African civil service, however, provided at least one outlet for them. 
Cameron successfully built up the economy of the country, improving harbour facilities, and extending the main railway from Tabora to Mwanza on the shore of Lake Victoria, to benefit the central and north-west districts. He established a labour department, abolished forced labour and manual porterage, and refused to give priority to European settlement, insisting that the mandate stressed the paramountcy of African interests. New crops were encouraged, and Cameron resisted pressure from settlers to ban Africans from growing coffee. However, he warned against too much dependence on cash crops and took care not to press Africans to grow more than they wished. When he left in 1931 revenues had been increased by 83 per cent, recurrent expenditure by 53 per cent, and there was a healthy government surplus. In addition, Tanganyika had purchased five aeroplanes in 1930 for survey work -- the first colonial or mandated territory to do so. 
Cameron was less happy in his relationship with Kenya colony, the Uganda protectorate, and indeed with the Colonial Office. During his governorship he had to defend Tanganyika from the mounting pressure for 'closer union' of these territories of British East Africa, and also possibly including central Africa. Cameron always maintained that Tanganyika, as a mandated territory, differed from Kenya or Uganda. This angered Sir Edward Grigg, governor of Kenya, and also the Colonial Office, which tended to treat Cameron as a colonial governor like any other. But Grigg, along with Lord Delamere, the influential Kenya settler, and the colonial secretary Leopold Amery envisaged a settler-dominated group of territories on the Kenya model. Cameron argued that this was entirely against African interests in Tanganyika as laid down in the mandate, and if it came to that he would resign on this issue. 
When the first conference of governors was held in Nairobi, Cameron attended very reluctantly and left early, holding that its decisions would not be binding on Tanganyika. Later he was particularly annoyed at Kenyan opposition to his proposal to extend the railway to Mwanza, as it was argued that this would detract from the profits of the Kenya-Uganda railway. It was partly a clash of personalities between Grigg and Cameron. When Amery called another governors' conference in London to press for closer union, Cameron again stood against it, and Amery sent out the Hilton Young commission in 1927 to inquire further into it. In the following year Cameron was again called to London to discuss their report, and he refused to support the type of union proposed. He utilized the support he had long enjoyed from the Labour Party, and they, and indeed some Conservatives and Liberals, joined him in opposing it. When the Labour government took power, another inquiry was sent to sound out opinions, but this time, apparently at Cameron's suggestion, it was a joint committee of both houses of parliament. This meant of course that it included some strong supporters for his view, and their recommendation was that there was no general agreement on closer union. Thus, for the time being at least, the matter was dropped. 
In 1931 Cameron was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of Nigeria. At that time Nigeria faced many difficulties. Taxation and other grievances had caused riots, especially the women's riots of 1929 in the east, causing many deaths. In the west Yoruba chiefs had been given new and greater powers than they had traditionally wielded, while in Lagos the growing educated elite -- many of them university trained -- were becoming increasingly impatient with the frustrations of indirect rule through traditional rulers. In the legislative council Herbert Macauley's National Democratic Party held all the elected seats and could be a political force. Cameron still favoured indirect rule but perceived that in the north the ruling emirs were almost heads of states within a state, and they were supported in this demeanour by the British officers there who tended to resent Cameron's efforts to exert some overall control from Lagos. Above all, the world depression was having serious effects, forcing Cameron to make severe cuts in staffing and budgets. 
In his short governorship of four years, however, Cameron achieved much. By 1934 the prices of groundnuts and palm oil, the major exports, had starting rising again and he managed to balance the budget. Because of his ruthless economies in managing the revenues he could claim that, by 1935, 30 per cent of the revenue was spent on education and social services -- goals dear to his heart. By introducing new native authority and native courts ordinances he reformed and refined the indirect rule system, to be more flexible and adaptable to modern Western methods and the advances of technology. In the north, Cameron may have been biased against the rulers and their officers, and according to some, relations were not good, but he tried to introduce measured reforms. He tried to curb their separatist tendencies, and in particular, to free non-Muslims and followers of traditional African religions, of whom there were many in the north, from Muslim domination. He encouraged new developments in this region by increasing the power of technical departments in Lagos. In 1933 he appointed his ally in these policies, G. S. Browne, to be the new chief commissioner -- not lieutenant-governor, as he abolished this grander title. Further, he sought to reduce the entrenched position of the northern officers by ruling that no officer could serve more than three consecutive tours in one province. However, Cameron did not have time to grapple with the problems of Northern Nigeria, which remained troublesome for many years to come. 
In 1935 his wife's illness forced Cameron to retire to England. Although he still took much interest in colonial affairs, for a former governor with such a reputation for administrative ability he was not used very much by the Colonial Office: he served as a member of the Colonial Office education advisory committee, and was vice-chairman of the governing body of the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture. In 1939 he published his autobiography under the curious title 'My Tanganyika Service and some Nigeria', suggesting that his real pride lay in his work in Tanganyika, where he indeed achieved much. The dominant theme of the book was his concern for African interests, and his total conviction that indirect rule through native authorities was the key to peaceful and purposeful colonial rule. Though he referred to the possible conflicts of interest between traditional chiefs and younger generations of educated Africans, he did not think this issue really serious. However, as governor he was popular with the masses and his departure from Tanganyika was regretted; scores of chiefs came all the way to Dar es Salaam to say goodbye. Julius Nyerere was an admirer, and said in a speech to the United Nations that all the British governors except Cameron had administered the country as if it were a colony and exploited the fear instilled into people by the Germans. 
In appearance Cameron was tall and upstanding, with dark hair, and he had a magisterial and commanding presence. He was an indefatigable worker and expected the same level of commitment from his subordinates. A brilliant administrator, he could at the same time be aloof, brusque, abrasive, with a caustic wit that earned him some enemies. Above all, however, there was universal recognition that he had at heart the best interests of the peoples he governed. His only child, Geoffrey Valentine Cameron, who became legal secretary to the government of Malta, perished in an aircraft which disappeared at sea in May 1941. Towards the end of his life Cameron suffered from increasing blindness. He was appointed CMG in 1918, KBE in 1923, KCMG in 1926, and GCMG in 1932, and received the honorary degree of LLD from Cambridge University in 1937. He died at his home, 21 Grosvenor Court, Sloane Street, London, on 8 January 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 32258


Cameron, Sir (Gordon) Roy (1899-1966), pathologist, was born at Echuca, Victoria, Australia, on 30 June 1899, the son of George Cameron, a Methodist preacher from South Australia, and his wife, Emily Pascoe, who had emigrated from Cornwall with her parents at the age of eleven. Cameron was their elder child -- his younger brother died in infancy -- and because his father, like most Methodist preachers, went on circuit, Cameron was brought up mainly by the women of the family. 
All Cameron's early schooling was in the state schools of the villages: Mitiamo, Lancefield, Dunkeld, and finally Kyneton, where he lived from 1911 to 1917, and where he was able to read extensively and to listen to music. From 1913 to 1917 he did his compulsory military training, and reached the rank of second lieutenant. The teaching at Kyneton was mediocre, but he managed to obtain a senior scholarship and a major scholarship at Queen's College, Melbourne University, which he joined in February 1916. 
Cameron had already decided on medicine, but it was not easy to make up for his ignorance of physics and chemistry, and he did only fairly well until his fourth year; in 1922 he graduated MB BS with second-class honours. After hearing Sir Harry Allen lecture on pathology he had decided on this as his subject, and after a year as resident medical officer at Melbourne Hospital, during which he did some research work in the pathology of pancreatitis, Cameron was appointed Stewart lecturer in pathology in the university department, where he pioneered experimental work by setting up a small animal house and a colony of guinea-pigs. 
Early in 1925 Cameron was invited by C. H. Kellaway to succeed F. M. Burnet as his first assistant and deputy director of Walter and Eliza Hall Institute in Melbourne. Two years later he went on leave to work under Ludwig Aschoff in Freiburg im Breisgau and later under A. E. Boycott in University College Hospital medical school, London. It was intended that he should in time return to Melbourne to succeed Allen as professor, but when his time was up, he found, to his great consternation, that he did not wish to return. Encouraged by his father, he went to live with Boycott's chief technician, Fred Crew, who, with his wife, Alice, looked after him until he died. 
Cameron became Graham scholar in pathology in 1928 and was Beit fellow from 1930 to 1933. After a rather unhappy year as pathologist at Queen Mary's Hospital, Stratford, London, he returned to University College medical school as reader in morbid anatomy (1934). In 1937, after Boycott's retirement, he was appointed professor, and in 1946 director of the Graham department, both of which posts he held until he retired in 1964. During the Second World War he was seconded to the Chemical Defence Experimental Establishment at Porton, Wiltshire. 
Over the years Cameron received many honours and was always in demand for work. From 1935 to 1955 he was an assistant editor of the 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology' under Matthew Stewart. In 1941 he became an honorary FRCP. He was elected FRS in 1946, served on its council in 1948-9, and was one of its royal medallists in 1960. He became honorary LLD of Edinburgh in 1956 and of Melbourne in 1962. He received the gold medal of the Graham Research Fund and the Crawford Mollison research prize of the British Medical Association in Australia, and was honorary member of many pathological societies. From 1947 to 1956 he was a member of the Agricultural Research Council and from 1952 to 1956 a member of the Medical Research Council. He was knighted in 1957. But the honour which gave him the greatest pleasure was undoubtedly his unanimous election in 1962 to be founder president of the College of Pathologists. 
Cameron's research work covered a very wide field, but he is most likely to be remembered for his work on the pathology of liver disease and of oedema of the lung, and for his willingness to encourage those who could bring biochemical concepts into pathology. By working out the pathological changes in the liver associated with poisoning by pure substances he was able to provide others with tools that would produce well-defined limited lesions in the liver, and thus to show how biliary obstruction, liver necrosis, vascular changes, and poisons affected it. Though not a biochemist, he had little difficulty in understanding biochemical concepts, and gave every help to those who wished to introduce them. Similar comment applies to his work on pulmonary oedema; he introduced new methods of producing it, and made a number of valuable suggestions to account for its development and for the remarkable species specific response to some lung irritants. He was in the main an experimental pathologist, according to some neither particularly expert nor interested in morbid anatomy. In practice, however, he used anything that came to hand -- casual findings at necropsy, the results of surgery, intended or unintended, accidental experimental results, morbid anatomy -- to stimulate experimental inquiry. 
Cameron was universally regarded as an honest, kindly man, whose judgements were based on wide learning, vast experience, and natural impartiality. He had a sparkling sense of humour and took the greatest delight in human absurdity. He loved music, was a good pianist, and a goodish mathematician; he had a profound knowledge of the history of the Renaissance popes, and of the Renaissance in Italy -- a country he greatly loved. From his early years he liked walking, even mountaineering. In politics he was a benevolent Conservative, with considerable attachment to the idea of the British empire. This conservatism he brought into his work, mainly by working with the simplest available techniques, and refusing, sometimes perhaps unreasonably, to buy apparatus by which newer techniques might have been introduced. The vast amount that he did with these simple means is perhaps his best justification. 
In his early days Cameron's lectures and papers were rather heavy; later he became a brilliant lecturer, whose papers were models of clarity and conciseness. He was the author of several books, notably 'The Pathology of the Cell' (1952). Cameron, who never married, died in the Memorial Hospital, Finchley, London, of heart disease on 7 October 1966. 
C. L. Oakley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32259


Camm, Sir Sydney (1893-1966), aircraft designer, was born in Windsor on 5 August 1893, the eldest of twelve children of Frederick Camm, journeyman carpenter and joiner, and his wife, Mary Smith. At the Royal Free School at Windsor his interest in aviation was awakened at an early age through the construction of elementary flying models. Soon after he left school Camm became an apprentice woodworker, helped to set up the Windsor Model Aeroplane Club, and became its secretary at the age of nineteen. Stimulated by his efforts, the club rapidly progressed from models to the design and building of a man-carrying glider which flew in December 1912. It was followed by a powered aircraft project, and Camm's leading role in these activities was cut short only by the outbreak of war in 1914. 
With his knowledge of practical woodworking and theoretical aerodynamics Camm had no difficulty in joining the Martinsyde aeroplane company at Brooklands. There he remained throughout the war, rising through the practical working levels to first minor and then major design tasks on Martinsyde aircraft. It was during this period that he learned his profession, taking every opportunity to study and write articles about all available types of British and captured enemy aircraft. Thus, when he was elected an associate fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1918, he was able to describe himself as a technical journalist. 
After the war, Martinsyde declined from lack of orders and closed in 1921. G. H. Handasyde continued as an independent designer and took on Camm as his assistant, and together they designed an advanced glider. R. P. Raynham, the Martinsyde test pilot, took Camm with him as mechanic when he competed in the first king's cup race in 1922 with a Martinsyde F4. 
In the same year Raynham joined the Hawker Engineering Company at Kingston upon Thames and when Camm's work with Handasyde finished, in 1923, he followed his friend into this famous firm, in which he was to work with the greatest distinction for the next forty-three years. He was already an expert in detail design and practical workmanship, and much preoccupied with the aeronautical virtues of simplicity, symmetry, and lightness. He joined as a senior draughtsman; such was his ability that he became chief designer only two years later. At this period aircraft could still be designed and built cheaply and quickly, and Camm was charged with the supervision of the design of a light biplane, the Cygnet. This remarkable little two-seater won many light aircraft competitions in 1925 and 1926, and clearly showed his gifts for imaginative conception, excellence of detail, and careful weight control. Camm was directed, from 1925 onwards, to the development of future military types. He produced two biplane aircraft, the Heron in 1925, which used metal for the main structure, and the Hornbill in 1926, the basic design from which his future bomber and fighter types were developed. 
In 1928 the emergence of the Hawker Hart day bomber with a Rolls-Royce Kestrel engine produced the first characteristically Camm aircraft. It was notable for grace, balance of design, and the complete integration of the engine within the aircraft, contrasting strongly with most contemporary aeroplanes whose engines often appeared to have been added as an afterthought. The Hart was adopted by the Royal Air Force, and with its variants the Hind, Audax, Osprey, and Nimrod was also sold to a large number of foreign air forces, so that finally some 3000 were built. A single-seater redesign of the Hart produced a high performance fighter named the Fury, which was similarly sold all over the world and is widely held to have been the most beautiful biplane ever flown. The Hart and Fury put Hawker back on the map. 
The Supermarine and Gloster companies were engaged in producing the monoplanes associated with the Schneider Trophy, but Hawkers had not been drawn in. Camm, and Hawkers, decided, however, that the firm's future lay in the construction of fast fighter aircraft. By 1933 Camm realized that he could go no further with biplane designs, and he began the study of a fighter monoplane to be built round the new Rolls-Royce Merlin. In 1934 the Air Ministry issued specification F. 36/34 for a monoplane eight-gun fighter, and the new Hawker design was thereafter produced to this specification, in close co-operation with the ministry's operational requirements branch. It was named the Hurricane. 
This was the first monoplane fighter supplied to the Royal Air Force, 100 m.p.h. faster than anything previously flown, and it went into production under the shadow of impending war. This urgency caused Camm to allow some compromises in design which he would not otherwise have permitted, but the aircraft was fast, manoeuvrable, and sturdy. It was in full production by the outbreak of war in 1939 and formed the major part of the strength of Fighter Command during the battle of Britain, so earning the major credit in the winning of that decisive battle. Hurricanes also fought in Europe, Africa, Burma, and over the oceans, first armed with eight machine-guns, later carrying bombs, rockets, and cannon. Some thousands were supplied to Russia, and a total of some 14,500 were finally built. As for the pilots of Fighter Command, 1940 provided Camm's finest hour. He was made CBE in 1941, prompting the 'News Chronicle' to hail him as the man who saved Britain. By the outbreak of war Camm was already well into the design of the Hurricane's successor, the Typhoon. When the Normandy invasion was launched in 1944 Typhoon fighter-bombers were present in large quantities, and Camm, driving himself and his team relentlessly through years of continual and intensive work, was producing the Tempest. This very powerful fighter, derived from the Typhoon and itself the parent of the Sea Fury, achieved the ultimate in the exploitation of propeller-driven monoplanes; indeed, the Tempest and Sea Fury were so fast and robust that they served on until the fifties, well into the jet era. 
The advent of the jet engine in 1942 was a powerful stimulant to a designer with Camm's special interests, and before the war was over his team was directed on to studies using the new engine. Others were ahead of him, and owing to the post-war relaxation his new jet-driven design was not needed until 1948, when the navy ordered it for carrier work and named it the Sea Hawk. This too was a successful project for peacetime military sales, 500 being built and supplied to a number of navies. The well-marked line of his design progress was continued with its successor, the Hunter. In this aircraft Camm pushed performance to the limit possible with subsonic aircraft, and once more he brought forth an outstanding machine, carrying all the distinctive marks of his design genius. Two thousand were built and sold, in 1953 it gained the world air speed record, and the Hunter was still in operational service twenty years after its first flight. 
Camm's next logical step was to design a supersonic fighter, and this he did in a number of variants, but owing to chance and government policy none were built, a denial which he resented greatly. Instead, he embarked on studies with Bristol Siddeley Engines of a possible combination of a special engine and airframe, which would give the flying characteristics of a high-performance fighter together with the landing and take-off of a helicopter. This concept, VTOL (vertical take-off and landing), permitted a number of different solutions, but the gifted Bristol Siddeley engine designer, Stanley George Hooker, favoured a single engine with vectored thrust, giving the ability to swivel the thrust of the engine downwards under the control of the pilot. Such a system required a completely new control system based on reaction jets, for that phase of flight in which the aircraft had insufficient speed for normal control. It is a proof of Camm's persistent character in design that, though revolutionary in concept, the resulting fighter looked much like the others of its line. However, it added a completely new dimension to military aviation, releasing aircraft from the prepared bases on which they had always been at their most vulnerable and bringing them nearer to the areas where they needed to fight. Such a radical step took much time to evolve, mainly owing to timidity by the customers, and its development exercised him from 1958 until his death. 
As an aircraft designer Camm was pre-eminent during the exciting early years of aviation. Circumstances placed him in a position in which, by his undoubted design genius, he made a major contribution to the outcome of one of the great battles of history. He worked so hard for most of his life that, though not without other interests, his history is inseparable from the aircraft projects he fathered and carried through. He was a tall, lean man, of quick speech and mercurial disposition. As his success and prestige grew, the same self-confidence which displayed his signature on each one of his aircraft showed also in a growing intolerance of questioning or opposition. He fiercely resented criticism of any of his projects, and persistent overwork brought this quality at times to the borderline of eccentricity, although his angriest outbursts, after a subsequent period of brooding solitude, might be succeeded by a reasonable assimilation of the criticism into his own opinion. He drove his staff hard, and his opinions of officialdom were more often than not unprintable. However, although not himself a pilot, Camm was always sympathetic to those who had to test and fly his aircraft. In an era when individual design was possible he could be regarded as one of the last of the great individual designers, whose personality and name could never be submerged in any committee or project team. 
Camm was elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1932, received the society's gold medal in 1958, served as president in 1954-5, and was elected honorary fellow in 1961. From 1951 to 1953 he was chairman of the technical board of the Society of British Aircraft Constructors. He was knighted in 1953. He received a number of foreign professional honours, of which the chief was the Daniel Guggenheim medal, which he received in 1965. He was elected to the board of Hawker Siddeley Aviation in 1935 and served until his death while playing golf at Richmond, Surrey, on 12 March 1966. His home was at Thames Ditton. He was survived by his wife, Hilda Rose Starnes, whom he married in 1915 and who died in 1977, and by one daughter. In 1984, on the occasion of Camm's investment in the International Hall of Aerospace Fame at San Diego, California (where he was then only the seventh Briton to be thus honoured), his daughter spoke of the father she had known: 'To the world at large he was a reticent figure, austere and reserved -- a perfectionist in his profession. In private he had a well-developed sense of humour and derived great enjoyment from reading Damon Runyon and Evelyn Waugh's novels' (Fozard, 'Aeronautical Journal', 144). His tastes in music were conventional and apart from a passion for golf, he enjoyed the simple pleasures of life. 
Peter Wykeham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32260


Campbell, Archibald Campbell, first Baron Blythswood (1835-1908), politician and physicist, was born in Florence on 22 February 1835, the eldest of the nine children of Archibald Douglas (1809-1868), laird of Mains, and his wife, Caroline Agnes, the daughter of Mungo Dick of Pitkerro. Campbell's name at birth was Archibald Campbell Douglas. His father claimed descent from the Scottish noble families of both Campbell and Douglas and in 1838 he changed his name to Campbell on succeeding his cousin, Archibald Campbell, as laird of Blythswood, Renfrewshire; his eldest son thus became Archibald Campbell Campbell. 
Campbell was educated privately for an army career. At the age of sixteen he joined the 79th highlanders, transferring to the Scots guards in the following year. He fought in the Crimea, where he was badly wounded, and reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel before retiring from the army on the death of his father in 1868. While still in the army he married Augusta Clementina (1841-1922), the daughter of the wealthy Liberal peer Lord Carrington (1796-1868), on 7 July 1864. Campbell assumed his patrimony as laird of Blythswood, in the vicinity of Glasgow, in time to participate in the general election of 1868, in which he stood as the unsuccessful Conservative candidate for Paisley. 
An enthusiast for Conservative causes, especially tariff reform, Campbell and his wife, Augusta, were both active in spreading the Conservative faith in Scotland, participating in the foundation of the Conservative Association and the Conservative Club in Glasgow, and in the extension of the Primrose League in Scotland. He first entered parliament after winning Renfrewshire in a by-election in 1873, losing his seat in the general election the following year. He was made a baronet in 1880, having failed to regain his seat in the general election of that year. On the division of the county he succeeded in being elected for West Renfrewshire in 1885 and remained in the Commons until the defeat of the Conservatives in 1892, when he was raised to the peerage in Salisbury's resignation honours list. 
Lord Blythswood was a notable amateur scientist. Using his ample private resources he established an extensive private laboratory at his home, Blythswood House, Renfrew. In the conduct of his experiments he had the benefit of the detailed advice and guidance of the professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow, Lord Kelvin, who, as a leading Liberal Unionist in the west of Scotland, was also a political ally. Between 1892 and 1905 Blythswood Laboratory, as it was known, was a location for experiments into many areas at the frontier of physics including cathode rays, X-rays, spectroscopy, and radioactivity. In 1900 Blythswood recruited a young physicist, Herbert Stanley Allen (1873-1954), to take control of his laboratory. After Allen left to take up a teaching position in London in 1905, the laboratory was frequently used for engineering experiments by a Whitworth Scholar, Walter Scoble. 
Blythswood's forte was the construction of large machines. The most notable of these was a Wimshurst electrical machine with 128 plates, about ten times the size of the larger models available on the market. In 1896, a few months after Rontgen's discovery of X-rays was announced, Blythswood claimed that with this machine he had managed to produce X-ray photographs without passing the electricity through a partial vacuum, a quite remarkable result. The credibility of his claim was aided by the cautious support of Lord Kelvin. Another important Blythswood machine was a sophisticated dividing engine for ruling diffraction gratings. He worked on the perfection of this for many years; it was later inherited by the National Physical Laboratory. In the last few years of his life Blythswood was much occupied with aerodynamics; 'his kites were a subject of wonder and awe to the rural population of Renfrewshire' ('The Times') and his laboratory was used to conduct experiments into the efficiency of aerial propellers. 
Blythswood's political style was described as 'bluff and uncompromising' ('The Times'). He commanded the Renfrewshire militia from 1874 and was appointed aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria on retiring this command in 1894. The queen had stayed at Blythswood House during her official visit to Glasgow in 1888. His main recreation, other than science, was angling. Elected president of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow for 1898-1901, he rarely attended their meetings but his 'agency and influence' (Minutes, 320) gained for them the right to call themselves the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow. 
Blythswood was elected FRS the year before his death. He died of heart failure at Blythswood House on 8 July 1908, and was buried at Inchinnan, near Glasgow, on 11 July. He left no children. He was survived by his wife, and was succeeded to the peerage by his brother, the Revd Sholto Douglas Campbell Douglas. The last Lord Blythswood, the seventh baron, died in 1940 at the age of twenty-one, while serving in the Scots Guards. 


@@@@@


doc= 32261


Campbell, Beatrice Stella (1865-1940), actress, was born on 9 February 1865 in Forest House, Kensington, London, the sixth and youngest child of John Tanner (1831-1893), the son of a wealthy army contractor to the British East India Company, and of his wife, Maria Luigia Giovanna Romanini (1835-1908), daughter of Count Angelo Romanini, an Italian political exile. The young Stella was educated in Brighton, Hampstead, and Paris. Although she attended the Guildhall School of Music and won a scholarship, she did not keep up her studies. In 1884, pregnant with her first child, Beo, Stella eloped and was secretly married to the young Patrick Campbell (1864-1900). In 1886 they had a second child, Stella, who also had a career on the stage (although much against the wishes of her mother). Given that the couple were in desperate financial straits, Patrick Campbell, known as Pat, sought employment overseas and left for Australia, subsequently moving on to South Africa, where he worked for mining companies. Although he stayed in contact with his wife and family, the money he was able to send home was not enough to support Stella and the two children. The experience of performing with the amateur Anomalies Dramatic Club gave Stella the idea of taking up acting professionally as a way of supporting herself and the two children. 
Stella chose her husband's name for her stage name, and made her professional debut as Mrs Patrick Campbell in 1888 at the Alexandra Theatre, Liverpool, in R. Buchanan's and H. Vezin's 'Bachelors'. Engagements with Millicent Bandmann-Palmer's company and with Ben Greet's Woodland Players (where her most successful role was as Rosalind in 'As You Like It') were to follow. In contrast to the open-air Shakespeare she played with Greet, Stella's early professional London work was in melodrama at the Adelphi, under the management of the Gattis, where she was contracted to play in R. Sims's and R. Buchanan's 'The Trumpet Call'. It was while playing at the Adelphi in 1893 in Sims's and Buchanan's melodrama 'The Black Domino', that she was 'discovered' by Florence Alexander and Graham Robertson as a possible contender for the title role in Arthur Wing Pinero's 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray'. Pinero was making arrangements for the play's production at the St James's Theatre, managed by George Alexander, but was finding it difficult to cast an actress to play Paula Tanqueray, a woman with a past. When seen at the Adelphi, Stella was recovering from an almost fatal illness (typhoid fever), but her dark Italian looks, and her natural paleness and fragility heightened by the illness, were thought suited to the appearance of Paula: a woman who tries desperately, but hopelessly, to begin a new, respectable life. No sooner had Pinero agreed terms with Mrs Campbell, than the Gattis, who had been looking to release her, refused to let her go. The part was then given to Elizabeth Robins, who graciously backed down when the Gattis revised their decision, thereby allowing Mrs Campbell to accept the role which would bring her overnight fame. 
Mrs Campbell's performance in 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray', which opened at the St James's Theatre on 27 May 1893, was arguably the highlight of her career. Reviewers compared her favourably to the star actresses: to Eleanora Duse (who had been playing in London shortly before 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray') and to Sarah Bernhardt. Typical of the lavish response to her performance was a comment from the reviewer for the 'Daily Chronicle' that 'she showed a genius which gives her from this time forth an enviable place on the English stage' (29 May 1893, 3). Among the many commentators, Kate Terry Gielgud described Mrs Campbell as 'tall and slight and dark, not pretty but attractive, the type of face that excites curiosity: and she has nervous, characteristic hands. There is a tinge of commonness about her though, which helps the part to a certain extent' ('A Victorian Playgoer', 1980, 10-11). Solomon J. Solomon painted her in the role of Paula Tanqueray; Aubrey Beardsley captured her as Paula in a pencil portrait for the first volume of the 'Yellow Book'. However, playing the role of a woman with a past also brought her notoriety. As Mrs Campbell comments in her autobiography 'many people held the attitude -- 'She could not play Mrs. Tanqueray as she does if she did not know something of that kind of life'' (Campbell, 82). 
After 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray', Mrs Campbell appeared as the barmaid Dulcie Larondie in Arthur Jones's 'The Masqueraders' (1894) -- a part which she did not care for and in which she did not excel. The degree of her antipathy was evidenced by the way in which she surrendered the part to Evelyn Millard, some few months after the production opened. Nor did a further woman with a past role -- Kate Cloud in C. Haddon Chambers's 'John-a-Dreams' (1894) -- repeat the success of her Paula Tanqueray. 1894 was a more significant year in terms of her personal rather than professional life: her husband returned from abroad, penniless and in poor health. Even if she had wanted to, Mrs Campbell was unable to give up her acting career with her two children and now a husband to support. 
Mrs Campbell's next major success came in 1895 in another of Pinero's plays, 'The Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith', in which she played Agnes Ebbsmith, a 'new woman' with unconventional views on marriage. Although radical in terms of its anti-marriage views, the drama was ultimately conservative in its treatment of Agnes who repents of her radicalism and returns to religion. The play was 'notorious' for its 'Bible burning' scene of the close of act III, in which Agnes throws her 'Bible' onto the fire and then, regretting her action, pulls it out of the flames. Although a supporter of the new drama -- Mrs Campbell appeared, for example, at the Avenue as the Ratwife in Ibsen's 'Little Eyolf' (November 1896) in a series of matinees organized by Elizabeth Robins, and outbid Janet Achurch to take the lead as Rita Allmers in a commercial production of the play the following month -- she needed commercial star vehicles, such as the eponymous heroine in V. Sardou's 'Fedora' (made famous by Duse and Bernhardt), which she played at the Haymarket in May 1895. 
In the summer of 1895 Mrs Campbell agreed generous terms with the actor-manager Johnston Forbes-Robertson and played Juliet to his Romeo (Lyceum, September 1895) for which she received rather mixed reviews. Their partnership continued over the next five years (both on and off the stage), the two appearing opposite each other in plays such as Francois Coppee's 'For the Crown' ('Pour la couronne') (February 1896), and 'Magda', a translation of Herman Sudermann's 'Heimat' (June 1896) -- a failure with both critics and audiences, and taken off in favour of R. B. Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', with Stella as Lady Teazle. She played Lady Hamilton to Forbes-Robertson's Nelson in R. Home's 'Nelson's Enchantress' (February 1897), a success for her, but a failure for him. After a period of illness, Mrs Campbell returned to the stage to play Ophelia to Forbes-Robertson's Hamlet (September 1897). This time their fortunes were reversed: Forbes-Robertson was praised for his Hamlet, while Mrs Campbell was heavily criticized for her playing of Ophelia, whom she chose to interpret as genuinely mad. The pattern continued: Forbes-Robertson angered Mrs Campbell because of his reluctance to stage Maeterlinck's 'Pelleas et Melisande' (June 1898), a production which delighted Mrs Campbell and the critics, while she was hostile to his choice of 'Macbeth' (1898), widely admonished as a failure. The two agreed to separate and in 1899 Mrs Campbell arranged to tour with her own company. They were reunited in September 1899 in Chester Baily Fernald's Japanese play, 'The Moonlight Blossom', but on rather different terms: this was Mrs Patrick's management venture, not Forbes-Robertson's. The production was neither a critical, nor a financial success, and the two severed their professional and personal lives completely. In April 1900 her husband was killed in fighting in South Africa during the South African War. 
Mrs Campbell continued in management, but at a smaller theatre, the Royalty, where productions included Louis N. Parker's 'The Sacrament of Judas', 'Mrs Jordan', George Fleming's 'The Fantasticks', 'Mr and Mrs Daventry' (controversial because based on a scenario by Oscar Wilde), and revivals of 'Pelleas et Melisande', 'The Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith', and 'Magda', which she played to much greater critical acclaim than in the original production. In 1901, in order to support her own extravagant lifestyle and family, Mrs Campbell undertook the first of several American tours, in between which she tried to find new plays to perform in England. During the first decade of the twentieth century, she appeared in the work of several internationally acclaimed playwrights, including Bjornstjerne Bjornson ('Beyond Human Power', November 1901), Henrik Ibsen ('Hedda Gabler', March 1907), W. B. Yeats ('Deirdre', November 1908), and Eugene Brieux ('False Gods', 'La foi', September 1909). Yet she was more popular (and financially successful) in plays such as Sardou's 'La sorciere' (October 1904), or revivals of 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray'. 
One of Mrs Campbell's own passions was Maeterlinck's 'Pelleas et Melisande', and in 1904 she appeared in a revival of the play with Sarah Bernhardt playing in 'travesti' as Pelleas. As Bernhardt did not speak English, Mrs Campbell played her Melisande in French. For this production Mrs Campbell wore the shimmering gold dress -- nicknamed the 'gold umbrella case' -- which she had worn in the original 1898 production and which had been designed by Edward Burne-Jones. Bernhardt, in tunic, chain mail, and tights, appeared as the young prince, although in reality she was a woman of sixty, while her princess was approaching forty. This caused one critic, Max Beerbohm, who had so admired Mrs Campbell's performance in the original production, to stay away (Peters, 249-50), and another, a Dublin critic, to complain during the subsequent 1905 tour of the production that the two actresses were old enough to know better (Campbell, 139). Beerbohm's reluctance to see the two stars playing opposite each other deprived him of a performance which other critics responded to with enthusiasm. 
On 6 April 1914 Mrs Campbell married again. Her second husband was the recently divorced George Cornwallis-West (1874-1951), previously married to Jennie Churchill. They were married just days before Mrs Campbell opened in G. B. Shaw's 'Pygmalion' at His Majesty's, in which she played Eliza Doolittle to Herbert Beerbohm Tree's Professor Higgins. Mrs Campbell was hugely successful as Eliza: 'I invented a Cockney accent and created a human Eliza', she wrote later ('DNB'). She and Shaw had known each other well for some time and they kept up an enduring, although tempestuous relationship. She used his letters in an autobiography published in 1922; and a fuller volume of their correspondence was published in 1952 after Shaw's death. Mrs Campbell was less fortunate in her marriage, which lasted barely six years: Cornwallis-West deserted her in December 1919, leaving behind huge debts. During the 1920s she appeared far less on the London stage. Her roles included George Sand in Philip Moeller's 'Madame Sand' (Duke of York's, June 1920), and appearances in Ibsen's 'Hedda Gabler' (1922), 'Ghosts' (1928), and 'John Gabriel Borkman' (1928). In 1929 she appeared for the last time at the Royalty, the theatre which she had previously managed, in a production of G. B. Stern's 'The Matriarch'. In the 1930s she continued to tour America and had a relatively uneventful career in Hollywood. The close of the decade found her in France, first staying in Paris, then travelling south to Pau where she died of bronchial and pulmonary infection on 9 April 1940 and was later buried. 
During her lifetime critics were divided over how 'great' an actress she was. For some she was the English Bernhardt, while others felt she did not take her art seriously enough. James Agate listed her as one of 'six great actresses, and six only', whom he saw during his lifetime: 'Bernhardt, Rejane, 'Mrs'. Kendal, Ellen Terry, Duse and Mrs. Patrick Campbell' (Peters, 468). Modern theatre scholarship has focused on the significance of her career in relation to gender issues: on her work as an actress who was not afraid to play roles deemed socially unconventional or radical for their time, and as a woman who tried for an independent career as an actress-manager. 


@@@@@


doc= 32262


Campbell, Frederick Archibald Vaughan, third Earl Cawdor (1847-1911), politician and railway administrator, was born on 13 February 1847 at St Leonard's Hill, Windsor, the eldest child of John Frederick Vaughan Campbell, second Earl Cawdor (1817-1898) and his first wife, Sarah, daughter of the Hon. Henry Compton-Cavendish. He had two brothers and four sisters. The elder of his brothers, Ronald George Elidor, Coldstream Guards, was killed in a skirmish with Zulu near Isandlwana in March 1879. Until he inherited the earldom he was known as Viscount Emlyn. His family was descended from a cadet branch of the ducal house of Argyll which had in the early nineteenth century acquired the extensive west Wales estates of the Vaughan family, earls of Carbery. The family seats were Golden Grove, Carmarthenshire; Stackpole Court, Pembrokeshire; and Cawdor Castle, Nairn. 
Emlyn was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. He sat in parliament as Conservative MP for Carmarthenshire from 1874 to 1885. Between 1885 and 1898, when he succeeded his father, as third Earl Cawdor, he made several unsuccessful attempts to return to the Commons (West Carmarthenshire, 1885; South Manchester, 1892; Wiltshire, Cricklade division, 1898). In parliament he was active on Welsh topics, most notably as a member of the Aberdare committee (1880-81), set up by Gladstone to examine the state of intermediate and higher education in Wales. The committee's work was recognized in the establishment of university colleges in Cardiff (1883) and Bangor (1884), and in the ground-breaking 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889. Outside parliament, Emlyn was an ecclesiastical commissioner for England (1880), and a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Carmarthenshire and Pembrokeshire as well as for Inverness-shire. He was lord lieutenant of Pembrokeshire in 1896. He commanded the Carmarthenshire militia and became its honorary colonel. He joined the Royal Agricultural Society in 1863, served on its council from 1882, and was its president in 1901; he was a member of the Carlton Club and the Travellers' Club. 
In 1868 Emlyn married Edith Georgiana Turnor, of Stoke Rochford, Lincolnshire. They had thirteen children, ten of whom survived their father. 
In 1890 Emlyn became a director of the Great Western Railway and a year later deputy chairman. From July 1895 to March 1905 he was chairman, and in this role presided over a significant period of growth and restructuring in the company's activities. The radical change from broad to standard gauge, undertaken by his predecessor, F. G. Saunders, made possible the numerous reforming measures introduced during his tenure of office, measures whose aim was to maximize growth as well as efficiency; most significant was the laying of new lines, including a direct route to south Wales in 1903. The improvements destroyed the legend of the GWR as the 'Great Way Round'. 
Cawdor's success as chairman of the GWR owed less to any extensive experience of the railway business than to innate management qualities. He was quick to spot a good idea, and imaginative and determined in pursuing its implementation. He was a persuasive advocate and a good manager of people. In 1903 Joseph Chamberlain referred to his reputation as 'the best chairman now living'. Such qualities had helped the GWR to become increasingly competitive and profitable by 1905. They had also led Cawdor to be considered for the post of war minister in the Conservative government of A. J. Balfour in 1903. In the event he was not called on, but in March 1905 he was offered and accepted the post of first lord of the Admiralty in succession to Lord Selborne. 
The explanation for the appointment of Cawdor, an aristocratic businessman who had not sat in the Commons for twenty years and who had never held government, let alone cabinet, office, lies only partly in the lack of administrative talent in the Balfour ministry. It reflects also an Edwardian interest in bringing 'non-political' businessmen and methods to bear on national problems. Thus, confronted after the South African War by the imperative need for rationalizing and cutting the cost of the empire's defences, Balfour looked outside parliamentary circles for reformist talent. 
Although as a landed aristocrat and a former MP Cawdor was scarcely a technocratic outsider, his low political profile and managerial acumen made him an imaginative choice. So too did his complete lack of a background in naval matters. In the event his tenure as first lord lasted just nine months (March-December 1905), a period marred by poor health and frequent absences. His stewardship of the Admiralty won him contemporary plaudits. His 'Times' obituary compared him with Charles Middleton, Baron Barham, a hundred years earlier. He too had gone to the Admiralty with no previous experience of government, had had a comparably brief tenure (May 1805 - February 1806), and had nevertheless left a mark on the navy. As had been the case at the GWR, however, Cawdor's achievement was less a matter of launching constructive ideas of his own than of developing and supporting those of others. He arrived at the Admiralty as the naval 'revolution' launched by Lord Selborne and Admiral Sir John Fisher in 1902 was reaching its height. 1905 saw the redistribution of the fleet on home waters, the scrapping of 147 obsolete vessels, and the adoption of the dreadnought design of capital ship. Fisher's gospel of the synergy of economy and efficiency found a receptive audience in the former railway chairman. Cawdor backed Fisher's policy and secured his extension in the office of first sea lord to 1910. During five years of intense and frequently bitter debate over Fisher's reforms from 1905 to 1910, Cawdor never wavered in his support, even though at times highly critical of Fisher's excesses and even though his stance won him enemies in his own party. 
On 30 November 1905 a 'statement of admiralty policy' was issued, immediately known as the 'Cawdor memorandum', which committed the Admiralty to the future construction of four dreadnoughts a year. It was to become the focal point of the party-political debate over the navy in the years 1906-9, with the Liberal government seeking to justify, and the Unionist opposition to prevent, its abandonment. Cawdor played a crucial role in prosecuting the Unionist attack, both in the annual set-piece parliamentary debates over the navy estimates and on public platforms, particularly in 1909-10 when the navy became a prominent election issue. He proved himself an effective debater in public, while in private he worked closely and amicably with Balfour to formulate opposition policy and tactics. 
Although Cawdor was primarily associated with naval questions after 1906, he also made an important contribution to Unionist education policy and constitutional reform. On both issues he represented the opposition in inter-party conferences convened to resolve a political impasse caused by the rejection of Liberal legislation by the Unionist-dominated House of Lords -- on education in December 1906 and on the Lords' veto in June 1910. Cawdor's role on the former occasion reflected his background on the subject (namely the Aberdare committee), as much as his prominence on the Unionist benches. In 1910, however, his role alongside Balfour, Lord Lansdowne, and Austen Chamberlain as Unionist representative in the constitutional conference, reflected not only an identification with the cause of Lords' reform, but also the fact that he had by that time achieved a leading role in the party. By 1910 he was 'de facto' if not formal deputy to Lansdowne, leader of the Unionists in the upper house, a considerable achievement for a man whose ministerial career had spanned a mere nine months. Even if account is taken of the fact that the Edwardian House of Lords was a far less testing arena than the Commons, Cawdor's rise was impressive. It occasioned little critical or sceptical contemporary comment, a sign of both his widely acknowledged abilities and a disarming personality. 
Cawdor died at 9 John Street, Mayfair, on 8 February 1911, aged sixty-three, of pneumonia following a short illness. He was buried in Stackpole church, Pembrokeshire. A memorial service at Holy Trinity, Brompton, was attended by the prime minister, Asquith, and many politicians and peers. 'Few men of his generation enjoyed so general an esteem', observed Sir Almeric Fitzroy. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Hugh Frederick Vaughan, Viscount Emlyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 32263


Campbell, Gordon (1886-1953), naval officer, was born at Upper Norwood, London, on 6 January 1886, ninth son and thirteenth of the sixteen children of Colonel Frederick Campbell and his wife, Emilie, daughter of Donald Maclaine of Lochbuie. Educated at Dulwich College, he passed into the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in 1900. He was promoted lieutenant in 1907 and at the outbreak of the First World War he was commanding a destroyer on channel escort duties. In 1911 he married Mary Jeanne, daughter of Henry V. S. Davids, of Hillier House, Guildford; they had one son and one daughter. 
Early in 1915 as part of the anti-submarine measures a number of tramp steamers were converted into decoy ships with naval crews and concealed guns. Campbell volunteered for these 'mystery' or Q-ships, and became the most brilliant exponent of this hazardous form of warfare. To outward appearance harmless merchantmen, the Q-ships offered themselves as targets in U-boat infested waters. After their existence became known and enemy submarine captains more wary, Campbell deliberately allowed his vessel to be torpedoed, remaining on board with his hidden gunners, after part of the crew had 'abandoned ship', waiting for the submarine to close her victim. Using these tactics he sank three of the eleven German submarines destroyed by Q-ships. For an action on 17 February 1917 against a German submarine he was awarded the Victoria Cross, which was given to him by the king on 7 March (and gazetted on 21 April). He was also appointed to the DSO with two bars, and attained promotion to captain in 1917 at the early age of thirty-one. He also received the thanks of the war cabinet, was awarded the Croix de Guerre, and appointed chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. More than seventy decorations, including four Victoria Crosses, were awarded to officers and men of the three Q-ships he commanded. 
Campbell's last Q-ships action typified his outstanding courage and that of the crews he inspired. On 8 August 1917 his decoy ship 'Dunraven' was attacked with gunfire by a surfaced U-boat which started a fierce fire on board. After torpedoing the 'Dunraven' the submarine continued to shell her while Campbell and his gunners remained at their posts in the burning vessel, with ammunition exploding about them, waiting for the U-boat to come within range, but she finally made off without doing so. Later the 'Dunraven' sank while in tow. 
After the loss of the 'Dunraven' Campbell served as flag captain to the commander-in-chief, coast of Ireland patrol, in charge of all anti-submarine operations in the Irish Sea. 
After the war Campbell commanded successively the cadet training cruiser 'Cumberland' and the boys' training establishment 'Impregnable', and subsequently served as captain in charge of Simonstown Dockyard. In 1920, in recognition of his distinguished war service, he was elected a younger brother of Trinity House. His last seagoing appointment was in command of the battle cruiser 'Tiger' from 1925 to 1927. In April 1928 he was retired as rear-admiral, his indifferent medical record since the end of the war undoubtedly contributing to this early retirement. He was promoted vice-admiral on the retired list in 1932. 
Campbell then turned to writing and lecturing. His first book, 'My Mystery Ships' (1928), told the story of his exploits in Q-ships, and he delivered many lectures on the subject in the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, proving a fluent and popular speaker. His autobiography, 'Number Thirteen', appeared in 1932; between 1933 and 1938 he produced a number of other works, mostly short historical accounts of various sea actions, also adventure stories for boys; and (with I. O. Evans) he published a textbook on flags (1950). 
When the National Government was formed to deal with the economic crisis in 1931, Campbell, although not politically minded, decided to stand as a National candidate for Burnley where he sensationally defeated the Labour member Arthur Henderson, former foreign secretary. A staunch supporter of Baldwin and the League of Nations, Campbell was popular with his constituents and spoke often in the house. In the general election of 1935 he stood again as Liberal-National candidate but was defeated by the Labour contender. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Campbell was specially commissioned by Winston Churchill to requisition and fit out a number of decoy merchantmen with the object of repeating the earlier 'ruse de guerre' of the Q-ships. Although under his direction the vessels were well armed and brilliantly disguised they met with no success, and after a few months the scheme was abandoned. Campbell was then appointed resident naval officer, Padstow, responsible for naval defences in that area. In appearance the traditional bluff, ruddy-faced sailor, he nevertheless continued to be dogged by ill health aggravated by the strain of his Q-ship experiences, and was finally forced to retire from active naval service in 1943. Campbell died at the West Middlesex Hospital, Hounslow, London, on 3 October 1953. He was the uncle of Lorne Maclaine Campbell (1902-1991), who was also awarded the Victoria Cross. 
A. C. Hampshire', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32264


Campbell, (Ignatius) Royston Dunnachie (1901-1957), poet and writer, was born in Durban, Natal, on 2 October 1901, the fourth child of a leading Durban physician, Samuel George Campbell (died 1926), the son of a Scottish settler, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of James Dunnachie of Glenboig, Lanarkshire. Campbell had a free-ranging childhood, provided at an early age by his extended family of soldiers, farmers, hunters, athletes, and administrators with horses, guns, buck to shoot, fish to catch, and great areas of country in which to wander. Though he was much less active than he later liked to pretend he had been, he attributed to this fortunate childhood his adult enthusiasm for physical pursuits, his love of energy, violence, and colour (in writing as in life), and his dislike of mechanization and urban living. He completed his schooling at Durban Boys' High School in 1917, and after a year at Natal University College in Pietermaritzburg sailed for England at the end of the First World War, intending to read English at Merton College, Oxford. He failed to gain entry to the university, and instead spent a year living in Oxford in a back street, reading widely, notably the Elizabethan and Jacobean poets. 
It was at Oxford that Campbell threw off the teetotalism of his family and took to drink; he was to be dependent on alcohol for the rest of his life. It was there, too, that he discovered his bisexual nature; he had a number of transitory affairs with men and women at Oxford. From the musician William Walton he learned the importance of dedicating himself entirely to art, and through Walton obtained introductions to the composer Philip Heseltine, the Sitwells, Wyndham Lewis, and T. S. Eliot. 
One of his lovers of this period, the critic T. W. Earp, took Campbell to London, Berlin, and Paris, and steered him in the direction of the French symbolists. When Campbell left Oxford and went down to London, he shared a flat with Earp and (for a time) Aldous Huxley. Here, supported by Earp and an allowance from his father, he moved on the fringes of the London art world, and lived a leisurely, drifting life, travelling cheaply in France during the summer and taking any odd jobs that came to hand. He was tall and powerfully built, with the insolent good looks captured in the portrait Augustus John painted of him around this time. 
In 1921 Campbell met and fell in love with a painter, Mary Garman (died 1979), one of several beautiful daughters of a Birmingham doctor. Mary Garman had run away to London with her sister Kathleen, and was mixing with artists much as Campbell had been doing. After a period during which Campbell lived with both Mary and her sister, causing scandal even in bohemia, he and Mary married on 11 February 1922, and settled in a converted cowshed in the Welsh village of Aberdaron. Here their first daughter, Teresa, was born, and here Campbell finished the long poem that was to be published by Jonathan Cape in 1924, 'The Flaming Terrapin'. This work was an immediate success and brought Campbell to prominence almost overnight, for in its energy, its cascading prodigality of imagery, and its strangeness of setting, it seemed a breath of fresh air to critics and readers grown accustomed to the genteel tones of the Georgian verse fashionable at the time. 
Buoyed by this success, Campbell moved his family to South Africa, where his second daughter, Anna, was born in 1926. He founded a monthly magazine, 'Voorslag' ('Whiplash'), which he ran with the help of William Plomer and Laurens van der Post. However their attacks on the colour bar alarmed 'Voorslag's' financial backer. Campbell, refusing to be called to heel, resigned after two issues and returned to Europe, taking his revenge on Durban's commercial crassness in a long satirical poem, 'The Wayzgoose' (1928). He followed up this energetic lampoon with another entitled 'The Georgiad' (1931), this time with a British target, a sense of persecution having been awakened in him by the passionate love affair which his wife, Mary, had during 1927 with Vita Sackville-West, whose guests the Campbells had been for some months in Kent. Campbell associated Vita Sackville-West and her diplomatist husband, Harold Nicolson, with the ruling class of Britain, and came to see in them everything he most disliked. 
During 1928-33 Campbell lived in southern France and from 1933 to 1936 in Spain; his love of southern Europe is evident everywhere in his poetry of this period, notably in the finest of his collections of verse, 'Adamastor' (1930). His continued friendship with Wyndham Lewis brought him into contact with many of the central movements of modernism, and some of his work of the early 1930s shows the influence of futurism -- paradoxically, for Campbell disliked machines and 'progress' as much as the Italian futurist Marinetti exulted in them. 'Choosing a Mast' (1931), 'Pomegranates' (1932), and 'Flowering Reeds' (1933) exemplify his preoccupations at this time. 
Campbell's emotional involvement in the Spanish Civil War is evident in many of the poems written after 1936; several reflect his direct experience of the fighting in Toledo, where he was living when the war broke out. His sympathies were for the nationalists (a result chiefly of his conversion to Catholicism), although he never fought for them as he claimed to have done. The most striking of his Spanish Civil War poems were the fine lyrics of 'Mithraic Emblems' and the long and partisan poem 'Flowering Rifle', which glorified Franco and did Campbell's reputation great harm. 
Campbell joined the British army in 1942, although he was by now over forty and in poor health. He served in east Africa, first in training with Wingate's commando force and then, after being permanently disabled in an accident, as a coast-watcher for German submarines. His wartime experiences gave rise to the poems he published in 'Talking Bronco' (1946), in which he continued to depict himself as struggling single-handedly against a hostile social and literary establishment in Britain. 
After the war Campbell worked as a clerk on the War Damage Commission in London before joining the BBC as a talks producer. For a short period he edited an unsuccessful magazine, 'The Catacomb', which espoused a right-wing position in British politics. His most important post-war publications were translations: 'The Poems of St John of the Cross' (1951), Baudelaire's 'Poems: a Translation of 'Les fleurs du mal'' (1952), two novels by Eca de Queiros, six Spanish plays, and the poems of Paco d'Arcos. His translations, particularly of St John of the Cross, are masterful works of art in their own right. He also showed himself to be a sensitive critic in a book on Garcia Lorca, interspersed with his fine translations of Lorca's poems, 'Lorca' (1952), and in a critical volume on Wyndham Lewis, published posthumously. During the last years of his life, from 1952, he lived in Sintra in Portugal. He was killed in a car crash near Sintra on 23 April 1957. He was buried four days later at the cemetery of Sao Pedro, Sintra. 


@@@@@


doc= 32265


Campbell, James Henry Mussen, first Baron Glenavy (1851-1931), lawyer and politician, was born at Terenure, Dublin, on 4 April 1851, the youngest son of William Mussen Campbell, a Dublin policeman, and his wife, Delia, daughter of Henry Francis Graham Poole, of Newtown Abbey, co. Kildare. He was educated at Kingstown, co. Dublin, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he won a classical scholarship and was a senior moderator in both classics and history. He won the college historical society's gold medal for oratory and obtained his BA in 1874. 
Campbell was called to the Irish bar in 1878 and rapidly became a leading junior on the north-eastern circuit. His skilful oratory won him the praise of distinguished advocates, including T. M. Healy (1855-1931), Edward Carson (1854-1935), and Seymour Bushe. He took silk in 1892 and was made a bencher of King's Inns in 1894. He was called to the English bar by Gray's Inn in 1899, and became a bencher in 1901 and KC in 1906, but did not practise much in England. In 1884 he married Emily MacCullagh (died 1939), daughter of John MacCullagh, resident magistrate, of Newry, co. Down. They had three sons, the youngest of whom was killed in the First World War, and one daughter. 
Like most Irish barristers of the time, Campbell was a politician. He became prominent as a Unionist. Elected to parliament for the St Stephen's Green division of Dublin at a by-election in 1898, he lost this seat to the nationalists in 1900. In 1903, at another by-election, he was returned as one of the two members for Dublin University, Carson having been the other member since 1892. Campbell held this seat until he was raised to the bench in 1916. He was solicitor-general for Ireland from 1901 to 1905 and attorney-general for a short time in December 1905. He was sworn of the Irish privy council in 1905. 
During the home rule controversy of 1912-14 Campbell, deeply involved in the Ulster Unionist movement, was a member of Carson's provisional government. He was reappointed attorney-general in April 1916 a few days before the Sinn Fein rising. In December 1916 he was made lord chief justice of Ireland. He was created a baronet in 1917 and in June 1918 was appointed lord chancellor of Ireland. In the last scramble for office before the setting up of the Irish Free State in 1921 he was induced to retire in favour of Sir John Ross (1853-1935), and was raised to the peerage as Baron Glenavy of Milltown, co. Dublin. 
Campbell's experience as potential rebel in the Ulster provisional government and as attorney-general after the rising of 1916 had considerably modified his views on home rule. As head of the Irish judiciary from 1918 to 1921, while the country was in active rebellion, he had come to see that a change was inevitable. Accordingly, when the Irish Free State was established he accepted the new regime and was made a member of its first senate; he was elected chairman in 1922. With his Unionist background, he was an unlikely choice for chairman and his dominance may have stunted the senate's independence. He was even known to adjourn the house to suit his own convenience. W. B. Yeats, a fellow senator, described him as 'handsome, watchful, vigorous, dominating, courteous, he seemed like some figure from an historical painting'. In 1928 he did not seek re-election. 
Glenavy was a convinced member of the Church of Ireland and served on its synod. He was also a keen golfer and bridge player. He died at his residence, Glenavy, Milltown, co. Dublin, on 22 March 1931, and was succeeded as second baron by his eldest son, Charles Henry Gordon (1885-1963). A portrait by Sir William Orpen was left to Gray's Inn, and another, by Leo Whelan, to Glenavy's son. 


@@@@@


doc= 32266


Campbell, Sir James Macnabb (1846-1903), administrator in India and ethnologist, born at Partick, Lanarkshire, on 4 October 1846, was the son of John McLeod Campbell (1800-1872), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, and his wife, Mary Campbell. His brother Donald (died 1909) was rector of Oakford, Devon, and rural dean of Tiverton. Two other brothers lived with him in Bombay, John McLeod (died 1888) being a member of the Bombay civil service, and Robert Story a merchant. 
Campbell was educated at Glasgow, first at the academy and then at the university, graduating MA in 1866, with the highest honours in logic, philosophy, and English literature. Having passed the Indian Civil Service examination in 1867, he went to Bombay presidency in November 1869, and served as an assistant collector. Soon reputed for his interest in the history and customs of the people, he was in June 1873 entrusted with the compilation of the provincial 'Gazetteer' of Bombay, though simultaneously having other duties. From April to August 1877 he was on famine work in the Kaladgi district; and from April 1880 until late 1881 he was successively municipal commissioner of Bombay, under-secretary to government in the political, judicial, and educational departments, and collector of Bombay. Yet to the 'Gazetteer' he devoted every spare moment. By August 1884 the statistical accounts alone occupied twenty-seven volumes averaging 500 pages each. The government, while then terminating Campbell's formal appointment as compiler, eulogized his work as 'a record as complete perhaps as ever was produced on behalf of any government'. But in 1889 and again in 1892 the secretary of state for India urged the Bombay government to extend the gazetteer series to include volumes on the history of the Bombay presidency and on the town and island of Bombay, and suggested that this work should be entrusted to Campbell. As a result, five additional volumes (in nine parts) were published between 1893 and 1901, four of them written by Campbell himself. Campbell was made CIE in January 1885, and while home on his first furlough that year was created honorary DCL of Glasgow University. Campbell completed his 'Bombay Gazetteer' at the close of 1901, when it consisted of twenty-six volumes embracing thirty-four sections; he himself wrote much in those dealing with ethnology. In 1904 R. E. Enthoven, his former assistant in Bombay, added an index volume, and brought up to date some of Campbell's earlier statistics, while in 1910 S. M. Edwards added three new volumes on the history of the city and island of Bombay. 
After serving as collector of various districts, Campbell was from November 1891 stationed at Bombay as collector of land revenue, customs, and opium. He rendered valuable service during the cow protection riots of 1893 and contributed valuable help, as a member of a confidential preliminary committee, in formulating the scheme which led to the passage of the 'City of Bombay Improvement Act' 1898. 
Campbell was recalled from furlough early in 1897 to aid in measures against the great outbreak of plague; and in June 1897 he succeeded General Sir William Gatacre as chairman of a new and independent plague committee at Bombay. The committee's compulsory measures of sanitation had provoked rioting and the murder on 22 June 1897 of two British officers on plague duty in Poona, W. C. Rand and C. E. Ayerst. The difficulties of the situation were soon multiplied by the appearance of famine in the countryside and the return to Bombay of thousands of refugees. Campbell's resourcefulness and popular repute -- he was nicknamed the Murani Collector-Sahib (the collector with the divinely lighted face) -- greatly improved the public attitude and encouraged voluntary co-operation in inspection and other work. Largely under his influence, in June 1898 the plague committee was disbanded and the administration was restored to the municipality. 
In June 1897 Campbell was made KCIE, and on 29 April 1898 he left Bombay in broken health, resigning, on the expiry of his furlough, in April 1900. The Bombay government on 14 February 1902 republished its earlier resolution of appreciation of his work and character and ordered it to be printed after the title-page of the first volume of the gazetteer and in every issue. Residing with his brother Robert at his father's old home, Achnashie, Rosneath, Dunbartonshire, he found his main recreation in gardening. He died unmarried at Achnashie on 26 May 1903, and was buried in Rosneath churchyard beside his parents. A memorial tablet on the ruined wall of the old church, in which his father had often preached when minister of the adjoining parish of Row, pays tribute to 'the noble example set by him during the great plague in Bombay, which led to his premature and deeply lamented death'. His friends also founded a gold medal, conferred triennially by the Bombay branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, for the best original work on Indian folklore, history, or ethnology. The first medal was presented on 1 March 1909 to A. M. Stein, the explorer, for his 'Ancient Khotan'. Subsequent recipients were among the most distinguished scholars in these fields. 
Campbell collected much material on Indian history and folklore. Apart from his gazetteer, he published the history of Mandu, the former capital of the Muslim kingdom of Malwa, in the 'Journal of the Bombay Branch, Royal Asiatic Society' (19, 1895-7, 154-201); 'The bharwad jang, or, shepherds' wedding', in the 'Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay' (4, 1895-7, 40-74); and 'Saint Sophia in Ramazan' (2nd edn, 1897). One of his hobbies was the study of spirit-scaring, and some of the materials he collected on this subject were published under the title 'Notes on the spirit basis of belief and custom', in various issues of the 'Indian Antiquary' (23-30, 1894-1901). 
In compiling the 'Bombay Gazetteer' Campbell displayed both unremitting energy over a period of nearly thirty years, and great tact in revising and where necessary recasting the many contributions that were made by British and Indian collaborators. The gazetteers were originally intended as sources of information for British district officials; in time they became invaluable reference sources for scholars interested in India. 
Campbell was a contemporary of Sir Denzil Ibbetson (1847-1908), Vincent Smith (1848-1920), and Sir Herbert Hope Risley (1851-1911), who, like him, were both administrators and scholars. Campbell was a sympathetic and generous man. In the last decade of his service he was at the centre of the intellectual life of Bombay and brought together at his hospitable table at the Byculla Club and his residence at Breach Candy men of all occupations and professions in congenial company. 


@@@@@


doc= 32267


Campbell, Dame Janet Mary (1877-1954), medical officer, was born in Brighton on 5 March 1877, the daughter of George Campbell, bank manager, and his wife, Mary Letitia Rowe. She attended Brighton high school and later went to Germany for some months; there she acquired a good knowledge of the language, which served her when she attended a postgraduate course in Vienna. After graduating MB in London in 1901 at the London School of Medicine for Women, Campbell took her MD and MS degrees in 1904 and 1905, a remarkable achievement. There followed house appointments in London at the Royal Free Hospital followed by the position of senior medical officer at the Belgrave Hospital for Children, a post eagerly sought by women graduates since at that time it was one of the few London hospitals to employ them. 
Janet Campbell was a member of the Medical Women's Federation and eventually became its president. At one time she was closely associated with Dartford Physical Training College, first as honorary secretary and afterwards for a time as chairman. As a result of the South African War, public interest in the concern for national physique had been aroused and under the 'Education Act' of 1902 school medical officers were appointed by some education authorities. An interdepartmental committee appointed in 1903 recommended, after extensive inquiries, among other measures the introduction of systematic medical inspection of children in elementary schools. In 1904 Campbell became an assistant school medical officer in the London school medical service, where she came under the stimulating influence of James Kerr, the 'father' of school hygiene and author of 'The Fundamentals of School Health' (1926). She went on to join the Board of Education as its first full-time woman medical officer in 1907. 
The high rate of infant mortality was another issue giving concern to the public and to local authorities, and in 1919, when the Ministry of Health was formed with Sir George Newman as chief medical officer, Campbell was appointed senior medical officer in charge of maternity and child welfare. At the same time she retained her connection with the Board of Education as chief woman adviser. She gave her time and her energies wholeheartedly to the organization of a vigorous and progressive scheme for the welfare of mothers and children. During the First World War, in addition to her specialized work her services had been at the disposal of government and international committees; she later became a medical member of the war cabinet committee on women in industry, and from 1930 to 1936 served on the health committee of the League of Nations. 
In 1917 Campbell wrote a valuable and influential report for the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust on the physical welfare of mothers and children. She also produced official reports on the recruitment and training of midwives and on the teaching of obstetrics and gynaecology in medical schools. In 1924 her well-known report on maternal mortality was published. She was appointed DBE, and Durham University made her an honorary doctor of hygiene in the same year. Her reports from 1923 to 1932 on the protection of motherhood, on neonatal and infant mortality, and on the maternity services all had an important influence on administrative reforms and helped in large part to reduce the mortality and morbidity rates of women and children. 
In 1934 Dame Janet Campbell married Michael Heseltine (1886-1952), registrar of the General Medical Council and the son of the Revd Ernest Heseltine. Under the rules of the civil service she had to give up her office, but her influence on the public health services of the whole country as they affected women and children was nevertheless profound. She was the great pioneer of maternity and child welfare services and as such was universally acknowledged. It was not only the charming and rather diffident manner of this tall, good-looking, well-dressed woman which attracted the admiration and respect of those who came into contact with her. Her clear-thinking brain and her sound knowledge of her subject enabled her to grasp essentials quickly so that her wise, considered opinion and advice were sought by local authorities, medical officers, and hospitals throughout the country and by organizations far beyond the confines of the United Kingdom. 
Dame Janet was a very good horsewoman and riding gave her special pleasure, as did walking and physical exercise, which probably accounted for her upright carriage. Gardening was a favourite hobby and when she lived outside London she grew a wonderful display of roses. She had always taken a keen interest in current affairs and in the politics of the day, and she was a JP for both Surrey and Gloucestershire. She loved a good play and had a lifelong interest in modern literature and in the world around her. Towards the end of her life she lived with her two cousins in Chelsea. After a long and painful illness, when she was in a nursing home, she died on 27 September 1954 at 12 Hornsey Lane, Upper Holloway, London. 
Margaret Hogarth', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32268


Campbell, John Charles (1894-1942), army officer, was born at Thurso, Caithness, on 10 January 1894, the second child and only son of Daniel Alexander Campbell, later in business in India, and his wife, Marion, daughter of Donald MacKay, sheep farmer, of Skelpick, Sutherland. He was educated at Sedbergh School, and on the first day of war in 1914 he enlisted in the Honourable Artillery Company. In July 1915 he was commissioned second lieutenant from the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. He joined the British expeditionary force (BEF) in August, was wounded in February and May 1916, and in September was sent back to England, but returned to the front in August 1917. At the end of the war he was serving in France as a captain in the Royal Horse Artillery and had been awarded the MC. 
Between the wars Campbell made his mark as a riding instructor at Woolwich and later at Weedon, Northamptonshire, with a reputation of being an ideal regimental officer and a first-class horseman. He was fond of all animals and devoted to horses. An excellent polo player, he was in all three Royal Artillery teams which won the inter-regimental polo cup, and for some years was probably unsurpassed in the shires as a heavyweight rider to hounds. On 12 September 1922 Campbell married Rosamond Elizabeth Rhodes ('b'. 1901/2), daughter of William Rhodes JP and great-niece of Cecil Rhodes. They had two daughters. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 found him a major in command of C battery, 4th regiment, Royal Horse Artillery, in Egypt. In July 1940 he succeeded to the command of his regiment, and when in September the Italian advance began, he soon distinguished himself by the boldness and judgement with which he handled his guns in a series of rearguard actions while commanding alternately the 4th and 3rd regiments. During this period he organized and led a number of mobile columns, consisting of a few guns and escort, against the Italian communications, and when used against the Germans these were nicknamed, after him, 'Jock columns'. For this service he was appointed to the DSO. During the long advance to Benghazi in which, for his work on 14 December 1940, he received a bar to the DSO, Campbell displayed the same dash and enterprise, and during the subsequent retreat to Sollum he rendered marked service. 
The climax of Campbell's career came in the autumn of 1941 when, on 3 September, he was appointed to the command of the 7th support group with the rank of brigadier. His handling of the group during the two most critical days of the battle of Sidi Rezegh (21 and 22 November) became an epic of the war. When almost surrounded by superior forces, Campbell showed great bravery. Three times he led tank forces against the advancing enemy, guiding his troops from his open car with a blue handkerchief, and three times he helped personally in the service of the guns at critical moments of the battle. Though wounded, he refused to be evacuated. For this work he was awarded the VC. 
The following February Campbell was appointed to command the 7th armoured division with the rank of major-general, but on 26 February 1942 he was killed in a motor accident at Halfaya Pass, Egypt. There is a memorial to him at Sedbergh School. 


@@@@@


doc= 32269


Campbell, John George Edward Henry Douglas Sutherland, marquess of Lorne and ninth duke of Argyll (1845-1914), governor-general of Canada, was born on 6 August 1845 at Stafford House, London, the eldest son of George Douglas Campbell, marquess of Lorne (1823-1900), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Georgiana Sutherland-Leveson-Gower (died 1878), the daughter of the second duke of Sutherland. Young Campbell, known in his family as Ian, assumed the courtesy title of marquess of Lorne in 1847 at the succession of his father as eighth duke of Argyll. He went to Eton College, and briefly to St Andrews University, where he supported the admission of women to lectures. After a year's tutoring in classics he proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, though his intellectual interests were more in science, history, and modern languages. He visited Jamaica in 1866, and spent a season at the University of Berlin, then another in Italy, all with the approval of his father, who felt Lorne's education was better served by travel than by Cambridge. His first book, 'A Trip to the Tropics and Home through America', was published in 1867. 
Lorne represented Argyll in the House of Commons as a Liberal from 1868 to 1878. He made little mark in the house, and was chiefly occupied as private secretary to his father, whom W. E. Gladstone had appointed as secretary of state for India. Lorne had a flirtation with Gladstone's daughter Mary, but in 1870 events took a different turn. Not since 1515 had an English princess married within Great Britain; Queen Victoria now had a British husband in mind for her fourth and most attractive daughter, Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (1848-1939) ['see 'Louise Princess]. In September 1870 five young British aristocrats were successively invited to Balmoral, with Lorne among them. The queen apparently liked everything about him except his nasal voice, a result of his having taken a cricket ball in the face while at Eton (he was, according to Vicary Gibbs's admirably concise physical description in the 'Complete Peerage', 'short, stout, with yellow hair, regular features, good complexion'), and he and Louise were married on 21 March 1871 at St George's Chapel, Windsor. Lorne refused a dukedom, and they went to live in Kensington Palace, with a country retreat near Tunbridge Wells, Kent. They had no children; after a few years this state of affairs gave rise to rumours that Lorne had homosexual inclinations. This is a view that some modern historians have been inclined to support, though it may simply have been that Louise was unable to have children. Their marriage endured, and Louise was devastated at his death, but it appears that she sought a separation in the mid-1880s, and the couple spent long periods apart, celebrating their silver wedding separately. 
In 1878 Lorne was appointed governor-general of Canada by Disraeli. He was a good choice; flexible, perspicacious, and sensitive, he became perhaps the most Canadian of all the British governor-generals, enjoying the climate of the new world, if not always the vagaries of its politics. In 1879 he was involved in controversy over Luc Letellier, the lieutenant-governor of Quebec, the dismissal of whom was desired by the Conservative federal government led by Sir John A. Macdonald. Lorne had opposed this, but, under instruction from the Colonial Office, acquiesced. This incident did not prevent Macdonald from describing the governor-general as 'a right good fellow, and a good Canadian' ('DNB'). In correspondence, Lorne put the word 'home' in quotation marks -- an indication perhaps of his preference for Canada over Britain, but Princess Louise found life there less congenial. She was injured in a sleigh accident in February 1880 and returned to England. Lorne joined Louise for the winter of 1881-2, which he found dank and unhealthy compared with the Canadian winter, with its 'bright light and the dry and beautiful snow with its sapphire coloured shadows' (Lorne to Emma MacNeill, 29 Dec 1881, Lorne papers, National Archives of Canada). 
Lorne was largely responsible for the creation in 1880 of the Royal Canadian Academy of Arts, which was followed in 1882 by the establishment of the Royal Society of Canada, which encompassed the English and French literary and scientific traditions. In 1881 he made a two-month expedition across the western Canadian prairies, at a time when the Canadian Pacific Railway was just being built. The expedition -- of some seventy-seven men and ninety-six horses -- left the railhead at Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, on 6 August. Lorne was tremendously impressed with the agricultural potential of the whole region, and overwhelmed with its beauty -- especially at Fort Calgary, where mountains glittering with snow suddenly block the whole western horizon. His 'Canadian Pictures Drawn with Pen and Pencil' (1884-5) was inspired by the trip, a good example of his artistic talent and flair for publicity. 
In September 1882 Lorne took Louise to British Columbia, where both enjoyed the scenery and the climate; a mixture, as Lorne put it, of 'Scotland and Heaven' (Campbell, 56). The political consequences of their residence among the British Columbians were much improved relations between Victoria and the federal government in Ottawa. They returned east via the southern United States, with Louise wintering in Bermuda. She returned to Canada in April 1883, by which time Lorne had concluded that he should resign the post; he did so reluctantly, telling Macdonald that, for his own part, he would 'like to stay here all my days' (letter, 10 April 1883, John A. Macdonald papers, vol. 83, National Archives of Canada). 
The furtherance of Lorne's career as an imperial administrator was stymied by Queen Victoria's desire to have Louise close by her: in 1900 he refused the governor-generalship of Australia. He immersed himself instead in the management of his Scottish estates and in authorship; his prolific output included a biography of Palmerston (1892), a pamphlet advocating imperial federation, and many travelogues and memoirs inspired by his stint in Canada, including 'Yesterday and Today in Canada' (1910). In 1901 he published 'V.R.I.: Her Life and Empire', a lively and popular biography of Queen Victoria, and in 1907 his two-volume autobiography, 'Passages from the Past'. He tried unsuccessfully for re-election to the House of Commons in 1885 (for Hampstead, as a Liberal) and 1892 (for Bradford Central, as a Liberal Unionist). He was eventually successful in 1895 as a Liberal Unionist for Manchester South; his estrangement from the Gladstonian Liberal Party was another point of difference with his wife, who was a supporter of Irish home rule. He became ninth duke of Argyll on the death of his father on 24 April 1900 but continued to be widely known by his courtesy title. 
By this time Louise's enthusiasm for physical fitness had begun to show to her benefit; Lorne, by contrast, was content with a sedentary existence and was showing signs of eccentricity. Once, to his private amusement, he accepted the award of an order of the Black Eagle from the visiting German Kaiser while wearing his dressing gown. In 1906 the couple travelled to Egypt, which Lorne disliked; his sister Frances observed that 'his heart is always in Canada' (Balfour, 2.414). After 1910 Lorne's health declined; he suffered from senility, and when visiting the Isle of Wight in April 1914 was struck with pneumonia. He died from this illness at Kent House, Cowes, on 2 May. After a memorial service in Westminster Abbey on 8 May, he was buried in the ancient family burial-ground at Kilmun, Argyll, on 15 May. He was succeeded in his titles by his nephew; his wife died on 3 December 1939. 
Lorne was primarily a traveller and dilettante, whose greatest pleasures were literature and the great outdoors. It might be argued that his talents lacked focus; certainly the volume of his publications was not conducive to their overall quality or longevity. As governor-general of Canada, for which he is now best remembered, he was, however, generally regarded as a success. 


@@@@@


doc= 32270


Campbell, Lewis (1830-1908), classical scholar, was born on 3 September 1830 at Howard Place, Edinburgh, the elder son of Captain Robert Campbell RN, who was related to the Campbells of Kirnan, Argyll, and his wife, Eliza Constantia, eldest daughter of Richard Pryce of Gunley, Montgomeryshire. His father died in 1832 and in 1844 his mother married her second husband, Colonel Morrieson. Campbell was educated at Edinburgh Academy, where he was a close friend of the physicist James Clerk Maxwell, and at Glasgow University (1846-9), where he was taught Latin by William Ramsay and Greek by Edward Lushington. Campbell then went to Oxford in 1849, taking up, in preference to a scholarship at Trinity, the Snell exhibition from Glasgow, tenable at Balliol College. There he met Benjamin Jowett, who was to be the major influence on his life and his work both in theology and philosophy. After graduating with first-class honours in classics Campbell spent a brief period (1856-8) as fellow and tutor at Queen's College. He resigned his fellowship on his marriage on 11 May 1858 to Frances Pitt (Fanny), daughter of Thomas Andrews, serjeant-at-law. 
Campbell was ordained deacon in 1857 and priest in 1858, spending five years of active ministry as vicar of Milford, Hampshire, a Queen's College living. In 1863 he was appointed professor of Greek at the University of St Andrews in succession to William Young Sellar who became professor of humanity at Edinburgh University. In 1875 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the Greek chair at Glasgow, to which Richard Claverhouse Jebb, ten years his junior, was appointed. The honorary LLD Campbell received from Glasgow in 1875 must have seemed a poor consolation. Then student numbers at St Andrews declined alarmingly, until in 1876 there were a mere 130 students in the entire university, which was threatened with extinction. When the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1889 addressed the situation, certain of its new provisions were perceived by Campbell as inimical to his subject and to academic standards. After a prolonged period of ill health in 1891-2, he resigned his chair. The Campbells soon made Alassio on the Italian riviera their winter home. Campbell's years of retirement were marked by further honours (including DLitt Oxon. in 1903) and continued professional activity, from the Gifford lectures at St Andrews in 1894-5 (published in 1898 as 'Religion in Greek Literature') to a lecture delivered shortly before his death entitled 'The Religious Element in Plato' to a Congress of Religions at Oxford in September 1908. 
Campbell had been appointed to the chair at St Andrews in recognition of his work on Plato, and for some time he continued to concentrate on Plato's philosophy: his 'Theaetetus' of 1861 went into a second edition in 1883; in 1867 his edition of the 'Sophistes' and 'Politicus' appeared (dedicated to the senatus of the university); and in 1894 he edited the 'Republic' with Jowett. Campbell pioneered the application of stylometry, a sophisticated examination of vocabulary, grammar, and sentence structure, to the question of Plato's chronological development. This innovatory and imaginative work was little appreciated at the time and continental scholars, failing to observe Campbell's results, later received more credit for proceeding on similar lines. 
The second area in which Campbell made a lasting contribution to scholarship was tragedy, especially Sophocles. His edition of Sophocles came out in two volumes, the first ('Oedipus tyrannus', 'Oedipus Coloneus', 'Antigone'), with a fulsome tribute to Jowett, in 1871, with a second edition in 1879; and the second in 1881. Jebb's celebrated Sophocles, which came to overshadow Campbell's, was not begun until 1880, the first part appearing in 1883. Campbell's insights on language (especially in the long 'Essay on the language of Sophocles', prefaced to his first volume), on lyric metre, on the textual tradition, and on dramatic and staging questions are particularly valuable. Campbell's third main scholarly enterprise was again original in conception: verse translation allied with comparative literature. He published translations of Sophocles (1883) and of Aeschylus (1890) in blank verse and lyric metres, and also a 'Guide to Greek Tragedy' (1891), and a comparative work on tragic method, 'Tragic Drama in Aeschylus, Sophocles and Shakespeare' (1904). Gilbert Murray followed Campbell's translations of Aeschylus and Sophocles with translations of Euripides which were staged and much more widely read, despite being less economical and less faithful to sense and metrical structure. Campbell's more general work included a volume on Plato's 'Republic' for the 'Home and School Library' (1902); and one on Sophocles (1897) for the 'Classical Writers' series. 
Campbell remained a lifelong proponent of liberal ecumenical views, expressed not only in sermons, such as those collected in 'The Christian Ideal' (1877), but also in correspondence, lectures, and essays. His 'On the Nationalisation of the Old English Universities' (1901) was a restatement of the liberal cause of freeing the ancient universities from denominational restrictions. Loyalty to his early associates was apparent in his extensive biographical and editorial work: with William Garnett he produced a life of Clerk Maxwell (1882); with Evelyn Abbott the biography of Jowett (1897) and editions of his writings and correspondence (1899); extracts from Jowett's work on Plato (1902) and his theological essays (1906); and editions of the poems of his father's cousin Thomas Campbell (1904). 
Campbell's unassuming character comes over in much of his work, especially his replies to Jebb in 'Paralipomena Sophoclea' (1907). He is described by his younger contemporary John Burnet as sensitive, nervous, and excitable ('DNB'). His lifestyle was mildly bohemian; he founded the students' Shakespearian society, dramatic society, and gymnastic club; and himself participated in their activities. He was an advocate of higher education for women and was closely involved in the foundation of St Leonard's School for Girls, being chairman of the school council from 1886 to 1903. Campbell died at Brissago, Lake Maggiore, near Locarno, Switzerland, on the return journey from Oxford to his home at Alassio, on 25 October 1908. He was survived by his wife; they had no children. There are memorial tablets at the English cemetery, Locarno, where he was buried, and at St John's Church, Alassio, and the chapels of St Andrews and Balliol. 


@@@@@


doc= 32271


Campbell, Sir Malcolm (1885-1948), holder of land and water speed records, was born on 11 March 1885 at Chislehurst, Kent, the only son and elder of two children of William Campbell (died 1920), diamond merchant, of Cheapside, and his wife, Ada Westerton. He was educated at a preparatory school near Guildford, and then at Uppingham School, but left at the age of sixteen to continue his studies -- primarily to become a fluent linguist -- in France and Germany. It was in Germany that he began a lifelong eagerness to test himself, and machines, to see how fast he could go. His first sporting pursuit was bicycle racing; as a youth he was fined 30's'. for driving a pedal cycle at 27 m.p.h. 'to the confusion and terror of two elderly ladies'. He graduated from racing bicycles to taking part in motorcycle trials and earned three gold medals in the London-Edinburgh trials of 1906, 1907, and 1908. 
In 1906, aged twenty-one, Campbell became an underwriting member of Lloyd's and acquired the financial resources to develop his racing enthusiasms. He spotted the market for insuring newspapers against libel actions and built up a good and profitable business. He was a pioneer of aviation; as an innovative designer and engineer his aerial advances were more significant than those achieved in his land and sea speed quests. In 1909 he built a monoplane following a blueprint of his own that borrowed from the successful 'Bleriot XI' aeroplane. The plane, built in a disused barn in a strawberry field, flew in a straight line -- then crashed. Campbell's career was punctuated by a series of near disasters and spectacular crashes, as he literally drove himself to the limits of physical and technological performance. In an interview quoted in the 'New York Times' of 2 January 1949, he observed, 'If I break my neck then I'm unlucky. It's just a great adventure.' 
In 1910 Campbell immersed himself in the Brooklands motor track racing subculture. His first racing car was a Peugeot called 'The Flapper' after a successful racehorse. However, his Flapper vehicles did not perform well. In 1912 he started using the moniker 'Blue Bird' for his racing cars, inspired by the play of that name by Maurice Maeterlinck, and he continued to use that name as a lucky talisman for the rest of his life. During a 1912 Brooklands race he brushed with death as 'Blue Bird' (a 1906 Darracq) lost wheels, swerved, and nearly flipped over. Such was his skill and presence of mind that he steered the shuddering, clanking 'Blue Bird' to a fourth place finish. Before the First World War he drove Lion Peugeot, Renault, Schneider, Sunbeam, Charron, and Gregoire cars, as well as Darracqs. He embarked on the first of his three marriages on 19 July 1913, when he married Marjorie Dagmar Knott ('b'. 1892/3), daughter of Henry Raglan Knott, gentleman. They separated and the marriage was dissolved. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Campbell enlisted as a motorcycle rider and was commissioned in the West Kent regiment. He was transferred to the Royal Flying Corps, where he was a ferry pilot and then a flying instructor. On demobilization, with the rank of captain and an MBE, he returned to Lloyd's and also established a motor car dealership. In March 1920 he married Dorothy Evelyn, daughter of Major William Whittall, with whom he had a son (Donald Malcolm Campbell) and a daughter. Recalling his impulsive temperament and his string of affairs during their twenty-year marriage, Dorothy Campbell thought him 'quite unfitted for the role of husband and family man' ('Malcolm Campbell: the Man as I Knew Him', 1951, 222). Motor-racing continued to be his chief interest and in the post-war years he won over 400 trophies, including the 200 mile race at Brooklands in 1927 and 1928, and the Boulogne grand prix in 1927, driving a variety of cars, including a 7.6 litre GP Peugeot, a collection of Talbots (1.5 to 4.5 litre), an Austro-Daimler, and a 5 litre Sunbeam. 
Always spurred on by an energetic fascination to test himself and his newest racing gadget, Campbell decided in 1922 to make a bid for the land speed record and took on Leo Villa as his racing mechanic. His first attempt, driving a 350 horse power Sunbeam at Saltburn in 1922, was unsuccessful, and this was followed by two failures at the international speed trial meetings at Fanoe, Denmark, in 1923 and 1924. Later in 1924 (on 25 September), however, driving the same vehicle at Pendine (Pen-tywyn) Sands, Carmarthenshire, he set a record of 146.16 m.p.h., and in the following year (21 July 1925) at Pendine became the first person to travel at over 150 m.p.h., setting a new record of 150.87 m.p.h. 
From 1926 the rivalry between Campbell and Henry Segrave in turn established Britain at the forefront of land speed record attempts. Driving a new Napier-Campbell 'Blue Bird', Campbell pushed the record to 174.88 at Pendine on 4 February 1927, but at the end of March Segrave beat him to break the 200 m.p.h. barrier. Campbell responded by rebuilding 'Blue Bird' and recording 206.95 m.p.h. at Daytona Beach, Florida, on 19 February 1928. This was subsequently broken by the American Ray Keech and then by Segrave. Campbell made an attempt to beat Segrave's record at Verneuk Pan, South Africa, in May 1929, but this proved a costly failure. 
Campbell finally overhauled Segrave's record at Daytona on 5 February 1931, when he reached 231.4 m.p.h. in a rebuilt 'Blue Bird'. On his triumphal return to London he received a knighthood. Successive attempts at Daytona pushed the record to 253.97 (24 February 1932), 272.46 (22 February 1933), and 276.88 (7 March 1935). Propelled by a Rolls-Royce 'R' engine, delivering 2350 brake horse power, he achieved his ninth and last land speed record on 3 September 1935 at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, where he became the first driver to exceed 300 m.p.h. with a speed of 301.13 m.p.h. His achievements were later (1940) recognized when he was awarded the trophy founded in memory of Segrave. 
On his return from Daytona, Campbell, who believed that rearmament in the face of the German threat had become an urgent necessity, regarded it as his patriotic duty to enter politics. At the general election held in November 1935 he stood as a Conservative for the Deptford constituency but was beaten by the Labour candidate. As well as writing a number of books on motoring, and an account of his expedition in 1926 to the Cocos Islands in (fruitless) search of buried pirate treasure, he was motoring correspondent of 'The Field' and the 'Daily Mail'. 
In the late 1930s Campbell took to the water with a 'Blue Bird' motor boat designed by F. W. Cooper, powered by a Rolls-Royce aero engine. At Lake Maggiore, Switzerland, he set successive records of 126.33 m.p.h. and 129.5 m.p.h. in September 1937, achieving 130.93 at Halwill, Switzerland, in July 1938. In August 1939 he achieved his last record, 141.74 m.p.h., at Coniston Water. 
During the early part of the Second World War, Campbell commanded a motorcycle unit and served for the remainder on the staff of combined operations, though he was frustrated not to be allowed to serve abroad with his regiment. After his second marriage was dissolved in 1940, he married on 16 August 1945 Betty Nicory ('b'. 1905/6), the divorced wife of Clement Nicory, and daughter of Sir John Humphery, company director. They separated within weeks and were divorced a year later. Campbell died at his home, Little Gatton, Reigate, Surrey, on 31 December 1948. His son succeeded him as a land and water speed record breaker. 


@@@@@


doc= 32272


Campbell, (Renton) Stuart (1908-1966), journalist, was born in Kensal Rise, London, on 4 June 1908, the third child of John Campbell, a printer's manager from Scotland, and his wife, Florence Harmsworth. He was educated at Lavender Hill School and at Wandsworth Technical Institute Secondary School. Encouraged by his father he quickly embarked on a career in newspapers, starting as a junior reporter on the 'Hendon and Finchley Times', from which he went on to the 'Woking Gazette' and the 'Nottingham Guardian'. He was still a reporter when in 1933 he moved to the Manchester office of the 'News Chronicle' and then, in 1935, to the 'Daily Mirror' in London. In that year he also married Joan Mary Algernon (died 1977), of Nottingham, with whom he had one daughter. In 1937 he was appointed assistant editor of the 'Sunday Pictorial' under Hugh Cudlipp. From then on he was a Sunday newspaperman of the watchdog breed. 
When Cudlipp joined the forces early in the Second World War, Campbell became editor of the 'Sunday Pictorial'. The paper was already making a name as a campaigner for populist causes, and Campbell developed that reputation. The 'Pictorial' took up many issues on behalf of soldiers and their families and investigated numerous complaints of profiteering. Campbell trained his reporters in the art of detecting, trapping, and exposing ration dodgers, oppressive landlords, petrol thieves, and other villains of the home front. It was a role he relished as an ardent, although undogmatic, socialist and as a passionate believer in the journalist as crusader. Libel actions were an inevitable hazard and in the course of fighting them Campbell acquired considerable legal agility. 
Cudlipp's return to the 'Pictorial' in 1946 meant that Campbell was an editor without a newspaper. But he was quickly promised the editorship of the 'People', a Sunday newspaper owned by Odhams Press. The paper was then edited by Harry Ainsworth, who was soon due to retire. In the meantime Campbell became managing editor, running the paper without interference save for timid occasional grumbles from Ainsworth. The grumbles arose because Campbell systematically removed or transformed editorial features which he regarded as almost criminally soporific and out of date, replacing them with his own brand of sharp, topical, combative reporting and comment. Within two years, having also completely redesigned the 'People''s layout and typography, Campbell had a newspaper which, in his view, would appeal to a new post-war generation far more demanding than their parents of entertainment, sensation, and information. He retained one highly successful feature of the old 'People', its confession series written by, or ghosted for, the famous and the notorious. But Campbell's confessionals were often those of obscure people, whose experiences somehow reflected the unacknowledged hopes or fears of his readers. He was a master of the telling headline that sold these articles, for example: 'I took a lorry ride to shame', 'I was a G.I.'s slave bride', and 'Because my skin is black'. 
It was, however, in the investigation and exposure of criminal and social wrongdoing that Campbell put his distinctive stamp on popular journalism. Disclosure has always been the business of newspapers. Campbell went a stage further for he not only printed the results of his reporters' enquiries but he also produced the evidence on which those conclusions were based. Thus when in 1950 the 'People' disclosed that the Messina brothers were running an empire of prostitution in London his reporter, Duncan Webb, set out the whole course of his investigation, showing how he had traced the women to their various addresses and had established their links with the gang exploiting them. It was a pattern that Campbell followed with equal success in exposures of bribery among footballers, slum landlordism, fake religions, and numerous other social scandals. His techniques were adopted by other newspapers, especially the 'quality Sundays'. All of them, like the 'People' itself, gained in circulation as a result. 
The 'People''s success was also due to its highly personal flavour. It spoke with one voice -- Campbell's. He wrote or rewrote a great part of the paper himself. Reporters' and even columnists' copy was often no more to him than raw material for moulding by the master. His immediate assistants caught Campbell's tone, and articles which he did not have time to edit himself came out with his accent. The note was often strident, especially when evil was being denounced. Articles usually carried black and white moral judgements; as a journalist Campbell knew no greys and, as a stern Caledonian by upbringing, he tended to hark back to hellfire. Campbell did not even leave sport to the experts. He often edited sporting features and constantly briefed sports columnists. His own regular contribution to the paper was the 'Man o' the people' column, for a time written by Gilbert Harding. In it he and Harding produced miniature exposes of the type carried on other pages, often campaigning on behalf of victims of officialdom. Campbell encouraged Harding to start an annual Christmas appeal for charities, which was remarkably successful and remained a feature of the paper that Campbell always cherished. 
In 1957 Campbell succeeded Ainsworth as editor. The change meant little. He had been in effective command of the paper for years and remained so until his death. But his elevation did, for the first time in his professional life, give him an uneasy place in the journalists' establishment. From 1961 to 1964 he was a member of the Press Council, whose occasional strictures on his editorial methods he had often scorned. He believed in getting 'the story', even if in the getting he sometimes violated the Press Council canon. But he did come to realize, under his colleagues' influence, the need to improve standards of taste and responsibility in popular newspapers. 
Accused more than once as an editor of invasion of privacy, away from his newspaper Campbell was himself a very private man. When he went home to Stella Cottage, near Farnham, where the Stella of Jonathan Swift once lived, he practised family seclusion. Always approachable in office hours by staff and visitors alike, he discouraged callers to his home. Once, when acquaintances were walking around the house in the hope of finding him in, he lay prone on the kitchen floor for half an hour to avoid detection, reading a book. He read, gardened, and fished enthusiastically. But his passion was newspapers. He died at Stella Cottage on 1 February 1966 and was cremated at Aldershot on 7 February. 
Nat Rothman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32273


Campbell, Sir Ronald Hugh (1883-1953), diplomatist, was born in London on 27 September 1883, the eldest son of Sir Francis Alexander Campbell (1852-1911), assistant under-secretary of state for foreign affairs from 1902 to 1911, and his wife, Dora Edith, daughter of Hugh Hammersley, army agent and banker. He was educated at Haileybury College and in June 1907 passed a competitive examination and was appointed a clerk in the Foreign Office. On 30 April 1908 he married Helen (died 1949), daughter of Richard Graham. They had a son and a daughter. In October 1910 Campbell was appointed an acting third secretary in the diplomatic service, and in November of that year he accompanied Sir Arthur Paget on a special embassy to the courts of Munich, Stuttgart, and Sofia to announce the accession of George V. In the following year he was in attendance on the representative of Venezuela at the coronation. From October 1913 to July 1919 he was private secretary to the permanent under-secretary and in January 1919 he was promoted second secretary while in attendance at the Paris peace conference. From July 1919 to December 1920 he was private secretary to Lord Curzon, acting secretary of state. He was appointed CMG in 1917 and promoted first secretary in September 1919. 
Having in April 1928 been promoted counsellor at the Foreign Office, Campbell was in November 1929 appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary in Paris, where he often acted as charge d'affaires. With his perfect command of French, he made many friends in official circles and proved himself a shrewd observer and an able negotiator. He was appointed minister to Belgrade in August 1935 and KCMG in January 1936. His lucid and well-balanced dispatches revealed an exceptional insight into the shifting pattern of Yugoslavia's foreign policy, subjected as it then was to mounting Nazi-fascist pressures. 
In July 1939 Campbell was promoted to succeed Sir Eric Phipps as ambassador at Paris. He was sworn of the privy council, and took up his new appointment early in November. Calm, unruffled, as impeccable in unravelling knotty problems as in his personal appearance, he was endowed with the sturdiest common sense, an infinite capacity for taking pains, and a dry sense of humour; it was said that he wrote with such meticulous care that he never needed to correct a draft telegram. When the Germans invaded France in May 1940 this unassuming and gently persuasive Scot soon found his qualities as a diplomatist put to the severest test. Major-General Sir Edward Spears, who liaised on Churchill's behalf with French premier Paul Reynaud, perceived 'a real toughness under the smoothness of his exterior, an unflinching purpose at the back of his non-committal manner' (Spears, 178). Campbell took part on 11 June 1940 in the exodus of the French government from Paris: first to Tours, and three days later to Bordeaux. In intensely trying conditions he attempted to prevail on the French leaders to transfer overseas at least the nucleus of a government and to place their fleet beyond the range of axis interference. After the signature of the Franco-German armistice had made it useless for him to remain at Bordeaux, he embarked for England on 22 June. On his return home he rejoined the Foreign Office and was promoted GCMG. 
In November 1940 Campbell was appointed ambassador to Lisbon with a specific brief to maintain Portugal's benevolent neutrality and help prevent Spain from entering the war on the side of the axis powers. In mid-December 1941 Anglo-Portuguese relations came near to breaking-point as a result of the unannounced entry of Australian and Dutch troops into Portuguese Timor to protect the colony from invasion by the Japanese. Campbell's dogged resourcefulness prevented the crisis from becoming an open quarrel. His masterly telegrams stressed the vital importance of the Anglo-Portuguese alliance for British Atlantic strategy and the need to avoid further alienating the Portuguese government and its leader, the dictator Dr Antonio Salazar. They were also reinforced by a visit to London. As a result an agreement was brought about that the troops would be withdrawn as soon as Portuguese forces arrived to replace them. The Japanese seized the island before this arrangement could be completed -- which was fortunate, as Churchill intended that the Dutch and Australians should stay. In the summer of 1943 Campbell received the emissaries of Marshal Badoglio, who had been appointed Italian premier following the fall of Mussolini, when they arrived in Lisbon to sue for an armistice. In the same year he presided over the delicate negotiations which led to the grant of Portuguese facilities in the Azores to the allied forces. The Azores played an increasingly significant role in the build-up of American forces before and after the D-day landings in 1944. The negotiations over the Azores had been preceded by a great deal of preparation by Campbell and his staff, not least being his contribution to a series of secret conversations between Portuguese and British military staffs from the winter of 1941. Campbell's unremitting efforts also secured for Britain the lion's share of Portugal's vital supplies of wolfram ore (tungsten). 'Campbell... was just our man, courteous to everybody, rich in experience, dispassionate in his judgement... assuring us, with a touch of the best Foreign Office cynicism, that nothing was ever as serious as we thought it was. One day... when things had gone very wrong and we expected an explosion, he broke off the meeting and rang for the chef to tell him there was just time to make a better apple charlotte for lunch, 'You know, the brown stuff on top must crunch and taste burnt'. We all loved him. (Eccles, 99)' In July 1945 his superbly handled mission in Portugal came to an end and he retired. 
It was appropriate that a man of Campbell's exemplary patience should have been an expert angler and that, with his keen eye for precise detail, he also excelled as a skilled cabinet-maker. The last years of his life were clouded by the death in 1949 of his charming and vivacious wife, Helen, and by the death of his daughter. He died at Lymington Hospital, Lymington, Hampshire, on 16 November 1953, of an intestinal obstruction. His son, Robin, who survived him, had been severely wounded in the attempt to kidnap Rommel during the North African campaign. 
In 2002, many years after Campbell's death, it emerged that he had saved the lives of some 1000 Jews from Nazi-occupied central Europe, while ambassador in Lisbon, by arranging visas for them to flee to Mauritius, and by persuading the Portuguese authorities to issue transit or entrance visas. His actions led 'The Times' to describe him as 'a British Oskar Schindler' ('The Times', 5 April 2002), after the Sudeten German who had saved a similar number of Jews in German-occupied Poland. 


@@@@@


doc= 32274


Campbell, (William) Howard (1859-1910), missionary and entomologist, was born in Londonderry on 20 September 1859, eldest of the nine children of Thomas Callender Campbell, businessman and lay Christian worker. Known to his family as Howard, he was an avid collector of insects and with his six brothers built up a nationally famous collection of Irish moths and butterflies. He was educated at the Academical Institution, Londonderry, and at Edinburgh University, where he studied first arts (MA, 1880), and afterwards, with a view to becoming a missionary, divinity (BD, 1882). He was a keen cricketer and he played rugby for the university; although not tall, he had a wiry, athletic frame and ran very fast. 
On 12 September 1884 Campbell was ordained by the London Missionary Society (LMS) at Londonderry's Congregational church, and soon after he departed for the district of Cuddapah in south India. He was later joined by his fiancee, Elizabeth (Lizzie) Nevin ('b'. 1858), daughter of David Boyd of Drukendult, Ballymoney, co. Antrim, whom he married at Madras on 7 December 1885. 
For seventeen years Campbell worked among the low-caste and 'untouchable' villagers of the Cuddapah plains, preaching a vigorous Christian socialism which attacked caste and economic inequalities head-on. His socialist sympathies were well known; he was a member of the Independent Labour Party and claimed Keir Hardie as a friend. Nevertheless, he also fully backed imperialism, arguing that no one could rule India as well as the British did. 
Campbell's colleagues rated him as an excellent preacher and marvelled at his boundless energy which, even with a punishing itinerating schedule, enabled him to amass an internationally significant collection of Indian moths, between sixty and seventy species of which were new to science. He was credited with founding scores of churches and schools and he wrote several texts which became standard works in Indian theological colleges, three of which were: 'Grounds for Belief in a Personal God' (1893); 'Christian Evidences' (1898); and 'Christian Theology' (1905). 
About 1901, and initially against his will, Campbell was transferred to the LMS's training institution at Gooty. He was already an examiner in philosophy to Madras University and at Gooty he proved to be an excellent teacher and administrator, as well as a fine cricket coach. His skills in Telugu soon attracted the attention of the Madras government and, at their order and with Veerasalingam Pantalu, he revised C. P. Brown's 'Telegu-English Dictionary' (1906) and A. H. Arden's 'Progressive Telegu Grammar' (1905). He also served on the committee to revise the Telugu 'Bible' between 1898 and 1903. Campbell was an enthusiastic advocate of union between the Congregationalist, Presbyterian, and Baptist missions, and in 1908 he rejoiced at the creation of the United Church of South India, which brought 150,000 protestants under one ecclesiastical umbrella. 
In 1909 Campbell was appointed head of the new Union Theological College at Bangalore, but he was forced to return home by an attack of sprue. His condition worsening, he moved for the winter to Bordighera in the Italian riviera, where he died, aged fifty, on 18 February 1910. He was buried in the local English cemetery, which overlooked the Mediterranean. His wife and four sons survived him, one of whom, Samuel Burnside Boyd Campbell (1889-1971), won twelve international rugby caps. 


@@@@@


doc= 32275


Bannerman, Sir Henry Campbell- (1836-1908), prime minister, was born at Kelvinside, Glasgow, on 7 September 1836, the second son and the youngest of the six children of Sir James Campbell (1790-1876) and his wife, Janet, 'nee' Bannerman (died 1873). His extra surname was acquired as a condition of inheriting his maternal uncle's estate in 1871. He did not like his 'horrid long name', preferring 'Campbell 'tout court'', or, 'as an alternative, CB' (Spender, 1.62). 
Campbell's forebears had been tenant farmers at Inchanoch, Menteith, since the seventeenth century. In 1803 his paternal grandfather, James McOran Campbell (1752-1831), sold the farm lease and followed his eldest son to Glasgow. There he founded a grocery business, but it failed. However, his second and fourth sons, James and William, succeeded in their various enterprises, founding in 1817 a flourishing warehouse and drapery business. The Campbells rapidly established themselves among Glasgow's leading commercial families. As tenacious and purposeful in politics as he was in business, James Campbell became the leader of Glasgow's Conservatives, was knighted in 1841, and served as lord provost from 1840 to 1843. Twice he stood unsuccessfully for parliament. His elder son, Sir James Alexander Campbell (1825-1908), was Conservative MP for the universities of Glasgow and Edinburgh (1880-1906). 
The Campbells were kindly but strict parents. Despite their wealth they chose not to live ostentatiously. Their views on religion as on politics were strongly held, but differences of opinion were tolerated and were never allowed to disrupt family harmony. Concerned for their children's education, they valued knowledge of the world as highly as book learning and esteemed particularly travel and the acquisition of foreign languages. The young Campbell attended Glasgow high school from 1847 to 1850, but at the age of fourteen, with his brother and cousin, he journeyed through Europe for almost a year. On returning home he went first to Glasgow University (1851-3), then to Trinity College, Cambridge (1854-8), where he read mathematics and classics. He confined his social life to a small group of friends. Unusually for a future politician, he chose to play no part in the university's union. He neither impressed nor was impressed by Cambridge. His examination results (twenty-second senior optime in the mathematical tripos and a third class in the classical tripos) were disappointingly modest. 
After university Campbell straightaway joined the family firm. He showed aptitude but was not particularly enthusiastic, and he acquired a reputation for indolence. He was made a partner in 1860. In that same year he met (Sarah) Charlotte (died 1906), the rather plain, stout daughter of the late Major-General Sir Charles Bruce, and they married in September. The young couple were entirely devoted to each other. Cultivated, though not clever, Charlotte was an instinctively shrewd judge of character. She became closely associated with all her husband's plans, jealously guarding his interests and resenting the least supposed slight to his reputation. Her aspirations for his success compensated for his lack of ambition. Years later he told John Morley that Charlotte's contentment was more important to him than his life. 
Campbell entered parliament in 1868 as an earnest, impatient radical, yet not until the late 1850s had he begun to question the Conservative principles in which he had been nurtured. The process had begun at Cambridge, prompted by reading Darwin and Spencer. But the deciding factor was his friendship with the radical and Chartist Daniel Lawson. When Campbell ought to have been engaged in his work, he was instead endlessly discussing and debating politics with his friend. His political metamorphosis was confirmed during a year-long correspondence with his brother-in-law, Henry Bruce, that embraced the gamut of contemporary political problems. At Westminster, the tyro politician soon modified his recently acquired beliefs, rejecting republicanism, while his strong faith in individualism turned him resolutely against 'dirigisme'. Imperialism in any guise never held any appeal. His unswerving allegiance to those ideas that inspired Richard Cobden and W. E. Gladstone was as much instinctual as intellectual. He defined Liberalism, simply and pragmatically, as 'the politics of common sense' (Wilson, 230). 
In 1865 dilatoriness cost Campbell the opportunity to contest a Glasgow constituency. Three years later, at a by-election in April 1868, he stood for Stirling Burghs as a radical opposing another Liberal of whig sympathies. Though he successfully rebutted the charge that his radicalism was mere opportunism and that he was really a tory in disguise, he narrowly lost. In November 1868, at the general election, against the same opponent but on a greatly enlarged electoral register, he triumphed. Campbell represented Stirling Burghs without interruption for the rest of his parliamentary career. 
Both Campbell-Bannermans valued their creature comforts highly. In London they lived in a series of large, well-appointed houses at convenient, fashionable addresses. The weekends they spent at Gennings, a country property CB had inherited near Maidstone, Kent. In 1884 he bought Belmont Castle, at Meigle, Perthshire, after restoration and extension their much loved Scottish home. For forty years their annual routine scarcely changed. When parliament was in session they lived in London. When London became too oppressive they would spend a few days at Dover, at the Lord Warden Hotel. CB's favoured form of exercise was to sit for hours on the pier reading one of his beloved French novels. They always went to Paris for Easter. In June and July, which became established as the season for speech making in the country, they were in Scotland. Then from August to October they invariably travelled on the continent, with six weeks reserved for the 'cure' at Marienbad. Their European peregrination always ended in Paris. The autumn parliamentary session found them once more in London, and the year ended as it had begun, entertaining friends at Belmont. 
From the first, CB enthusiastically embraced parliament's time-worn conventions. Theatricality, excitement, verbal dexterity, and repartee never fail to please the House of Commons, and CB was eager to oblige. He proved a rather dull dog, hopeless at extempore exchange, easily flustered if interrupted. His speeches were carefully prepared, succinct, persuasive, but, for the most part, read. Myopia obliged him to hold his notes close to his face. He rarely attracted the attention of his auditors, so consequently was discounted as, at best, a mediocre parliamentary performer. Nevertheless, after only three years, he was promoted from the back benches. 
Edward Cardwell needed a financial secretary to secure economies at the War Office, and in November 1871 he chose CB for this key appointment. Courageous, determined, impervious to parliamentary criticism, Cardwell made the ideal ministerial mentor and exercised a powerful influence over his junior colleague's subsequent parliamentary career. A change of government in 1874 sent Cardwell to the Lords, and CB became Liberal spokesman on defence in the Commons. He did not make the most of his opportunity and entirely failed to impress the house. In April 1880, when the Liberals returned to power, he did not gain promotion but returned to the War Office, this time to serve under the less than inspiring Hugh Childers. The department was beset by difficulties: war in the Transvaal and, even more distracting, a struggle with the crown over the appointment of Garnet Wolseley as adjutant-general. CB was delivered from these problems when, in May 1882, he was transferred to the Admiralty. There his officials were surprised, then impressed, by his quiet authority and efficient dispatch of business. The unexpected, unintended 'reward' for his political acuity in helping to defuse a naval scare campaign was to be offered, in October 1884, 'the most disagreeable post in the public service' (Rosebery to CB, 26 Oct 1884, BL, Add. MS 41226, fol. 100), the Irish chief secretaryship. 
Others had been offered the appointment and refused. CB accepted only because Charlotte pressed him to seize the opportunity. At Westminster the Irish nationalist MPs could scarcely contain their eagerness to rend this new secretary, whose previous small reputation suggested an easy victim. To their amazement, they found no weaknesses in his armour. He 'laughed at their vituperation and was jaunty under their cyclone of attack' (O'Connor, 26). While his duties were heavy and exacting, they were made easier by his excellent relationship with the viceroy, Spencer, who considered CB the ideal parliamentary spokesman. Though he was chief secretary for only seven months, until the fall of Gladstone's government in June 1885, this proved long enough for CB's reputation and status to be utterly transformed. 
On the problem of Ireland's future, CB's general election address in November 1885 was ambivalent. The flight of the 'Hawarden kite' in December revealed that Gladstone favoured an Irish parliament. Until Salisbury's intransigence on the Union was declared CB clung to the possibility of compromise. Only after a period of further doubt and misgiving did he declare his support for Gladstone. He admitted on several occasions that his thinking had been inconsistent. The 'indispensable condition' that finally determined his support for home rule was that there should be 'an end to agitation' (CB to Sir H. James, 21 July 1886, BL, Add. MS 41232, fol. 300). But Gladstone's proposals, far from ending agitation, divided the Liberal Party and ensured its defeat in the Commons in June 1886 and its electoral rout in the country in July 1886. Despite this political shambles, CB spoke warmly and eloquently for home rule and expressed unqualified support and admiration for Gladstone. When the Liberals again took office, in 1892, their parliamentary majority was too small to secure home rule. Nevertheless, a bill that CB helped to draft was prepared. Though secretary of state for war, CB chose to ignore the declared concerns of the army and lightly dismissed Ulster's opposition as 'Ulsteria'. The bill was slain in the Lords. Public opposition to home rule was overwhelming. Gladstone capitulated, and Ireland's governance became a dormant issue at Westminster. 
Campbell-Bannerman was forty-nine when, in February 1886, he entered the cabinet in Gladstone's third government as secretary of state for war. Gladstone would have preferred Childers but deferred to the queen, who insisted she wanted CB. The ministry was no sinecure, and even his first brief tenancy made CB aware of how much the queen interfered, listening to her soldiers rather than to her ministers. Once more in opposition CB proved effective and vigorous. In 1888 he joined somewhat reluctantly Hartington's commission of inquiry into the army's civil and professional administration. He opposed the proposed appointment of a chief of staff because his time at the War Office had impressed him with how senior officers constantly sought to interfere with the minister's decisions. He demonstrated the typical Liberal distrust of militarism and, as a devoted Cardwellian, argued there was no need of any further immediate military reform. 
In August 1892 Campbell-Bannerman returned to the War Office, with a seat in the cabinet, in Gladstone's fourth administration, and he retained that office when Rosebery succeeded Gladstone as prime minister in 1894. As minister for war he proposed a series of changes embodying those among the recommendations of the Hartington commission that he approved. He was well aware that, for any reform to succeed, the queen's elderly cousin would have to resign as commander-in-chief. The problem was that George Cambridge was resolutely opposed to resigning. There could be no better testimony to CB's determination, patience, resource, and tact than that, in a mere six weeks, he persuaded the duke to resign, in June 1895. At this moment of triumph the opposition censured CB for compromising the nation's safety by providing insufficient small-arms ammunition and cordite. The charge was false, but CB's rebuttal was unconvincing, and the government was narrowly defeated on St John Brodrick's motion in the House of Commons on 21 June 1895. Had the government been so minded the vote could easily have been reversed. Instead they chose to depart, Rosebery loudly insisting that a cabinet without CB as his colleague was unthinkable. The award of a GCB acknowledged not only Rosebery's genuine appreciation of his worth, but also the queen's gratitude at CB's sensitive handling of her uncle's 'resignation'. 
In opposition the Unionists had excoriated CB's military reforms as entirely inadequate. In government they were obliged to admit that their own proposals were very little different. CB had been a popular minister with soldiers and civilian advisers alike. Of the ministers with whom he had dealings, Wolseley thought CB much the most capable. CB insisted that his responsibilities were not to be shared or limited, though this never prompted any greater activity on his part or willingness to master the fine details of any brief. What he did demonstrate was the happy, priceless ability to eviscerate verbiage to expose the heart of any matter. Now when he spoke to parliament on defence it was as one thoroughly familiar with military matters. He robustly defended Cardwell's system in the army estimate debates of 1898, and in October 1899, expressing satisfaction with the army's mobilization, he boasted that Cardwell's reforms had entirely fulfilled their purpose and confounded the critics -- a reflection that proved somewhat premature. He made nonsense of the military reforms proposed by Unionist secretaries of state, and his frequent assertion that conscription was 'impossible' pleased almost all kinds and conditions of Liberals. 
In February 1894 'The Spectator' nominated CB as 'the dark horse in any future liberal leadership stakes' and as the 'only person capable of stilling the fierce conflicts' ('The Spectator', 17 Feb 1894). Few would have agreed and many would have shared Esher's estimate that, 'compared with his colleagues', CB was 'very undistinguished' ('Journals and Letters', 1.181). Far from coveting the party leadership, CB sought the speakership, as it offered an honourable escape from the wrangles of party politics and would allow more time for him to be with Charlotte, whose deteriorating health was a cause of much concern. His initiative startled and discomfited some colleagues, while others supposed he was not being serious. When he pressed his claim, Rosebery told him bluntly that his services could not be spared. CB fumed that his modest, legitimate request should be frustrated. A second appeal to Rosebery proved equally unavailing. Reluctantly CB acknowledged that, apparently, his unavoidable fate was to be a permanent party protagonist. 
Following Gladstone's retirement the Liberals were in a hapless state, the parliamentary party riven by jealousy and discontent. Rosebery had every reason to appreciate CB's quiet loyalty. Possessing neither the character nor the will to face down the formidable obstacles confronting his leadership, Rosebery resigned in October 1896. Sir William Harcourt succeeded as Liberal leader in the Commons, but from the beginning his credibility was undermined by the general belief that, when it suited Rosebery, he would resume the leadership. By December 1898 Harcourt had endured enough. Unintentionally, John Morley forfeited his chance to succeed by too close association with Harcourt's resignation. Rosebery declined the reversion, so the choice was confined to the four remaining former cabinet ministers: Bryce, Fowler, Asquith, and CB. Somewhat surprisingly CB emerged as favourite. He was dismissed disparagingly by 'The Times' as 'a temporary leader who will serve adequately enough as a warming pan until a more commanding figure emerges' ('The Times', 17 Jan 1899). In February 1899, at the Reform Club, CB was unanimously confirmed as Liberal leader in the Commons. Not alone among commentators, J. A. Spender noted CB's anomalous position as the leader of a party 'whose men of greatest reputation' stood outside presenting a 'disturbing, inscrutable threat' ('Westminster Gazette', 6 Feb 1899). 
There were those Liberals who would have been happy had CB denounced the Liberal Imperialists as heretics, but in his public statements he strove not to offend Roseberyite sensibilities. These efforts to emphasize Liberal unity came to nothing when war in South Africa exacerbated and emphasized differences. CB never doubted that it was 'Joe's war', and that it had been Joseph Chamberlain's 'policy of bluff' that had fomented the conflict (CB to David Bannerman, 25 Oct 1899, BL, Add. MS 41246, fol. 73). But, as the leader of a national party in wartime, he believed it was not proper to express such views publicly. Nor did he wish to widen the breach with the Liberal Imperialists, despite their showing an almost indecent enthusiasm for the Unionist government's conduct. To pro-Boer Liberals, the issue was perfectly simple. There could be no future for Liberalism if it chose to acquiesce in what was 'morally detestable' (Channing to CB, 19 Nov 1899, Koss, 'Pro-Boers', xxvi). 
To rumours of an imminent general election, CB had affected indifference. Military successes in the summer of 1900 tempted the government to seek a mandate from the country. CB, who was at Marienbad, did not return to England until five days after parliament's dissolution. For the Liberal Party, prospects could not have been blacker. Their organization was in hopeless disarray, they were short of money, and there was a jingo spirit abroad in the towns that it was assumed would favour the government. CB determined it would be best to husband their few resources. His unquenchable enthusiasm and optimism boosted morale, stilled panic, and rallied Liberals to fight in a common cause. The result of the election was not determined, as so many supposed, by jingo passions but by voter apathy. The Unionist majority scarcely increased, and CB's electoral strategy was completely vindicated. Wisely he discounted the unanimous approval of his leadership, warning friends that extremists in the party -- he identified the Roseberyites as the most insidious and deadly -- would magnify small differences into mighty schisms. 
The government had assumed that the war was all but won when the Boers successfully adopted guerrilla tactics. The British army responded by burning Boer farms and interning Boer families. On 14 June 1901, at a dinner in London given by the National Reform Union, CB passionately condemned these tactics as 'methods of barbarism' ('The Times', 15 July 1901). The extempore comment excited praise and derision in equal measure. It was no less than his heartfelt response to the bombastic policy that he considered unworthy and stupid. He blamed his political opponents, but they accused him of slandering British troops when for the past eighteen months he had consistently extolled the army's humanity, discipline, and generosity. No fewer than fifty Liberal Imperialist MPs demonstrated their disgust and dissatisfaction with CB's leadership by walking out of the Commons and refusing to support a radical motion condemning the concentration camps. The short-lived 'war to the knife and fork' (Lucy, 85) that followed provided the ludicrous spectacle of pro-Boer and imperialist Liberals attempting to dine and counter-dine each other out of existence. Just as suddenly they determined to kiss and make up, declaring unanimous belief in CB's leadership. 
Rosebery still retained his powerful hold over the public imagination. 'I would like to bite him harder', CB confided to Ripon, 'but it would not do to outrun the general feeling' (CB to Ripon, 28 Nov 1901; Strong, 143). At Chesterfield, on 16 December 1901, Rosebery, seeking to recast Liberalism in his own image, implored Liberals to abandon obsolete policies and adopt a 'clean slate'. At last it seemed that Rosebery was to give up his self-imposed exile. But the psychological moment to strike came and went. CB delayed his response until 19 February 1902. Then, at Leicester, he thrilled his audience with a powerful avowal that, as a convinced, impenitent Liberal, 'he' would never abandon a single tenet of his faith. When Rosebery was made president of the Liberal League, the breach between the two men was institutionalized. CB was contemptuously tolerant of a body whose 'raison d'etre' was to promote Rosebery. It failed hopelessly, and the earl was reduced to complaints in the press that he had effectively been excommunicated by CB. Reserved animosity between the two was briefly breached when, during the tariff reform controversy, Rosebery so far forgot himself as to call for Liberal unity. As on numerous previous occasions, CB extended a sceptical welcome to no avail. 
Self-inflicted Liberal wounds were soothed by peace in South Africa, a process enhanced by a royal commission report that condemned the government's unpreparedness in 1899. Salisbury's resignation, and the succession as Unionist leader and prime minister by his nephew Arthur Balfour, signalled a significant turn of the tide of British opinion. Attention switched from foreign to domestic issues, from stale Liberal dissension to Unionist disagreements. Balfour's 'Education Act' of 1902 did more than rouse nonconformist anger; miraculously it united Liberals in opposition. CB censured Balfour's measure as much because it denied democratic as religious rights. He was determined to retain nonconformist support and not repeat Gladstone's mistake of 1874. The immediate political advantage for the Liberals was a spate of spectacular and unexpected by-election victories. When Chamberlain, in May 1903, launched his tariff reform campaign, CB immediately condemned it root and branch, yet advised patience, not confrontation, as the better tactic, for it would allow time for Unionist differences to fester. It was his equally shrewd decision to concentrate the campaign for free trade in the country rather than at Westminster. The hapless Unionists damaged themselves further by approving Milner's scheme to employ indentured Chinese labourers in the Transvaal goldmines, an issue that excited a host of powerful prejudices in the minds of the electorate. 
By the end of the parliamentary session in 1904, indifferent health, domestic anxiety, and political strain had reduced CB to utter exhaustion. Yet he returned from his customary long continental holiday apparently as vigorous and determined as ever. He told the Irish nationalists that immediate home rule was impractical and offered instead a gradualist policy of amelioration. To this, John Redmond, leader of the Irish party, somewhat surprisingly agreed, promising in addition that he would use his best efforts to secure the Irish vote for the Liberals, considered vital for electoral success. This was an extraordinary tribute to the trust and affection in which CB was held by the nationalists. With the concurrence of Asquith and Grey, CB publicly announced at Stirling, on 23 November 1905, his step-by-step policy, while reaffirming Liberal support for eventual Irish self-rule. This last provoked Rosebery to sever any remaining connection with CB. It was a disastrous miscalculation that left Rosebery politically isolated and powerless. At last CB was freed of his greatest political incubus. With courage, determination, principled politics, and shrewd tactics, the temporary incumbent of six years earlier had strengthened his hold on the Liberal leadership. Unionist hubris, incompetence, and division had eased CB's task, while death, disease, and finally political miscalculation had successively removed his rivals. But fortune rewarded his resolution only after many sore trials. He had never sacrificed his innate modesty, and with rare selflessness had invariably put his party before his own success. Only a truly gifted leader could have forged out of powerless, disaffected fragments a viable anti-Unionist coalition that embraced a motley collection of whigs, Gladstonian Liberals, radicals, progressives, Lib-Lab trade unionists, and ex-Unionist free-traders. Ever the political realist, CB did not allow euphoria to betray his hard-won success. Liberal homogeneity, he acknowledged, was more apparent than real. The party he led remained, at best, a fragile coalition. 
Supposing that Rosebery's outburst signalled renewed Liberal strife, Balfour resigned as prime minister on 4 December 1905 without seeking a dissolution. Minority government had been a dilemma that many Liberals had anticipated with dread. It was not a prospect that held any fears for CB. On 5 December 1905 he happily accepted the king's commission and selected a cabinet that reflected every aspect of the Liberal coalition, rewarding old friends, acknowledging talent, indulging sentiment, and encouraging promise. Three of Rosebery's senior lieutenants, fearing the prospect of a 'little England' administration led by a man they supposed a weak, tired mediocrity, had earlier agreed among themselves to refuse office unless CB went to the Lords. This outrageous proposal would have made him prime minister in name only. CB successfully called their bluff. Despite their perfidy, he offered them three key cabinet posts: the exchequer, and the Foreign and War offices. Asquith's presence in a Liberal cabinet had always been indispensable, whereas Grey and Haldane were given high office partly to reassure the Roseberyites but mainly to enhance the chances of a Liberal victory at the impending general election, for the new government immediately dissolved parliament. 
The speech with which CB launched the electoral campaign at the Albert Hall, on 21 December 1905, received the kind of rapturous acclaim that previously Gladstone alone had commanded. Unionist failings were highlighted. Although old-age pensions were not mentioned, the speech skilfully suggested long-held Liberal aspirations were about to be rewarded. CB firmly nailed free-trade colours to the Liberal mast, the better to promote party unity and induce Unionist discord. Balfour supposed that CB was the helpless hostage of wild revolutionaries, whereas the bulk of the party, CB very well knew, were of a decidedly cautious and centrist disposition. Consequently his speech was descriptive, not prescriptive, and instead of a programme he offered an electoral slogan redolent of the past: 'peace, retrenchment, and reform'. In the polling, which took place during January 1906, the Liberals swept to a landslide victory. CB's considerable contribution was rightly acknowledged, but the result largely reflected the electorate's dissatisfaction with the Unionists. When he met the new Commons, his assured and effective performances from the dispatch box -- most notably his verbal lashing of Balfour's dialectical meanderings as 'foolery' -- roused Liberals to a frenzy of enthusiasm. Deservedly he basked in their respect and affection, 'the great, outstanding personality of the new Ministry, dwarfing and submerging all the others' (O'Connor, 87). It was a fitting culmination to a remarkable parliamentary journey: from respectable obscurity to leadership; from obloquy to popularity, praise, and affectionate admiration. 
To satisfy the nonconformists, the legislative priority consisted of two bills, on education and temperance. Also, to retain support from the Irish nationalists, legislation short of home rule was required. All these plans were thwarted by the opposition of the House of Lords. Liberal administrations customarily suffered at the hands of the upper house. CB on numerous previous occasions had condemned the absurdity of parliament's second chamber behaving as though it were an annexe of the Unionist Party. In 1894 he had advised the queen that one day the Lords' behaviour would inevitably lead to deadlock and constitutional chaos. Now the Lords, at Balfour's direct behest, were mutilating and destroying Liberal measures. CB angrily insisted that democracy would triumph and the will of the people prevail, yet counselled patience rather than confrontation. It is uncertain whether he desired that the Lords be given the opportunity to mend themselves, or thoroughly to alienate the electorate by their intemperate behaviour. Technically his tactics were wise, but his nonconformist supporters in particular grew frustrated and resentful. They supposed that their prime minister lacked the political will for a fight. Meanwhile, CB wisely rejected a proposal from a cabinet committee to reform the composition of the Lords. He recognized the priority was to resolve relations between the two houses. He persuaded cabinet colleagues to accept the suspensory veto, and introduced the measure on 24 June 1907 with arguably the most impressive speech he ever made to the Commons -- all the more remarkable for its being made the day after he suffered a heart attack. The problem of the Lords was not solved in CB's lifetime, but he effectively determined his successor's path towards the 1911 'Parliament Act'. 
During the South African War CB had declared publicly that the former Boer republics should be returned to self-government, and he never wavered from that belief. The Colonial Office did not share his opinion, but he rejected their advice, together with that of a cabinet committee. Virtually single-handed he persuaded his colleagues to return self-government to the Transvaal and the Orange River Colony. In August 1906 he was able to circumvent the Lords' veto by an order in council, thus giving South Africa what he could not give Ireland. His magnanimous act of statesmanship hastened the South African 'Act of Union' of 1910 and secured friendship and trust from a generation of South African political leaders. 
On constitutional issues CB's record was not entirely beyond reproach. He was a sympathetic but not enthusiastic supporter of votes for women. As party leader he not unreasonably refused to pledge Liberals on an issue peripheral to the main political debates and upon which they were divided. On 19 May 1906 he told a deputation led by Emily Davies that he considered their case conclusive and irrefutable, but he nevertheless counselled them to be patient and to continue lobbying -- advice that encouraged the constitutionalists but enraged the militants. In 1906 and again in 1907 private members' bills for women's franchise were talked out of the house. CB's attitude has been well described as 'friendly but timid' (Rover, 122). His unspoken concern was that, if women were enfranchised, it might serve Unionist more than Liberal interests. 
In the public mind the radical prime minister was associated with the new Liberalism of C. F. G. Masterman and the 'Daily News'. Many had hoped, though some dreaded, that the Liberals would introduce a vigorous programme of economic and social reforms. As opposition leader CB had frequently been urged to sponsor a disparate range of progressive measures. His election address had included the promise to modernize the poor law, alleviate unemployment, and improve conditions in the sweated industries. He was deeply and genuinely concerned about the plight of the poor and so had readily adopted the rhetoric of progressivism, but he was not a progressive. This was not, as Haldane suggested, because he was 'a dear old Tory... determined to do little' (Wilson, 500). CB was old and set in his ways, and he remained what he had for so long been: a Gladstonian Liberal. In office, like Gladstone, he proved a better constitutional than social reformer. His attachment to orthodox Gladstonian economics prompted his desire to reduce public expenditure. This appeared to be at odds with the financial implications of any ambitious reform scheme. What mattered most to CB, however, was the knowledge that social reform divided Liberals, whereas party unity was his major concern. 
Was the progressive anti-Unionist alliance that CB had helped to forge no more than a convenient electoral device? Labour and Liberal politicians traditionally adopted different views on how to improve working-class conditions. Judgements differed whether it was possible, even desirable, to create a single, progressive party sheltering Labour and Liberal views and uniting the radical vote. A party that sounded and acted so differently when street-corner evangelizing as socialist and debating at Westminster as Labour necessarily prompted ambivalence in the most sympathetic Liberal mind. CB never took Labour's taunts and propaganda seriously. He did not believe that socialism was about to replace Liberalism. He had been closely associated with the 1903 electoral pact between the Liberal chief whip, Herbert Gladstone, and Ramsay MacDonald on behalf of the Labour Representation Committee, which, while it ensured that Labour candidates would be unopposed by Liberals, had been designed to serve Liberal as much as Labour interests. He did not suppose that he had gullibly 'afforded room to the Socialist cuckoo in the Liberal nest' (Douglas, xii). Nor was he unduly concerned about Labour intervention in by-elections. For personal as much as political reasons he had appointed John Burns a minister. 
That CB's sympathy for many Labour aspirations was genuine is well illustrated by his conduct over the 'Trade Disputes Bill' (1906). Against his instincts, he had deferred to a majority cabinet decision that legislation to reverse the Taff Vale judgement should restore limited rights only to trade unions. To the consternation and amazement of colleagues, on the floor of the Commons he spoke, then voted, for a Labour-sponsored bill. Despite the formidable opposition of Liberal lawyers and senior colleagues, he succeeded in embodying the total immunity of the Labour bill into the government's legislation. Labour and Liberal differences concerning the treatment of trade unions were of long standing. CB had always tended to favour Labour's views, and fifteen years earlier he had been censured by Elgin for supporting striking railway workers. Although CB personally liked and got on well with most Labour leaders, his sympathy for their proposals never implied commitment. Arthur Ponsonby, CB's secretary and himself a Labour sympathizer, noted that the prime minister was always anxious that his administration should never be thought to be 'in the hands and at the mercy of Labour' (Ponsonby to Bryce, 24 May 1907; Harris and Hazlehurst, 377). 
Despite trials and tribulations, CB's administration secured a number of important social reforms. What it achieved was consistent with traditional Liberal values, and because it did not challenge Unionist interests it was not destroyed in the Lords. There was legislation concerning factories, workshops, and mines and workmen's compensation. Perhaps most significantly, the groundwork was laid for major reforms later achieved under Asquith's leadership. The budget of 1907 trailed provision for the funding necessary for old-age pensions. Given CB's views on economics, it was no accident that part of the financial strategy to secure funding for pensions was to effect economy in the spending upon the armed forces. 
Most Liberals thought the army a waste of time and money. Radicals -- the loudest, most scathing anti-militarists -- neither liked nor trusted Haldane, the secretary of state for war, but supposed he would 'be compelled to abjure his heresies and support the democratic policies of his chief' ('Concord', January 1906, 4). CB knew that Haldane was an incorrigible conspirator, but acknowledged he was also an able administrator, capable, as few others were, of undertaking required army reforms. Haldane assiduously cultivated the support of the prime minister, whom he had not supported when in opposition. It was given unstintingly. Both prime minister and secretary of state recognized that 'the inevitable result of failure' would be 'an agitation for compulsion' -- that is, compulsory military service (Haldane to J. A. Spender, 26 Feb 1907; Koss, 'Haldane', 51). Haldane's restoration of the essential features of Edward Cardwell's system of army organization mollified CB. But he also saw, despite the opacity of Haldane's rhetoric, the minister's conceptual clarity, placing economy and voluntarism -- both sound Liberal principles -- at the heart of his proposals. 
Disowning responsibility for increased costs in his department, Haldane happily and frequently emphasized that foreign and defence policies are complementary. Diplomatic apprehensions about Germany's hostile intent were immediately reflected in increased estimates for the Admiralty. The problem was exacerbated when the launch of the first Dreadnought battleship in 1906 transformed naval strategy, technology, and economy. Privately CB thought continued observance of the two-power naval building standard irrational. He proposed a cut in the capital shipbuilding programme with the caveat that, if the peace conference at The Hague in 1907 failed, the cut would be reversed. On the eve of the conference CB published in 'The Nation' (March 1907) some anodyne proposals for armament cuts. They reflected his generous, trusting nature, but the Germans perversely saw it as a plot to secure permanent British naval supremacy. So CB's single foray into public diplomacy proved an abject failure. Naval 'economists' who had been elated by CB's proposals were now instead obliged to deplore a small rise in the 1908 naval estimates. CB was well aware that selfish departmental imperatives were driving ever upwards the estimates of the armed services. He was uneasy at the constant lobbying and squabbling for increased funding. Had the committee of imperial defence (CID) fulfilled its intended role, that would have helped resolve the difficulties. He changed his earlier opinion that the CID was a mischievous assembly, but he never fully exploited its potential. 
Radicals, who were averse to the notion of continuity, wanted a progressive foreign policy distinct from that pursued by the Unionists. They dubbed CB's election address the 'league of peace' speech, emphasizing his opposition to aggression and support for disarmament; they thereby chose to ignore his equally clear statement that foreign policy would continue upon existing lines. In December 1905 a demoralized France, bullied in Morocco by Germany, wished to discover exactly what Britain would do if war broke out with Germany. Grey approved military and naval conversations between the military and naval staff of both countries. CB agreed though he had misgivings, as he recognized joint preparations for a war came uncomfortably close to an honourable undertaking. He did not inform certain senior cabinet colleagues about these arrangements because he expected their opposition. Knowledge of the conversations became general only after CB's death. Radicals argued either that he had not known of the talks or that he had been deliberately misled by Grey as to their significance. Grey, they maintained, was the willing accomplice -- some even suggested cipher -- of his anti-German permanent officials at the Foreign Office, or else he had been duped by French chauvinists. CB had supported Grey but, making no allowance for diplomatic or military initiative, had naively assumed, or hoped, that no further commitment was implied. This was the limited view he advertised to Clemenceau in April 1907. The French premier was shocked and angered by what Cambon, with unfailing diplomatic finesse, described as 'un petit malentendu' (Wilson, 544). When the two premiers next met, in January 1908, there was no repeat of the misunderstanding. 
Many Liberals condemned negotiations with Russia, begun in July 1906, as politically unacceptable -- a moral affront and a diplomatic disaster. CB considered these criticisms ill-informed. The tsar's ill-advised dissolution of the Russian parliament appeared to ruin any chance of a diplomatic agreement. CB, who that day was due to address the Interparliamentary Union, immediately added a postscript to his speech, 'La Douma est morte -- Vive la Douma' (23 July 1907; Spender, pl. facing 2.264). His audience, which included Russian delegates, greeted his peroration with wild enthusiasm. It was a further example of CB's extraordinary ability exactly to capture a public mood or sentiment in a few simple, sincere words. At the end of August 1907 the Anglo-Russian agreement was signed, and CB was the first to congratulate Grey for 'a great achievement that... [would] make things easier in Europe' (CB to Grey, 3 Sept 1907; Trevelyan, 189). Those who condemned the agreement as designed to isolate Germany diplomatically later perversely argued that CB had opposed Grey's Russian policy. 
It was CB's policy never to interfere more than absolutely necessary in the affairs of any department of state, and this undoubtedly exaggerated the Foreign Office's already notorious independence. Never pretending to the part of a dynamic, innovative leader such as Gladstone, CB managed, facilitated, and mediated the work of his colleagues. He never sought to steal the limelight, for he lusted neither for prizes nor for personal glory. If the occasion required he never hesitated to demonstrate his authority, for he knew his own mind and was determined, but invariably tactful. Given the fragile unity of the Liberals, there was much to recommend his cautious, quietist approach. His emollient wisdom kept the cabinet 'peculiarly and happily free from personal differences and restlessness' (Grey, 1.67). Nevertheless, there were reservations about his style of managing the cabinet. Haldane likened it to 'a meeting of delegates'. He criticized CB for 'insufficient consultation... relying unduly upon the initiative of individual ministers'. Yet Haldane acknowledged that, once the prime minister's confidence was secured, 'there were few better chiefs to work for' (Haldane, 182, 217-18). Everyone who worked with CB had reason to appreciate his spontaneity, generosity, and kind-heartedness. What was not always realized was that although he readily forgave he did not so easily forget. His private secretary noted that CB was 'outwardly easy-going... inwardly... firm and resolute' (Hirst, 262). The suggestion by some critics that CB's 'laissez-faire' attitude reflected indolence is incorrect: he was never lethargic or indifferent. 
Trivial routine and lesser activities occupied CB's days as much as grave matters of state. As a Presbyterian, he professed not to know what a rural dean was, yet for someone who was a lifelong advocate of disestablishment he took inordinate pains over church preferments. 'You said I never acted on your advice', he wrote to his friend Archbishop Randall Davidson, 'But you will be lenient to my doubts and perplexities!' (CB to Davidson, 5 Nov 1907; Bell, 1239). Averse to high-churchmen, he sought to promote evangelicals, his intention bolstered by the opposition of a predominantly Anglo-Catholic bench of bishops in the Lords to the government's education bills. But, as he enquired with mock bemusement of Spence Watson, the Quaker president of the National Liberal Federation, 'What is a poor devil to do when all the new school of Church Liberals are Sacerdotalists and the Evangelicals of note, pronounced Tories?' (CB to Spence Watson, 13 July 1907; BL, Add. MS 41242, fol. 254). 
CB was noted for his pawky sense of humour, and few subjects were as unfailing a source of amusement to him as the effrontery, exaggerated expectation, and obvious unsuitability of many who sought inclusion in the honours list. The party had been long out of power, and now the importunate faithful expected their reward. On occasion CB was overgenerous, but he was genuinely alarmed to discover the large sums routinely extracted from ambitious petitioners by the Liberal chief whip. Despite his disapproval, the time-dishonoured traffic continued unabated. He refused an earldom for Curzon on the grounds that it was absurd to recommend what the viceroy's own political friends had denied. This argument did not impress the king, who supported Curzon's claim. 
Edward VII enjoyed his prime minister's company when taking the cure at Marienbad, but generally their relationship was fraught with niggling difficulties rooted in the king's antipathy to CB's political beliefs. The king disapproved of his behaviour during the South African War, particularly the 'methods of barbarism' speech, he deprecated CB writing about disarmament in a radical journal, he was horrified as much as amazed that he agreed with female enfranchisement, he was angered by CB's failure to curb the more extravagant language of young colleagues, and he blamed him for exacerbating the clashes between the Commons and the Lords. Edward was much exasperated, and not entirely without reason, by the meagreness of CB's cabinet letters. CB informed Knollys that he was sorry to have earned the king's displeasure but, characteristically, proffered no apology. He found that cabinet meetings were generally tedious and saw no reason why he should pretend otherwise merely to amuse the king. It was typical of their relationship that Edward discouraged CB, despite the prime minister's mortal illness, from returning too soon, so that he would not be incommoded by having to cut short his holiday at Biarritz. 
During CB's comparatively short time as prime minister his energy was eroded by illness, age, and grief. Much the most severe blow he suffered was the death of his beloved wife, on 30 August 1906, from which he never fully recovered, emotionally or physically. Charlotte's illness had grown increasingly painful and debilitating. Through every crisis CB nursed her with tender care and anxious devotion. He readily acknowledged to Knollys that the time and energy he gave unstintingly to his wife meant that he neglected his prime-ministerial duties. He knew this was not right, but he could do no other. Never were a couple more devoted than Henry and Charlotte: 'their hearts were as one' (from the lines of Tasso chosen by CB to be inscribed on his wife's memorial tablet in Meigle church). 
Shortly after Charlotte's death, CB suffered the first of a series of progressively more serious and damaging heart attacks. Each time he appeared to have made a rapid and full recovery. He returned to Westminster, made speeches in the country, carried out his official duties, and even visited Paris and Biarritz. But these jaunts did not have the savour of earlier visits to the continent, and CB grew increasingly fatigued. His illness was kept from the public until a fourth attack, which was particularly sharp and debilitating, in late November 1907. Asquith, as crown prince, increasingly handled the reins of power, but CB did not formally resign office until 4 April 1908. He died on the morning of 22 April 1908 while still in residence at 10 Downing Street. Generous tributes were paid CB in parliament, and an impressive service was held at Westminster Abbey. Arthur Ponsonby was not so much impressed by the establishment's conventional obsequies at the death of a prime minister as he was by the intense reverence and sympathy etched on the faces of the silent masses in the streets mourning the passing of a much loved old man. As CB's coffin sped north for interment on 28 April next to Charlotte's in Meigle churchyard, groups of railwaymen stood bare-headed at the railway side, paying silent tribute to a good man. 
In the debates between historians about Labour's rise to power and what George Dangerfield characterized as Liberal England's strange death, where the focus has been personality it has concentrated almost exclusively upon CB's successors as prime minister, Asquith and Lloyd George. The leader who, more than any other, made possible the Liberal decade of dominance has been relatively ignored. Yet CB has been fortunate in his two major biographers, J. A. Spender and John Wilson. Though not an intimate, Spender knew CB well and was thoroughly familiar with the contemporary political scene. CB's official life, published in 1923, is detailed, unvarnished, and straightforward. Radical and Labour critics complained that it insufficiently emphasized CB's supposedly distinctive views on peace, disarmament, and the conduct of foreign affairs. Ponsonby supposed Spender had fallen into error not only because of his Liberal Imperialist sympathies but also because he effectively ignored the memoir of CB that he (Ponsonby) had written. Despite their considerable value, especially on domestic issues during CB's premiership, Ponsonby's notes are not particularly reliable on military and diplomatic issues, as his memory was coloured by the events of the First World War. F. W. Hirst used the notes in writing an idealized portrait of CB that concludes with the assurance: 'he kept the faith to the end and was no way responsible for the European tragedy that came to pass six years after his death' (Hirst, 265). Wilson's biography, published in 1973, is worldly-wise in its judgements; scholarly and subtly nuanced, it does justice to CB as a man and a politician. It confirms the broad outlines of Spender's earlier work. Some reservation has been expressed that his account is stronger on character than interpretation. The torrents of monographs and articles analysing so many aspects of Victorian and Edwardian political life, as well as the further release of private papers, have, it is true, added considerable detail. Yet they do not suggest any need for major revision of the viewpoint taken in Wilson's balanced, persuasive portrait of Britain's first and only radical prime minister. 


@@@@@


doc= 32276


Campion, Gilbert Francis Montriou, Baron Campion (1882-1958), civil servant, was born at Simla on 11 May 1882, the eldest son of John Montriou Campion, later chief engineer, Punjab, in the public works department of India, and his wife, Grace Hannah, daughter of Abraham Collis Anderson, of co. Kilkenny. He was educated at Bedford School and won a classical scholarship to Hertford College, Oxford, where he gained first-class honours in both classical moderations (1903) and 'literae humaniores' (1905). Though he took the civil service examination in 1906 he decided to accept the nomination of Sir Courtenay Ilbert to a clerkship in the House of Commons. 
Campion's interest in comparative parliamentary procedure was shown early on when he and his colleague, W. P. Johnston, suggested to Ilbert that they should visit the principal countries in Europe and gather information about their respective systems. The results of their investigations were placed at the disposal of the select committee on procedure, 1914, and appended to their minutes of evidence. On the outbreak of war Campion joined the army and became a captain in the Army Service Corps. He was invalided home from France and in 1917 was appointed secretary to the conference on the reform of the second chamber presided over by Lord Bryce, who warmly commended Campion's wide knowledge of parliamentary institutions at home and abroad. In 1919 Campion was appointed secretary to the conference on devolution presided over by Speaker Lowther. The scheme of regional grand councils proposed by Lowther is believed to have been substantially Campion's work. In January 1920 Campion married Hilda Mary, daughter of William Alfred Spafford; she was principal of the Darlington Training College for women teachers. There were no children. 
In 1921 Campion became second clerk assistant, and in 1929, the year before his promotion to clerk assistant, he published 'An Introduction to the Procedure of the House of Commons', which was conceived originally as a manual of first aid for members, but was in fact a complete account of the procedure of the house. In 1937 he succeeded Sir Horace Dawkins as clerk of the house and when war broke out in 1939 he was responsible for organizing the move to Church House and the procedural innovations required by security. 
The publication in 1946 of the fourteenth edition of Sir Thomas Erskine May's century old classic 'Parliamentary Practice' marked the end of twelve years' labour for Campion and established his reputation as a master of parliamentary procedure. This massive work was rearranged and largely rewritten under his editorship. A historical introduction, which he had hoped to expand into a separate volume, outlined briefly the results of modern research. 
In 1945 the Labour government, faced with a heavy legislative programme, invited Campion to submit a comprehensive scheme of reform to a select committee on procedure. Although his more radical proposals for lessening the legislative burden on the house were rejected, his suggestions provided a framework for discussion, and the changes finally agreed upon were incorporated in the fifteenth edition of Erskine May (1950), edited by Campion with the assistance of T. G. B. Cocks. 
After the war the movement towards self-government in the colonies stimulated the demand for information and guidance from Westminster, and Campion authorized the first official visits of a clerk to Commonwealth legislatures. In July 1948 he retired, and his outstanding services to the Commons were recognized in tributes from Herbert Morrison, the leader of the house, and Winston Churchill on behalf of the opposition. The following month Campion set out on an official tour of Commonwealth parliaments, in the course of which he visited Ceylon, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Kenya, and Sudan. In 1949 he made a similar visit to the legislatures of Canada. Owing to ill health he never wrote the book which would have contained the results of these investigations, but he contributed some impressions of the earlier tour at intervals to the 'Sunday Times'. 
On his return from these travels Campion was appointed the first clerk of the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe, which met at Strasbourg. The difficulties and weaknesses of this novel experiment in European co-operation were discussed by Campion in articles contributed to the 'Sunday Times' (30 July 1950) and 'The Times' (13 November 1950). His early interest in comparative procedure had come to fruition in 1946 when he was elected president of the autonomous section of secretaries-general of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. On his initiative the material was collected for the handbook of 'European Parliamentary Procedure', which he compiled jointly with D. W. S. Lidderdale and published in 1953. 
Campion ranks with the greatest of his predecessors at the table of the house. By temperament a scholar and somewhat shy in his dealings with people, his humanity and sense of humour made him much more than the pre-eminent practitioner of his profession. His power of analysis and lucid expression made him the ideal expositor of the intricacies of procedure; his grasp of principle, combined with his wide knowledge of historical precedent and contemporary parallel, gave to his views on the British parliamentary system a unique authority. 
Campion was appointed CB in 1932, KCB in 1938, GCB in 1948, and was raised to the peerage as Baron Campion in 1950. Hertford College made him an honorary fellow in 1946 and the University of Oxford conferred on him an honorary DCL in 1950. He was a keen golfer and in 1948 won the parliamentary golf handicap. He died at his home, Little Bowes, Abinger Hammer, near Dorking, on 6 April 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 32277


Cannan, Charles (1858-1919), Aristotelian scholar and publisher, was born at Richmond, Surrey, on 2 August 1858, son of David Alexander Cannan (1820-1877), a building contractor of Kirkcudbrightshire, and his wife, Jane Dorothea Claude (1822-1861), a Sunday school teacher of Huguenot descent. His brother was the economist Edwin Cannan (1861-1935). He was educated at Clifton College and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Cannan was elected fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1884. He became classical tutor and dean in 1884, and junior bursar in 1887. 
After an accomplished period as an unorthodox tutor and lecturer Cannan was elected a delegate of Oxford University Press in 1895, and the direction of his career was determined when in 1898 the delegates appointed him their secretary in succession to Philip Lyttelton Gell. He remained in the post until his death, and made Oxford what he deemed 'it ought to be: the first Press in the world' (Sutcliffe, 107). On 18 December 1891 he married Mary Wedderburn (1857-1943), daughter of Andrew Wedderburn-Maxwell of Middlebie, Dumfriesshire, and Glenlair, Kirkcudbrightshire. They had three daughters: Dorothea, who married the printer and assistant secretary to the delegates John Johnson; Joanna Maxwell Cannan (1896-1961), children's writer; and May Wedderburn Cannan. Cannan died at his home, Magdalen Gate House, Oxford, on 15 December 1919, his wife surviving him; he was buried three days later in Holywell cemetery. 
During his secretaryship Cannan promoted great expansion in the press's business and in the number of its branches overseas. By nature conservative and cautious, he seldom seemed to initiate far-reaching changes of policy. He conceived of the press as an institution possessing inherited characters and a natural growth. He saw himself as fostering its growth rather than as giving it new directions. 
Cannan's greatest reform concerned the press's London office. From here, Henry Frowde had distributed titles and managed the 'Bible' and prayer book business. Cannan saw that the time had come for Oxford men to direct the office. The changes which he made, especially Humphrey Milford's appointment as publisher in 1913, turned the London office into a real university department. Cannan also encouraged fresh projects, including 'The Oxford Book of English Verse', the 'Oxford Classical Texts', and the revival of the seventeenth-century Fell types, notably in Robert Bridges' 'The Yattendon Hymnal' (1899). He was secretary when in 1917 the descendants of George Smith offered the 'Dictionary of National Biography' to the press. Cannan was already in dispute with Sidney Lee, hitherto the editor, about a contract and the acceptance of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' was problematic. John Johnson, the assistant secretary, recalled in a letter: 'Cannan hated Sidney Lee, had quarrelled with Sir Charles Firth... disliked A. F. Pollard and altogether regarded the 'D.N.B.' as a white elephant. They were the most melancholy Delegates meetings I ever remember before the gift was finally accepted' (Matthew, 7). 
Cannan was a conservative and an imperialist, but not a party man. Local affairs interested him, and he sat on Oxford city council. He was an influential presence on Oxford's committee of appointments, but made few public appearances. He rarely left Oxford except on mountaineering holidays. Rugby football, proofs of 'The Oxford English Dictionary', the daily newspaper, and Aristotle were his other pastimes. His single, anonymous book was the 'Selecta ex organo Aristotelio capitula' (1897). 
Cannan's manner was formidable. His enthusiasms were unspoken. His tone was dry, even cynical. He had a mean opinion of human intelligence in general, and not a very high one of human probity. His last weapon, which he used ruthlessly, was silence. This is, perhaps, not the description of a great man, or even a lovable one. Yet Cannan was both. Those who knew him saw a man of great intellectual power and subtlety; of rare determination; and of unselfish devotion to the things he loved. 


@@@@@


doc= 32278


Cannan, Edwin (1861-1935), economist, was born on 3 February 1861 at Funchal, Madeira, son of David Alexander Cannan (1820-1877) of Kirkcudbrightshire, formerly a manufacturer's agent, and his wife, Jane Dorothea (1822-1861), formerly Claude. Charles Cannan was his elder brother; an elder sister was born in the mid-1850s while David and Jane were in Australia, but she died in infancy. A substantial legacy was left to Jane in 1854; it was her poor health during the later 1850s that precipitated first a move from Richmond, Surrey, to Bournemouth, and subsequently to Madeira. She died there thirteen days after giving birth to Edwin, who was named after his godfather, Edwin Chadwick, a close friend of David Cannan (Kadish, 'Oxford Economists', 6-7). David Cannan and his two sons soon returned to Bournemouth to live with his older sister, Agnes, and then, following her death in 1864, with another sister, Margaret. In 1868 David married Eliza Weekes and the family moved to her school, Aschan House; Eliza, however, died in the following year. 
Edwin Cannan, who was colour-blind, tone-deaf, and of a delicate constitution, attended Aschan House School, and then in 1876 followed his brother, Charles, to Clifton College, the family having moved to Bristol so that Edwin might attend as a day boy. The following year David Cannan died while touring Ireland, bequeathing to each of his sons, neither yet twenty, a comfortable private income. Edwin entered Balliol College, Oxford, in January 1881 as a commoner, and moved with his aunt Margaret into rooms at 24 St Giles', where they were to share a simple daily routine for many years. Poor health during the spring of 1882 prompted Edwin to abandon his plans to sit for an honours degree; instead in 1884 he took a pass degree, and then embarked on a trip around the world with his aunt (Kadish, 'Oxford Economists', 10). Having returned to Oxford, Edwin began to work up an essay on Saint-Simon (1675-1755) for the Lothian prize, which he was awarded in 1885. 
Cannan's fragile health ruled out the peripatetic rigours of lecturing for the Oxford extension, and in any event his private income meant that he was not, like many of his contemporaries, impelled into teaching political economy to earn a living. Another essay was entered, unsuccessfully, for the Cobden prize in 1886; a revised section was published as 'Elementary Political Economy' (1888), and his 1889 paper to the Fabian Society (E. Cannan, 'Economics and socialism', in 'The Economic Outlook', 1912, 53-86) also built on the Cobden essay. Through this latter paper he came to know Sidney Webb, who later persuaded Cannan to join the part-time staff of the London School of Economics (LSE) when it opened in 1895. This proved to be a turning point in Cannan's life, for the vigour that he brought to the school belied the fragile health of his youth. He was appointed professor of political economy in 1907, the year of his marriage, on 12 June, at Cheltenham, in a Presbyterian ceremony, to his second cousin, Margaret Mary (Rita) Cullen ('b'. 1870/71), daughter of David Cullen (deceased), who had been deputy surgeon-general; they had one son, David Ricardo, who died in 1918. Cannan retired from his LSE chair in 1926 after joining with Graham Wallas and A. L. Bowley as a founder editor of the school's journal 'Economica'. 
Oxford was at the centre of academic economics in Britain during the 1880s. Interest in political economy was linked to a wider concern for social reform and Irish home rule, both of which found expression in a number of university and college societies in which Cannan actively participated. Among his student contemporaries were W. J. Ashley, E. C. K. Gonner, Langford Price, and H. L. Smith, while Alfred Marshall succeeded Arnold Toynbee for a brief spell as tutor at Balliol in 1883 before leaving at the end of 1884 for Cambridge. At this time in Oxford political economy was taught in the context of modern history, and a broadly historical approach marked Oxford economics well into the twentieth century. Early influenced by the historian A. L. Smith, Cannan's Lothian essay is an unremarkable historical biography of the life and times not of the social thinker Saint-Simon, but of an aristocratic predecessor. 'Elementary Political Economy' is, however, a broadly unhistorical text, expounding classical principles with aggressive common sense, notable mainly for a wilful avoidance of the term 'capital' and a consequent resort to obscure circumlocution. As his 'Times' obituarist later observed, 'In controversy he may not always have hit the right nail, but he hit it on the head, and hit it very hard' ('The Times', 9 April 1935). 

'The History of the Theories of Production and Distribution' (1893) is by contrast a work of some scholarship, but even a cursory glance reveals that Cannan's approach was at once more analytical and critical than historical. He eschewed formal and mathematical reasoning, judging his subject matter in terms of current 'good sense', a quality he rarely encountered in his reading of the classical economists. Alfred Marshall, he thought, was too soft on these writers; W. S. Jevons provided the underlying theoretical principles by which all economics, past and present, should be measured. By this standard the classical economists were woefully inadequate, argued Cannan (Maloney, 70), but as practical responses to contemporary problems their abstractions made more sense. Cannan criticized past economic theory from the standpoint of modern economics, and then used history to account for its shortcomings -- the reverse of what one might have expected of a historically inclined economist. This was because he saw himself primarily as an economic theorist building upon, and renovating where necessary, the established body of classical doctrine -- for he remained until his death a classical rather than a neo-classical theorist, despite his admiration for the work of Jevons. 
Cannan's most lasting contribution was as an editor of Adam Smith, where his acuity and scholarship are displayed at their best. In 1895 a chance encounter with an Edinburgh lawyer brought into his hands a set of student notes from Smith's Glasgow lectures of 1763. Since Smith's executors had (on Smith's instructions) destroyed most of his papers when he died, the discovery of this notebook contributed significantly to understanding of the work. Cannan published the notes as 'Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms' (1896), and this edition was not superseded until an augmented edition appeared in 1978. Similarly, in 1904 he published an edition of Smith's 'Wealth of Nations' that remained the standard critical text until 1976. 
In the early 1890s Cannan became a regular contributor on legislative and administrative matters to the new Oxford-based 'Economic Review', and developed an especial interest in the evolution of local government taxation. This formed the subject of his first course of lectures at the LSE in 1895, published the following year (1896) as an account of the early modern statutory foundation of local systems of taxation. His teaching for the school developed rapidly, combining in his core lectures the history of economics with an appraisal of recent economic theory based upon a critical evaluation of Marshallian economics. The first-year lectures on economic principles that he gave were written up as the introductory textbook 'Wealth' (1914), a copy of which was placed in a time capsule under a foundation-stone for an extension laid at the school by the king in May 1920 ('Economic Journal', 30, 1920, 278-9). The second- and third-year theory lectures delivered from the early 1900s until his retirement were likewise written up and published (1929). 
Cannan's commitment to teaching at the LSE contrasts with his earlier Oxford years, but he continued to live in Oxford, commuting daily on the train. Lionel Robbins, a student after the First World War, reported that he was a poor, though informative, lecturer, lacking familiarity with modern economic developments (Robbins, 'Autobiography', 83-6) -- by which Robbins probably means American and European developments, for Cannan had attended Marshall's lectures in the winter of 1891-2 and demonstrates in 'A Review of Economic Theory' an easy familiarity with Marshallian principles. Cannan belonged to an earlier age, when historical and practical interests went naturally together. This was also true of his interest in local government, for he was elected by the university to Oxford city council in 1896 and served his city for many years. At the national level his chief engagement was as a critic of economic administration. Anticipating the question 'What did you do in the Great War?' in the preface to a collection of occasional pieces and letters dating from the period 1914-26, he responds: 'I protested' (E. Cannan, 'An Economist's Protest', 1927, v). War finance and its inflationary domestic impact prompted an interest in earlier debates on paper money, which led to an edition of the 1810 bullion report coupled with a lengthy essay on its historical context entirely within the same combative spirit (1919). 
Cannan was a keen gardener and a cyclist who never walked if he could cycle, 'at any time prepared to ride a hundred miles, and the story is told that when he failed to find a book at the Bodleian, he merely said ' -- then I must go on to the British Museum'' (Bowley, 392). He died on 8 April 1935 of pneumonia and cardiac failure at Bournemouth Hydropathic, Durley Gardens, Bournemouth; his funeral was held on 11 April at Wolvercote, Oxford. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32279


Canning, Sir Samuel (1823-1908), civil and electrical engineer, was born at Ogbourne St Andrew, Wiltshire, on 21 July 1823, the son of Robert Canning of Ogbourne St Andrew, and his wife, Frances Hyde. Educated at Salisbury, he gained his first engineering experience (1844-9) with Locke and Errington on the Great Western Railway extensions, and as resident engineer on the Liverpool, Ormskirk, and Preston Railway. From railway work he turned in 1852 to submarine telegraphy, and entering the service of Glass, Elliot & Co., cable manufacturers, he laid in 1855-6 the Canadian cable connecting Cape Breton Island with Newfoundland. 
In 1857 Canning assisted Charles Bright with the first Atlantic cable, and he was on board HMS 'Agamemnon' during the submergence of the cable in 1857 and 1858. Subsequently, until 1865, while in the service of Glass, Elliot & Co., he laid cables in the deep waters of the Mediterranean and other seas. He married on 27 September 1859 Elizabeth Ann (died 1909), daughter of William Henry Gale of Grately, Hampshire; they had three sons and three daughters. 
When the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company was formed in 1865, Canning was appointed its chief engineer, and in that capacity had charge of the manufacture and laying of the Atlantic cables of 1865 and 1866, for which the company were the contractors. This work involved the preparation and fitting-out of the 'Great Eastern'. On 2 August 1865 the cable broke in 2000 fathoms of water. After a second cable had been successfully laid by the 'Great Eastern' (13-27 July 1866), Canning set to work to recover the broken cable, using special grappling machinery, which he devised for the purpose. After several failures, the cable was eventually recovered on 2 September 1866. For these services he was knighted in 1866; the king of Portugal conferred upon him the order of St Jago d'Espada, and the Liverpool chamber of commerce presented him with a gold medal. In 1869 he laid the French Atlantic cable between Brest and Duxbury, Massachusetts. 
After his retirement from the service of the Telegraph Construction Company, Canning practised as a consulting engineer in matters connected with telegraphy, and, among other work, superintended the laying of the Marseilles-Algiers and other cables for the India Rubber, Gutta Percha, and Telegraph Works Company, acting later as adviser to the West Indian and Panama and other telegraph companies. When the firm of Callender's decided to adapt their bitumen products to the manufacture of insulated cable, they hired Canning to advise them on the acquisition of machinery for wire work. He was appointed to Callender's board in March 1883, but resigned in December after a dispute over his remuneration. He was a member of both the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He died at Whatley, Twyford, Hampshire, on 24 September 1908, and was buried on 29 September in Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32280


Cannon, Herbert Graham (1897-1963), zoologist, was born on 14 April 1897 at Wimbledon, Surrey, the third of the four children of David William Cannon, a compositor in the firm of Eyre and Spottiswoode, and his wife, Alice, the daughter of Charles Graham, who owned and drove one of the first horse-buses to run in south London. 
When Cannon was about five years old the family moved to Brixton. He attended the local council school, from where he won a scholarship to Wilson's Grammar School in Camberwell. Following a serious accident at the age of sixteen, when he fell from a window while sleepwalking (and suffered several compound fractures), he found strenuous exercise impossible. In 1916, being unfit for war service, Cannon went up to Cambridge as a choral scholar of Christ's College to read for the natural sciences tripos. In 1918 he passed part one with first-class honours in zoology, chemistry, and physiology. Instead of continuing with part two, he obtained leave of absence to take up a temporary post as naturalist in the board of fisheries laboratory at Conwy, returning to Cambridge in January 1919 to complete the three years of residence necessary for the BA degree. 
For a while Cannon thought of taking up research in experimental zoology, for which he was well qualified. However, he was unable to get a post in Cambridge and, encouraged by his experiences at Conwy with a variety of living marine animals, he turned his attention to the problems of interpreting animal structure and the nature of animals' developmental processes in terms of their functional significance and adaptational value. 
In 1920 Cannon was appointed a demonstrator in the department of zoology at Imperial College, London, under Professor E. W. MacBride, a powerful and provocative advocate of the Lamarckian view of the evolution of organisms through the inheritance of acquired characters. Through MacBride, Cannon became friendly with W. T. Calman, deputy keeper of zoology in the British Museum (Natural History), and an authority on Crustacea, a subphylum which appealed strongly to Cannon as material for research; and in 1922 he began the long series of skilful investigations of the embryology, feeding mechanisms, and general anatomy of the Crustacea which established his reputation as a zoologist. 
In 1926 Cannon was appointed to the chair of zoology at Sheffield University, where in the space of five years he published several important papers, three in collaboration with Sidnie Milana Manton (1902-1979). It had long been known that many crustaceans can feed by filtering small organisms from the surrounding water, and that by complicated limb movements they can themselves generate feeding currents, thus drawing food to their mouths. Together with Manton, Cannon studied the structure and motion of the limbs in relation to feeding currents made visible through the movements of particles and dyes. Limb movements were analysed by stroboscopic viewing and the sites of filtration and particle transfer traced by microscopic examination of sections of animals with their limbs carefully preserved in their natural relationships. 
In 1927 Cannon married Annie Helen (Nannie), a zoologist, and graduate of Edinburgh, the daughter of Edwin J. Fyfe of Edinburgh. The couple had four children, and the marriage was happy. 
Cannon was regarded as a fine lecturer. He used plain language delivered with an actor's generous use of gestures and emphasis, and he was watchful of the responses of his audience. Forthright and uncompromising in the defence of his beliefs, and quick to react to criticism, he was nevertheless warm-hearted and generous. He took an especial pleasure in beautiful things, whether they were natural or artefacts. His main hobby was the collection and annotation of elegantly worked swords and furnishings, on which he was an authority. In his later years his thoughts turned to evolutionary topics, and he wrote 'The Evolution of Living Things' (1958) and 'Lamarck and Modern Genetics' (1959). 
Cannon was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1927 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1935. He died in St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, on 6 January 1963, shortly after being flown home from Las Palmas, where he had become seriously ill while on a recuperative voyage. 
Eric Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32281


Canton, William (1845-1926), poet and journalist, the eldest son of Thomas Canton of the colonial civil service and his wife, Mary Thomas, was born on 27 October 1845 on the island of Chushan, off the coast of China. His father died in Jamaica when he was nine, and his schooldays were spent in France, where 'the sudden discovery of a cromlech in a cornfield inspired him with a passion for antiquity', which became perhaps the most individual quality of his writing. His parents were Catholics, and for a while he studied for the priesthood at the Benedictine College at Douai in Picardy. But as a young man he left the Roman Catholic church and became a protestant. Early friendships, and the estrangement inevitable from his change of faith, found utterance in the lyric 'The Comrades' (published in a collection of the same name, 1902) and in his beautiful story 'The Lost Brother' (published in 'A Child's Book of Saints', 1898). From 1867 he was a teacher and journalist in London. In 1873 his long poem 'Through the Ages: the Legend of a Stone Axe', published in the 'New Quarterly Magazine', aroused T. H. Huxley's enthusiasm as 'the first attempt to use the raw material of science' for poetry. In 1874 Canton married Emma (died 1880), daughter of Charles Moore. The only child of the marriage, a daughter, died in 1877 and was commemorated in 'The Invisible Playmate' (1894), the first prose work which won him recognition. 
In 1876 Canton began fifteen years of writing for papers in Glasgow, initially as editor of the 'Glasgow Weekly Herald' and then as sub-editor and leader writer of the 'Glasgow Herald', which made many assume him to be a Scot -- and as such he was attacked in T. W. H. Crosland's diatribe 'The Unspeakable Scot'. In 1882 he married his second wife, Annie Elizabeth, daughter of John Ingham Taylor of Manchester, a civil engineer; a daughter, Winifred Vida, was born in 1890 and a son, Guy Desmond, in 1896. In 1891 Canton went to London as general manager to the publishers Isbister & Co., and shortly after became sub-editor of the 'Contemporary Review' and editor of the 'Sunday Magazine'. He also wrote a large amount of prose and verse for 'Good Words'. However, he made his reputation by his own independent work. 'A Lost Epic and other Poems' appeared in 1887 and won the admiration of Max Muller, T. E. Brown, and Walter Pater. The 'W. V.' (Winifred Vida) books -- 'The Invisible Playmate' (1894), 'W. V. her Book' (1896), 'A Child's Book of Saints' (1898), 'In Memory of W. V.' (1901) -- gained him a large public. 
Winifred Vida died in 1901, and Canton then undertook the task of writing the official 'History of the British and Foreign Bible Society' in the hope that the heavy workload would prove an anodyne. It occupied nine years of conscientious labour, and when he at last emerged into literary daylight he found himself all but forgotten. Thereafter, his work was all definitely commissioned. Much was in small popular books for the Bible Society, the last being finished, with the exception of the final chapter, the night before he died. Imaginative relief came rarely to him, but it did so notably in 'The Story of St Elizabeth of Hungary' (1912). He was granted a civil-list pension in 1912, and in 1925 his friends collected a sum to mark his eightieth birthday. In the same year, Ernest Benn Ltd published a short selection of his verse in their 'Augustan' series, compiled mainly by his lifelong friend and admirer Edward J. Thompson, the first author of this memoir. On 2 May 1926 Canton died at Hendon, London, where he had lived since 1912. 
Canton's verse lacked lyrical impulse, except in the elegiac poems included in 'In Memory of W. V.' An earlier generation considered his poems of childhood his finest achievement, but a later age may well consider them marred by a cult of the trivial, the domestic, or the merely pretty. His longer poems are of two kinds: classical, influenced, but remaining individual, by Tennyson's 'Oenone' and 'Tithonus' and, still more, by Robert Browning's 'Cleon' and 'Artemis Prologises'; and those that must be termed antiquarian. The latter are a good expression of the immense change in imaginative outlook which followed the mid-Victorian discovery of the almost immeasurable antiquity of man and of animal life generally. The 'W. V.' books are the best of his prose works, written in a whimsical, light style, allusive in a poetical and not merely scholarly fashion, and often profoundly moving. His eager, courageous spirit, which expression in literature was so often clogged and jaded, showed itself in his private letters; very few who received his correspondence destroyed any of it, notably the first author of this piece himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 32282


Cape, (Herbert) Jonathan (1879-1960), publisher, was born in London on 15 November 1879, the youngest of the seven children of Jonathan Cape, builder's clerk of Cumbrian origin, and his wife, Caroline Page. He received little formal education, and at the age of sixteen he started his career as an errand-boy for Hatchards bookshop in Piccadilly. Four years later, in 1899, he joined the English house of the American publishers Harper & Brothers, where he worked as a travelling salesman, first in the provinces and later in London. In 1904 he moved to the English publisher Gerald Duckworth as London traveller, and later became manager. On 13 June 1907 he married Edith Louisa (1880/1881-1919), the daughter of Francis Creak, an ironmonger. They had two daughters. 
In the First World War, Cape served in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, where he reached the rank of captain. After the war he returned to Duckworth, but early in 1920 he went as manager to the Medici Society: its chief products were coloured reproductions of paintings, with some book publishing on the side. There he met George Wren Howard, fourteen years his junior, who after taking a degree at Cambridge had fought in the war and was now learning the business. Cape quickly saw that Howard had a fine sense of design in book production, as well as a good business head; the two became friends and allies. After some months they decided that there was no future for them where they were, and that they had better start a new firm of their own. Howard managed to borrow his share of their exiguous starting capital from his father; Cape with no such resource was compelled to look elsewhere. All the time he had been with Duckworth the firm's most profitable author had been Elinor Glyn, and Cape had always advocated cheap editions of her books, which Duckworth had steadfastly refused to issue. Cape persuaded Duckworth to lease him the 'shilling rights' of Elinor Glyn's books, which he republished under the imprint Page & Co.: the profits of this venture helped to provide Cape with his share of the necessary capital. 
One thing more was needful: a literary adviser, and for this Cape and Howard engaged Edward Garnett (husband of Constance Garnett), the ablest and most influential publisher's reader of recent time, whom Cape had known at Duckworths. He stayed with Cape until his death in 1937, and it was largely his literary judgement, coupled with Howard's production, which gained the new firm its outstanding reputation for quality during the next two decades. 
The firm of Jonathan Cape opened its doors at 11 Gower Street, Bloomsbury, London, on 1 January 1921, and its first publication was a reissue of 'Travels in Arabia Deserta' by C. M. Doughty, originally issued in 1888 with no success. This new edition, in two volumes at the huge price of 9 guineas, seemed so risky that it was initially issued jointly with the Medici Society. But its success was prompt and substantial, and long before its appearance it had won the new firm one of its strongest supporters. Knowing that T. E. Lawrence was interested in the book, they persuaded him to write a long introduction for nothing. This eventually led to the firm's publishing Lawrence's 'Revolt in the Desert' (1927), 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom' (1935), and 'The Mint' (1955). 
In 1922 Cape purchased the business of A. C. Fifield, a small publisher of independence and judgement, thus adding the works of Samuel Butler, H. G. Wells, Laurence Housman, Lancelot Hogben, and W. H. Davies to his growing list. Cape also regularly visited the United States in search of books, and he led the London publishing industry in importing work by American authors. He was the English publisher of three future Nobel prize-winners (Sinclair Lewis, Ernest Hemingway, and Eugene O'Neill), as well as H. L. Mencken, Sherwood Anderson, Louis Bromfield, Dorothy Canfield, Robert Frost, Carl Sandburg, Edna St Vincent Millay, Margaret Mead, Lewis Mumford, Herman Wouk, and James M. Cain. In 1929 he went into partnership with Harrison Smith to set up a short-lived American company, which published William Faulkner's 'As I Lay Dying' (1930). 
In 1925 Cape's firm moved to its lasting home at 30 Bedford Square, from which in due course appeared the first, and most of the subsequent, works of H. E. Bates, Duff Cooper, Eric Linklater, J. E. Neale, and C. V. Wedgwood. The children's books of Hugh Lofting and Arthur Ransome were perennially successful, and when Cape heard that Stanley Baldwin was planning to speak at the Royal Literary Fund dinner about 'Precious Bane' (1924) by Mary Webb, which Cape had published, he speedily bought the rights of her earlier books from their original publishers and reissued them in an immensely popular collected edition. Cape's many cheap series, of which the 'Travellers' Library' was the most prominent, set a new standard of quality and appearance, and held the field until the arrival of paperbacks. Ten of the first Penguin books were Cape titles: he soon came to regret selling the rights, since the resulting paperback revolution killed his own hardcover reprints. 
Several Cape books won the James Tait Black memorial prize, including Percy Lubbock's 'Earlham' (1922), Liam O'Flaherty's 'The Informer' (1925), and E. H. Young's 'Miss Mole' (1930). He also published Robert Graves's 'Goodbye to All That' (1929), James Joyce's 'Stephen Hero' (1944), Arthur Koestler's 'Darkness at Noon' (1940), and works by Roy Campbell, Christopher Isherwood, Henry Williamson, Andre Maurois, Malcolm Lowry, and Alan Paton. 
On 1 October 1927 Cape married again; his second wife was Olyve Vida (1894/1895-1931) who had been an employee in the firm. She was the daughter of M. G. Blackmon, and had recently divorced her first husband, Thomas James. They went on to have a son and a daughter. 
Cape won notoriety by publishing Radclyffe Hall's lesbian novel 'The Well of Loneliness' (1928), an affair he handled with questionable judgement. When a reviewer, James Douglas, denounced the book as pornographic, Cape appealed to the home secretary, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, who predictably threatened to ban it. Cape then announced that he would cease publication, but he leased the rights to a Parisian press, which smuggled copies into Britain until they were seized by the police. In the subsequent trial Cape's barrister bungled the defence, and the novel was ruled obscene. Fearful of another clash with the censors, Cape was to pass up the opportunity to publish work by Samuel Beckett, Norman Mailer's 'The Deer Park' (1955), and Vladimir Nabokov's 'Lolita' (1955). He also expurgated fiction by Hemingway and Irwin Shaw. Although he had a low opinion of 'Casino Royale' (1953), Cape took on Ian Fleming's James Bond thrillers, which eventually sold millions and generated nearly all of the firm's profits. 
Ten years after the death of his second wife, Cape married again, on 16 October 1941. His third wife was Kathleen Mary Webb (1906/1907-1953), the widowed daughter of Philip Wilson, a former librarian at the British Museum. They had one son. 
Cape knew his own limitations and stuck to what he knew: general publishing and high-quality books (never attempting to enter the educational, technical, or specialist markets, of which he was ignorant), and his standard remained unusually high. In this he was helped, first by Edward Garnett, and later by the diverse talents of Hamish Miles, David Garnett, Guy Chapman, J. E. Neale, C. V. Wedgwood, Daniel George, and William Plomer. 
Cape was a tall, handsome man of commanding stature. He was an extremely hard worker, always keeping the same hours as the most junior member of his staff. By some he was considered a hard man, and he was certainly a shrewd one, but he had a humorous as well as a sentimental side and could sometimes be prevailed upon. He seldom became close personal friends with his authors, but they respected his integrity and admired his thorough knowledge of publishing. Except for reading, and the governorship of Frensham Heights, the co-educational school, he had no other interests. Publishing was his life, and although he suffered two strokes in 1954, he worked at it until his death at his home, 128 Bedford Court Mansions, London, from heart failure on 10 February 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 32283


Capel, Thomas John (1836-1911), Roman Catholic priest, born at Ardmore, co. Waterford, on 28 October 1836, was the eldest son of John Capel and his wife, Mary Fitzgerald. His father, after service in the navy, joined the coastguard service and was stationed at Hastings, where Thomas received his early education from the parish priest before being placed in the care of the Revd J. M. Glennie, a Tractarian convert to Roman Catholicism resident at Brook Green, Hammersmith. In 1851 Glennie became the founding principal of St Mary's Roman Catholic Teacher Training College at Brook Green, and in 1853 Capel was one of the first students to obtain a teaching certificate there. From 1854 he taught at the normal school attached to the college, while studying for the priesthood. He was ordained priest by Cardinal Wiseman in his private chapel at York Place on 28 August 1859. Unusually, he did not attend a seminary, so it must be presumed that he was ordained on his own patrimony. The source of his private income is unknown. 
In 1863 Capel retired for reasons of health to Pau, in the Basses-Pyrenees, where he acted as English Catholic chaplain, earned a reputation as a preacher and controversialist, and made some fashionable converts. While there he became acquainted with Charles Scott Murray, the patron of A. W. Pugin, who on his return to England in 1867 engaged him as his chaplain at Danesfield, near Marlow, Buckinghamshire. Scott Murray introduced him to John Patrick Crichton-Stuart, third marquess of Bute, then an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford, who adopted him as his spiritual director. In 1868 he paid several visits to Oxford, where his eloquence and charm produced an outbreak of Roman fever among the undergraduates of Christ Church, to the alarm of Dean Liddell. According to Bute, on the last day of his visit in December, after having 'operated privately on some rationalists' he drew an 'immense congregation' to his sermon at the Catholic chapel in St Clements (Blair, 71-2). Capel's reception of Bute into the Roman Catholic church on 8 December 1868 attracted much publicity. Early in 1869 he and Bute departed from Nice on the latter's yacht for a cruise to the Holy Land, calling 'en route' at Rome, where they had a private audience of Pope Pius IX, who appointed Capel a papal chamberlain, with the title of Monsignor. 
Attached to the pro-cathedral at Kensington on his return to England in 1869, Capel rapidly made his mark in London society and won over a number of titled converts. In 1870 he appeared, thinly disguised, as the worldly-wise and casuistical Monsignor Catesby in Disraeli's novel 'Lothair' (1870). Two years later life converged with art when in April 1872 Disraeli was one of the witnesses at the wedding of Bute (Lothair) in Brompton Oratory, Capel celebrating the nuptial mass and Manning (Cardinal Grandison) performing the ceremony. On 7 September 1872, in its 'Men of the day' series, 'Vanity Fair' profiled Capel as an 'apostle to the genteel', 'if not an admirer, at least a great controller of the fair sex', who had 'probably made and unmade more important marriages than any man or mamma in the country'. 
In February 1873, with the backing of the duke of Norfolk and Lord Petre, Capel opened a Catholic public school at Kensington which was intended to attract the sons of the Catholic aristocracy away from Eton and Harrow. Impressed by his dynamism, Cardinal Manning appointed him in 1874 to the rectorship of his Catholic university which opened at Kensington in January 1875. The appointment was unanimously approved by the English Catholic hierarchy. The staff included scholars of the calibre of St G. Jackson Mivart, Frederick Apthorp Paley, and Charles Stanton Devas, and in three years the number of undergraduates rose from seventeen to fifty, but the scheme was handicapped by the opposition of the Jesuits and by a lack of co-operation from Newman, who declined an invitation to become a member of the senate. Capel devoted his principal energies to his school, and there were complaints that the university students were inadequately supervised. In 1878 a committee of investigation discovered that Capel had kept no accounts and was heavily in debt. On being requested to resign he threatened to sue the hierarchy for damages, and in order to avoid the scandal of a court case Manning was obliged to come to a private financial settlement. The university was wound up and Capel's school also closed, its patrons having withdrawn their support. A further charge of misconduct, involving young women, led to his suspension by Manning. Capel vigorously denied the charges and carried the case to Rome, where he had influential allies. In September 1882 he secured an acquittal, but Manning threatened to resign his see if he were allowed to return to England, and appealed to a higher authority. By a decree of 6 February 1887, valid worldwide, Capel was finally suspended from the exercise of his priestly faculties. 
Meanwhile, in 1883 Capel had migrated to the United States, where he undertook a highly successful lecture tour of the eastern and mid-western states before settling in 1885 at San Francisco, where he lived in some style. In 1886 he took up permanent residence at Arno Ranch, near Galt, in northern California, as the guest of Mrs Alice Valensin, whose son he tutored. He continued to publish pamphlets in defence of ultramontane doctrine, and was befriended by Thomas Grace, the bishop of Sacramento, at whose residence he died on 23 October 1911. The entry he supplied to the 'American Catholic Who's Who' of 1911 gives a somewhat misleading account of his meteoric career. 


@@@@@


doc= 32284


Capes, William Wolfe (1834-1914), Church of England clergyman and classical scholar, was the third son of Joseph Capes, an employee of the Royal Mint and a bookseller in Paternoster Row, London, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Joseph Wolfe, of Reading. He was born on 1 January 1834 in the parish of St Michael-le-Querne, London, probably in Paternoster Row. He was admitted to St Paul's School, London, on 31 January 1843. A keen pedestrian, he used to walk to school daily from Norwood, where his parents then lived; at sixteen he began to travel abroad (he continued these journeys throughout his life), making an expedition, mainly on foot, from the Netherlands to Rome. In 1852 he went up to Oxford, as Michel exhibitioner at Queen's College. The foundation of the college was then being thrown open, and in 1854 Capes was elected to a taberdarship, previously a closed scholarship. He had in 1853 obtained first classes at moderations in classics and mathematics, and in the final honour schools in 1855 he obtained a first class in classics and a second class in mathematics. 
Capes was elected fellow of Queen's on 11 December 1856, and as tutor found himself responsible for all the college teaching in 'literae humaniores'. He proceeded MA in 1858, and remained a fellow of Queen's until 1870. He was ordained in 1865, and served briefly as curate at Abbot's Anne, near Andover. He returned to college work, and was junior proctor in 1865-6, and examiner in 'literae humaniores' in 1867-9, 1873-5, and 1878-9. In 1869 he was presented by his college to the rectory of Bramshott, Hampshire, which he held for thirty-two years. On 23 August 1870 he married Mary (1836/7-1908), daughter of John Leadbeater, of Blackburn. Bramshott was an extensive agricultural parish and, with as many as fourteen gatherings on Sundays for teaching and worship, the services of his wife, his curate, the schoolmasters, and other laymen were called on. But Capes spent three or four days in the middle of each week of term in Oxford, and was from 1870 to 1887 university reader of ancient history. From 1876 to 1886 he was elected fellow and tutor of Hertford College. At this time Capes published 'The Early Roman Empire' (1874) and 'The Age of the Antonines' (1877), both in a series of 'Epochs of Ancient History', 'University Life in Ancient Athens' (1877), a course of lectures based on Greek inscriptions, and 'Stoicism' (1883). Several of these were reissued in the twentieth century. He also prepared editions of some of the texts newly introduced as set books for university honours courses. An edition of Livy, books xxi and xxii (1880), which was reprinted as late as 1960, was followed by one of Sallust (1884) and the part of Polybius containing the history of the Achaean league (1888). Capes was select preacher to the university (1873-4), rural dean of Petersfield, and honorary canon of Winchester from 1894 to 1903. His 'History of the English Church in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries' (1900) was the third volume of an eight-volume work on 'The English Church'. Although reprinted in 1968, it had by then very largely outlived its usefulness. 
Capes resigned the rectory of Bramshott in 1901 and settled for a while at Addington, Kent, where he wrote 'Rural Life in Hampshire' (1903), an account of the neighbourhood of Bramshott. In 1903 he was collated to a residentiary canonry in Hereford Cathedral, and in 1908 he published 'The Charters and Records of Hereford Cathedral' with a long introduction containing a valuable account of the constitution of the cathedral. In the late twentieth century this was still a useful work, not least as others have proved reluctant to improve on it. Capes had earlier founded the Cantilupe Society, which succeeded in a few years in printing all the pre-Reformation registers of the bishops of Hereford. Six of these he himself edited, and he took an active interest in the work of his colleagues. He was one of the first scholars to apply himself to publishing this sort of record and is remembered for his early lead, even if his editions have not themselves stood the test of time. He also began arranging and cataloguing the valuable cathedral library, but this he had not finished at his death, on 30 October 1914 at his home in the cathedral close at Hereford. He and his wife were both buried at Bramshott. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32285


Capper, Sir Thompson (1863-1915), army officer, was born in Lucknow, India, on 20 October 1863. He was the third son of William Copeland Capper of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Sarah, the daughter of William Taylor Copeland. His older brother was Sir John Capper. Thompson Capper was commissioned lieutenant in the East Lancashire regiment on 9 September 1882, and was promoted captain on 22 April 1891. He served in the Chitral relief expedition in 1895 and attended the Staff College at Camberley in 1896-7, where he was regarded as an original and imaginative student. He then served with the Egyptian army in the Sudan from December 1897 to July 1899, being present at the battles of the Atbara and Omdurman. Capper received a brevet majority on 16 November 1898. After a brief attachment to the War Office as staff captain for intelligence, Capper went to South Africa in November 1899 as deputy assistant adjutant-general on the staff of the Natal army during the operations for the relief of Ladysmith and the subsequent advance into the Transvaal. From June 1901 to May 1902 he commanded a mobile column in Cape Colony. For his services he received the DSO and was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 29 November 1900. 
Capper's next employment was as professor and then deputy assistant adjutant-general at the Staff College from December 1902 to December 1905, in the course of which he received a brevet colonelcy in December 1904. It would appear that Sir Henry Hughes Wilson feared that Capper rather than himself would succeed to the command at Camberley and, at Wilson's suggestion, Capper was then selected first commandant of the Indian Staff College at Quetta, a position he held from March 1906 with the rank of colonel, and from May 1906 to January 1911 as temporary brigadier-general. In his teaching at Camberley, and especially at Quetta, where he lectured extensively on the Russo-Japanese War, Capper was a powerful exponent of the 'offensive spirit', arguing that 'attacking dash' was the best means of overcoming entrenched positions defended by modern firepower. He thus placed particular emphasis on courage. A fellow instructor at Camberley, Hubert Gough, recalled that Capper 'always inculcated a spirit of self-sacrifice and duty, instead of the idea of playing for safety and seeking only to avoid getting into trouble' (Gough, 93). Similarly John Charteris recorded during the first battle of Ypres that Capper told him, 'No good officer has a right to be alive during a fight like this', and that Capper had also supposedly ordered his staff to the front with the words, 'What! Nobody on the Staff wounded today; that won't do!' (Charteris, 58). It is difficult to assess Capper's precise influence on his audiences, and Douglas Haig, who came into contact with him at Quetta, believed Capper 'too full of nerves and too much of a crank to get the best out of officers' (Haig to Kiggell, Kiggell MSS, 1/27, 22 Oct 1911), while George Barrow also considered that the geniality that had marked Capper's personality at Camberley had given way to a darker intensity of outlook at Quetta. 
On 15 October 1908 Capper married Winifride Mary, the eldest daughter of the Hon. Robert Joseph Gerard-Dicconson of Wrightington Hall, Wigan; they had one son. Two years later he received the CB, and after a brief period of half pay he was appointed to command the 13th infantry brigade at Dublin on 19 February 1911. Capper's abilities as a trainer of troops were much in evidence, and he was appointed inspector of infantry in February 1914, and promoted major-general on 12 May. He had strongly supported Hubert Gough during the Curragh incident in March. On 27 August 1914 he was appointed to command the 7th division, and he took it to Belgium in October. Capper covered the Belgian retreat to the Yser and then took a leading role in the first battle of Ypres, his division losing over 10,000 of its infantry in just three weeks but holding its ground. One obituarist later commented that 'no one but Capper himself could, night after night, by the sheer force of his personality, have reconstituted from the shattered fragments of battalions a fighting line that could last through tomorrow' ('The Times', 1 Oct 1915). 
Capper was created KCMG for his services at Ypres but was accidentally wounded during experiments with hand grenades in April 1915 and did not return to his division until shortly before the battle of Loos. Indeed Capper had been appointed to a corps but received permission to remain with his division until after the battle. On 25 September 1915 the division took its first objectives but was heavily counter-attacked. Accounts vary as to whether Capper was trying to encourage his men or to urge forward a 'sticky' unit and whether or not he was riding his horse in full view of the enemy. He was hit by a sniper and died on the following day, 26 September 1915. He was buried in Lillers communal cemetery, Pas-de-Calais. 
Capper had been true to the principles he had set out in one of his lectures in June 1908: that wars could not be won 'unless the individuals composing an army set out to fight with the determined spirit that they will conquer, or they will die in the attempt to do so' (Capper MSS, II/4/16). 


@@@@@


doc= 32286


Carden, Sir Sackville Hamilton (1857-1930), naval officer, the third son of Captain Andrew Carden, 60th rifles, and his first wife, Anne, eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General Sackville Hamilton Berkeley, was born at Templemore, co. Tipperary, on 3 May 1857. He entered the navy in 1870. He took part in the Egyptian and Sudan campaigns of 1882-4, and, under Admiral Sir Harry Holdsworth Rawson, one of the most efficient officers of his time, served in the 1897 Benin expedition. Carden was promoted captain in 1899, and rear-admiral in 1908. He was for two years on half pay, then hoisted his flag in the battleship 'London' as rear-admiral in the Atlantic Fleet, an appointment tenable for only one year. This was followed by special service at the Admiralty. 
In August 1912, Carden was selected to be admiral superintendent of Malta Dockyard, an appointment usually regarded as a precursor to retirement. However, upon the outbreak of war in August 1914, Carden was forced into a crucial role by the circumstances following the escape of the German warships 'Goeben' and 'Breslau' from the Mediterranean into Turkish waters. Although Admiral Sir Berkeley Milne, commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, was officially held blameless for the incident, his continued presence in southern waters was incompatible, owing to his seniority, with the assumption by the French of the command of allied naval forces in the Mediterranean, in accordance with a naval convention concluded soon after the outbreak of the war. Carden, who had just attained the rank of vice-admiral, was chosen (20 September 1914) to command the British battle squadron associated with the French forces. 
Following the closing of the Dardanelles by the Turks (27 September), war was declared between Great Britain and Turkey on 5 November, and simultaneously French and British warships, under Carden's command, carried out a preliminary bombardment of the outer forts of the straits. When, in January 1915, definite proposals to occupy the Gallipoli peninsula were being debated in the war council on Churchill's initiative, Churchill asked Carden (by cable) whether, in his opinion, the Dardanelles could be forced by ships alone. Carden replied that the straits could not be 'rushed', but that they 'might be forced by extended operations with large numbers of ships' (Higgins, 80) -- a reply contrary to orthodox naval theory and repeated staff studies. On Churchill's orders he drew up a detailed plan (submitted 11 January), involving the systematic destruction of the fortifications by naval bombardment and a subsequent invasion of the Peninsula, but insufficiently considering crucial questions concerning both the bombardment and minefields. There were strong differences of opinion in the war council when Churchill proposed Carden's plan; but pushed by Churchill, preparations for carrying it out were nevertheless begun, with the concurrence of the French and Russian governments. This diversion of forces was subsequently strongly opposed by Fisher; but approval of the Dardanelles operations was given by the war council on 28 January. Arrangements were made for the assembly of warships, and the 29th division was eventually chosen (10 March) to co-operate with the naval forces. 
The first phase of the operations against the Dardanelles, the systematic bombardment of the outer forts, was begun on 19 February with the support of a large Anglo-French force of varied ships under the supreme command of Carden. It became known later in the war that successive bombardments of both the outer and intermediate defences (25 February - 8 March) had proved ineffective as the Turks, warned by the preliminary attacks, had under German guidance greatly strengthened the defences on the Peninsula, besides developing the minefields to an effectiveness exceeding the expectations of British naval officers. The attacks were undertaken under conditions of great controversy, owing to the differences within the war council; and the full responsibility of command rested with Carden, who had failed to prepare adequately for the operations, to use his aircraft efficiently, and to improve his minesweeping. Faced with an admittedly very difficult situation, he failed to rise to the challenge. The strain on an officer who had not been employed at sea for several years and who was nearly sixty years old rapidly undermined his health. He was forced, on 16 March, to relinquish command to one of his flag officers, Rear-Admiral J. M. de Robeck, and return home. 
From April until June 1915 Carden was appointed to the Admiralty on special service, and in October 1917, after being on half pay, he retired with the rank of admiral. Though controversy continued about his advice on the practicability of forcing the Dardanelles, he took no part in it. 
Carden, who was created KCMG in 1916, was married twice: first, in 1879, to Maria Louisa, daughter of Captain Loftus J. Nunn (99th foot); second, in 1909, to Henrietta, daughter of William English Harrison KC of Hitchin, Hertfordshire, who survived her husband. He had one daughter, by his first marriage. He died on 6 May 1930 at his home, Highfield End, Lymington, Hampshire. 
Contemporaries' opinions of Carden differed, but were largely critical. Fisher long distrusted his capabilities; Churchill -- though later willing to use Carden to advance his own Dardanelles initiative -- wrote in 1914 that Carden had done nothing remarkable; and General W. R. Birdwood, investigating for Kitchener in 1915, considered Carden 'very second-rate', lacking initiative, and over-optimistic. Naval historians have also criticized him. Roskill wrote that he had 'never been up to the heavy responsibility which had fortuitously fallen to his lot' (Roskill, 1.156), while Marder concluded that 'Carden was a charming man and an ideal peacetime admiral, but he had none of the qualities needed for an admiral at war in the technical age' (Marder, 15). 


@@@@@


doc= 32287


Cardew, Philip (1851-1910), army officer and electrical engineer, was born on 24 September 1851 at Oakshade, near Leatherhead, Surrey, the eldest son in a family of four sons and four daughters of Captain Christopher Baldock Cardew, 74th highlanders, of East Hill, Liss (son of Lieutenant-General George Cardew, colonel-commandant Royal Engineers), and his wife, Eliza Jane, second daughter of Richard Bethell, first Baron Westbury. Educated at Guildford grammar school, he passed first into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1868, and left at the head of his batch. He was awarded the Pollock medal and the sword of honour, and commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 4 January 1871. After two years at Chatham, he was sent to Aldershot and Portsmouth. From September 1873 to April 1874 he was employed at the War Office on defences, and, after a year at Glasgow, went to Bermuda in May 1875. 
Cardew was placed in charge of military telegraphs and joined the Submarine Mining Service, applying electricity to military purposes, which was to be the pursuit of his life. At the end of 1876 he was transferred to Chatham, where the headquarters of the Submarine Mining Service was on board HMS 'Hood', lying in the Medway off Gillingham. In 1878 he was acting adjutant of the submarine miners at Portsmouth, and became in the same year (1 April) assistant instructor in electricity at Chatham. Cardew married in London, on 19 June 1879, his first cousin, Mary Annunziata, daughter of Mansfield Parkyns, the traveller in Abyssinia. They had three sons and two daughters, and Mary survived him. 
Cardew assisted in important experiments with electric searchlight apparatus for the Royal Engineers committee. The need for better instruments led him to design a galvanometer for measuring large currents of electricity (described in a paper for the Institution of Electrical Engineers, 25 May 1882). He next evolved the idea of the hot-wire galvanometer, or voltmeter, for which he was awarded the gold medal at the inventions exhibition in London of 1885. He also originated a method of finding the efficiency of a dynamo. 
Cardew's invention of the vibratory transmitter for telegraphy was perhaps his most important, and in the case of faulty lines it proved useful not only on active service overseas but also during heavy snowstorms at home. He received a money reward for this from the imperial and Indian governments. The utility of the invention was greatly extended by his further invention of 'separators', consisting of a combination of choking coil and two condensers. These instruments enabled a vibrating telegraph circuit to be superimposed on an ordinary Morse circuit without interference between the two, thus doubling the message-carrying capability of the line. His apparatus for testing lightning conductors was adopted by the war department. 
Promoted captain on 4 January 1883 and major on 12 April 1889, Cardew was from 1 April 1882 instructor in electricity at Chatham. On 1 April 1889 he was appointed the first electrical adviser to the Board of Trade. He held a long inquiry into the proposals for the electric lighting of London, and drew up regulations on the supply of electricity for power and light. 
Cardew retired from the Royal Engineers on 24 October 1894, and from the Board of Trade in 1898. He then entered into partnership with Sir William Preece & Sons, consulting engineers, and was actively engaged on large Admiralty orders, involving an expenditure of $1,500,000. He joined the board of the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway in 1902, and visited Sydney, New South Wales, in connection with its electrical installations. He published scientific and technical papers, served on the council of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, and was its vice-president in 1901-2. Cardew died on 17 May 1910 at his residence, Crownpits House, Godalming, Surrey, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery on the 21st. 


@@@@@


doc= 32288


Carey, Rosa Nouchette (1840-1909), novelist, was born at Stratford-le-Bow, London, on 24 September 1840, the sixth of the seven children (five girls and two boys) of William Henry Carey (died 1867), shipbroker, and his wife, Maria Jane (died 1870), daughter of Edward J. Wooddill. She was brought up in London at Tryons Road, Hackney, and in South Hampstead, and educated at home and at the Ladies' Institute, St John's Wood, where she was a contemporary and friend of Mathilde Blind (1841-1896). As a child she told stories to her younger sister, and in this way created the plot of her first novel, 'Nellie's Memories' (1868). The publisher's advertisements suggest that it sold over 52,000 copies. It was followed by many other novels, marked by pious tone, domestic subject matter, and a large number of rather unmemorable characters, which were staples of the market in safe fiction for girls during the last third of the nineteenth century. Even Elizabeth Lee, whose many articles on women writers in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' do not display marked feminist sympathies, commented (by implication unfavourably) on how old-fashioned and limited seemed the lives of the women who inhabit Carey's fiction. Yet, gushing and unpretending as her work is, she does depict the frustrations of such women with some sympathy, exploring the pains of living up to high ideals and the psychic cost of self-abnegation. Although she is sometimes described as a follower of Charlotte M. Yonge, in whose magazine, the 'Monthly Packet', Carey's novel 'Heriot's Choice' (1879) was serialized, she is a far less intellectual writer (there is a tincture of high Anglicanism but no theological content), and a less humorous one, and where Yonge's characters belong to the landed gentry, her subject is the lives of women of the urban professional middle class. A saccharine and laudatory biographical collection, 'Twelve Notable Good Women of the XIXth Century' (1899), includes among its subjects Queen Victoria, Grace Darling, and Elizabeth Fry. The bibliography by Jane Crisp (1989) argues that the British Library catalogue is wrong in attributing to Carey four thrillers which appeared late in her life under the pseudonym Le Voleur. 
Carey's literary career got going after the death of her father, when she was in her late twenties. After the death of her mother in 1870 Carey and her remaining unmarried sister went to keep house for a widowed brother and look after his children; after the sister married and went to live in Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland (which provided a setting for some of Carey's fiction), the brother died and Carey was left in charge of the children. As well as writing thirty-three three-volume novels, she was on the staff of the 'Girls' Own Paper', for which she wrote eight serials. She does not seem to have moved in literary circles, although she was a close friend of the novelist Ellen Wood (Mrs Henry Wood). The poet Helen Marion Burnside, who also worked for the 'Girls' Own Paper', lived with her from about 1875, and edited 'The Rosa Nouchette Carey Birthday Book' (1901). When Carey's sister was widowed she returned to keep house for the two authors. Rosa Carey died of lung cancer at her home, Sandilands, Keswick Road, Putney, London, on 19 July 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 32289


Carlile, Wilson (1847-1942), founder of the Church Army, was born on 14 January 1847 at Brixton, the eldest of the twelve children of Edward Carlile, a merchant in the City of London, where his father had settled, and whose forebears had for some generations been prominent in the civic and business life of Paisley. Wilson Carlile's mother was Maria Louisa, second daughter of Benjamin Wilson, a Yorkshireman who had come to London as a silk mercer and became master of the Haberdashers' Company. He was a second cousin of Sir R. W. Carlyle and A. J. Carlyle. Carlile's education was hampered by a spinal weakness from which he suffered throughout his long life and which prevented him from taking an active part in sports or exercises. After attending a private school at Brixton he entered his maternal grandfather's business at the age of thirteen, but shortly afterwards went for a year to school at Lille, where he became fluent in French. Of this he made good use during the Franco-Prussian War, when he travelled widely in France in order to take advantage of the unsettled state of the silk market. Later he learnt to speak German with equal facility and acquired a good knowledge of Italian. When Carlile came of age the business became his property and by 1873 he had laid the foundations of a small fortune when a slump ruined him. 
A serious illness supervened and turned Carlile's thoughts to religion, in which his interest hitherto had been no more than conventional. His parents, who had been devout Congregationalists, had recently joined the Church of England in which, on recovery, Carlile was confirmed after a brief attraction to the (Plymouth) Brethren. He was now in partnership with his father, giving his spare time to mission work in the parish of Holy Trinity, Richmond, where his family had settled. Having great musical ability he also acted as deputy organist to Ira D. Sankey during the great Moody and Sankey missions of 1875, and this brought him in touch with the leading evangelists of the day. In 1878 Carlile gave up his business in order to be trained for holy orders at St John's College, Highbury. He was ordained deacon in 1880 and priest in 1881, being appointed in the former year curate at St Mary Abbots Church, Kensington. The happy association of ten or twelve curates of widely different views under Edward Carr Glyn, later bishop of Peterborough, greatly influenced Carlile when he founded the Church Army as a strictly non-party society within the Church of England. He was profoundly concerned by the lack of contact between the church and the working classes, and by the absence of opportunities for working-class Anglicans to play an active part in the church's life and mission. He began open-air meetings in which the help of working men and women was enlisted, and which eventually caused so much obstruction to traffic that in June 1882 he was asked to give them up. Indoor meetings, held in the parish school and making use of magic-lantern slides, also attracted working people. 
In 1882 Carlile resigned his curacy and founded the Church Army which (like the Salvation Army begun four years earlier), in its early days in the slums of Westminster, met with great violence. Two or three times Carlile was gravely injured, yet not infrequently his roughest opponents came to be his greatest helpers. Opposition came also from within the church, where many disliked his unconventional methods. But the movement grew, and the success which soon came was due in no small degree to Carlile's wise decision to devolve many responsible duties to his workers. In 1884 a Church Army training college was established at Oxford, in which working men, without cost to themselves, were trained to be full-time evangelists; in 1887 a similar college for women workers was opened in west London, where for many years women were trained by Carlile's sister, Marie Louise Carlile. Under an order of convocation made in 1897 the male students were admitted, on the successful conclusion of their training, by the bishop of London to the 'office of Evangelist in the Church of God' and by this specially created office the Church Army workers obtained an official status, which was extended to women in 1921. During the war of 1914-18 the Church Army was engaged in extensive work with British troops in the various theatres of conflict. 
Carlile based his organization on the unit of the parish, in which there was a 'corps' of Church Army members who, under the guidance of Church Army officers, were required to bear private and public testimony to their faith. During a serious illness in 1926 Carlile conceived the idea that every parish, including those without any trained Church Army officer, should organize its members into corps or news teams, and this method received official support after his death. By building up the largest lay society within the Church of England Carlile not only greatly increased opportunities for the laity to participate in the work of the church but also stimulated similar efforts inside the church, independent of the Church Army (for example, in the increasing role given to lay readers). His influence on the evangelistic side of the Church of England was therefore very great. His social work was equally influential. In 1889 he established Church Army homes for ex-prisoners, tramps, and others on the margins of society, and two or three times each winter week he would spend the night on the Thames Embankment; sometimes up to 2000 homeless men and women would gather for Church Army food and shelter. This and other aspects of his social work were criticized by committed socialists on the grounds that they were only palliatives. The fact remains that Carlile's efforts not only alleviated a great amount of misery but did much to rouse the social conscience by publicizing the plight of those suffering desperate poverty, homelessness, and unemployment to middle-class Anglicans who lived in the comfort of the suburbs. By practical help, and not by platform eloquence, he drew public attention, for instance, to the problem of overcrowding in the 1920s. As a result of his appeals for gifts of money or loans at low interest nearly 1000 houses were built for large families with small incomes by the Church Army Housing Ltd, one of the precursors of the housing association movement. 
In collaboration with his eldest son, Victor, Carlile wrote 'The Continental Outcast' (1906), an account of a tour of labour colonies and other establishments in Denmark, Belgium, Holland, and Germany. He also composed a simple choral communion service which was widely used. In 1891 he was presented to the rectory of St Mary-at-Hill, an empty City church which he filled to overflowing before he retired in 1926, retaining a connection as honorary curate. Meanwhile the success of the work of the Church Army brought him honours from both church and state. In 1906 he was appointed a prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral; he received an honorary DD in 1915 from the University of Oxford and in 1926 from the University of Toronto. In 1926 he was appointed CH. In 1870 Carlile had married Flora (died 1925), daughter of Thomas Vickers, lawyer, of Brixton; they had five sons. His grandson, the Revd E. Wilson Carlile, became chief secretary of the Church Army in 1949. Wilson Carlile died at his home, Kingsbury, Coley Avenue, Woking, on 26 September 1942; his funeral on 2 October was held at St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 32290


Carling, Sir Ernest Rock (1877-1960), surgeon and developer of radiotherapy, was born in Sidney Road, Guildford, Surrey, on 6 March 1877, the third son of Francis Rees Carling, master ironmonger, and his wife, Lydia Colebrook. He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Guildford, and King's College, London, and entered the Westminster Hospital medical school at the age of eighteen. His medical training was interrupted by service in the South African War with the Imperial Yeomanry Field Hospital as a surgical dresser to Charles Stonham, the Westminster's senior surgeon. On 10 June 1901 Carling married Edith Petra (1872/3-1959), daughter of the Revd Edward Dennis Rock, vicar of Sutton, Woodbridge, Suffolk; they had two sons. 
Carling qualified MRCS LRCP in 1901. Early in his university studies he showed both brilliance and versatility, being awarded a gold medal and an exhibition in pharmacology and therapeutics; he also won a further gold medal and scholarship in obstetrics and gynaecology in his final MB (1902). He became BS in 1903 and FRCS in 1904. After graduation he held appointments at the Westminster Hospital, first in the pathology department and then as surgical registrar; in 1906 he was appointed to the honorary consulting staff as assistant surgeon and in 1919 he became full surgeon. On his retirement from the active staff in 1942 he became honorary consulting surgeon. 
Carling was a general surgeon of more than average ability and, before the days of specialization, an orthopaedic surgeon of considerable skill. In addition to the Westminster he worked at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, the Peace Memorial Hospital, Watford, the Chislehurst Hospital, and the King Edward VII Convalescent Home for Officers at Osborne. As a member of the Territorial Army he was mobilized on the outbreak of war in 1914 and served as captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps with the 4th London Hospital, and later in France and Flanders. 
In many aspects of medical thinking and practice Carling was ahead of his time. The detailed planning of the new Westminster Hospital medical school and its nurses' home in St John's Gardens was as much his as the architect's, and he waited almost five years to see the building completed in the spring of 1939. Carling retained an interest in medical education throughout his career, and remained a member of the academic council of the Westminster medical school until his death. For many years he was a member of the faculty of medicine and of the board of advanced medical studies of the University of London, and he was also a member of the court of examiners at the Royal College of Surgeons, acting for a time as its chairman. He took a wide interest in benevolent activities related to the medical profession and was a member of council of the Royal Medical Benevolent Fund, treasurer of the Society for the Relief of Widows and Orphans of Medical Men, a trustee of the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust and chairman of its medical advisory committee, and president of the Medical Protection Society. 
Carling's interest in the use of radium in the treatment of cancer dated from 1920 when he visited the Fondation Curie in Paris and the radium institutes in Brussels and Stockholm. It was Carling's foresight which enabled Westminster Hospital to open its radium annex in Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, later developed as the radiotherapy department of the new hospital. Carling designed the first models of mass radium units and had them built with the help of physicists; he recognized from the early years that the application of the use of X-rays and radium in medicine needed the special knowledge of physicists to achieve precision, accuracy, and safety. 
This scientific approach opened for Carling the door to a second profession which he embraced with enthusiasm and which occupied most of his time after his retirement from active surgical practice. He became a member of the National Radium Commission and the Atomic Energy Commission, chairman of the international commission of radiological protection, and member and for a time chairman of the Standing Advisory Committee on Cancer and Radiotherapy of the Ministry of Health. This second career was even more rewarding for Carling and more beneficial for the country than his earlier surgical achievements. His specialized knowledge resulted in his appointment as consultant adviser to both the Home Office and the Ministry of Labour, as expert adviser to the World Health Organization, and as member of the Medical Research Council. He also became chairman of the advisory committee on medical nomenclature. 
Carling was knighted in 1944, made an honorary fellow of the faculty of radiology, received an honorary LLD from Queen's University, Belfast, and was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. His chief recreation in his early years was to travel and to visit art museums, especially in Italy where for a time he kept a small house. He was a great conversationalist and a lover of books, mostly on scientific subjects. Carling died at his London home, 49 Hallam Street, Portland Place, on 15 July 1960. 
Stanford Cade', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32291


Carlyle, Alexander James (1861-1943), historian and social reformer, was born in Bombay on 24 July 1861, the second of three children and younger son of the Revd James Edward Carlyle (1821-1893), minister of the Free Church of Scotland in Bombay, and his wife, Jessie Margaret, daughter of James Milne of Huntly, Aberdeenshire. His elder brother was Sir Robert Warrand Carlyle. His father, who returned to Scotland when Alexander was a month old, was compelled for reasons of health to take charge of Presbyterian churches abroad, so that Alexander's boyhood was passed in Rome, Paris, Berlin, and South Africa. His knowledge of foreign languages and literature, and his enjoyment of foreign travel, were the outcome of this experience. 
Carlyle had no regular schooling, and apart from two years at Glasgow University (1876-8) his systematic studies began when in 1883 he entered Exeter College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner. He obtained a first-class in modern history in 1886 and a second-class in theology in 1888. In the latter year he was president of the Oxford Union and ordained to a curacy at St Stephen's, Westminster, where his sympathies as a social reformer were first aroused. He served as general secretary of the SPCK in 1890-91. In 1893 he was elected to a fellowship at University College, Oxford; although he had to vacate his fellowship in 1895 on his marriage to Rebecca Monteith Smith (died 1941), daughter of the Scottish poet and preacher Walter Chalmers Smith, he continued to serve the college as lecturer in politics and economics and as chaplain. In 1935 he was elected an honorary fellow. 
From 1895 to 1919, however, Carlyle's centre in Oxford was the city church of St Martin and All Saints, of which he was rector. During these years he took a leading part, as a liberal thinker and Christian socialist formally attached to no political party, in the social life of the city and in religious movements. His friendship with Sidney and Beatrice Webb and other reformers, his co-operation with the high-church Anglicans associated with Charles Gore -- for whom, although he did not share his ecclesiastical and theological opinions, he had a deep regard -- and his close alliance with his old Exeter College friend John Carter testify to his breadth of outlook. He was one of the early advocates of planned social reform, the unity of the churches, and better-informed relations between the city and the university of Oxford. He was a mainstay of the Christian Social Union, which was largely sustained by disciples of Gore and Henry Scott Holland; a friend and adviser of local trade unionism; a promoter of interdenominational summer schools of theology, which for a number of years were held in Oxford; and he was in close touch with liberal leaders of religious life and thought abroad -- such as Lars Olof Jonathan (Nathan) Soderblom, archbishop of Uppsala -- as well as with men of such various outlook as Baron Friedrich von Hugel and the leaders in England of the free churches. 
Carlyle's resignation of the living of the city church in 1919 enabled him to give more time to his work as writer and teacher. He had never neglected these interests and had owed much to the inspiration of William Sanday, whose seminars he attended, and to co-operation with Hastings Rashdall, whose theological views he largely shared. He had published a life of Hugh Latimer, with his wife, in 1899; an essay on the church in the composite volume 'Contentio veritatis' (1902); the short books 'The Influence of Christianity upon Social and Political Ideas' and 'Wages' in 1912; and, with J. V. Bartlet, 'Christianity in History' (1917). 
Since 1895 Carlyle's main preoccupation had been his 'History of Mediaeval Political Theory in the West', which he had then planned with his elder brother. Although Sir Robert Carlyle was able to contribute only to the fifth volume of the book (1928) -- the volume on the thirteenth century, which represents more or less what in 1895 they had first thought to produce -- the two men discussed the work continuously, and the sixth and last volume (1936) was dedicated by Alexander to Robert's memory. As the work proceeded (1903-36) it gradually won a high place in historical literature both on the continent and in the English-speaking world. Written with lucidity and with a simplicity that is apt to be misleading, it remains an invaluable guide to an immense series of texts ranging from the early Roman law books and the writings of the church fathers to the works of Bodin and Althusius. Its main theme is the rule of law, firmly rooted in the nature of things, as the basis of the search for and maintenance of justice and liberty. It was followed, in 1941, by 'Political Liberty', which was concerned with the seventeenth century. The Political Philosophy and Science Club, which Carlyle founded in 1909 primarily for teachers in the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and London, was the practical expression of his wide political and social interests. 
Apart from four years (1930-34) as a canon of Worcester Cathedral, Carlyle lived continuously in Oxford from 1895 until his death. Throughout this period he was an active teacher and lecturer working for several colleges, including the women's colleges, as a tutor in history, economics, politics, and modern languages. His diversity of interests and his unconventional manner of speech provoked criticism in some quarters but his inspiration as a teacher and his influence upon many who in later life attained distinction are indisputable, and confirm the impression that his incisive and provocative table talk made on all who knew him. At different times he was the close and valued friend of such men as Rashdall, Sidney Ball, J. A. Smith, and H. H. Joachim. His home, where his wife and his two daughters supported him with an independent devotion, was a delightful social centre. He was an urbane, cultivated man who, though he rarely talked about it and was unclerical in demeanour, was in the words of one of his younger friends 'dominated by religion'. As a curate in Westminster he was so much impressed by the evil social effects of intemperance that he became a total abstainer; but he never 'preached', although he was a good and forthright preacher, and was a living example to others by his belief that complete frankness and generous tolerance are not incompatible. In a word he expressed in action his belief in personal liberty. 
Carlyle was in some ways more successful abroad than in England, whether in lecturing tours in Scandinavia or at juristic conferences in Rome. He gave the Olaus Petri lectures in Uppsala (1918) and the Lowell lectures in Boston (1924), as well as the Birkbeck lectures in ecclesiastical history at Trinity College, Cambridge (1925-7). In 1936 he was elected FBA. He received the honorary degree of DD from Glasgow University (1934) and was a foreign member of the Royal Academy of Naples. He died in Oxford on 27 May 1943. His daughter made a bequest to the University of Oxford in 1972 that provides the Carlyle lectures on medieval political theory. 


@@@@@


doc= 32292


Carlyle, Benjamin Fearnley (1874-1955), Benedictine monk, was born at 8 Ashmount, Broomhill, Ecclesall Bierlow, a suburb of Sheffield, on 7 February 1874, the eldest of six children of James Fearnley Carlyle and Anna Maria Champion Kelly. He was baptized at St Mark's Church in the city on 13 March 1874, receiving the Christian names of his grandfather, a Church of England clergyman, one time rector of Badgeworth in Gloucestershire. His father was a railway engineer who worked in England and Argentina, but died unexpectedly when Carlyle was sixteen. 
Carlyle entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1892 as a medical student. But on his own confession 'most of my interest at St. Barts was given to the care of neglected cases of sick children instead of being concentrated on the actual work of taking my degree in medicine and surgery' (Carlyle, diaries, 3 Dec 1948). He wanted 'to help the poor lads in the slums' (ibid.). He also had an idea to revive the Benedictine order in the Church of England. He believed that the monastic system was 'the great solution of many social problems' (Carlyle to Green, 10 Sept 1897, Elmore Abbey Archives). He therefore made a personal profession to live according to the rule of St Benedict on 22 February 1892. His knowledge of monastic life was derived from visits to the Roman Catholic abbey of Buckfast in Devon. The prior, Benedict Gariador, gave him a copy of the rule. He read the life of the English Cistercian abbot, St Ailred, by J. D. Dalgairns, in 1893 and began calling himself Brother Aelred OSB. He joined a group of Church of England Benedictine oblates in Ealing and was chosen as their superior in 1894. 
Carlyle's first attempt to found his own Benedictine community was in 1896 in the East End of London at Glengall Road, Isle of Dogs. There he kept open house for the poor and ministered to the local Boys' Brigade in a black habit. He moved to Lower Guiting in Gloucestershire in February 1898 to find a place 'where some of our poor lads might be sent' (Carlyle to Green, 8 Dec 1897). He wanted 'to lead the strict Religious life and train men for Rescue Work' (Carlyle to Green, 4 Dec 1897). Part of the divine office was recited in Latin from a monastic breviary, but the communal life was minimal. It all ended when an angry mob forced them out of the village. 
Carlyle's second attempt began at Milton Abbas in Dorset in 1899, this time in white habits. He moved to Caldy Island off Pembrokeshire, where his seven disciples elected him their abbot on 23 February 1902. In the same year they all moved to Painsthorpe, on Lord Halifax's estate in Yorkshire. It was here that the community first established itself on a regular basis. Numbers passed double figures. A magazine called 'Pax' was begun in 1904, to which Aelred contributed a 'Community letter' fairly regularly, and other occasional pieces. An account of the community's ideals called 'Our purpose and method' appeared under his name (1905-6). He also got himself ordained in America by C. C. Grafton, bishop of Fond du Lac, on 15 November 1904. 
He returned in triumph to Caldy in 1906. With little money but great enthusiasm he now embarked on an elaborate building programme for a monastery of the purely contemplative life. Only a few of the buildings planned by his architect, J. Coates Carter, were ever completed. They were described as 'exotic and eclectic and quite without parallel' (Anson, 159). Aelred devised an equally elaborate liturgy, based on monastic ritual, with many modern Roman Catholic feasts and practices, but with devotions of his own. For a period between 1906 and 1913 Caldy became a focus of public attention. Anglo-Catholics flocked to the island. The young Ronald Knox came for his ordination retreat and stayed eleven weeks. He described Caldy as having 'something of fairyland about it' and Aelred as the 'magician who had called all this into being, as with a stroke of Prospero's wand' ('Pax', 277, 1956, 31). But others questioned his position as an abbot and even as a validly ordained minister in the Church of England. Aelred argued that Frederick Temple, archbishop of Canterbury, had approved of his vocation and enterprise from the beginning; but he also claimed that Caldy was extra-diocesan and that he was free to do as he wished. 
In order to regularize his position in the Church of England Carlyle invited Charles Gore, bishop of Oxford, to carry out a visitation. Gore, however, laid down a number of conditions before formal accession to the Church of England would be possible. Aelred replied on behalf of the community in February 1913 that 'we can not conscientiously submit to the demands you make of us' (Carlyle to Gore, 19 Feb 1913, Prinknash Abbey Archives). On 5 March he led nineteen of his monks into the Roman Catholic church. 
Carlyle now had no status as a monk, priest, or abbot. He therefore went to the monastery of Maredsous in Belgium to begin a canonical noviciate. He completed it on 29 June 1914, a day after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo. He was informed of the news on the morning of his profession. He was ordained by the bishop of Namur on 5 July and returned to Caldy four days before the outbreak of the First World War. Although he was reinstalled as abbot of Caldy, the legal superior, appointed by Rome for ten years, was now Francis Mostyn, the bishop of Menevia. Financial and other difficulties forced Aelred to leave Caldy in 1920. He resigned the following year and began a new career as a priest in British Columbia. At Bear Creek, 1921-30, he ministered to Okanagan Indians. In 1930 he was made parish priest of the mining town of Princeton. He still hankered after religious life. In 1933, therefore, he returned to Europe to enter the Carthusian noviciate at Miraflores near Burgos in Spain. On the way he stayed two days with his former community now at Prinknash Park in Gloucestershire. The Carthusian vocation did not materialize and he returned to Canada. In 1937 he moved to Vancouver and acted as prison chaplain to Okalla provincial gaol. In recognition of outstanding service there he received the freedom of the city of Vancouver on 1 May 1951. 
On his retirement Carlyle accepted an invitation to settle with his former brethren at Prinknash. He was clothed in a white habit on arrival and was allowed to re-make his solemn vows privately on 3 November 1953. He died at St Teresa's Hospital, Corston, Somerset, on 14 October 1955 and was buried five days later under the high altar of the new abbey church at Prinknash. 
At the time of Carlyle's death tributes were paid to his charm, his ability to fire young people with enthusiasm, and his greatest virtue, 'compassion for the unfortunate' ('Pax', 277, 1956, 35). Ronald Knox, while admiring his enthusiasm, said that 'he was one of those men whose minds are too preoccupied to read the other man's thoughts in a conversation... It was not easy to tell Abbot Aelred things'. Knox found a 'faint air of make-believe' about the whole period at Caldy ('Pax', 215, 1940, 84). Peter Anson extended this criticism to other periods of Aelred's life. But there is no denying the solid achievements of his pastoral ministry -- and the community he created survived and prospered. 
There are two biographies of Aelred based on personal knowledge. One, 'Abbot Extraordinary', is by Peter Anson, who was a member of the Caldy community. The other (unpublished) is by the Benedictine Michael Hanbury, who came to know Aelred well after his return to the community in 1951. The two works agree upon the facts of Aelred's life but differ sharply on the estimate of his character. 


@@@@@


doc= 32293


Carlyle, Sir Robert Warrand (1859-1934), administrator in India and writer on medieval subjects, was born at Brechin on 11 July 1859, the elder son of James Edward Carlyle (1821-1893), minister of the Free church at Brechin, and his wife, Jessie Margaret, daughter of James Milne, of Huntly, Aberdeenshire. His father was subsequently Free Church of Scotland chaplain in Bombay, Berlin, and Pietermaritzburg. The original spelling of the family name, Carlile, had been altered by Robert's grandfather, a kinsman of Thomas Carlyle. 
Robert was educated privately and at Glasgow University. In 1878 he passed the open competition for the Indian Civil Service, and in December 1880, having spent his two years' probation at Balliol College, Oxford, was posted to Midnapore, Bengal, as assistant magistrate. His early career included several stints as an under-secretary to the governments of both Bengal and India. Appointed magistrate of Tippera in August 1894, in March 1896 he was transferred to Darbhanga, Bihar, just as the famine of 1896-7 was beginning to bite. The commissioner of Patna, J. A. Bourdillon, praised without reservation his 'heart and soul' relief effort, and in 1898 he was created CIE for his famine work. 
In 1902 Carlyle was appointed inspector-general of the Bengal police. In the following year, on 29 September, he married Isabel Jane, daughter of James Barton, of Farndreg, Dundalk, co. Louth. In 1904 he became chief secretary to the government of Bengal. In 1907 he was further promoted to revenue and agriculture secretary to the government of India and in 1910 became head of that department on appointment to the executive council. An advocate of lighter revenue demands, he presided over increased investment in agriculture and an expansion of the fledgeling co-operative rural credit movement. As his council portfolio also included public works, from 1911 he bore responsibility for the planning and initial construction of the new imperial capital at Delhi. He was renowned in the government for his downright, uncompromising expression of opinion, but secretariat work was not particularly congenial to him, nor did he have much liking for the debates in the legislative council. He was appointed CSI in 1910 and KCSI in 1911. 
In 1915 Carlyle retired to Essex and thereafter collaborated with his younger brother Alexander James Carlyle on volumes 3, 4, and 5 of 'A History of Mediaeval Political Theory in the West' (6 vols., 1903-36). An earlier publication, 'The political theories of St. Thomas Aquinas' ('Scottish Review', January 1896), had been erroneously attributed to Alexander. 
From 1916 to 1918 Carlyle served on the central tribune which determined adjustments between war service and industrial activities, and in 1919 he became a trustee of the king's fund. In 1916 Lady Carlyle was awarded the kaisar-i-Hind gold medal for her work in organizing comfort packages for the troops in Mesopotamia. In retirement both took a great interest in the work of Carlyle's cousin Prebendary Wilson Carlile, founder of the Church Army. 
Carlyle died at via Alfieri 10, Florence, on 23 May 1934. He was survived by his wife. There were no children of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32294


Carman, (William) Bliss (1861-1929), poet and essayist, was born on 15 April 1861, in Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, the eldest son of William Carman, a barrister: his mother, Sophia Mary, daughter of George Bliss, was related to Ralph Waldo Emerson. Carman's family background was United Empire loyalist. He wrote a few poems while studying at the collegiate school in Fredericton, and his first published efforts appeared in the monthly journal of the University of New Brunswick in 1879. He graduated from the university with an honours BA in Greek and Latin in 1881, spent an academic year visiting Oxford University and Edinburgh University in 1882-3, and completed an MA degree in English literature at the University of New Brunswick in 1884. He studied for two years (1886-8) at Harvard College, where he met Richard Hovey, a fellow poet who became an editorial collaborator and lifelong friend. At Harvard he studied under and was greatly influenced by Francis Child, Josiah Royce, and George Santayana, and he began publishing poems in magazines such as the 'Harvard Monthly' and the 'Atlantic Monthly'. 
In the time between leaving Harvard and the publication of his first and very successful volume of poetry, 'Low Tide on Grand Pre: a Book of Lyrics' (1893), Carman moved continually between New York, Washington, D.C., Boston, Massachusetts, Fredericton, and Windsor, Nova Scotia -- and this became quite typical of his vagabond lifestyle. He made a modest income by performing editorial tasks for such publications as 'The Independent', 'Current Literature', 'Cosmopolitan', the 'Boston Transcript', the 'Atlantic Monthly', and 'The Chap-Book', the last of which he co-founded in 1894 with Hovey. He was alert to the literary issues of his time, and he wrote many literary, social commentary, and philosophical columns. Some of his work is gathered together in his prose selections, 'The Kinship of Nature' (1903), 'The Friendship of Art' (1904), 'The Poetry of Life' (1905), and 'The Making of Personality' (1906). These selections clearly display some of the marks of his late-Romantic biases, his interest in symbolist experimentation, his regard for traditional poetic forms, and his enthusiasm for the spiritually curative value of the unitarianism of Francois Delsarte (1811-1870). 
With the success of 'Low Tide', Carman was established as essentially a nature mystic and poet of the open road in the tradition of Walt Whitman, and he went on to publish more than thirty titles over the next twenty-five years, most of them exquisitely rendered perceptions of nature. Carman's many volumes include 'Songs from Vagabondia' (1894), and 'More Songs from Vagabondia' (1896), both collaborations with Richard Hovey. He also published 'Ballads and Lyrics' (1902); 'From the Book of Myths' (1902); 'Sappho: one Hundred Lyrics' (1905); 'Pipes of Pan' (definitive edition, 1906); 'Later Poems' (1921); 'Sanctuary: Sunshine House Sonnets' (1929); and 'Wild Garden' (1929). 
Carman spent much of his life in New England, travelled extensively across the North American continent, and in Europe, and in 1908 settled in New Canaan, Connecticut. He was unmarried, and his saint-like appearance and gentle character won for him many readers and advocates during his lifetime. It was at New Canaan that he died suddenly of heart failure on 8 June 1929. He was cremated, and his ashes interred on 20 August 1929 in Forest Hill cemetery, Fredericton, New Brunswick. 
All of Carman's poetry is tissued through with a spiritual optimism, as he managed to avoid being overwhelmed by the ironic harvest of much modern verse. This in part accounts for the waning of his more learned readership during the early decades of the century, and the fact that only in the last decades of the twentieth century have a number of critics come to appreciate his strange uniqueness as an early twentieth-century poet, his musical brilliance, and his savvy as a social commentator. 


@@@@@


doc= 32295


Carmichael, Thomas David Gibson, Baron Carmichael (1859-1926), administrator in India and art collector, was born at Castlecraig, near Edinburgh, on 18 March 1859, the eldest son of the Revd Sir William Henry Gibson Carmichael, tenth baronet (1827-1891), and his wife, Eleanora Anne (died 1861), eldest daughter of David Anderson, of St Germains, East Lothian. He was educated at the Revd Cowley Powles's school, Wixenford, in Wokingham, where the local rector, Charles Kingsley, inspired in him a passion for natural history. In 1877 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA with second-class honours in history in 1881, his first choice of natural science having been vetoed by his father. A visit to Italy in 1881-2 sparked a lifelong interest in Italian art and art collecting. 
After university Carmichael turned his attention to politics. His father, however, in spite of a family tradition of whiggism and the entreaties of Lord Rosebery, forbade him from standing for parliament and in 1885 he accepted instead the post of private secretary to Lord Dalhousie, secretary of state for Scotland, and afterwards to his successor, Sir George Trevelyan. 
On 1 July 1886 Carmichael married Mary Helen Elizabeth (died 1947), eldest of the seven children of Albert Llewellyn Nugent, younger brother of the second Baron Nugent. They settled at Chiefswood, former residence of Sir Walter Scott, near Melrose, where Carmichael began experiments in commercial apiarism. In 1891 he founded the Scottish Bee-Keepers' Association. 
In 1891 Carmichael was appointed to the Prison Commission and from 1894 until 1897 chaired the general board of lunacy for Scotland. In December 1891 he succeeded to the baronetcy and with his wife moved to the family estate at Castlecraig. With his father now dead, he stood unsuccessfully for the Liberals in a by-election for Peebles and Selkirk in 1892, and was eventually returned for Midlothian in succession to W. E. Gladstone in 1895, in which year he also became a freemason. He subsequently held the office of grand master in Scotland, Victoria, and Bengal. In 1900 financial difficulties caused him to retire from parliament and later to sell his house and art collection. He continued, however, as chairman of the Scottish Liberal Association (1892-1903), whose anti-imperial tone during the South African War of 1899-1902 he was unable to prevent. He was a councillor of the Liberal League. In 1904 he was appointed by parliament to the Scottish churches commission. In 1908 he had just settled in as the first chairman of the newly constituted board of trustees of the National Galleries of Scotland when he was offered the governorship of Victoria, Australia. 
In December 1908, four months into his term in Victoria, Carmichael was embroiled in a constitutional controversy. The sitting Conservative ministry was defeated in a vote of no confidence and, rather than call on either of the leaders of the minority parties to form a government, Carmichael dissolved the state parliament and called for fresh elections, a decision which generated considerable unpopularity in the local press and boosted the agitation for local men to be appointed as governors. The rest of his term in Victoria was less eventful, although the Carmichaels found the social routine expected of an Australian governor and his wife exhausting -- all the more so as Carmichael took seriously his obligation to visit outlying parts of the state. He calculated that during his time in Victoria he delivered an average of two speeches a day; his wife, patroness of numerous associations for children's and women's welfare, did not lag far behind. 
In May 1911 Carmichael was appointed governor of Madras. He took office in the following November, but five months later, in April 1912, was appointed the first governor of the newly reconstituted state of Bengal. 
Bengal was a difficult office. To the upheaval of the territorial readjustment and removal of the capital from Calcutta to Delhi were added a wartime economy and local revolutionary movement. Carmichael's administration achieved some progress in matters of public hygiene and education, but he preferred to leave the larger issues to others. Underlying some of his diffidence was a recognition that, as foreigners, Britons could never provide a government wholly acceptable to Indians. He left India in mid-1917 at the expiry of his five-year term. 
Back in Britain Carmichael immersed himself in the art world again. He had previously served as a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery (1904-8) and of the National Gallery (1906-8). Now, in 1918, he became a trustee of the Wallace Collection, in which capacity he served until his death in 1926, and also again of the National Gallery (1923-6). The sales in 1902 and 1926 of his collections, which observed few limits in class, school, or period, were events in the art world. His numerous public gifts included a bequest of a 'Virgin and Child' by Piero di Lorenzo to the National Gallery. 
Carmichael had a shrewd understanding of people and a whimsical sense of humour, and appears to have been happier as an observer of humankind than as a leader or administrator. He was created KCMG in 1908, GCIE in 1911, and GCSI in 1917, and appointed lord lieutenant of Peeblesshire in 1921. In February 1912 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Carmichael of Skirling. He died at his home, 13 Portman Street, Oxford Street, London, on 16 January 1926, after four years of failing health. He was buried in Skirling churchyard. He was survived by his wife, who in 1929 published an affectionate memoir, 'Lord Carmichael of Skirling'. They had no children (although they had brought up two of Carmichael's nieces and a nephew) and the peerage became extinct on Carmichael's death. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his cousin, Henry Thomas Gibson-Craig (-Carmichael). 


@@@@@


doc= 32296


Carnegie, Andrew (1835-1919), steelmaker and philanthropist, was born in Moodie Street, Dunfermline, Fife, on 25 November 1835, the eldest of three children of William Carnegie (died 1855), a damask linen weaver, and his wife, Margaret. After the age of eight he was educated at a Lancastrian school. Other influences on him -- aside from his parents' poverty -- were his family's nonconformity (his father was a Swedenborgian) and its Chartist sympathies. 
In 1848 the depression in the linen trade prompted the Carnegies to emigrate to the United States, where they joined relatives in Pittsburgh in the picturesquely named district of Slabtown, Allegheny. Andrew Carnegie began work at the age of thirteen as a bobbin-boy in a cotton factory at a weekly wage of $1.20, thus beginning a classic rise from 'rags to riches'. The early phase of his career, up to about 1863 -- by which time he had already acquired the income of a dollar millionaire -- was characterized by his energy, his ability to attract the attention and help of those in authority, and his unerring knack of being in the right industry at the right time. By 1850 he had become a messenger-boy at the O'Reilly Telegraph Company in Pittsburgh. Three years later he was appointed clerk and telegraph operator to Thomas A. Scott, assistant superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. According to Carnegie, 'the great aim of every boy should be to do something beyond the sphere of his abilities -- something which attracts the attention of those over him' (Wall, 126). Carnegie did just that, and Scott rewarded him with ever greater authority and also loaned his assistant the capital to invest in the Adams Express stock, the dividends from which gave Carnegie his first taste of capitalism. Another investment soon after, in the Woodruff Sleeping Car Company, proved the basis of his great fortune. In 1859 Scott became vice-president of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company and appointed Andy (as Carnegie was known) to take his former post as superintendent of the western division of the line. A short man -- only 5 feet 3 inches tall -- Carnegie grew a beard to disguise his youth, as he was at the time only twenty-four. A hard taskmaster, he quickly proved himself a most effective manager on one of the busiest divisions of what was then the nation's best-managed railroad. 
By the time of the American Civil War, Carnegie's interests had diversified: besides the Woodruff Sleeping Car Company (ultimately absorbed by the Pullman Car Company, a deal which he helped negotiate), he had interests in the Columbia Oil Company, a scheme for building telegraph lines, a project for establishing a sutler's business for the army, a horse-trading concern, a bridge-building company, a locomotive works, and several other ventures. Nearly all of these made money and by 1868, when he had moved to New York, he had assets of $400,000 and an annual income of over $56,000. He seriously considered retiring at the age of thirty-five, declaring in a private note to himself that: 'No idol was more debasing than the worship of money' (Wall, 225). However, by then wider horizons beckoned. 
Carnegie's railroad experience convinced him that an even greater fortune could be made in the iron and steel industry. It was one of the reasons why after the civil war he had organized the Keystone Bridge Company in Pittsburgh. Having become even more convinced of the potential of the new Bessemer process on a visit to England in 1872, he decided to commit himself more fully to the iron and steel business during the depression of 1873. His key decision was to invest $250,000 in the Edgar Thomson Steel Company, formed in 1874 with a capital of $1 million. The Bessemer plant at the company's site at Braddock's Field, near Pittsburgh -- laid out by the engineer Alexander Holley -- was designed to manufacture rails. Carnegie's huge success with this venture was due first to his commitment to technological change and second to his previous experience with the railroads. He wanted to have the most modern equipment available and was willing, if necessary, to scrap expensive machinery after only a short time if better technology could be had. The administrative structure he put together at the Edgar Thomson works was similar to the one he had worked in at the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. He appointed the country's most talented steel engineer, Captain William Jones, as general superintendent to oversee the daily work of the managers in charge of the blast furnaces, Bessemer converters, and other departments of the works. 
As general manager, Carnegie selected William P. Shinn, a highly competent railroad executive who had been appointed the general agent of the Pennsylvania company when it was formed in 1871. Shinn introduced methods (copied from the railroads) of generating statistical data, which allowed Carnegie to become an early exponent of cost accounting. He insisted on knowing the exact expense of every operation and did his best to reduce costs. His maxim was: watch the costs and the profits will take care of themselves. He also appreciated the need to control raw materials in order to assure continuous operations and minimize costs. He purchased ore lands in the Lake Superior region, acquired boats and ore-handling facilities, and joined forces in 1884 with Henry Clay Frick (1849-1919), who controlled the great Connesville coal beds. Carnegie Bros. & Co. -- the head of this large vertical combine -- was formed in 1881 with a capital of $5 million; its chairman was Tom Carnegie (1843-1886), Andrew's brother, though after 1889 Frick held the post. Andrew Carnegie himself had no title, though he controlled 55 per cent of the capital in the partnership, which made a profit of $2 million in its first year. In 1887, a year after the death of his mother, he married, on 22 April, Louise Whitfield (died 1946), daughter of John W. Whitfield, a prosperous merchant; they had one daughter, Margaret. 
Carnegie had a remarkable talent for picking men from the ranks and he gave a good deal of freedom to his youthful executives (his 'young geniuses', as he liked to refer to them). Besides Jones and Frick, Charles Schwab, who later became president of the United States Steel Corporation, was another notable recruit. But there was a cost: job security was poor and managers were expended as ruthlessly as old machinery if they did not perform. Tom, Carnegie's brother, was driven to drink by the pressure of running the company and died prematurely. Carnegie's attitude to labour was equally unsentimental: like most American steelmasters, he regarded labour as primarily an item of cost. Although the introduction of machinery had reduced much of the employees' toil in the furnaces, compared to European workers, American labourers in Carnegie's mills (and in other steelworks) soon found their wages reduced and their unions undermined. Carnegie's (and Frick's) policies led in 1892 to a bloody showdown with the unions at the company's works in Homestead, Pennsylvania, when both sides suffered injury. (Even Frick was shot and stabbed, though he soon recovered.) Carnegie's reputation with the public was also harmed by the debacle, especially so since his book 'Triumphant Democracy' (1886) expounded his theories of philanthropy and democracy. Nevertheless, he and Frick had removed steel unionism from their steelworks. 
Carnegie's ruthless business tactics paid dividends during the bitter depression years of the 1890s, when the recurrent price wars and the economies of scale possessed by large-scale production resulted in many of his rivals failing to survive. Meanwhile, Carnegie thrived. By the end of the 1890s his business had profits of $20 million. For the year 1900 they stood at $40 million. After the mergers of the 1890s, however, the Carnegie company itself began to face stiff competition in selling ingots to specialized producers. When Carnegie threatened to enter the market for finished products -- thus raising the spectre of another vicious price war -- a number of his rivals persuaded the New York banker J. P. Morgan to arrange a massive consolidation that would absorb Carnegie's interests and those of other competitors. After much negotiation (during which Carnegie succeeded in forcing out Frick), the United States Steel Corporation was formed -- the world's first billion-dollar company -- and Carnegie sold out his interest. As John D. Rockefeller had done in oil, Carnegie had accumulated one of the greatest fortunes the world had ever seen: his share from the transaction was a staggering $447 million. 
At the age of sixty-five Carnegie went into 'retirement', with his wife and daughter, to his 30,000 acre estate at Skibo in Sutherland, Scotland. Now a white-bearded and kind-faced patriarch, he could play the Scottish laird at his estate, and guests were led into dinner by a piper. However, his main interests after 1900 lay in other directions. No longer a businessman, he still retained his energy, wealth, and desire to make things happen in the world. This was to be achieved by his second career as America's first great philanthropist and a new role as an international pacifist. 
Like many men of influence and wealth, Carnegie was unable to resist trying to put the world to rights. He was largely self-taught and an avid reader, especially of Herbert Spencer, whose social Darwinism appealed to him. However, his actions were not always consistent with Spencer's ideas (a writer he never entirely understood). A friend of Spencer and also of Matthew Arnold, he was closely associated with such Liberal statesmen as W. E. Gladstone and John Morley. Like Cecil Rhodes, he helped to finance the Gladstonian Liberal Party after the split over home rule in 1886 and he offered Gladstone an interest-free loan of any size to set him up privately; the offer was declined. Through Gladstone as an intermediary, Carnegie bought Lord Acton's library and allowed the historian to keep it during his lifetime; after Acton's death Carnegie gave the library to John Morley, who gave it to Cambridge University. 
A ruthless conservative in America, Carnegie posed as a Chartist and radical in Britain, where by 1884 he owned or controlled seven daily newspapers and weeklies. In his writing, too, he tried to reconcile his radical Dunfermline past with his more plutocratic present. The same man who cut workers' wages and unsentimentally refused to loan money to help Thomas Scott when he had business problems later in his career, began after the 1880s to expound the virtues of the 'wise distribution' of his wealth. 'The man who dies thus rich, dies disgraced', declared Carnegie, a doctrine that received its fullest expression in his book 'The Gospel of Wealth' (1900). In his view, plutocracy such as his could exist alongside democracy, but men who acquired great wealth must return it to the community to preserve individual initiative. Thus the wealthy were but a trustee and an agent for their poorer brethren, albeit of the better and aspiring sort. His 'scientific philanthropy' was to be carefully targeted according to a list of seven priorities. These were headed by his over-riding concerns -- universities and free libraries -- with churches in seventh place (an indication perhaps of his lukewarm interest in organized religion). His interest in libraries dated back to his early days as a messenger-boy in Pennsylvania, when each Saturday he borrowed a new book from a free library. He later declared that it was his own personal experience which led him to value a library beyond all other forms of beneficence. 
Carnegie's giving had begun as early as 1873 when he had donated $25,000 to the Dunfermline swimming baths, but it gathered pace after the publication of his 'gospel'. Within five years he gave libraries to Allegheny and to Fairfield in Iowa, while several Scottish cities, such as Edinburgh and Aberdeen, were similarly endowed. In 'old smoky' Pittsburgh he founded a great civic educational centre -- the Carnegie Institute. By 1900 his programme for founding libraries had become, from his house on East 91st Street in New York, as organized a business as that of churning out steel ingots. His acceptance of freedoms of cities and other civic honours also became routine. (At one stage he accepted six freedoms in six days, eventually reaching a record total of fifty-seven such awards by the end of his life.) Not surprisingly, his critics dismissed his philanthropy as mere publicity-seeking. However, not all his giving was well-publicized. 
As well as free libraries, Carnegie's philanthropic vehicles included the Carnegie Teachers' Pension Fund, which targeted underpaid college personnel and pensionless professors with an endowment of $10 million. Yet despite his enthusiasm in the 1890s and early 1900s for philanthropy, he had made little impression on his great fortune (which was hardly surprising, in view of the fact that the interest on his capital was $15 million a year). He needed to disperse his fortune faster. After 1900 he began using trusts to administer his charitable gifts. After trying out the idea in Washington and Dunfermline, in 1911 he created the Carnegie Corporation of New York as his major vehicle for the 'advancement and diffusion of knowledge'. He transferred to it the bulk of his remaining fortune of $125 million. In 1913 he established, under a separate endowment, a British version of the New York trust. Bored with philanthropy, he had now given away 90 per cent of his fortune and was content to leave the direction of it to others. Eventually the trusts founded 2811 free public libraries, of which 1946 were in the USA and 660 in Britain. 
Carnegie's other great enthusiasm after leaving steel making was his quest for world peace. Despite his early jingoism, he became a convinced pacifist after 1900. Between 1903 and 1914 he endowed four foundations and three imposing buildings ('temples of peace'), the largest of which was in The Hague. Also linked with his pacifism was the idea of a Simplified Spelling Board, which aimed to facilitate communication (it proved a total failure); and his Hero Fund, which rewarded peaceful (as opposed to warlike) individual acts of heroism. In 1910 he created the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace to hasten the abolition of war. An optimistic man, who had commanded whole industries and labour forces to do his bidding, Carnegie believed that peace could be organized on similarly rational lines. The businessman who had been a ruthless and machiavellian negotiator, and who had broken cartels and agreements to achieve his ends, now proved to have a naive faith in international treaties and peace organizations. He proposed a league of peace, with the major superpowers -- Great Britain, the USA, Germany, Russia, and France -- acting as a kind of international peace force through a world court at The Hague. He also liked meddling in foreign affairs by writing to and meeting presidents, emperors, chancellors, and prime ministers. Much of his faith for the future was placed on Kaiser Wilhelm II and President Theodore Roosevelt. He counted the latter as a friend, even though their views rarely coincided, especially where naval rearmament was concerned. The First World War was therefore a considerable disillusionment to him and he did not long outlive it. He died at Lenox, Massachusetts, on 11 August 1919. By then his benefactions totalled over $350 million, leaving a fortune of a mere $30 million (two-thirds of which was left to the Carnegie Corporation). He was survived by his wife. Carnegie's 'Autobiography' was published posthumously in 1920. His name is perpetuated in Britain by a number of trusts, notably the Carnegie United Kingdom, Dunfermline, and Hero trusts. 


@@@@@


doc= 32297


Carnegie, James, sixth earl of Southesk (1827-1905), poet and antiquary, was born at Edinburgh on 16 November 1827, the eldest son of the three sons and two daughters of Sir James Carnegie (1799-1849), of Pittarow, fifth baronet, and his wife, Charlotte (1800-1848), daughter of Daniel Lysons (1762-1834) of Hempstead Court, Gloucester. The father, who was fifth in descent from Alexander, fourth son of David Carnegie, first earl of Southesk, laid claim without success to the family earldom which had been forfeited in 1715 on the attainder of James Carnegie, fifth earl, for his share in the Jacobite rising of that year. 
Educated at Edinburgh Academy and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, James Carnegie was commissioned in the Gordon Highlanders in 1845, was transferred in 1846 to the Grenadier Guards, and retired on succeeding his father as sixth baronet in 1849. On 19 June of that year he married Lady Catherine Hamilton (died 1855), second daughter of Charles Noel, first earl of Gainsborough. They had one son, Charles Noel, who was to succeed as seventh earl of Southesk, and three daughters. By 1854 Carnegie had restored the family residence, Kinnaird Castle at Brechin, and began collecting antique gems, books, old master paintings, and a large assortment of mid-eastern cylinders. He also disposed of much of the extensive family property, selling his estate of Glendye to Sir Thomas Gladstone of Fasque, baronet, brother of the prime minister. Renewing his father's claim to the earldom of Southesk in 1855, he obtained on 2 July an act of parliament reversing the attainder of 1715, and was confirmed in the title by the House of Lords on 24 July. In 1869, on Gladstone's recommendation, he was made a knight of the Thistle, and on 7 December of the same year a peer of the United Kingdom, with the title Baron Balinhard of Farnell. 
Southesk's wife died in 1855, and in 1859, for health reasons, he went on a long hunting expedition in western Canada. On his return in 1860 he married, on 29 November, Lady Susan Catherine Mary Murray, daughter of Alexander Edward, sixth earl of Dunmore, with whom he was to have three sons and four daughters. Also in 1860 he was made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, but the diary of his Canadian travels, 'Saskatchewan and the Rocky Mountains', was not published until 1875. The work records his travel and sporting adventures and has some interesting plates, maps, and illustrations. 
However, Carnegie's chief writing interests were literary. He had published 'Herminius, a Romance' in 1862 and an essay, 'Britain's art paradise' (on the Royal Academy exhibition of 1871). In 1875 he published anonymously 'Jonas Fisher: a Poem in Brown and White', which caused some controversy. In a hostile review in 'The Examiner', the book was incorrectly ascribed to Robert Buchanan, who successfully sued the editor of the journal, Peter A. Taylor, for libel. This title, and those which followed, were minor poetic works. Rhys described Carnegie as having a 'certain mystic tendency' (Rhys, 345) and this attraction to fantasy and the occult is reflected in the titles of some of his publications: 'Lurida lumina' (1876), 'Greenwood's Farewell' (1876), 'The Meda Maiden' (1877), 'The Burial of Isis' (1844), and 'Suomira, a Fantasy', which was printed privately in 1899. 
In later years Carnegie's interest in the recondite found a more productive outlet in his antiquarian and archaeological research, particularly in Pictish stones and symbols. A distinguished member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, he read several papers, some of which were later published: 'The Newton stone' (1884), 'The ogham inscriptions of Scotland' (1885), and 'The origins of Pictish symbolism' (1893). 
Carnegie was made an honorary LLD of St Andrews in 1872, and of Aberdeen University in 1875. He died at Kinnaird Castle on 21 February 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 32298


Caroe, William Douglas (1857-1938), architect, was born on 1 September 1857 at Holmesdale, Blundellsands, near Liverpool, the younger son of Anders Kruuse Caroe (died 1897), Danish consul at Liverpool and a naturalized British subject, and his wife, Jane Kirkpatrick Green (died 1877). He was educated at Ruabon grammar school, Denbighshire, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was a senior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1879. 
Caroe was articled first, in 1879, to Edmund Kirby, an architect of Liverpool, and after one year his articles were transferred to John Loughborough Pearson, with whom he remained on a gradually diminishing part-time basis while he built up his own practice. In 1891 he married Grace Desborough, 'nee' Rendall (died 1947), with whom he had one daughter and two sons, the elder of whom was Sir Olaf Kirkpatrick Kruuse Caroe (1892-1981), Indian administrator. It was at this period that he was responsible under Pearson for a great deal of the detailing of Truro Cathedral. His own practice at that time included a large amount of work in Ireland -- houses, farm buildings, and stables -- and his church work in England grew rapidly. In 1885 he was appointed architect to the ecclesiastical commissioners and the Charity Commission, where Pearson's brother-in-law Ewan Christian was then senior architect, a post to which Caroe succeeded on Christian's death in 1895, and which he then held for the remainder of his life. From 1897 to 1903 Caroe was in partnership with Christian's nephew J. H. Christian, of Christian and Purday, who designed Mombasa Cathedral (1901-4). From 1903 he went into partnership with his assistant Herbert Passmore, who continued the work of the firm after Caroe's death, when the latter was succeeded by his son Alban Douglas Rendall Caroe. 
A vast amount of ecclesiastical work passed through Caroe's hands in these years. He acted as consulting architect to the diocesan boards of finance of Lichfield, Canterbury, Bath and Wells, and Newcastle upon Tyne. He was architect to the cathedrals of Canterbury, Durham, Southwell, St David's, Brecon, and Jerusalem, and to many churches, including Great Malvern Priory, Tewkesbury Abbey, Romsey Abbey, and St Peter's, Wolverhampton. He built or reconstructed the archbishop's palace at Canterbury, and the bishops' palaces at Abergwili, Southwell (1907-8), Bristol (1905; des.), St Albans, Llandaff, Rochester, and Wolvesey (Winchester). He also designed many substantial suburban churches, including that of St David, Exeter (1897-1900). He designed internal fittings for many hundreds of medieval churches, including woodwork in Winchester College chapel, and between the years 1887 and 1937 he was responsible for the structural restoration of many medieval buildings; in 1910 he carried out important restoration work on Tom Tower at Christ Church, Oxford, recorded in an etching by Muirhead Bone. He designed the monuments to Archbishop Temple in Canterbury Cathedral, to Bishop Owen in St David's Cathedral, to Bishop Satterlee and Bishop Harding in Washington Cathedral, USA, and to Bishop Ridding in Southwell Cathedral. He was a member of the first commission on St Paul's Cathedral in 1912, and acted as adviser to the Norwegian government on Trondheim Cathedral. 
Caroe's secular work includes the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire at Cardiff, the Teddington laboratories of the National Physical Laboratory, the offices of the ecclesiastical commissioners in Millbank (1903), flats in Knightsbridge (1901), Coleherne Court, Kensington (1901-3), 37-43 Park Street, Mayfair, boarding-houses at Wycombe Abbey School (1898-1910), and new buildings for Trinity and Pembroke colleges, Cambridge (1905-7). 
Caroe received the order of St Olaf of Norway, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1890. He was president of the Architectural Association in 1895-6 and became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. His publications include 'Sefton' (1893) and 'King's Hostel, Trinity College, Cambridge' (1909); he also edited ''Tom Tower', Christ Church, Oxford: some Letters of Sir C. Wren to J. Fell' (1923). 
Caroe was a man of forceful character and great energy and business capacity. A recent historian noted that, 'his early churches established him as the leading Arts and Crafts Gothic church architect outside the High Church party' (Bettley, 2.10). His metropolitan works in warm red brick were richly arrayed, and his remarkable offices for the church commissioners in Millbank gave architectural expression to the theme of 'a Church jubilant' (Gray, 135). In the same year as his Millbank project Caroe designed the working men's college in Crowndale Road, London, and he took an active interest in the work of the college. From his home at Vann, Hambledon, Surrey, he gave his professional services gratis to community projects, and founded the Fold County Rural Preservation Society. One of the first building conservators, this aspect of his work has been continued by his grandson Martin Bragg Caroe FSA in the firm Caroe & Partners. Caroe's career extended to the design of furniture and metalwork, sculpture and embroidery. He maintained an interest in Scandinavia and was an authority on the vikings. 
Towards the end of his life Caroe retired to Cyprus, where he took an active interest in preserving the antiquities of the island: his last published work was 'The Importance of the Historical Buildings of Cyprus' (1931). He died on 25 February 1938 at Latomia, a house he had built in Kyrenia, Cyprus, and was buried in the old British cemetery in Kyrenia. 


@@@@@


doc= 32299


Carpenter, Alfred Francis Blakeney (1881-1955), naval officer, was born at Barnes, Surrey, on 17 September 1881, the only son of Lieutenant (later Captain) Alfred Carpenter RN and his first wife, Henrietta, daughter of G. A. F. Shadwell. His father in 1876 received the Albert medal and the Royal Humane Society bronze medal for rescuing a man overboard while serving in the 'Challenger', and while in command of the marine survey of India, at the time of the Third Anglo-Burmese War, was among the first naval officers to be appointed to the DSO. His grandfather Commander Charles Carpenter in 1814 assisted in the capture after a long chase of the American privateer 'Rattlesnake'. His uncle was the writer Edward Carpenter. 
On leaving his preparatory school Carpenter entered the Royal Navy as a cadet in 1897. The following year as a midshipman he saw service in Crete during the massacres, and in 1900 he was with the naval brigade landed during the Boxer uprising in China. After promotion in 1903 to lieutenant he specialized in navigation, becoming a lieutenant-commander in 1911. In the year preceding the war he gained experience in staff duties on a war staff course and received the thanks of the Admiralty for various inventions of a specialized nature. In the same year he was awarded the silver medal of the Royal Humane Society for saving life at sea. 
The outbreak of war in 1914 found him in the 'Iron Duke' on the staff of Sir John Jellicoe, but in November 1915, after his promotion to commander, he was appointed navigating commander in the 'Emperor of India'. In 1917 Roger Keyes was appointed director of plans at the Admiralty and Carpenter, who had been Keyes's navigating lieutenant in the 'Venus', successfully begged to be taken on his staff. There he was engaged in the secret plans for attacking Zeebrugge and Ostend with the purpose of blocking the exits from the submarine and destroyer bases. Keyes in his 'Naval Memoirs' wrote: 'Commander Carpenter's gift for going into the minutest details with the most meticulous care, greatly assisted me in preparing a detailed plan, and orders, which embodied the work of several officers' (2.215). 
In selecting Carpenter for the command of the 'Vindictive' Keyes knew he was choosing a man familiar with all the main phases of the operation. The whole conception of the attack on Zeebrugge and Ostend had the spirit and elements of the cut-and-thrust raids of Drake and Hawkins. The chance of favouring winds and currents coinciding with the eve of St George's day 1918 gave the expedition an additional romantic appeal. To Keyes's signal 'St George for England' Carpenter replied 'May we give the Dragon's tail a damned good twist' (Keyes, 'Naval Memoirs', 2.262). 
Carpenter had been promoted to acting captain for the expedition but his duties were confined to the command of the ship and Acting Captain H. C. Halahan, who was senior to him, was in command of the landing force designed for attacking the mole at Zeebrugge, partly to divert attention from the block ships and partly to destroy enemy armament. Carpenter's part in bringing the 'Vindictive' alongside the mole was vital to the success of the operation and his achievement in doing so is not to be underrated even though he brought her 340 yards beyond her planned position and thus out of reach of her primary object: the guns which commanded the approach to the harbour. It was characteristic that Carpenter freely admitted this error was entirely his, explaining that it was due to the great difficulty in recognizing the objects on the mole amid the shell and smoke flare. Keyes, in his first dispatch, paid tribute to Carpenter's personal share in the attack, pointing out that, from all reports he had, Carpenter's 'calm composure when navigating mined waters and bringing his ship alongside the Mole in darkness, and his great bravery when the ship came under heavy fire, did much to encourage similar behaviour on the part of the crew, and thereby contributed greatly to the success of the operation. ('Ostend and Zeebrugge', 164)' His skill in bringing his ship away after the action was also highly praiseworthy.Carpenter, as the senior surviving officer, was asked by Keyes to make recommendations for conspicuous gallantry, but he replied that he felt it would be invidious to select individuals where everyone had acted so splendidly. Nor would he take part in the ballot which was then arranged for an officer and rating for the VC in accordance with rule 13. In this ballot, in which officers could only be elected by officers, Carpenter received one more vote than Commander Harold Campbell of the 'Daffodil' and was thus awarded the cross. He was immediately confirmed in his promotion to captain and later received the Croix de Guerre with palm and was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. His detailed account of 'The Blocking of Zeebrugge' was published in 1921. 
After Zeebrugge, Carpenter was sent on a lecture tour of Canada and the United States (1918-19) and on his return, after a brief time in the naval intelligence department, on 1 October 1919 he was given command of a war course at Cambridge for naval officers. In 1921 he took over the command of the light cruiser 'Carysfort' and in October 1923 was given charge of the senior officers' technical course at Portsmouth. From February 1924 to September 1926 he held the triple post of captain of the dockyard, deputy superintendent, and king's harbour master at Chatham. After a period on special duty at the Admiralty he was given command of the 'Benbow' in August 1927, transferring to the 'Marlborough' the following May. He was promoted rear-admiral in August 1929, at a time when opportunities for employment in flag rank were limited, and placed on the retired list, on which he was promoted vice-admiral in 1934. 
During his retirement Carpenter interested himself in the merchant navy, particularly in the training of its junior officers and cadets. He introduced the idea of a training ship, the 'St Briavels', in which they could have practical experience in handling, manoeuvring, and mooring ships, which was necessarily in the hands of senior officers on actual voyages. During the Second World War he commanded the 17th Gloucestershire battalion of the Home Guard from 1940 to 1944. He was appointed a deputy lieutenant for Gloucestershire in 1946. 
He married in 1903 Maud (died 1923), daughter of the Revd Stafford Tordiffe, rector of Staplegrove, Somerset, and they had a daughter. He married second, in 1927, Hilda Margaret Alison, daughter of Dr W. Chearnley Smith. 
Lean and ascetic in appearance, Carpenter, brought up in the traditions of the navy, although somewhat conventional in his outlook, embodied many of the highest qualities of the best type of naval officer. Disciplined in mind, courageous and calm in action, energetic and inspiring as a leader and generous in his praise for subordinates, he also possessed an unusual gift for the mastery of detail and exactness in planning. He died at his home, Chantersluer, St Briavels, Gloucestershire, on 27 December 1955. 
G. K. S. Hamilton-Edwards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32300


Carpenter, Edward (1844-1929), campaigner for homosexual equality and socialist writer, was born on 29 August 1844 at 45 Brunswick Square, Brighton, Sussex, the third son of Charles Carpenter RN (1797-1882) and his wife, Sophia, the daughter of Thomas Wilson RN of Walthamstow. The Carpenters were a west-country family, and Edward's grandfather Admiral James Carpenter (1760-1845) fought naval battles against revolutionary France in the West Indies. Edward's father, a lieutenant stationed at Trincomalee, retired early, became a barrister, and led the life of a respectable 'rentier' in Brighton, occupying a large house and investing heavily in stocks and shares. Edward had three brothers and six sisters, and he was the seventh child. He attended Brighton College from 1854 to 1863. After his three brothers entered the colonial, army, and naval services respectively, he was left alone with his sisters, most of them unmarried. The Brighton household, in which his mother was a conventional matron, helped to shape his personality; he combined an unconscious revolt against Victorian standards of social ethics with frustration of his sexual desires, which he soon realized were for his own sex. 
In 1864, after spending some months in Heidelberg, Carpenter entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, with the intention of being ordained. He won a college prize in 1866 for his essay 'On the continuation of modern civilization', which showed him well on the road to advanced liberalism. He was tenth wrangler in the mathematical tripos of 1868, and was elected to the clerical fellowship at his college vacated by Leslie Stephen. In 1869 he won the Burney prize at Cambridge for his essay 'The religious influence of art'. After being ordained in 1870, he served as curate to Frederick Denison Maurice, the incumbent of St Edward's, Cambridge, of which the fellows of Trinity Hall were patrons. Maurice's liberal Anglicanism, however, was not broad enough for Carpenter, who read Mazzini with W. K. Clifford and attended the Republican Club at Cambridge, led by Henry Fawcett. He joined with thirty-three other clerics, most of them Oxford or Cambridge fellows, in a memorial presented to Gladstone in 1870 seeking the freedom to resign clerical orders. The 'Clerical Disabilities Relief Act' was passed in 1870, and was followed by the 'University Tests Act' of 1871. Carpenter's commitment to the cause of university reform coincided with his reading Walt Whitman's 'Leaves of Grass' and 'Democratic Vistas', extolling 'manly love and friendship'. He also broadened his social vision by visiting Paris shortly after the suppression of the Paris commune. All this affected his sermons, which became Whitmanesque and even proto-socialist. In 1873 he took a long holiday in Italy, where the works of Greek sculpture at Paestum and elsewhere convinced him of the beauty and cleanness of the human body remote from commercialism and Christianity. Taking advantage of the 'Clerical Disabilities Relief Act', he relinquished his orders in 1874, which meant resignation of his college fellowship. He was disappointed in his hope of being elected to a lay fellowship. 
In October 1874 Carpenter started lecturing on astronomy at Leeds (where he lived) and other northern towns for the university extension scheme, a 'peripatetic' university for the people, which had been started in the previous year by James Stuart. In May 1877 he visited Whitman in Camden, New Jersey, and some of the New England celebrities: Ralph Waldo Emerson, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and John Burroughs. He wrote to Whitman on 'the squalor and raggedness' of manufacturing towns such as Sheffield and on the workmen, proud and poor. Strains due to overwork and also to continued sexual frustration led him to seek a more natural way of living -- he became mainly a vegetarian and a teetotaller. He interested himself in John Ruskin's experiment at St George's Farm, and in May 1880 he took lodgings with Albert Fearnehough, a scythe maker, and his family at Totley, near Sheffield, and from March 1881 at Bradway in a cottage owned by a young farmer, Charles Fox. Fearnehough became his lover and the long-delayed fulfilment of his sexual needs was attained at last. 
Carpenter's sexual liberation was accompanied by his conviction of spiritual freedom and equality gained through his study of the 'Bhagavad Gita', a gift from his Cambridge friend Ponnambalam Arunachalam (1853-1924). By the spring of 1881 he had given up lecturing altogether, and in a small wooden hut built in the gardens of the Bradway cottage he began to write poems, or a hymn of the soul, charting its 'slow disentanglement', in the style of Whitman. The result was a slender volume published anonymously in 1883 under the title 'Towards Democracy'. About 400 copies out of 500 printed were sold in two years. It was saved from oblivion by a favourable review by George C. Moore Smith in the 'Cambridge Review'. 
The death of his father in 1882 brought Carpenter some $6000; he now set himself up as a market gardener, bought three fields of about 7 acres at Millthorpe, half-way between Sheffield and Chesterfield within walking distance of the moors, and built a substantial cottage, where he and the Fearnehoughs moved in October 1883. As well as cultivating an orchard and market garden, he also took up sandal making. About the same time he began to play a role in the nascent socialist movement. Relying on H. M. Hyndman's 'England for All' (1881) for economic argument to explain the cause of alienation, he wrote an important tract, 'Modern Money-Lending and the Meaning of Dividends' (1883), which presents a world of surplus value from which the moneyed class could extricate themselves by adopting a simple mode of living, and by starting co-operative production or disseminating ideas on the subject. He joined the Democratic Federation founded by Hyndman and contributed $300 to its organ 'Justice', started in January 1884. He was critical of those who split the federation in December 1884 and was attracted to the Fellowship of the New Life, the parent body of the Fabian Society; it was members of this circle, such as Edward Pease, Havelock Ellis, and Ellis's friend Olive Schreiner, who really appreciated 'Towards Democracy' when its second, enlarged, edition came out in 1885. 
For the Sheffield Socialist Society that came into existence in March 1886 Carpenter prepared a programme asserting independence from the claims of the national socialist bodies. Their socialist work was assisted by Raymond Unwin of Chesterfield, later known as a promoter of garden cities, and by Robert Franklin Muirhead (1860-1941) of Glasgow, a Cambridge graduate and mathematician, who shared Carpenter's ideals of nature and manly love. Carpenter wrote 'England Arise: a Socialist Marching Song' (1886) for the new movement. Millthorpe and Sheffield attracted some of the Cambridge elite -- Charles Robert Ashbee, Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson, and Roger Fry -- and Carpenter for a while entertained the idea of reconciling culture and labour. 
Carpenter's new year Fabian lecture of 1889 came out as a book, 'Civilization: its Cause and Cure' (1889), in which he described civilization as a social and moral disease, and earned the nickname of the Noble Savage. One of the sores of civilization was 'smoke nuisance' or air pollution, against which he and Sheffield socialists conducted a well-organized campaign. He helped Kropotkin in his studies of small industries. In 1892, when the Walsall anarchists were tried for an attempt to manufacture bombs allegedly for the Russians, Carpenter as a witness defended them by dissociating anarchism from terrorism. 
Carpenter's journey to Ceylon and India in the winter of 1890-91, described in his book 'From Adam's Peak to Elephanta' (1892), was memorable for his visit to a guru and for reinvigoration of his faith in spiritual freedom and equality. Carpenter co-operated with his friends Henry and Kate Salt in their work for the Humanitarian League and joined in its campaigns against vivisection, for prison reform, for the abolition of cruel sports, and for other similar causes. 
Carpenter indulged in a new comradeship of a serious and extremely tender nature in 1886-7 with George E. Hukin, a razor grinder. He was deeply wounded when Hukin decided to marry. His homosexual life, however, remained well protected from curiosity, though Henry Labouchere's amendment to the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' of 1885 made all male homosexual acts liable to legal prosecution. Carpenter's reticence on the subject ended in 1892, when he met John Addington Symonds, who was preparing a full-scale book on sexual inversion in collaboration with Havelock Ellis. Carpenter supplied notes on his and his friends' homosexual cases for this study. Symonds's sudden death in 1893 deprived Ellis's 'Studies in the Psychology of Sex' (1897) of his contribution. Carpenter felt that he was destined to succeed him in defence of homosexuality. 
In the course of 1894-5 the Labour Press, Manchester, published four of Carpenter's pamphlets on sex: 'Sex-Love, and its Place in a Free Society'; 'Woman, and her Place in a Free Society'; 'Marriage in Free Society'; 'Homogenic Love, and its Place in a Free Society'. The last of these was for private circulation only, and was not included in the collection reissued as 'Love's Coming-of-Age' in 1896, but it was included in the enlarged edition published in 1906. Carpenter did not regard sexual inversion as environmental and abnormal but as congenital, and called men and women with an innate homosexual bias 'urnings', a word which he derived from 'uranos' ('heaven'). His 'The Intermediate Sex' (1908) had a significant readership both in Britain and abroad. Among those who were influenced by his works were Siegfried Sassoon, Robert Graves, E. M. Forster, and D. H. Lawrence. 
After the Fearnehoughs left Millthorpe in March 1893, George Merrill, the son of an engine driver and a product of the Sheffield slums, became Carpenter's sole companion. George Oates of Leeds, his Cambridge friend with whom he had maintained an intimate friendship, died (unmarried) in 1902 and left $3000 to Carpenter. The third edition of 'Towards Democracy' (1892) included a new third part, entitled 'After civilisation'. Its fourth edition (1905) brought in another addition, a fourth part, overtly homosexual, which was originally published in 1902 under the title 'Who shall Command the Heart?'

Carpenter was a pro-Boer in the South African War. His socialism was catholic enough to welcome both the Labour Party and its critics. His 'Non-Governmental Society' (1911) contains his mature thought on syndicalism or guild socialism. For the suffragette movement he worked with Mrs Charlotte Despard and the Women's Freedom League. During the First World War he condemned the war as part and parcel of 'civilization' and advocated 'a United States of Europe' in 'The Healing of Nations' (1915). His 'Never Again!' (1916) was a powerful anti-war poem. His autobiography, 'My Days and Dreams', also appeared in 1916. Fenner Brockway, the founder of the No Conscription Fellowship, remembered his appearance at this period: 'his head and features were of extraordinary beauty; his face a chiselled statue, clear-cut and of perfect outline; his eye bright and kindly' (Brockway). 
The death in 1917, at the age of fifty-six, of George Hukin, who appeared prominently in part 4 of 'Towards Democracy', snapped Carpenter's emotional tie with the north. In 1922 he and Merrill moved south and settled at the new Millthorpe, Mountside Road, Guildford, Surrey, where George took to drink and died in January 1928 in his early sixties. Carpenter sold the house, and with Edward Inigan from Wigan, another 'personal friend', moved to a bungalow, Inglenook, in Joseph's Road, Guildford. He had a stroke and died on 28 June 1929 of uraemia and senility. He was buried in the same grave as Merrill at Guildford cemetery. Carpenter survived all his brothers and sisters, and his estate, estimated at $5214 gross ($4152 net), mostly went to his nephews and nieces, apart from $1000 left to Inigan in his will. He was sometimes called the English Tolstoy, and Tolstoy considered him 'a worthy heir of Carlyle and Ruskin'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32301


Carpenter, George Alfred (1859-1910), physician and paediatrician, was born on 25 December 1859 at 176 Lambeth Road, London, the son of John William Carpenter MD and his wife, Mary, daughter of George Butler of New Shoreham, Sussex. Alfred John Carpenter was his uncle. 
After two years (1874-6) at Epsom College, a school then much favoured by doctors, Carpenter spent a year (1877) at King's College School, London, which had established an outstanding academic reputation and which educated many future distinguished members of the medical profession. 
Carpenter trained first at St Thomas's Hospital, London, where he was a prizeman, qualifying MRCS and LSA in 1885. He graduated MB (London) in 1886 with first-class honours. Subsequently he studied at Guy's Hospital in 1889, qualifying MRCP in 1889 and MD (London) in 1890. 
After a brief period as deputy medical superintendent at the Coppice Lunatic Hospital, Nottingham, Carpenter returned to London to practise at 12 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square. His medical career, however, centred on his work with the young children of the poor. Between 1885 and 1903 he was on the staff of the Evelina Hospital for Sick Children, Southwark, where he was finally physician in charge of the extensive outpatients' department. In 1903 Carpenter was appointed assistant physician at the North Eastern Hospital for Sick Children, renamed the Queen's Hospital in 1908, which treated sick children of the poor under the age of twelve. At the time of his death Carpenter was full physician. 
Carpenter's significant contributions to the study of paediatrics consisted not so much in any innovations he made in clinical treatment as in his assiduous compilation of case notes, his tireless efforts to encourage specialization in that branch of medicine, and in his meticulous editing and documentation of such work. 
In 1900 Carpenter was joint founder and leading figure of the Society for the Study of Disease in Children of which provincial branches were rapidly established in England. He edited eight volumes of the society's reports between 1900 and 1908, after which it was incorporated as a section of the Royal Society of Medicine, of which Carpenter was vice-president at the time of his death. 
In 1904 Carpenter founded the 'British Journal of Disease in Children', partly to fill the gap left when the American journal 'Pediatrics' ceased publication. This was published jointly in New York and London, between 1896 and 1901. Carpenter was its English editor and a copious contributor to the eleven volumes. He was also a corresponding member of La Societe Pediatrie of Paris and a member of La Societe Francaise d'Ophtalmologie, to both of which he contributed papers. He was also a regular contributor to 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal' and he read a number of papers to the Hunterian Society, the Royal Society of Medicine, and the Institute of Hygiene. 
The time spent by Carpenter on his editorial and administrative tasks, besides his medical attention to sick children, may explain why he published only two books, both in 1901, 'Syphilis in Children in Every-Day Practice' and 'Golden Rules for Diseases of Infants and Children'. The former, one of the 'Medical Monograph' series, draws heavily on Carpenter's comprehensive experience of the congenital complaints he had treated in infants of the poor. In reviewing the book 'The Lancet' commented that though 'there is no new or original feature' yet 'nothing, except for certain matters of treatment, is omitted'. 
Carpenter's Wightman lecture of 1909 is an account of the various congenital heart complaints that he had noted, mainly during his work at the two hospitals, together with references to the research of other specialists. The paper that he read to the Institute of Hygiene in 1907, 'The rearing of children', stresses the necessity of suitable food, clothing, and hygiene and moral guidance in the care of young children. One sentence in this paper voices the conviction brought home to him by his lifelong work among the poor: 'Many of life's failures are not so much hereditary as environmental'. 
Carpenter married Helene Jeanne, daughter of Henry, Baron d'Este, on 21 April 1908. He died of a cerebral haemorrhage at Cold Harbour, Waddon, Surrey, on 27 March 1910, and was buried in the old Sanderstead churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 32302


Carpenter, Sir (Henry Cort) Harold (1875-1940), metallurgist, was born at Clifton, Bristol, on 6 February 1875, the second son of William Lant Carpenter, engineer, of Bristol, and his wife, Annie Grace Viret. He was a grandson of the naturalist William Benjamin Carpenter and a great-great-grandson of Henry Cort, the inventor of the puddling process for iron. Owing to his father's early death, his ideas were much influenced by his uncle, the Unitarian minister (Joseph) Estlin Carpenter (1844-1927). He was educated at St Paul's School, then at Eastbourne College for a year, and in 1893 entered Merton College, Oxford, as a postmaster. Having obtained a first-class degree in natural science in 1896, he studied organic chemistry at Leipzig and took his PhD at the end of two years. He then worked with W. H. Perkin at Owens College, Manchester, until 1901, when he was appointed to take charge of the new departments of chemistry and metallurgy at the National Physical Laboratory. His interest soon shifted from organic chemistry to metallurgy, and from 1905 he confined his work to that subject, his first original contribution, with B. F. E. Keeling, being a study of the alloys of iron and carbon, involving accurate measurements in the range of high temperatures. This difficult investigation, establishing the main features of the system, was followed by studies of the structure of other alloys, especially the complex alloys of copper with aluminium. In 1905 Carpenter married Ethel Mary, daughter of George Henry Lomas, of Brooklands, Cheshire; there were no children of the marriage. 
The following year Carpenter accepted the new chair of metallurgy in the University of Manchester, where he built up a school of research, investigating tool steels and various complex alloys containing copper and aluminium. He left Manchester in December 1913 for the chair of metallurgy at the Royal School of Mines, South Kensington, but before taking up the duties he made a six months' tour of Canada and the United States of America in order to study metallurgical operations on a large scale. At the Royal School of Mines, however, he devoted himself mainly to the metallographic side of the subject. In a series of papers, mostly in collaboration with Constance Fligg Elam (later Mrs Tipper), he followed the process of recrystallization of metals which had been deformed, in the course of which means were devised for growing crystals of metals, especially aluminium, large enough to allow a study of their mechanical properties. This research laid the foundation of later work on single crystals. In collaboration with John Monteath Robertson he wrote numerous papers and a two-volume work, 'Metals' (1939). 
Carpenter was successively president of the three principal British metallurgical institutes -- of Mining and Metallurgy (1934), of Metals (1918-20), and of Iron and Steel (1935-7). He had been instrumental in founding the Institute of Metals, and as chairman of a Treasury committee was responsible in 1929 for a report which resulted in improving the status of professional people in government service. He was elected FRS in 1918 and knighted in 1929. He received the honorary degree of DMet from the University of Sheffield and that of DSc from the University of Wales. He also received numerous gold medals, including the Japanese Honda medal (1940). 
In the First World War Carpenter served on the Admiralty board of invention and research. On the outbreak of war in 1939 the metallurgical department of the Royal School of Mines was transferred to Swansea, and it was while on a country walk in Clyne valley wood, near Swansea, that he succumbed to heart failure, on 13 September 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 32303


Carpenter, (Joseph) Estlin (1844-1927), Unitarian minister and college head, the second of the five sons of William Benjamin Carpenter (1813-1885), a prominent naturalist, and Louisa Powell (1812-1887), was born on 5 October 1844, in Ripley, Surrey. He was the grandson of Lant Carpenter and the nephew of Mary Carpenter, both honoured names in the annals of Unitarianism; his uncles, Russell Carpenter and Philip Pearsall Carpenter, were also Unitarian ministers. William Carpenter was, at the time of his son's birth, tutor to the children of Lord Lovelace, but the family moved soon afterwards to London. Known throughout his life as Estlin, rather than Joseph, Carpenter grew up in a home where rational religious faith and puritan austerity (which included abstinence from alcohol) were balanced by scientific, literary, and musical enthusiasms. Among the family's treasured possessions were an organ (always whimsically known as 'Dagon') and a microscope. They were committed members of Rosslyn Hill Unitarian Chapel, Hampstead, and William Carpenter served for a time as organist and choirmaster. 
Estlin was educated first at University College School, and then, in 1860, having decided to follow his uncles into the Unitarian ministry, he moved to University College, London, where he studied mental and moral philosophy. In 1863 he proceeded to Manchester New College, the noted inheritor of the tradition of the dissenting academies, which by that time had moved from Manchester to London. Here, his intellectual ability and personal charm made a great impression on his fellow students. One of them, Philip Henry Wicksteed, was destined to become his lifelong friend and comrade, and his equal in academic eminence. Somewhat unexpectedly, during his student days Carpenter experienced a brief period of spiritual aridity. But this was resolved by a mystical experience in north Wales, described some years later, in graphic terms, in a letter to a friend. He left Manchester New College in June 1866 and spent the rest of the summer enjoying an extended holiday in Zurich. This enabled him to perfect his knowledge of the German language -- an important factor in his later competence in critical scholarship. His stay in Switzerland also provided him with welcome opportunities for rowing and mountaineering, always his favourite recreations. 
In the autumn of 1866 Carpenter was appointed minister of Oakfield Road Church, Bristol, and in 1869 he moved to Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds, where Joseph Priestley had once ministered. At both places he was much admired, not only for the spirituality of his preaching, sustained by a well-grounded intellectual faith, but also for his wide interests. At Leeds in particular, his Sunday services were supplemented by regular academic lectures on many different topics, and he also found time to translate and edit (from the original German) a large part of G. H. A. von Ewald's 'History of Israel' (1871-8). But his career in the pastoral ministry was cut short by the onset of a curious speech defect, not finally eradicated until some nine years later, which seriously affected his preaching and lecturing. 
In 1875 Carpenter accepted, not without some initial reluctance, an invitation to return to Manchester New College as professor in ecclesiastical history, comparative religion, and Hebrew. Though his initial qualifications for such an appointment were questionable, he threw himself into the work of ministerial training with great enthusiasm, devoting much time and energy to improving the range of his knowledge. He also showed, from the first, a special pastoral concern for the welfare of his students, offering them regularly the hospitality of his home in Hampstead, where he held frequent literary and musical evenings, and occasionally taking them on outings to cathedral cities and other places of interest. On 12 July 1878 he married Alice Mary (1854-1931), the daughter of George Buckton, a leading member of his former congregation at Leeds. Though no children were born to them, their union was to prove in every respect a 'marriage of true minds', and throughout the rest of his life Alice remained his beloved helpmate and companion. 
Thanks to the zealous and methodical dedication to study which was to mark Carpenter's entire career, his fame soon spread beyond the college, and in the wider academic world he eventually became an acknowledged authority in two spheres in particular -- biblical criticism and comparative religion. In the latter field he learned the Pali language with the assistance of Thomas Rhys Davis, the leading Buddhist scholar of the day, and in association with him he later undertook the onerous task of transliterating and editing some of the Pali Buddhist texts. 
In 1885 James Martineau, always very highly esteemed by Carpenter, retired from the principalship of Manchester New College; he was succeeded by James Drummond, and Carpenter became vice-principal. Four years later, not without some controversy, the college moved to Oxford, subsequently dropping 'New' from its name, and Carpenter moved with it. For the rest of his life he was to remain closely linked with Oxford, and his reputation and personality probably did much to secure the successful establishment of the college in its new home. In 1899, under somewhat obscure circumstances, Carpenter resigned from the vice-principalship, retaining only the Case lectureship in comparative religion. But this probably merely reflected a desire on his part to devote himself more earnestly to academic pursuits, and in 1906 he resumed a full involvement in the work of the college upon his appointment as principal in succession to Drummond. He retired in 1915 on attaining the age of seventy, but he continued as principal-emeritus, and from 1920 to 1925 he held the honorary office of president of the college. From 1914 until 1924 he was the Wilde lecturer in comparative religion at Oxford University. 
Carpenter lived an extraordinarily busy and well-filled life. His very considerable literary output, which included some major works in both biblical criticism and comparative religion, is listed in full in C. H. Herford's 'Memoir'. In the field of biblical criticism perhaps his most famous work was what came to be known as 'The Oxford Hexateuch' (1900). Though this was originally a composite production, edited by Carpenter and G. Harford Battersby, it was Carpenter who was most closely involved in the enterprise, and the one-volume second edition (1902) was almost entirely his responsibility. The work did much to secure a general acceptance of the Graf-Wellhausen hypothesis -- the theory that the 'Pentateuch', and possibly other parts of the 'Old Testament', were an untidy combination of four separate sources, designated by the symbols J, E, D, and P. He also wrote some important books on the 'New Testament', such as 'The First Three Gospels, their Origin and Relations' (1890), and in his eighty-third year he published 'The Johannine Writings, a Study of the Apocalypse and the Fourth Gospel' (1927). In comparative religion perhaps his best works, apart from the editions of the Pali texts, were 'Theism in Medieval India' (Hibbert lectures, 1921) and 'Buddhism and Christianity, a Contrast and a Parallel' (Jowett lectures, 1923). His small comprehensive manual entitled 'Comparative Religion', a contribution to the 'Home University Library' series, published in 1913, though much admired in some quarters, was probably one of his less successful efforts. He also wrote definitive biographies of his revered teacher James Martineau (1905) and his aunt Mary Carpenter (1879). 
Carpenter was always an assiduous organizer of conferences and summer schools, especially during his time at Oxford. This brought him into contact with many of the leading academics of the day, both at home and abroad. It also led to new collaborations and friendships, notably with F. Max Muller, A. S. Peake, and L. R. Farnell. When Peake came to compile his famous one-volume 'Commentary on the Bible', he asked Carpenter to contribute an introductory article on the 'Pentateuch'. His intellectual eminence earned him honorary degrees from several universities, including a DLitt and a DD from Oxford. Passages in the many letters which he received underline the extent to which his contemporaries acknowledged his competence and expertise. Max Muller once said to him, in a brief note: 'Could you, without much trouble, tell me the latest date that can safely be assigned to Exodus 3.14?' A. J. Edmunds, another academic, wrote to him as follows: 'There are hundreds of scholars who know more about the 'New Testament' than I do, and scores who know more about the 'Pali Texts'; but I know of only one man on earth who is equally well acquainted with the two, and that man is Estlin Carpenter' (Carpenter MSS, Manchester College, Oxford). 
But Carpenter was also from first to last a dedicated Unitarian. In spite of his multifarious academic activities, he seems nevertheless to have found time to involve himself, to quite a surprising degree, in the practical affairs of the Unitarian denomination. He devoted much energy, for example, to a personal campaign for the establishment of a pension fund for ministers. His abilities as lecturer and preacher were occasionally instrumental in the founding of new Unitarian causes -- most notably at Cambridge, where a congregation, founded in 1908, was the eventual outcome of regular weekly services held during university term time, which had been inaugurated after a series of lectures by Carpenter in 1903. In addition, throughout his life -- true to a family tradition -- he showed an active concern for social service, and always retained a special interest in such causes as temperance, international peace, and the relief of poverty. In pursuit of the latter he was from 1880 to 1889 the secretary of the London Domestic Mission Society, a pioneer Unitarian organization with a practical concern for the problems of urban deprivation. 
Always firmly committed to the Unitarian tradition in all its aspects, Carpenter was an untiring advocate of friendly relations with all the great world faiths, and especially with the religions of the East, of which he had an astonishingly detailed knowledge. He also fostered and encouraged close contacts with liberal churches in India and Japan. In his own personal life, as was always evident from his conduct of worship, he possessed a rich and emphatically Christian spirituality, characterized by a deep assurance of an all-embracing divine love. Here, perhaps, was the source of his unswerving belief in a universal revelation. 
To those who did not know him well, Carpenter sometimes seemed a rather shy and austere figure. Someone is supposed to have said of him, rather unkindly, that 'he had no redeeming vices' (Herford and others, 102). But he was in reality an unusually friendly individual who always took a close personal interest in the lives of all his former students. The enterprising house parties at his country cottage in the Lake District, to which students and colleagues both past and present were regularly invited, were at one time quite legendary. With his full beard and handsome face Carpenter was an imposing figure, and for most of his life he was endowed with robust health and much given to vigorous exercise, especially rowing and hill walking. His final years, however, were marred by painful illness, and at an earlier period he had had to endure some tragic experiences, the details of which his biographer does not disclose. But nothing could shake the serenity of his personal faith. A month before his death, in a letter to a former student, he wrote: 'A recent attack has made me an old man, and my walking days are over. But from my windows I can still enjoy the glories of spring, and even in bed I can say 'How beautiful it is to be alive!'' ('The Inquirer', 25 June 1927). 
Carpenter died at his home, 11 Marston Ferry Road, Oxford, on 2 June 1927, and was buried at Wolvercote cemetery on 7 June. The public orator at Oxford University, in sonorous Latin, mourned the passing of 'a learned, gentle, and most Christian soul' (Herford and others, 90). After his death the memory of Carpenter's saintly life eventually faded -- even within his own denomination -- and his academic reputation suffered a marked eclipse. In biblical scholarship, some at least of his conclusions have stood the test of time, and his books, especially those on the 'New Testament', can still be read with profit. But the world of comparative religion is no longer in tune with his essentially evolutionary approach, and his obvious Christian commitment, despite his wider sympathies, makes him suspect. But in both of the fields in which he excelled he undoubtedly deserves an honourable place as a remarkable pioneer in objective critical study, and the Carpenter Library of Comparative Religion, established at Manchester College (now incorporated into the university as Harris Manchester College) constitutes a unique and lasting memorial to his genius. 


@@@@@


doc= 32304


Carpenter, Robert Pearson (1830-1901), cricketer, was born at 45 Mill Road, Cambridge, on 18 November 1830. Both of his brothers -- George (1818-1849), a butcher, and William -- played cricket for Cambridge town. Originally a boot-closer by trade, Robert soon became a professional cricketer with engagements at Godmanchester (1854), Ipswich (1855-7), Birkenhead (1858), and Marlborough College (1859-60). In Cambridge he became known as the 'Old Gardener', because of his custodianship of Parker's Piece (until 1881). It was there he played in 1856 for the town against the university. 
Carpenter's first match at Lord's was in June 1858, when he scored 45 for the United All England eleven against the All England eleven. Throughout the 1860s he was the leading batsman in the United All England eleven; in the matches against the All England eleven, no batsman on either side surpassed his average of 24.44. He also appeared in nearly 150 matches against 'odds' of eighteen or twenty-two players. While loyal to the United All England eleven, as a professional he was ready to appear for the All England eleven when available and it was for this side that he made 174 against the Radcliffe-on-Trent XVIII in 1870 and 134 -- his highest score in first-class cricket -- against Yorkshire in 1865. In the same decade he also played for Cambridgeshire, when his batting, together with that of Tom Hayward and the fast bowling of George Tarrant, gave the county pre-eminence for a few seasons. Against Surrey at the Oval in 1861 he made 100. He made eighteen appearances (1859-73) for the Players in matches against the Gentlemen, scoring centuries in 1860 and 1861, both at the Oval. He went to America in 1859 with the first English overseas touring team, led by George Parr, and to Australia, under the same captain, in 1863-4. 
Carpenter was an attacking batsman, especially off the back foot. After he retired, in 1876, he umpired, standing in two test matches (1886, 1888). He died on 14 July 1901 at his home, 45 Mill Road, Cambridge. He left a widow, Eliza. One of their sons, Harry Carpenter (1869-1933), played for Essex (1888-1920). 


@@@@@


doc= 32305


Carpenter, William Boyd (1841-1918), bishop of Ripon, the second son of the Revd Henry Carpenter, incumbent of St Michael's, Liverpool, and his wife, Hester, daughter of Archibald Boyd, of Londonderry, was born at Liverpool on 26 March 1841. His mother's brother, Archibald Boyd, was dean of Exeter. Educated at the Royal Institution, Liverpool, he won an open scholarship at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, and graduated BA (senior optime) in 1864. Ordained the same year, he served as curate at All Saints, Maidstone (1864-6), St Paul's, Clapham (1866-7), and Holy Trinity, Lee, Lewisham (1867-70). He rapidly gained a reputation as a preacher, his last vicar nicknaming him 'the extinguisher'. In 1870 he was appointed vicar of St James's, Holloway, London, and became known as a capable parish priest. In 1879 he passed to the fashionable parish of Christ Church, Lancaster Gate, London. Originally evangelical in inclination, he became a moderate liberal churchman, influenced in part by study of F. W. Robertson. He was much liked by Queen Victoria and was appointed a royal chaplain in 1879 and canon of Windsor in 1882. Later he was clerk of the closet to Edward VII (1903-10) and to George V (1911-18), by whom he was created a KCVO in 1912. In these offices he came into close contact with the German court and was a friend of the Empress Frederick and of Kaiser Wilhelm II, who made him a knight of the royal crown of Prussia. 
In 1884 W. E. Gladstone selected Boyd Carpenter, despite reservations about the audibility of his sermons, for the see of Ripon. This he administered successfully for twenty-five years. He helped to create the see of Wakefield, and prepared the way for that of Bradford; he instituted the Queen Victoria Clergy Fund to provide pensions for poor clergy, and founded the Ripon Clergy College in 1897 to train graduates for holy orders. This foundation (renamed Ripon Hall) was moved to Oxford in 1919. He supported many forms of philanthropic endeavour, and keenly advocated the national league of physical training, the passing of the 'Children Act' (1908), and the old-age pensions scheme. A lover of drama, he promoted the British Empire Shakespeare Society. He delivered the Hulsean lectures at Cambridge in 1878, the Bampton lectures at Oxford in 1887 -- presenting an important essay in comparative religion, published as 'Permanent Elements of Religion' (1889) -- the Noble lectures at Harvard in 1904 and 1913, the pastoral theology lectures on preaching at Cambridge in 1895, and the Liverpool lecture (translated into German) in 1913. In these utterances he showed himself a persuasive exponent of Victorian religious liberalism. He was a prolific writer; commentaries, reviews, religious poetry, books of devotion, and popular expositions of the poets, particularly Dante, flowed from his pen. His recreation was the collecting of works on Dante. His 'Introduction to the Study of the Scriptures' (1902) is perhaps the best example of his popular religious teaching. In 1905 under the 'nom de plume' Delaval Boyd he produced a tragedy, 'Brian'; earlier, under the same name, he had written a 'shilling shocker', 'The Last Man in London'. His reputation, however, rests mainly on his oratory. He spoke, without manuscript or notes, with extreme rapidity, and in a beautifully modulated voice; this caused him to be known as 'the silver-tongued bishop of Ripon'. His most notable sermon was that before the House of Commons at the queen's jubilee in 1887. 
Boyd Carpenter was married twice: first, in 1864, to Harriet Charlotte, only daughter of the Revd J. W. Peers, of Chiselhampton, Oxfordshire; and secondly, in 1883, to Annie Maude (died 1915), daughter of W. W. Gardner, publisher. He had five sons and six daughters. 
On resigning his bishopric in 1911 Boyd Carpenter became canon, and was later subdean, of Westminster. He died, comfortably off, at his home, 6 Little Cloisters, Westminster, London, on 26 October 1918 and was buried in the cloisters at Westminster Abbey. There is a memorial window to him in Ripon Minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 32306


Carr, Sir Cecil Thomas (1878-1966), lawyer, was born at Poolemeade, Twerton, near Bath, on 4 August 1878, the younger son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Thomas Carr, a cloth manufacturer of Twerton, and his wife, Susan Arnell Creed. Educated first at Bath College under T. W. Dunn, who made boys enjoy working to their limits and gained their lasting devotion, Carr kept alive an association of old boys more than fifty years after the school closed. 
In 1897 Carr went to Trinity College, Cambridge, with an exhibition soon converted into a scholarship. He was placed in the second division of the first class of part one of the classical tripos in 1899 -- and the classics remained a resource throughout his life -- and in the third class of part two of the law tripos in 1901. Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1902, he practised on the western circuit; and although his practice was still small when war broke out, private means had enabled him in 1911 to contract his happy marriage with Norah, daughter of the civil engineer Sir Alexander R. Binnie. There were no children of the marriage. 
His early years as a barrister, with comparatively few briefs, allowed Carr time to write. He twice won the Cambridge Yorke prize (in 1902 and 1905) with books published as 'The General Principles of the Law of Corporations' (1905) and 'Collective Ownership' (1907); and F. W. Maitland entrusted him with a Selden Society volume, which appeared in 1913 as 'Select Charters of Trading Companies'. More light-heartedly Carr regularly entered for literary competitions, developing the lugubrious wit characteristic of his letters and speeches. He was good enough at various games to be an occasional recruit for county sides, and organized a cricket team for west country tours which inspired a series in 'Punch' by A. A. Milne, one of his regular players; a tall, awkward character seems to be based on Carr. 
Carr joined the 2nd / 4th Wiltshire regiment in September 1914, and spent the war in staff appointments in India. A year before he proceeded to the degree of LLD, Cambridge, in 1919 he became assistant to the editor and in 1923 editor of the 'Revised Statutes' and of the statutory rules and orders (later called 'Statutory Instruments'). His appointment followed from the chance recollection of his qualities by a former member of his chambers; and his main quality was a determination to make something of whatever engaged him. His duties lay in the edition and consolidation of the growing mass of delegated legislation, and in the consolidation of the statute book; and without the staff which Carr was later instrumental in securing for his successors most men would have been proud just to keep up with the work. But not Carr: with delegated legislation he made it his business to understand each item, and caught many flaws which had passed departmental muster; and with the 'Revised Statutes' he hunted down suspect enactments, verified that they were obsolete, and himself drafted statute law revision bills. 
Ultimately more important than his official duties was Carr's work in focusing thought on the problems of delegated legislation. He was one of the founders of administrative law in England, and played some part in the United States. This originated with three lectures given in Cambridge in 1921, subsequently published as 'Delegated Legislation' (1921). When a congressional committee was considering the systematic notification of administrative regulations in the United States, a travelling fellowship was arranged which took Carr in 1935 to Washington, where he advised on techniques for the 'Federal Register', first published in 1936. This journey took him also to universities in the east and mid-west, where talks enhanced his reputation and gained him many friendships. In 1940 he gave the Carpentier lectures at Columbia University, published on both sides of the Atlantic in 1941 as 'Concerning English Administrative Law'. Paradoxically this book was influential in England precisely because it was not addressed to English lawyers. Its historical detachment showed them the point they had reached after Lord Hewart's 'The New Despotism' (1929) and the 'Report of the Committee on Ministers' Powers' (1932). Ignoring slogans for and against the inevitable, Carr addressed the actual problems. It is the spirit in which the subject has since grown; though one might wish that Carr's imagination and values could also have been perpetuated. 
In 1943, at an age when most men retire, Carr became counsel to the speaker, an office largely concerned with private bills. In securing procedural improvements generally, and in the passage of individual bills, Carr's resourceful helpfulness was widely appreciated. It was also extensively used. From 1944 to 1947 he headed a committee considering the law about parliamentary and local elections. From 1943 to 1965 he served on the statute law committee, and helped initiate more radical consolidation of the statute book. And in 1944 his experience with delegated legislation was again enlisted: the 'watchdog' select committee then set up was granted the assistance of speaker's counsel, and Carr did much to settle the principles upon which it was to act. 
Carr retired in 1955 at the age of seventy-seven. He was knighted in 1939 and became KCB in 1947. He became bencher of the Inner Temple in 1944 and KC in 1945. He received honorary degrees from Columbia in 1940, London in 1952, and the Queen's University of Belfast in 1954; and he became fellow of the British Academy in 1952, and honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1963. From 1943 to 1956 he was election secretary, then chairman, of the Athenaeum. From 1958 to 1961 he was president of the Selden Society, editing for it after almost fifty years a second volume, 'Pension Book of Clement's Inn' (1960), and travelling to Washington in 1960 to address American members. A year earlier he had captained a team sent to the United States by the Senior Golfers' Society, of which he later became president, to compete with their North American counterparts; and at the age of eighty-two he combined this with addresses to the American Philosophical Society and two law schools. 
Carr played golf, on the course beside which he lived at Rock in Cornwall, almost to the end. No less energetic was his reading, also kept up to the end. As in his Westminster offices, everything was digested into untidy piles of clear notes which he could always find but rarely needed: what mattered remained in his head. He was offered an academic post when the First World War ended; and had he accepted, the problems of English public law might have been identified more clearly, more quickly, and much more quietly. But there is no saying what would have been lost without the practical authority exercised during a critical period by a shy man whose few words were always so compelling. Carr died on 12 May 1966 in the Nuffield Nursing Home, Wanford Road, Exeter. He was survived by his wife. 
S. F. C. Milsom', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32307


Carrington, Sir Frederick (1844-1913), army officer, was born at Cheltenham on 23 August 1844, the second son of Edmund Carrington JP, and his wife, Louisa Sarah Henney. After education at Cheltenham College, he entered the 24th foot (South Wales Borderers) in 1864. He quickly made himself expert in musketry, and became instructor to his regiment in 1870; in 1875 a rebellion in Griqualand West, northern Cape Colony, collapsed before a small force commanded by Lieutenant Carrington, who had been selected for the duty on the strength of this special qualification. For the Transkei War (1877-8) he raised and commanded the frontier light horse, which he led with great success. 
Early in 1878 Carrington was promoted captain, and in the same year commanded the Transvaal volunteer force against Sekukuni in the Transvaal. For his services he was gazetted brevet major, and later (1880) given a step in brevet rank and the CMG. He commanded the African levies against the Zulu. In the Basuto War, while in command of the colonial forces, he was surrounded at Mafeteng for nearly a month (September-October 1880) by 5000 Sotho. Though rations were so reduced that horse-flesh had to be eaten, he and his little force held out until relieved by Brigadier-General Charles Mansfield Clarke. 
Carrington was promoted colonel in 1884, and in the following year accompanied Sir Charles Warren's expedition to Bechuanaland in command of the 2nd mounted infantry, known as Carrington's Horse. Subsequently he raised and commanded the Bechuanaland border police (1885-93). He was created KCMG in 1887, and, in the Matabele (Ndebele) campaign of 1893 was military adviser to the high commissioner. 
In 1895, on promotion to major-general, Carrington took command of the infantry at Gibraltar, then was again sent to southern Africa, where he played an important part in quelling the Matabele uprising (1896), for which he was created KCB (1897). On the outbreak of the South African War his unique experience of irregular warfare in southern Africa made his appointment to a high command natural; with the temporary rank of lieutenant-general, he was selected to organize and lead an expedition which, starting from the east coast and marching through Rhodesia, entered the Transvaal soon after Roberts had captured Pretoria (5 June 1900). 
In 1904 Carrington retired from the army, and pursued his favourite recreations -- hunting, shooting, and fishing. He had married in 1897 Susan Margaret (1870/71-1921), only daughter of Henry John Elwes of Colesborne, Cheltenham, with whom he had two daughters, the younger of whom was Dorothy Violet Carrington (1910-2002), historian and writer on Corsica. He died of pneumonia at Colesborne Park, Cheltenham, on 22 March 1913, and was buried at Cheltenham cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32308


Saunders, Sir Alexander Morris Carr- (1886-1966), sociologist and academic administrator, was born at Reigate, Surrey, on 14 January 1886, by some fifteen years the youngest child of James Carr-Saunders, a wealthy underwriter, and his wife, Flora Anne Tower. He was proud of his descent from the architect Robert Morris and conscious of his affinity with two other relatives, W. W. and Edward Saunders, both entomologists and fellows of the Royal Society. In childhood he was lonely and at Eton College intensely unhappy. He left, aged sixteen, to spend two years in Paris and the French Alps. In this period he came to believe that it was in biology that the greatest advancement of learning would be made in the years ahead, and it was to read this subject that he went up to Magdalen College, Oxford. He took a first in zoology in 1908, was elected to the biological scholarship at Naples for a year, then returned to Oxford as a demonstrator in comparative anatomy. 
It became clear to Carr-Saunders, however, that his interests extended beyond the laboratory. His imagination had been fired by the prospects for human betterment, opened by Mendel's rediscovered paper of 1865, and by the work of William Bateson on heredity. In 1910 he moved to London, where he studied biometrics under Karl Pearson, became secretary of the research committee of the Eugenics Education Society, and served as sub-warden of Toynbee Hall. He was elected to Stepney borough council, and in 1914 was called to the bar by the Inner Temple. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Carr-Saunders enlisted in the ranks of the infantry but he was commissioned in the Army Service Corps and, after a year in France, was posted to a depot at Suez, where he remained, against his will, for the rest of the war. His duties left him leisure to plan a work on population that would 'view the whole problem... from an historical and evolutionary standpoint'. He came back in a state of depression and indecision, and accepted an offer to return to Oxford as a demonstrator in zoology. Here, however, he accomplished his grand design rapidly; his book 'The Population Problem' (1922) did much to establish his reputation among his contemporaries, although it did not attract wide attention at the time. Forty years later it was claimed as having anticipated later developments in ethology by its stress on behaviour that contributes to the survival of the group, and on the practices by which groups are secured of their territory. His concern for the problems of population was to lead him to serve as chairman of the population investigation committee from 1936, and of the statistics committee of the royal commission on population from 1944 to 1949; he was instrumental in establishing the study of demography, and unflagging in his leadership of the Eugenics Society, which awarded him its first Galton medal in 1946. 
In 1923 he was called to Liverpool as the first holder of the Charles Booth chair of social science. The task of directing a department proved highly congenial to him; the air of detachment that his colleagues felt in him did not prevent him from entering fully into the life of a civic university. His own publications meanwhile added to his reputation, especially the pioneering account of the history and structure of the professions (in a book of that title, with P. A. Wilson, 1933). He married in 1929 a former Oxford pupil, Teresa, daughter of Major Edmund Harington Molyneux-Seel, a professional soldier and Lancashire landowner; they had two sons and a daughter. 
The appointment to Liverpool had been quite unforeseen. Equally unforeseen but readily accepted was the call to Carr-Saunders in 1937 to succeed Sir William Beveridge as director of the London School of Economics (LSE). In the next nineteen years he held the school together through its exile during the war and presided over its ensuing expansion of numbers and activities. When he joined it he found an academic community agitated and divided by his predecessor's style of administration; he himself established his authority and restored harmony in the community by a style that was an absence of style. His simple and quiet approach to business flowed from his self-image; he saw himself as no more than a scholar among scholars animated by a common devotion. He was vigorous, even combative when necessary, and was able to transact business in the office rapidly. But in council his touch was as light as it was deft. Where sectional interests were latent his own selflessness diffused disinterest; discussions in which he never forcibly intervened served their therapeutic purpose and moved to generally accepted conclusions that seldom ran contrary to his own judgement. 
When in 1943 Carr-Saunders joined the commission under Sir Cyril Asquith on higher education in the colonies he took up a task to which he was drawn alike by his scholarly and his humanitarian concern for its object. He created and became chairman both of the University of London senate committee, which guided the development of university colleges in east Africa, Sudan, central Africa, Nigeria, the Gold Coast, and the West Indies, and of the Inter-University Council, through which the help of all the British universities was given to the colleges and universities of the dependent territories. He was chairman in 1947 of the commission which promoted the University of Malaya, and in 1952-3 of the commission which led to the foundation of the multiracial University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. On his retirement from the LSE, in December 1965, he devoted himself to this work more than ever, travelling continually to maintain personal contacts with the new colleges. He carried out the survey of the manpower requirements of the African universities presented to the Tananarive conference of 1962; his book 'New Universities Overseas' (1961) gives an account of these developments. 
Two interests formed in early years remained with Carr-Saunders throughout life. In the French Alps he had learned the craft of the mountaineer; he had a special knowledge of the Aiguilles Rouges and, while he was at Liverpool, he climbed Tryfan more than a hundred times. His first sight of Raphael's frescoes in the Vatican had opened a new world to him and he continued to find a lively pleasure in paintings and to collect them. He also had a lifelong interest in farming and country pursuits, finding happiness in their practical and creative aspects. He once remarked that the farmer is 'the man who does the only job that really matters'. Seemingly withdrawn and remote he was keenly observant and warm in his attachments. In his private judgement of men he made sharp distinctions but in his dealings with them he was uniformly tolerant. His lean frame and ascetic, somewhat melancholy mien concealed great energy; the strength of his hands marked the tenacity which enabled him to carry through on his retirement a task that would have extended most men fully in the prime of life. His exertions responded to the breadth of his intellectual interests and his deep sense of social responsibility. As a young man he had been a sceptic in the tradition of the Victorian rationalists but his philosophic bent and concern for right action drew him insistently towards theology, and he found a faith within the Anglican fold. 
Carr-Saunders was knighted in 1946, in which year he also became a fellow of the British Academy, and was appointed KBE in 1957. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Glasgow, Columbia, Natal, Dublin, Liverpool, Cambridge, Grenoble, Malaya, and London; he was also honorary fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, of the University College of East Africa, and of the LSE. He died near Dale Head, Thirl Moor, St John's in the Vale, Cumberland, on 6 October 1966. 
Henry Phelps Brown', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32309


Carruthers, (Alexander) Douglas Mitchell (1882-1962), explorer and naturalist, was born in London on 4 October 1882, the eldest son of William Mitchell-Carruthers (1853-1931), who took orders in 1886, and his wife, Antonia, daughter of Atkinson Alexander Holden, who had been rector of Hawton, Newark-on-Trent. Educated at Haileybury College and Trinity College, Cambridge, he started in quite a humble way as secretary to various people who were working at the Royal Geographical Society, and underwent training in land survey work. He also learned how to skin animals and became an expert taxidermist. This enabled him to take part in expeditions which advanced his career. On the British Museum expedition to Ruwenzori and the Congo (1905-6) he sent home remarkable specimens of birds and mammals. In 1907-8 a German businessman and natural historian enabled Carruthers to travel in Russian Turkestan and the borders of Afghanistan. There he did research work on the various kinds of wild sheep in the Tien Shan (Tianshan) range of mountains. He established the territories inhabited by the 'Ovis ammon' and 'Ovis poli' and found another specimen of sheep, new to natural history, and later named 'Ovis karolini'. He supplied many museums in Europe and America with specimens of these sheep at a time when very little was known about them. He then explored by himself the countries south-east of Syria and shot certain rare deer, among them the Arabian oryx, one species of which was hitherto unknown. He also made a collection of marmots, one of which was new. 
Carruthers's next most important work was undertaken in collaboration with the big-game hunter John H. Miller and Morgan Philips Price. In 1910 they decided to explore the stony desert of Outer Mongolia, then part of the old Chinese empire, during the last years of the Manchu dynasty. The expedition took eleven months, crossed Siberia, and went up the Yenesei River to the source. The explorers had some difficulty in crossing the Sayansk Mountains on the Russo-Chinese frontier as they entered Outer Mongolia, but Carruthers was expert in dealing with obstructive officials. The country of the upper Yenesei basin was largely unknown. Only two Russian explorers had been there before and virtually no mapping had been done. Carruthers did some surveying and made some maps of the country watered by the Japsa River, which flows into the upper Yenesei north of the Tannu-ola Mountains. This was difficult forested and mountainous country which had never been worked at before. Carruthers and his colleagues were real pioneers, and the expedition owed much to his capacity for organization and leadership and his knowledge of human nature. His two volumes on 'Unknown Mongolia' were published in 1913 and in the meantime he had been awarded the Gill memorial (1910) and the patron's gold medal (1912) of the Royal Geographical Society, which he was to serve as honorary secretary in 1916-21. 
During the First World War Carruthers was employed mainly at the War Office compiling maps of the Middle East. He ceased active exploration following his marriage, on 9 October 1915, to Mary (1878-1962), the divorced wife of Major James Archibald Morrison MP and the daughter of Arthur Edwin Hill-Trevor, the first Lord Trevor. He settled in the countryside of East Anglia and his later career consisted largely in working at map making and with explorers and travellers. He published some articles and memoranda on various aspects of geography. His later books included 'Arabian Adventure' (1935) and 'Beyond the Caspian: a Naturalist in Central Asia' (1949). His work showed alertness to the impact of climatic and physical variations on all forms of life: a thought which ran through most of his lecturing and writing. He did some work on climatic conditions in central Asia, and continued some of the work started by Ellsworth Huntington and other geographers and explorers. He was interested in the idea that in the course of centuries a process of desiccation had been going on in the centre of the continent. This induced him to work in getting information about the old civilizations which had arisen and disappeared in central Asia, thereby adding to what had been done by Sven Hedin, Aurel Stein, and others. He was awarded the Sykes medal of the Royal Central Asian Society in 1956. 
Carruthers's first marriage was dissolved in 1948 and in that year he married Rosemary Arden, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Ernest Charles Clay. He died in the Royal Free Hospital, Islington, on 23 May 1962. 
M. Philips Price', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32310


Carson, Edward Henry, Baron Carson (1854-1935), politician and lawyer, was born in Harcourt Street, Dublin, on 9 February 1854, the second son of Edward Henry Carson, architect and civil engineer, and Isabella Lambert of Castle Ellen, Athenry, co. Galway. His family was typical of the Irish protestant, or 'Anglo-Irish' people, with its mixture of professional and landed backgrounds. 
Carson was educated at Arlington House, a boarding-school in Portarlington, Queen's county. In 1871 he took the entrance examination to read classics in Trinity College, Dublin, where he joined the celebrated debating society. In that society he displayed traits of his Liberal Unionist disposition, supporting radical causes such as the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland but in the broader context of maintaining the union with Britain. After taking only a pass degree in 1876 he studied at the King's Inns, Dublin, and was called to the Irish bar in the Easter term of 1877. 
Carson soon built up a reputation as a junior counsel, making the acquaintance of Edward Gibson (afterwards Lord Ashbourne), then Disraeli's attorney-general for Ireland, and Gerald FitzGibbon, solicitor-general. Like many of his contemporaries, he was lucky in that, at a crucial time in his career, he was soon involved in the increase of litigation resulting from Gladstone's 'Land Act' of 1881, and by 1886 he had acquired a leading reputation at the Irish bar. By then he had left any active political interests behind, but in 1886 John Gibson, recently appointed Irish attorney-general by the new Conservative administration, nominated him to be his crown counsel. Carson was only thirty-two years old, and the position carried with it some personal risk. He was soon embroiled in cases arising from the Plan of Campaign launched by members of the Irish Parliamentary Party to reduce rents in selected estates through direct and concerted action by the tenants. Carson was retained in his post by Peter O'Brien, Gibson's successor, and he caught the eye of Arthur James Balfour, chief secretary for Ireland, who was impressed by his legal skills and dogged courage. 
Carson's role in prosecuting cases during the Plan of Campaign earned him the nickname of Coercion Carson, and the accusation that he had sold out on his earlier principles (when he had acted for tenants under the 'Land Act' of 1881) in the hope of a government job. But it was characteristic of Carson to ignore criticism, however savage, if he thought that what he was doing was right: and Carson, always an admirer of the landlords of Ireland, believed that the Plan of Campaign must be faced down. He showed his mettle in the celebrated Mitchelstown affair on 9 September 1887, when the Royal Irish Constabulary fired on demonstrators, inflicting two fatalities. Carson deplored the mishandling of the episode which had led to the confrontation, but declared 'I think that as far as the people are concerned, the firing would have a satisfactory result' (Hyde, 71). 
Carson's rise to the top of his profession was now rapid. In 1889 he was appointed a QC, and in June 1892 he became solicitor-general for Ireland. In 1892 he entered politics as one of the Unionist members for Dublin University, though he never lost his liberal disposition, and indeed preferred to describe himself as a 'liberal unionist'. But his overwhelming interest still lay in the legal profession. He was called to the English bar by the Middle Temple in 1893, and became a QC in 1894. It was now that he made his name in some famous cases, notably the libel action brought by Oscar Wilde against the marquess of Queensberry in 1895. Carson acted for Queensberry, revealing his formidable powers of cross-examination in destroying Wilde in a celebrated encounter. By 1900 he was earning some $20,000 a year in fees, and was reckoned one of the great advocates in an age when advocates had a following among the public. In 1900 he was appointed solicitor-general for England, a ministerial post which carried a knighthood, and he went on to take further high profile cases. In 1910 he acted for the Archer-Shee family in their action following their son's expulsion from the Royal Naval College at Osborne for allegedly stealing a postal order. This case, which Carson won, showed him at his best: emotional, yet professional, and determined to gain justice for the smallest in the land against the greatest. 
Carson entered his most active political phase only belatedly. But, in a real sense, his Irish experience at the bar had already helped him formulate his political ideas. His early career had been marked by his appearing for tenants under Gladstone's 'Land Act'; but his experience during the Plan of Campaign, and his concern to defend the landlord system, made him a stern advocate of the landlord class. In 1892 he represented one of the most unpopular landlords, Lord Clanricarde, during the hearings of John Morley's evicted tenants commission. He condemned the 'Irish Land Bill' of 1895, and led a revolt against the 'Land Act' of 1896, which extended the right of tenants to purchase their farms. Carson was no passive spectator of Irish policy, as his revolt showed. He castigated British ministers for their occasional asides against the Irish members, denouncing A. J. Balfour for his remark that the Irish members 'will invariably come down to the House and press for money when they think it can be squeezed out of the Treasury' (Boyce, 150). He warned British ministers against their 'everlasting attempt to make peace in Ireland by giving sops to one party at the expense of the other' (Beckett, 163). When he told Balfour in 1900 that it was 'only for Ireland that I'm in politics' he spoke the plain truth. But his coming to the forefront of Irish, and British, politics was delayed until 1910, when Carson was fifty-six years old and (as always) obsessed with what he regarded as his poor health. This, the apogee of his political career, revealed Carson's strengths and weaknesses as a political leader and as a man. And it seemed at variance with his career in the law that had been the mainstay of his rise to fame and fortune. 
In February 1910 Carson became leader of the Irish Unionist MPs at Westminster. These members, about twenty in number, were drawn almost entirely from the unionist constituencies of the north, and Carson assumed the leadership at a time when the political outlook for unionist Ireland seemed dangerous. The general election of January 1910 left Asquith's Liberal government dependent for its Commons majority on John Redmond and the Irish nationalists. A second election in December left the position virtually unchanged, and now the Liberals set about removing the House of Lords' veto over Commons' legislation. Once this was done, the last constitutional barrier against Irish home rule would be dismantled. A man of Carson's temperament would have disliked the Liberals' attack on the Lords anyway, for it showed the exercise of government power at its most ruthless. But the price of nationalist support for the attack on the Lords was a new 'Home Rule Bill', which Asquith introduced in April 1912. Carson now prepared himself for the last great struggle of his career, to preserve the union, which he described as the guiding star of his political life. 
This brought Carson to confront the nature of his political beliefs, and test them against the harsh realities of power; to struggle between his passionate, emotional temperament and the need to act as a pragmatic leader of a volatile Ulster unionist rebellion against home rule; and to reconcile this leadership with a lifetime spent in the law. Carson had shown Balfour in 1896 that he would not spare unionist politicians if he thought they were betraying Ireland; it was unlikely that Liberal politicians would fare any better. But his struggle against home rule proved to be more protracted than anyone could have imagined, and lasted until after the First World War. And the changing backdrop against which it took place called upon Carson to weigh up his love of unionist Ireland against his equally deeply held belief in the British empire. It was indeed only for Ireland that Carson was in politics; but politics soon made other demands on his loyalties, demands which could not be set aside. Small wonder, then, that the years between the 'Home Rule Bill' of 1912 and the partition of Ireland in 1921 were to prove the most dramatic and testing of Carson's long and distinguished life. 
His life rather than his career; for there was little to be gained by Carson in terms of career politics from his special connection with Ulster Unionism. His purpose was to defeat home rule for the whole of Ireland; his means were the special case that he could make for Ulster opposition to home rule which, he believed, would force the government to abandon its bill. If Ulster could not be coerced, then home rule was dead. This course of action must involve him in some dangerous circumstances; and, while Carson never feared danger, he went into the Ulster camp in what was a risky venture. At a great demonstration on 23 September 1911 held at Craigavon, the home of the Ulster Unionist MP for East Down, Sir James Craig, Carson was welcomed as the leader of Ulster's stand for union. Carson pledged himself to join with the Ulster unionists to defeat 'the most nefarious conspiracy that has ever been hatched against a free people' (Hyde, 291). There is no doubt that Carson's bond with Ulster unionists was sincere; no doubt, too, that he was loved as much by them as he was hated by nationalists. But, while in public their unity was proclaimed, this concealed deep differences not only of tactics but of strategy as well. Carson came from the outside; and he struggled to control the Ulster unionists, and to keep them to peaceful processes. Thus he joined enthusiastically in the brilliant propaganda coup of 'Ulster's solemn league and covenant' in September 1912, in which Ulster unionists pledged themselves to resist home rule, which was as much an attempt to control passions as to express defiance. He accepted the raising of the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) in 1912 to resist home rule, and acquiesced in its arming in 1914. But he was no proto-fascist, leading armed men against lawful authority. And, despite his grand strategic design of defeating home rule for the whole of Ireland, he knew that his duty lay in making whatever reasonable settlement could be achieved. On 23 September 1913 he wrote to the Conservative and Unionist Party leader, Andrew Bonar Law, that he was 'fully conscious of the duty there is to try and come to some terms' (ibid., 339-40). This would entail getting the best terms that he could for the Ulster unionists, should his more ambitious plan to save all Ireland for the union come to nothing. These would take the form of some form of exclusion of unionist Ulster from the operation of the 'Home Rule Act', be it county option, or a six-county 'clean cut'. In March 1914 fifty-eight officers of the British army, stationed at the Curragh camp, co. Kildare, declared that they would accept dismissal from the service rather than attack Ulster unionists. Carson used the government's loss of face to press, not for the abandonment of the 'Home Rule Bill', but for the exclusion of six counties of Ulster. He accepted the Ulster unionist plan of a gun-running expedition when he became convinced that not to proceed would weaken the Ulster Volunteers and thus undermine the whole Ulster unionist position. 'I rely on you to keep your arms with a view to keeping the peace', he warned one UVF regiment (ibid., 368). Carson now appeared to have become the servant of events rather than their master: by May 1914 the 'Home Rule Bill' had proceeded through all the formalities, and only required the royal assent. Carson's mood, seldom optimistic, now darkened, and he awaited with despair the final crisis, one that seemed inevitable when a conference held at Buckingham Palace at the end of July to try to resolve the deadlock ended in failure on the issue of which Ulster counties would be excluded temporarily from the jurisdiction of the 'Home Rule Act'. 
Carson warned that the great crisis of 'our country' and 'our fate' was imminent 'unless something happens'. That something turned out to be the involvement of the United Kingdom in the European war in August 1914. As the new crisis approached, Carson and Bonar Law met Asquith on 30 July and agreed that, subject to the cabinet and John Redmond's approval, an amending bill which the government had offered dealing with the Ulster question should be postponed. Asquith's decision, announced on 15 September, to place the 'Home Rule Bill' on the statute book, but postpone its operation until the war ended, was naturally regarded by unionists as a betrayal. But Carson showed that he was a loyal servant of the state. He swallowed the government's 'betrayal' and promised the Ulster Volunteer Force for overseas service without qualification. 
But it was from now on that Carson's political guiding star -- the defence of the union -- found itself influenced by other, and at times much more pressing, issues. Carson, the unionist back-bencher, now proved himself a formidable scourge of the government's mishandling of the war. When Asquith reconstructed his administration in May 1915 to include members of the opposition, Carson entered the cabinet as attorney-general, but resigned in October because of the series of military and strategic blunders that began with the disaster of the Gallipoli landings, and ended with the collapse of Serbia. Carson's stock in the Unionist Party now rose to new heights. He led the unionist war committee, a 'ginger group' formed in January 1916 and dedicated to a more vigorous prosecution of the war. He played a significant role in the fall of Asquith and his replacement by Lloyd George in December 1916. Carson now became first lord of the Admiralty, but he proved a surprisingly ineffective minister. Lloyd George ascribed this to Carson's Irishness, asserting that an Irishman was naturally opposed to every government, even one supported by his own party. This trite remark contained a germ of truth: Carson's real power lay, as it did in his legal career, in his strength of critical attack. He had not the temperament to hustle civil servants, and his admiration for the navy lowered his guard against the prejudices and conservatism of the service. In July 1917 he moved to the war cabinet as minister without portfolio. 
But Carson's involvement in, and sincere commitment to, the British war effort modified his deep-seated love of the union. Following the Easter rising in April 1916 Asquith gave Lloyd George the task of making a quick settlement between nationalists and unionists so that the kingdom would not be weakened by a renewal of the Irish crisis. Carson accepted Lloyd George's suggestion for a settlement based on the exclusion of six Ulster counties (Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry, and Tyrone) from a Dublin parliament, which would now be introduced at once. Carson yielded to the loss of most of Ireland from the union because, as he exclaimed when Lloyd George warned him that not to settle might lose the war, 'if the war is lost, we are all lost'. It was a measure of his distance from his fellow southern unionists that his support of partition was accepted by the Ulster Unionist Council in June 1916, but rejected by leading southern unionists such as Lord Lansdowne and Lord Middleton. Carson was deeply disappointed at the failure of the Lloyd George mission; but Ireland returned to the agenda in March 1917, when the government was anxious that the Irish question should not hinder its efforts to induce the United States of America to enter the war on the allied side. Carson consented to the setting up of a convention of representative Irishmen under the chairmanship of Sir Horace Plunkett to find a basis for agreement. Carson did not participate in the convention. And it was a sign of his growing remoteness, not only from southern but also from Ulster unionists, when he moved towards the idea of a federal settlement of the Irish question (which he had considered in 1914), only to see this now firmly rejected by the Ulster unionists in the convention. In January 1918, thoroughly unhappy in office, Carson resigned from the government, on the grounds that he wanted to be 'unfettered' in considering any Irish settlement proposal that Lloyd George might derive from the convention's report. 
Carson now seemed to have lost all his political bearings. He supported conscription for Ireland, but warned that the inclusion of Ulster in a home rule bill as the price of conscription was impossible. 'Nothing', he exclaimed in a remarkable outburst in the House of Commons in April 1918, 'Ireland -- north, south, east and west -- has suffered so much in its history as from the broken pledges of British statesmen' (Colvin, 3.343). When the Lloyd George coalition published its manifesto for the general election of December 1918, Carson supported its promise that Ulster would not be coerced into any home-rule settlement. In that election Carson finally abandoned his southern Irish constituency and successfully contested the Duncairn division in Belfast; but he pressed for the government to introduce better services of health, housing, and education into the whole of Ireland. When the government introduced its Irish legislation, in the form of double-barrelled home rule, with parliaments for northern and southern Ireland, Carson advised the southern unionists to accept the inevitable, or take refuge in Ulster, but although he chaired the meeting of the Ulster Unionist Council held in March 1920 to decide its response to the bill, Carson took no part in the debates. This meant that Ulster would accept home rule, and although Carson approved of the decision, he then went on to say in Westminster that home rule was fraught with disaster: 'As regards my own country, it will be cut off from the greatest Kingdom that has ever existed.' His political impotence was clear to all when he confessed that he would 'not vote for home rule. At the same time I shall do nothing to prevent this Bill from becoming law' (Hyde, 447). 
Carson formally resigned the Ulster Unionist leadership in February 1921, a few days before his sixty-seventh birthday, urging the Ulster unionists 'from the outset' to see that 'the Catholic minority have nothing to fear from the Protestant majority' (Hyde, 449). In May 1921 he was appointed lord of appeal and was created Baron Carson of Duncairn. But his last, and in many ways his greatest, speech was made on 14 December 1921 during the debates in the Lords on the Anglo-Irish treaty which Lloyd George had signed with Sinn Fein on 6 December. Carson was now fully liberated from the need to put loyalty to Britain before loyalty to Ireland, and he attacked the treaty in a superb display of invective. But his speech was a commentary on his own failure to defend the union as much as it was an attack on the treaty. 'Loyalty', he declared, 'is a strange thing. It is something you cannot get by sitting round a table and trying to find a formula for an Oath of Allegiance which means nothing. It is something born and bred in you.' It was Carson's tragedy that his loyalty could not remain all of a piece, but was divided between his southern upbringing, his Ulster affiliations, and his wider British and imperial patriotism. His bitter attack on the Conservative and Unionist Party, in particular, was an expression of his frustration, as negative as it was brilliant. 
Carson may have damaged the coalition government by his attack, though it is doubtful if it made a substantial difference to what was an already uneasy political arrangement. Carson continued as a law lord, between 1921 and 1929, defending the interests of southern unionists in the new Irish Free State. He was regarded by his contemporaries as a competent rather than a great judge, but he remained, as always, well disposed towards even the most junior barrister. He revisited Ulster only three times: to receive an honorary LLD from Queen's University, Belfast, in 1926, to attend the opening of the new Northern Ireland parliament buildings at Stormont in 1932, and on the occasion of the unveiling of his own statue in front of those buildings in July 1933. 
Carson was a man of powerful and brooding presence. His features were usually set in a scowl, and his political speeches were marked by a menacing, and yet homely, style. However, he could look jaunty and dashing, and he possessed great charm. His outward appearance hid a lack of confidence and an emotional nature which placed him under great strain. He occasionally took to his bed, complaining of bad health but, considering the demands he made on himself in the course of his career, and especially between 1911 and 1921, his constitution was clearly sound. Carson was married twice: first, on 19 December 1879, to Sarah Annette Foster (died 1913), the adopted daughter of Henry Persse Kirwan of Triston Lodge, co. Galway, and second, on 17 September 1914, to Ruby (1881-1966), elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Stephen Frewen of Charlton Musgrove, Somerset. His friendships with women -- with whom he was more at ease than with men -- caused strained relations with his first wife. His second wife was younger than Carson by some thirty years, and this provoked ribald jokes from his contemporaries about the reasons for his fatigue during the day. His children (two daughters and two sons from his first marriage, and a son from his second) caused him concern, and he once described them as a 'rum lot'. His elder son and younger daughter by his first marriage predeceased him; Edward Carson, his son by his second marriage, was elected Conservative member of parliament for the Isle of Thanet in July 1945. 
Carson died at home at Cleve Court, Isle of Thanet, on 22 October 1935 and was buried in St Anne's Cathedral, Belfast. He belonged to the Anglo-Irish tradition which held fast to the belief that the union between Great Britain and Ireland was axiomatic. This earned Carson the jibe from one opponent that 'he has no country -- he has a caste'. Certainly he and his people depended on England's support, and it was a measure of the essential fragility of their position that Carson found himself on the losing side in 1921. But he believed in the greatness of the British empire, and in this sense he possessed a broader patriotism that he always hoped would be compatible with his Irish patriotism. Perhaps a better judgement was that of T. M. Healy, who remarked of Carson that 'although a Unionist, he never was un-Irish'. Carson saw no conflict between being Irish and being a unionist. This is why, in both parts of the partitioned island, he felt, like Garibaldi, that he had been made a stranger in the land of his birth. 


@@@@@


doc= 32311


Carte, Richard D'Oyly (1844-1901), theatre impresario, was born on 3 May 1844 in Greek Street, Soho, London, the son of Richard Carte (died 1891) (originally Cart; he frenchified the surname) and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Jones. The name D'Oyly, arising from his mother's side, was a forename (not part of a double surname), by which he was addressed. He matriculated at University College, London, in 1861 but left his studies to join his father's firm of Rudall, Carte & Co., well-known makers of woodwind instruments. From within his father's firm, then from an adjacent address in Craig's Court, Charing Cross, he set up a management agency for musical performers: some two hundred instrumentalists and singers (including those of such distinction as Adelina Patti and Clara Schumann, the widow of the composer) appear on his prospectus of the late 1870s. 
A dilettante composer, Carte published a few songs and other pieces. Three light operas composed by him were produced in London: 'Dr Ambrosias: his Secret' (1868), 'Marie' (1871), and 'Happy Hampstead' (1877, preceded by provincial tour). His commanding role, however, was to be in theatrical promotion. As lessee and manager of London's Opera Comique between June and October 1874, he presented a Brussels company in 'Girofle-Girofla' (its first staging in Britain) by one of the most popular composers of French operetta, Lecocq. An English adaptation of Gaston Serpette's 'La branche cassee' followed, and Carte announced his ambition 'to establish in London a permanent abode for light opera'. Not French but British works were, however, to provide his route. 
In 1875 Selina Dolaro, a musical actress who headed her own company, installed him as manager of the Royalty Theatre for a run of Offenbach's operetta 'La Perichole'. To fill out the evening Carte suggested that Arthur Sullivan should set W. S. Gilbert's 'Trial by Jury', a libretto originally intended for Carl Rosa. While it was in gestation other works plugged the gap, but these were eclipsed by the brilliant success of 'Trial by Jury' on its first performance on 25 March 1875. Carte needed no further prompting to pursue the long-term promotion of Gilbert and Sullivan's works (and others compatible with them). He organized a syndicate, the Comedy Opera Company, which financed 'The Sorcerer' in 1877 and 'HMS Pinafore' in 1878. In 1879 he obtained sole control, and 'Mr R. D'Oyly Carte's Opera Company' (as it was thenceforward known) presented all the subsequent joint theatrical works of the pair. 
To counter a wave of unauthorized (pirated) American productions of 'HMS Pinafore', Carte went to New York with Gilbert and Sullivan and presented his own production there in 1879, followed by its successor 'The Pirates of Penzance' (prior to its London production). The financial rewards of the operettas enabled Carte to construct a new London theatre, the Savoy, which opened on 10 October 1881 with a transfer from the Opera Comique of the newest Gilbert and Sullivan operetta, 'Patience'. The most up-to-date and comfortable of all London theatres, the Savoy was claimed as the world's first public building to be lit entirely by electric light. 
The label of 'Savoy Operas' was thenceforward most commonly used to identify Gilbert and Sullivan's works, though it was also applied by Carte to other operettas he later presented at that theatre. His contractual arrangement with his two colleagues (from 1883) was as follows. For an annual rent, Carte formally let the theatre to a partnership of himself, Sullivan, and Gilbert; once the expenses of mounting the productions had been deducted, each was entitled to one-third of the profits. For his part, Carte had the right to demand a new work from his creative partners at six months' notice. 
Continuity of style was assured by the maintenance of what was, in effect, a permanent company of soloists and chorus; such soloists as Jessie Bond, George Grossmith, and Rutland Barrington won their own following. Long runs became an expectation: 'The Mikado' (14 March 1885) set a London theatrical record with 672 performances. Carte's meticulous standards of staging and dresses were extended to the supporting companies which he sent to tour the repertory in the provinces. Thus his monopoly of the works was reaffirmed while a national taste was formed for them. 
Carte also took a company from London to give the first New York performance of 'The Mikado' on 19 August 1885 and then accompanied almost the same set of artists to Berlin and other continental cities. Vienna's leading critic, Eduard Hanslick, reviewing 'The Mikado' in September 1886, specifically noted that its 'unparalleled success' was owing not merely to the libretto or the music or both together but also to 'the wholly original stage performance, unique of its kind, by Mr D'Oyly Carte's artists... riveting the eye and ear with its exotic allurement'. There was a further continental tour in 1887. 
As up-to-date as his London theatre was the new, luxurious Savoy Hotel built by Carte: it opened in 1889, the year of Gilbert and Sullivan's 'The Gondoliers'. The creative partnership was by then under strain, Sullivan wishing to move away from operetta towards grand opera; Carte, with every confidence, resolved to build a new theatre to launch that enterprise. In the meantime Gilbert had precipitately accused Carte of cheating on the accounts, provoking the so-called 'carpet quarrel', the issue being whether a front-of-house carpet could be included in production expenses. An astonished public beheld the partnership in tatters, Gilbert challenging Carte in a legal action spanning from July to September 1890, with Sullivan on Carte's side. The legal result was inconclusive, the artistic consequences lamentable. 
Estranged from Gilbert, Sullivan conducted his grand opera, 'Ivanhoe', at the opening of Carte's new theatre, the Royal English Opera House (now the Palace Theatre, Cambridge Circus), on 31 January 1891. Defying grand opera custom, Carte presented 'Ivanhoe' not in repertory with other works but in a continuous run, with multiple casting of leading roles. It was the sole major failure of his career: the total of 160 performances exceeded any precedent for such a work but the run was insufficient to cover the financial costs. He had no other opera to replace 'Ivanhoe' immediately, and its eventual successor, Messager's 'La Basoche', likewise failed (though much praised by Bernard Shaw). Late in 1892 Carte sold the theatre to Sir Augustus Harris, his only rival in vigour of theatrical promotion. 
On 24 August 1870 Carte married Blanche Julia Prowse, who died in 1885; on 12 April 1888, at the Chapel of the Savoy, he married his professional assistant, known as Helen Lenoir (really Susan Helen Couper Black) ['see 'Carte, Helen (1852-1913)], whose work both before and after her marriage to Carte identifies her as one of the most remarkable of Victorian businesswomen. Her decisive managerial role in relation to both Sullivan and Gilbert is evident from the time of the carpet quarrel; the subsequent reconciliation of composer and librettist and the mounting of their two final collaborations ('Utopia Limited' and 'The Grand Duke') devolved largely on her as Carte became increasingly ill. 
Neither of these operettas renewed the spell which Gilbert and Sullivan had once exerted on the public. No longer able to depend on their joint output to fill the Savoy, Carte produced new operettas by Sullivan with other librettists ('Haddon Hall', 1892; 'The Chieftain', 1894; 'The Beauty Stone', 1897; 'The Rose of Persia', 1899) and extended the repertory to other composers, including Messager ('Mirette', 1894) and Alexander Mackenzie ('His Majesty', 1897). None of these had much success. 
From the time of his second marriage Carte lived at 4 Adelphi Terrace, in the area of the Savoy, with a handsome summer residence on an island in the Thames at Weybridge, Surrey. He died at his London home from dropsy and heart disease on 3 April 1901. At the same time as he was buried, on 6 April at Fairlight church, Hastings, a memorial service for him was held at the Chapel Royal of the Savoy. Despite the disastrous enterprise of his Royal English Opera, he left some $250,000, twice the amount of Gilbert's legacy and more than four times Sullivan's. 
After Helen Carte's death in 1913, control of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, as it was later styled, passed to Rupert D'Oyly Carte (1876-1948), a son of Carte's first marriage, and then to Rupert's daughter Bridget D'Oyly Carte (1908-1985). The company continued under the family's management, but with a final change of name to the D'Oyly Carte Trust, until 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 32312


Carter, Howard (1874-1939), artist and archaeologist, was born on 9 May 1874 at 10 Rich Terrace, Brompton, Kensington, London, youngest child of Samuel John Carter (1835-1892), artist and illustrator, of Kensington and Swaffham, Norfolk, and his wife, Martha Joyce (1837?-1920), daughter of Mr Sands, a builder of Swaffham. Carter's childhood was passed mostly in Swaffham, where he was cared for, and probably educated, by maiden aunts in the Carters' 'country house', a cottage in Sporle Road. He was not a strong child, and was never exposed to the rough-and-tumble of conventional schools. He was, however, carefully trained in drawing and watercolour by his father, who was an accomplished artist, exhibiting regularly at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition (1855-90), and serving as a staff illustrator on the 'Illustrated London News' (1867-89). 
Like most of Samuel Carter's children, Howard was brought up to be an artist, and it was as an artist that he was first sent to Egypt, on the recommendation of the Amherst family of Didlington Hall, not far from Swaffham. William Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst was a collector of Egyptian antiquities and an influential member of the committee of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Through him the young Howard Carter went to Egypt in late 1891 to work as a 'tracer' of tomb scenes at Beni Hasan. After a few weeks he was sent to join W. M. Flinders Petrie who was excavating at Tell al-Amarna. Four months with Petrie, an obsessive but outstanding fieldworker, inspired Carter with a desire to excavate. He was still just seventeen. 
From 1893 to 1899 Carter was responsible for the drawing of the painted reliefs in the temple of Queen Hatshepsut at Deir al-Bahri, Thebes. The results, published in six large folio volumes, 'The Temple of Deir el Bahari' (1894-1908), are considered among the finest records of Egyptian inscribed monuments. His experience in archaeological management during this time led to his being appointed in 1899 the first chief inspector of antiquities in Upper Egypt by Gaston Maspero, director-general of the antiquities service of Egypt. 
Carter's appointment at the age of twenty-six, with limited archaeological experience and no formal qualifications, surprised the archaeological community in Egypt, but he justified Maspero's trust by pursuing active campaigns against tomb-robbers, and by protecting and restoring monuments at Thebes and elsewhere. He also directed excavations for the antiquities service at the tomb of King Mentuhotpe II, and initiated with the American Theodore Davis explorations in the Valley of the Kings. For Davis, Carter discovered the tomb of King Tuthmosis IV. 
In the autumn of 1904 Carter was transferred to the lower Egyptian inspectorate in Cairo. Shortly afterwards, at Saqqara in January 1905, foreign visitors were involved in a skirmish with Egyptian antiquities guards. Carter was held to be responsible. He refused to offer an apology, and was reprimanded and transferred to Tanta in the Nile delta. A stubborn, unbending attitude, especially towards official interference, would on more than one subsequent occasion bring him to the brink of calamity. In 1905, dissatisfied with the apparent lack of support for his position, he resigned from the antiquities service. For three years he scraped a living by painting watercolours, and by conducting rich foreign tourists around the ancient sites of Egypt. 
Carter's rehabilitation came in early 1909 when, on the recommendation of Maspero, he began his association with George Herbert, fifth earl of Carnarvon. Until the First World War they excavated in the Theban necropolis, making important, but unspectacular, discoveries, partly published in 'Five Years' Explorations at Thebes: a Record of Work Done, 1907-1911' (1912). Additional, but short-term, exploratory excavations were also carried out on two delta sites, Sakha (1912) and Balamun (1913). Carnarvon was then encouraged by Carter to apply for the concession for the Valley of the Kings, surrendered finally by Davis in 1914. The time was not right, and the prognostications for discovery were not favourable. Davis, Maspero, and others believed that there was nothing of importance left in the valley to be discovered. Carter thought otherwise. 
A short campaign by Carter in the tomb of King Amenophis III in 1915 produced trifling results, and for the rest of the war until 1917 he was employed as a civilian by the intelligence department of the War Office in Cairo. His duties were not onerous, and he was able to spend much time at Thebes, even carrying out some epigraphic work for Alan Gardiner, a leading British Egyptologist. In 1917 he was at last free to return to working for Carnarvon, and until 1922 he conducted annual campaigns in the Valley of the Kings; but few positive results were achieved. 
In the summer of 1922 Carter persuaded Carnarvon to allow him to conduct one more campaign in the valley. Starting work earlier than usual Howard Carter opened up the stairway to the tomb of Tutankhamun on 4 November 1922. Carnarvon hurried to Luxor and the tomb was entered on 26 November. The discovery astounded the world: a royal tomb, mostly undisturbed, full of spectacular objects. Carter recruited a team of expert assistants to help him in the clearance of the tomb, and the conservation and recording of its remarkable contents. On 16 February 1923 the blocking to the burial chamber was removed, to reveal the unplundered body and funerary equipment of the dead king. Unhappily, the death of Lord Carnarvon on 5 April seriously affected the subsequent progress of Carter's work. 
In spite of considerable and repeated bureaucratic interference, not easily managed by the short-tempered excavator, work on the clearance of the tomb proceeded slowly, but was not completed until 1932. Carter handled the technical processes of clearance, conservation, and recording with exemplary skill and care. A popular account of the work was published in three volumes, 'The Tomb of Tut.ankh.Amen' (1923-33), the first of which was substantially written by his principal assistant, Arthur C. Mace. 
No archaeological discovery had met with such sustained public interest, yet Carter received no formal honours from his own country. In 1926, however, he did receive a decoration from the king of Egypt, and he was made a 'commandeur' of the order of Leopold II by the king of the Belgians in 1932. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Yale University in 1924, and was made a corresponding member of the Real Academia de la Historia, Madrid, in the same year. 
The last years of Carter's life were plagued by illness, and he found himself incapable of preparing the full scientific publication of his remarkable discovery. Disillusioned, largely neglected by his few Egyptological friends, and suffering painfully from Hodgkin's disease, he eventually died on 2 March 1939 at his London home, 49 Albert Court, Kensington Gore, and was buried on 6 March at Putney Vale cemetery. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 32313


Carter, Hugh (1837-1903), painter, was born in Birmingham on 4 March 1837, the son of Samuel Carter (1805-1878), solicitor to the London and North Western and Midland railway companies and one-time MP for Coventry. After moving to London, he studied for a short time at Heatherley's Art School. He then trained with J. W. Bottomley, whose daughter, Maria Concordia, he married on 7 July 1866. They had four daughters and two sons, one of whom, Frank W. Carter, also became a painter. Carter also studied with Alexander Johnson, F. W. Topham, and John Phillip, as well as K. F. von Gebhardt in Dusseldorf. 
From 1859 to 1902 Carter exhibited twenty-four pictures at the Royal Academy, domestic genre paintings as well as portraits of Alexander Blair (exh. 1873 and 1898), the antiquary Sir Joshua Staples (exh. 1887), and Mrs Worsley Taylor (exh. 1890). Two of his most successful exhibits at the academy were 'Music hath Charms' (exh. 1872) and 'Card Players' (exh. 1873), both representing scenes from Westphalian peasant life. Much of his best work was done in watercolour and pastel, and in those media he painted a number of landscapes which displayed a fine sense of colour and atmospheric effect. As a watercolour painter he was a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, of which he became an associate in 1871 and a member in 1875. He was also a member of the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from its foundation in 1883, and later of the New English Art Club. 'The Last Ray', an oil painting in the Tate collection, was donated by his wife in 1905. The Guildhall Art Gallery in London has his work 'Hard Times'; and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London owns two watercolours, 'Buildings and Gondolas at Venice' and 'Interior of the Capuchin Convent at Albano'. His portrait of his uncle, Sir Francis Ronalds (1788-1873), the inventor of the first working electric telegraph, is in the National Portrait Gallery in London. Hugh Carter died on 27 September 1903 at his home, 12 Clarendon Road, Notting Hill, London; he was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. A memorial exhibition of his works was held at Leighton House, London, in October 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 32314


Carter, Thomas Thellusson (1808-1901), Church of England clergyman, was born at Keate's Lane, Eton, on 19 March 1808, the younger son of the Revd Thomas Carter, lower master and afterwards vice-provost of Eton College, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Henry Proctor of Clewer. He had a brother and five sisters. He entered Eton College aged six and spent twelve years there, leaving as captain of the oppidans. After matriculating at Christ Church, Oxford, on 8 December 1825, he went into residence in 1827. There he met Edward Bouverie Pusey, one of his father's former pupils, who in 1828 became regius professor of Hebrew; W. E. Gladstone was Carter's junior by a year. Carter graduated with a first class in classics in 1831 and sat unsuccessfully for an Oriel fellowship, but left Oxford before the Tractarian movement developed, following Keble's assize sermon in July 1833. 
On 21 October 1832 Carter was ordained deacon by Bishop Burgess of Salisbury and was licensed to St Mary's, Reading, of which Henry Hart Milman (1791-1868) was vicar. Following his ordination to the priesthood by the bishop of Lincoln on 22 December 1833, he went to Burnham, Buckinghamshire, as his father's curate. While there he was greatly influenced by the 'Tracts for the Times', which were then being published. On 26 November 1835 Carter married Mary Anne Gould (died 1869), daughter of John Gould of Amberd, near Taunton, and they had a son and two daughters. She had been a childhood friend of Richard Hurrell Froude (1803-1836), and it was through the Goulds that Carter met Tractarian sympathizers. In 1838 he became rector of Piddlehinton, near Dorchester, in Dorset, an unhappy appointment during which his health suffered. From 1842 to 1844 he took leave of absence and returned to Burnham; in 1844 he was appointed rector of Clewer, near Windsor. Clewer found in Carter a zealous incumbent bent on social as well as ecclesiological reform. Aided by his friend the architect Henry Woodyer (1816-1896), he restored the fabric of Clewer church, established two mission churches within the parish, and brought order and dignity into the worship, steadily developing the ritual used and the doctrine taught. A benefit society was established to aid the poor; part of the glebe was given for allotments and, in an attempt to stem the drink problem, a temperance society was started. 
Clewer parish was large and included a slum district known as Clewer Fields. Two army barracks and a large number of itinerant railway navvies compounded the social problems of drink, poverty, and prostitution. In December 1848 Mariquita Tennant (1811-1860), a widow living in Clewer, rescued a young woman from a life of poverty and abuse in Clewer Fields; she soon had over a dozen women under her roof in what became the Clewer House of Mercy. Carter, who had been influenced by the writings of the Revd John Armstrong (1813-1856), later bishop of Grahamstown, Cape Colony, on the need for church rescue work, supported her efforts to found a religious community, but ill health forced her to withdraw in 1851. Carter was fortunate in Mrs Tennant's successor, the recently widowed Harriet Monsell (1811-1883), who was installed as mother superior of the newly founded Community of St John Baptist, Clewer, on 30 November 1852. 
The work of the community was conducted on clearly defined lines and led to over forty branch houses, besides extensive work in the United States and India. The development of sisterhoods was viewed by many with alarm, provoked controversy, and caused Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, much anxiety, although he remained the visitor until his translation to Winchester in 1869. Owing to the nature of Carter's pastoral work and his role in the revival of the religious life, requests for spiritual direction came to him from all sides, and he discharged the task with growing conviction and sympathy. Perhaps the most widely used of his books was 'The Treasury of Devotion' (1869). He also pioneered the retreat movement and led some of the earliest recorded retreats in the Church of England. 
In the midst of the controversies surrounding ritualism within the church, Carter found a role both as leader and conciliator. He was an early member and vice-president of the English Church Union, founded in 1859, and in 1875 suggested the so-called 'six points' as a guideline for ritual practice. His role of warden at the Clewer House of Mercy had deepened his awareness of the importance of sacramental confession, leading to one of his major works, 'The Doctrine of Confession in the Church of England' (1865). When, in 1873, amid great controversy, a petition signed by 483 clergymen requesting the education, selection, and licensing of duly qualified confessors was read in the Canterbury convocation, Carter and others drew up a 'Declaration on Confession and Absolution, as Set Forth by the Church of England' as a defence of the practice. In 1878 he became the master of the influential Society of the Holy Cross during the controversy surrounding a manual for confessors entitled 'The Priest in Absolution'. 
His allegiance to the Tractarian movement led Carter to hold a high view of the sacraments and the ordained ministry. In 1856 he signed the protest against the Bath judgment in the case of Archdeacon George Denison, which was a considered statement on the doctrine of the real presence in the eucharist. A year later he published the 'Doctrine of the Priesthood in the Church of England', which was followed in 1870 by 'The Holy Eucharist'. In 1862 he had been instrumental in the founding of the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament and remained superior-general until 1897. In common with many of his contemporaries Carter was dismayed by biblical criticism, and in 1870 he sent to Archibald Campbell Tait, archbishop of Canterbury, the memorial of 1529 clergy against the admission to holy communion in Westminster Abbey of the interdenominational committee appointed by convocation to revise the 'New Testament'. In 1870 Bishop John Mackarness of Oxford acknowledged his pastoral work by making him an honorary canon of Christ Church. Though his zeal and personal charm had won over most of his parishioners, his ritual changes provoked some opposition, which in time produced appeals to the law. 
Three times between 1871 and 1878 the law was set in motion against Carter on the charge of ritualism, and each time the bishop of Oxford vetoed proceedings. On the third occasion Dr Julius, an absentee parishioner, obtained from the queen's bench a writ of mandamus against the bishop. In March 1879 the judges found in Julius's favour; the bishop won an appeal, but Julius took the case to the House of Lords, which upheld the Court of Appeal, thus vindicating the bishop's power of veto. Carter knew, however, that the bishop disapproved of ritualism, and when the House of Lords delivered its judgment on 22 March 1880 he resigned the rectory of Clewer. 
Carter retired to St John's Lodge, built for him by public subscription: situated opposite the Clewer House of Mercy, it enabled him to continue as warden of the house and community. He maintained a close interest in the wider church and continued to be a respected authority; following the publication of 'Lux mundi' (1889) he was a signatory to a 'Declaration on the Inspiration of Holy Scripture' in December 1891. In 1893 he spoke at the Birmingham church congress, and as late as 1898 addressed a meeting of priests in London on the limits of ritual. 
Thomas Thellusson Carter died at St John's Lodge on 28 October 1901 after a short illness. Following a service in the chapel of the House of Mercy he was buried on 31 October in Clewer churchyard alongside his wife, who had died in 1869. He was survived by his two daughters, Jane, who wrote his biography, and Mary; his son, John, had died in 1899. While his detractors counted him among the ritualists, Carter was a Tractarian at heart, firmly grounded in scripture, the church fathers, and the Anglican divines. His obituarists praised his quiet dignity and his deep spirituality: the protestant journal 'Truth' described him as 'a saintly man' and the 'Daily Telegraph' declared him 'one of the most venerated and the last of the Tractarians'. Carter was one of the most influential men of his day, but, for all his wider associations, he was essentially a parish priest ministering to the people of Clewer and to the House of Mercy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32315


Carton, Claude (1856-1928), actor and playwright, was born at 46 Finsbury Square, London, on 10 May 1856. He was the younger son of George Critchett (1817-1882), ophthalmic surgeon, and his wife, Martha Wilson, daughter of Captain Nathanael Brooker RN, of Bosham, Sussex; his brother was Sir George Anderson Critchett (1845-1925), also an eye specialist. In 1875, adopting the surname Carton, he took to the stage at Bristol (29 March) in T. W. Robertson's 'Sea of Ice', and made his London debut (19 June) as Osric in 'Hamlet' at Henry Irving's Lyceum Theatre, where he later created Courtenay in Tennyson's 'Queen Mary' (1876). His early career, interspersed with several out-of-town engagements (especially Liverpool), involved in the autumn of 1876 a provincial tour with Irving, in whose acting company Carton began his lifelong friendship with Arthur Wing Pinero. At the Folly Theatre, London, which he managed briefly, Carton produced and performed in Pinero's early comedy 'Imprudence' (1881), winning qualified approval for his 'cynical, cool', but 'crude' style (Pascoe, 43) as the adventurer Baines Durant. 
Carton never really liked acting: his unremarkable career ended when the success of the boulevard-type farce 'The Great Pink Pearl' (1885), the first of three collaborations with Cecil Raleigh, established him as a professional playwright. His first solo drama, the sentimental comedy 'Sunlight and Shadow' (1890), starred George Alexander and Marion Terry. 'Liberty Hall' (1892) was written during a period of severe ill health and uneasily slotted between 'Lady Windermere's Fan' and 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' at the St James's Theatre. It was Carton's first major artistic and financial success, running to 182 performances. Set mainly in a Bloomsbury bookshop, it combines sentiment with humour in the manner of the early Dickens, Carton's professed model. 
Carton's writing, especially from the late 1890s onwards, was largely shaped by the comic acting strengths of his wife, Katherine Julia Mackenzie (1853-1928) -- stage name Miss Compton -- the younger daughter of the actor Henry Compton (1805-1877). She and Carton acted together in the late 1870s and the early 1880s, in plays that included some early ones by Pinero. In 1885 she appeared in her husband's first play as a haughty Russian countess, foreshadowing the 'grande dame' character which, in middle age, became her speciality in such notably successful roles as Lady Algernon Chetland in 'Lord and Lady Algy' (1898) -- with Charles Hawtrey as hero -- and Joanna, duchess of Rushmere, in 'Mr Preedy and the Countess' (1909). Carton's writing was perfectly attuned to her 'deep-toned drawl', 'deceptively vacant smile', 'stately deliberation', and 'consummate knowledge of how to make the points' ('The Times', 17 May 1928). 
After Pinero, Henry Arthur Jones, and Sydney Grundy, Carton was the most performed playwright of the 1890s. Shaw remarked that Carton's plays might lack originality but were 'so extremely goodnatured that they disarm criticism' (Shaw, 3.232). Carton had some gift for humour and for witty, if occasionally overly metaphoric, dialogue. His success continued with sometimes morally tendentious society comedies, often bordering on farce, such as 'Lady Huntworth's Experiment' (1900), 'The Rich Mrs Repton' (1904), 'Mr Hopkinson' (1905), 'Eccentric Lord Comberdene' (1910), and 'The Bear Leaders' (1912). Carton's last substantial success (in collaboration with Justin McCarthy) was 'Nurse Benson' (1918), a topical wartime farce, featuring Marie Lohr as a nurse in love with a wounded patient. Carton's work has not been printed or reprinted since 1925. 'Liberty Hall' was last revived in London, briefly, in 1930. 
A bookish and to some extent retiring -- even reclusive -- individual, Carton never attended his first nights; yet he insisted on conducting his own rehearsals, believing that authors were best fitted to help actors to develop their parts. Although he had no time for the bohemian side of the theatre, he actively promoted fellow playwrights' professional interests as founder member in 1909 of the dramatic subcommittee of the Society of Authors, and of the Dramatists' Club. Carton died at his home, Red Lodge, Springfield Park, Acton, Middlesex, on 1 April 1928; his wife died at the same address the following month. Both were buried in Acton cemetery. They had one daughter, named Lenore. 


@@@@@


doc= 32316


Carton de Wiart, Sir Adrian (1880-1963), army officer, was born in Brussels on 5 May 1880, the eldest son of Leon Constant Ghislain Carton de Wiart (1854-1915), barrister, who later moved to Cairo, and his first wife, M. I. James, who died when the boy was six. He was educated at the Oratory School, Edgbaston, from 1891, and went to Balliol College, Oxford, in January 1899. His college career was marked by a conspicuous lack of success in examinations, and he ran away later that year and enlisted (under a false name and age) in Paget's horse, a newly raised, independent regiment. 'Trooper Carton' was severely wounded fighting the Boers and, his real identity revealed, he returned to Balliol in 1900, but he did not complete his studies there. He went back to South Africa with the Imperial light horse, and in 1901 obtained a regular commission in the 4th dragoon guards. After service in India (1902-4), he became aide-de-camp to Sir Henry Hildyard, commander-in-chief, South Africa (1904-8). At Vienna in 1908 he married Countess Frederica, eldest daughter of Prince Fugger-Babenhausen of Klagenfurt and his wife, Nora, Princess Hohenlohe; they had two daughters. From 1910 to 1914 he was adjutant of a yeomanry unit, the Royal Gloucestershire hussars. In the summer of 1914 he was attached to the camel corps in Somaliland, in operations against Mohammed bin Abdullah. In November he was wounded in an eye, which had to be removed; his black eye-patch was thereafter a distinguishing feature. He was appointed to the DSO, and joined the 4th dragoon guards in the trenches near Ypres. 
Carton de Wiart's career in the First World War was legendary. Severely wounded eight times, he lost his left hand, and was awarded the Victoria Cross for an action on the Somme in which he assumed command of 57 brigade of 19th division during the capture and defence of La Boiselle (3-4 July 1916). He subsequently commanded in succession the 12th, 105th, and 113th infantry brigades. He ended the war a brigadier-general. After the armistice he was appointed second-in-command of the British military mission to Poland, succeeding to the command on the death of General Louis Botha in 1919. He was involved in the widespread fighting, including the battle of Warsaw against the Bolsheviks, but had little influence over the course of the Polish-Soviet war. Indeed, Carton de Wiart was embarrassed by the Lloyd George government's off-hand attitude towards the Poles. In 1924 he resigned his commission, and spent the rest of the inter-war years happily shooting duck in the Pripet marshes in Poland, from a house there lent to him by Prince Charles Radziwill, his last Polish aide-de-camp. He was summoned back to England in July 1939, and was asked to resume his old mission to Poland. Unhappily for him, Carton de Wiart found himself reprising his role of the early 1920s, acting as the representative of a state friendly towards Poland but unwilling or unable to offer any immediate military aid. He had strong disagreements with the Polish commander-in-chief, Marshal Smigly-Rydz. With the Polish forces defeated by the invading Germans, Carton de Wiart returned to England by way of Romania and was given command of the 61st (territorial) division. In April 1940 he was appointed to command, as lieutenant-general, the central Norwegian expeditionary force. He failed to capture Namsos, but skilfully extracted his force, emerging from the disastrous campaign with his stock high with Churchill. 
In April 1941 Carton de Wiart was dispatched to form a British military mission in Yugoslavia, but his aircraft was shot and came down in the sea, and he became a prisoner of the Italians. Held with other senior officers at Sulmona and the Castello di Vincigliati at Fiesole, he was at once busy with attempts to escape. With Lieutenant-General Richard O'Connor, on one occasion he eluded recapture for eight days, no small achievement given Carton de Wiart's distinctive appearance. In August 1943 the Italians dispatched Carton de Wiart to Lisbon to act as an intermediary in the negotiations which led to Italy's withdrawal from the war in the following month. 
In October 1943 Churchill sent Carton de Wiart, as a lieutenant-general, as his personal representative to Chiang Kai-shek in China. The rest of the war he spent in Chungking (Chongqing), where he could do little to resist the erosion of British power in the face of increasing American power in the region. He attended the Cairo conference in November-December 1943, and in December 1944 made a personal report to the cabinet on the situation in the Far East. His dismissive view of Mao Zedong and the Chinese communists revealed the shallowness of his grasp of Chinese politics. He eventually retired to England in 1946, having broken his back in Rangoon 'en route'. He was appointed KBE in 1945, was elected an honorary fellow of Balliol in 1957, and held an honorary doctorate from the University of Aberdeen, as well as many foreign decorations. 
Carton de Wiart's wife died in 1949, and on 18 July 1951 he married (Ruth Myrtle Muriel) Joan ('b'. 1903/4), daughter of George McKechnie and divorced wife of Arthur Henry Carr Sutherland. They settled at Aghinagh House, Killinardrish, co. Cork, where he continued his tireless pursuit of snipe and salmon. He died there on 5 June 1963. 
With his black eye-patch and empty sleeve, Carton de Wiart looked like an elegant pirate, and became a figure of legend. In 1916 Cynthia Asquith called him 'the hero of the war' ('Diaries', 244), and Evelyn Waugh based the figure of Ritchie-Hook in his 'Sword of Honour' trilogy on Carton de Wiart. His autobiography, 'Happy Odyssey' (1950), gives something of the flavour of the man. He was quick-tempered and modest, omitting any mention of his decorations from his autobiography, and he loathed humbug and meanness. Carton de Wiart was a battlefield leader in the most literal sense, rather than a commander or a diplomat. It was ironic that much of his post-1918 career was concerned with quasi-diplomatic roles for which he was neither well-suited nor well-qualified, and in which he was not particularly successful. In the view of one historian, he was 'almost as politically naive as he was brave' (Thorne, 560). 


@@@@@


doc= 32317


Carver, Alfred James (1826-1909), headmaster, was born at King's Lynn on 22 March 1826, the only son of James Carver (1790-1866) and his wife, Anne Spurling. His father was an evangelical clergyman of an old Norfolk family, who, after graduating at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, devoted himself in London to the spiritual welfare of prisoners for crime or debt in Newgate and other prisons. Carver was admitted to St Paul's School, London, on 20 February 1836, proceeding from there to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a scholar in 1845. At Cambridge he was elected Bell university scholar in 1846, and he won the Burney university prize essay in 1849. He graduated BA with a first class in classics and as a senior optime in 1849. Next year he became classical lecturer and fellow of Queens' College, Cambridge. His fellowship lapsed on his marriage in 1853 to Eliza (died 1907), youngest daughter of William Peek, of Peek, Winch & Co., tea merchants. His active connection with his university ceased after he served as examiner in the classical tripos in 1857-8. 
Meanwhile, in 1852, Carver became surmaster of St Paul's, his old school, and was ordained in the following year. In 1858 he was appointed master of Alleyn's College of God's Gift at Dulwich. A new scheme for the development of Alleyn's educational foundation had just been sanctioned by a private act of parliament. Although Alleyn had intended, by statutes drawn up in 1626, to found a public school of the high grade, his educational endowment was until 1858 applied solely to the instruction of 'twelve poor scholars'. The new act, which Carver was first to administer, created two schools of different types. The upper school, providing a public-school education for boys up to the age of eighteen, was soon known as Dulwich College, and the lower school, offering what was described as middle-class secondary education, mainly for boys intended for commerce, was named Alleyn's School. Both schools were under Carver's control and prospered greatly. The upper school or Dulwich College moved in 1870 to a building designed by Charles Barry (1823-1900). 
Carver's energy created Dulwich College, and made it one of the leading public schools, though not without a long period of controversy involving the chairman of the board of governors, William Rogers, who believed that Alleyn's legacy should be used to educate a larger number and wider social range of London children. Carver finally carried his point in 1882 when, under a new act, Dulwich College and Alleyn's School, which also moved into new buildings under his guidance, became two distinct schools under separate masters. He felt able to retire in the following year with a pension after twenty-five years' service. 
During his headmastership Carver carried into practice broad-minded views on education. He saw that every subject could be of educational value, pioneered the teaching of science and modern languages, and promoted the study of art. His object was to develop a boy's faculties on lines most congenial to his natural aptitude, at the same time opposing rigid specialization. He was the first headmaster to pass boys direct from school into the Indian Civil Service; an old boys' club, the Alleyn Club, founded at his instigation in 1873, was one of the first of its kind. 
In 1861 Carver was made DD of Lambeth by the archbishop of Canterbury, and in 1882 he was appointed an honorary canon of Rochester. In later life he was chairman of the governors of James Allen's Girls' Schools at Dulwich, and vice-president and member of the council of the Royal Naval School, Eltham (closed in 1909). Carver, who had three sons and five daughters, died at his home, Lynnhurst, Streatham Common, on 25 July 1909, and was buried in Norwood cemetery, the first part of the funeral service being held in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 32318


Cary, (Arthur) Joyce Lunel (1888-1957), writer, was born on 7 December 1888 at the Belfast Bank, Londonderry, the elder son of Arthur Pitt Chambers Cary (1864?-1937), engineer, and his first wife, Charlotte Louisa (1861?-1898), elder daughter of James John Joyce, manager of the Belfast Bank, Londonderry. Joyce Cary, as he was immediately called to avoid confusion with his father, noted later that he had inherited conflicting qualities from 'Dad the sportsman, the practical man -- and my dear Mother who had the Joyce dreaminess, and reflectiveness' (letter to his wife, 5 Nov 1919). This inward tension was mirrored in a life broadly divided between action and artistic creation. To his diverse parental inheritance were added complicating influences. He was Anglo-Irish. The Carys were an ascendancy family, with roots in the English west country, who had settled in the Inishowen peninsula, north of Londonderry, in the sixteenth century. Locally powerful, moderately wealthy, and respected as magistrates and benevolent landlords through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the family then declined slowly, partly as a result of profligacy, and was finally ruined by the 'Land Act' of 1881, a measure intended to alleviate abuses feeding nationalist agitation. Within two years the remnant of the family's once-extensive holdings, and even Castle Cary itself (the last of their three big houses and the one in which Cary's father was born) had been sold. Growing up in the shadow of these losses, Cary was aware from an early age of 'the tragedy of social conflict in which personal quality counts for nothing; where a man is ruined not because he has done any wrong, but because he represents a class or race' (J. Cary, 'Speaking for myself', 'New York Herald Tribune Book Review', 8 Oct 1950, 10). Injustice, and responses to it, were thus early established as a dominant theme in his thought. 
The loss of Castle Cary precipitated a dispersal of the family's younger generation, even before Cary's grandfather, Arthur Lunel Cary, died in 1885. Cary's father, the second son in the family, moved to London in 1884 and trained as an engineer. He had met Charlotte Joyce the year before he left Inishowen, and they married in August 1887, setting up house in south London. Charlotte returned to Londonderry for the birth of their first child, in her parents' home above the Belfast Bank, in the following year. A second son, John (always called Jack), was born on 28 January 1892, but their mother died suddenly of pneumonia on 1 October 1898, when Joyce Cary was nine years old. 
Cary's childhood was divided between Ireland and England: grey London streets and, every summer, the cherishing homes of his Irish grandmothers, Lough Foyle, green fields, and a horde of ebullient boys -- his novel 'A House of Children' (1941) superbly memorializes that joyful, knockabout, evanescent life. Remarried, Cary's father sent him to Hurstleigh, a preparatory school in Tunbridge Wells; and then to Clifton College. In his first year there his beloved stepmother died, and the boy's renewed distress was clear when he ran away briefly. These early experiences of sharply contrasting lives and values, of painful loss, of removal from his family, and of the requirement to maintain rigorous self-control, prepared him for his adventurous early manhood and also helped to shape the patterns and themes of his fiction. 
Cary set out to become an artist by living in Paris (an elderly painter he knew there, Charles Mackie, was later a model for Cary's most famous character, Gulley Jimson in 'The Horse's Mouth'), and then trained at the Edinburgh College of Art from 1907 to 1909. But he recognized that his artistic talent was limited, and shifted his attention to literature, privately publishing a volume of poems, 'Verse', in 1908. He was persuaded by his father, however, to read law at Trinity College, Oxford. There his restlessness continued, and minimal academic effort resulted in the fairly rare achievement of a fourth-class degree in 1912. He had preferred to live a sociable life. Two of his many friends became influential on his later life: John Middleton Murry, with whom he shared digs, roistered in Paris and cultivated a bohemian literary life; and Heneage Ogilvie, a medical student, whose sister Gertrude he wanted to marry. 
In October 1912 Cary rushed off to Montenegro, where the First Balkan War had broken out: as a Red Cross orderly he observed some fierce fighting between Turks and Montenegrins. On his return to England he briefly set himself up as a writer in London, and wrote a vivid account of his war experiences ('Memoir of the Bobotes', published posthumously, 1964). He knew now that if he was to be permitted to marry Gertrude Ogilvie he needed a paying job. Love and knowledge of Ireland pointed him to Sir Horace Plunkett's co-operative movement; but when, after several months, it was made clear that he would not be offered a permanent position, he fell back on his alternative plan to apply for a post in the Northern Nigerian political service, the elite colonial administration of Britain's African territories. He was accepted, and in May 1914 began work as an assistant district officer in a large province, Bauchi. There are traces of his two contrasting superiors, H. S. W. Edwardes and J. F. J. Fitzpatrick, in Gulley Jimson and in Jim Latter of 'Not Honour More' respectively, and they both influenced his characterization of Cock Jarvis. 
When the First World War broke out, the Nigerian administration was soon involved in conflict with the neighbouring German colony of Cameroons. Cary was seconded to lead Nigerian troops in an attack on the German redoubt of Mora Mountain. Some of his finest short stories vividly re-create experiences which culminated in his being shot through the ear on 3 September 1915, and being invalided back to England in very poor health. On 1 June 1916 he married Gertrude Margaret Ogilvie (1891-1949), and on 9 August he returned to his duties in northern Nigeria, leaving her pregnant. He was sent to govern a very remote district, Borgu, which had two competing emirs and a recent history of bloody rebellion. There, for two years, Cary put into successful practice his administrative and military experience, his own liberal principles, and those of indirect rule (the general governing policy formulated by the governor, later Lord Lugard). He presided over the building of roads, bridges, and 'zungos' (inns for travellers), so increasing trade and the general standard of life in the district -- at the cost of some local unrest, and tension with the emirs. In his 'The Case for African Freedom' (1941) and 'Britain and West Africa' (1946), Cary defended the British empire as largely benevolent in its effects, although he fully acknowledged the concomitant strains and injustices that he had observed critically. 
During his often lonely years in Borgu Cary had continued to write fiction, completing one important short novel, 'Daventry', and some pot-boiling short stories which, accepted for publication by the 'Saturday Evening Post', supported his decision to resign from the colonial service and become a professional writer in England. He was now the father of two sons, Michael ['see 'Cary, Sir (Arthur Lucius) Michael (1917-1976)] and Peter, and his wife had written forcefully of her increasing distress at his long absences. In 1920 they bought a house at 12 Parks Road, Oxford, which was Cary's home for the rest of his life, and where he began his long struggle to establish himself as a novelist. By the time he published his first novel, 'Aissa Saved' (1932), the psychological and financial strain was extreme. Two more sons, Tristram Cary (1925-2008; later a pioneer of electronic music) and George, had been born -- Cary was now avowedly a 'family man'. 
Cary wrote strenuously through the 1920s, developing his 'philosophy of life': that creativity is fundamental for a fulfilled life, and the only foil to the pervasive change and injustice which are the price of human freedom. But a particular barrier was the chaotic method of writing he had developed in his unsettled Nigerian days, when, frequently travelling rough in Borgu, he would necessarily work randomly rather than consecutively on a novel, often writing several versions, and even several novels, side by side. What should have been his first published novel, 'Cock Jarvis' (edited and published posthumously), with a seminal protagonist and theme, collapsed in confusion after years of hard work. 
But Cary prevailed; his energy and ambition resulted in 'An American Visitor' (1933) and 'The African Witch' (1936), which drew mainly on his Nigerian memories, while 'Castle Corner' (1938), intended as the first of a series, connected these with his family's history in Ireland. His intense experiences and relationships in Borgu were especially fruitful in his fiction, most strikingly as the heart of one of his finest novels, 'Mister Johnson' (1939), about a young Nigerian clerk who works in a British colonial office, loves England, and who, as Cary explains in his preface, 'turns his life into a romance'. Thereafter -- apart from 'A House of Children', which won the James Tait Black memorial prize in 1941 -- setting and characters were predominantly English. His most popular, admired, and lucrative novel was 'The Horse's Mouth' (1944), the third of his first trilogy, which also included 'Herself Surprised' (1941) and 'To be a Pilgrim' (1942). This trilogy has a basic pattern of conflicting viewpoints -- of the family-centred woman, the tradition-bound man, and the creative, innovative man -- which was again fundamental in Cary's darker and more complex second trilogy: 'Prisoner of Grace' (1952), 'Except the Lord' (1953), and 'Not Honour More' (1955). 
During and after the Second World War Cary also published political treatises, 'Power in Men' (1939) and 'Process of Real Freedom' (1943); two idiosyncratic long poems, 'Marching Soldier' (1945) and 'The Drunken Sailor' (1947); and three novels reflecting his substantive themes of creativity, change, and injustice, in relation, especially, to children and women: 'Charley is my Darling' (1940), 'The Moonlight' (1946), and 'A Fearful Joy' (1949). He also endured tragedy in his family life, with the death of his wife in 1949, and the early death of his fourth son, George, in 1953. He was given strong support by his family and by close friends in Oxford such as Lord David Cecil, Enid Starkie, and Helen Gardner, and by American friends such as Edith Haggard, his New York agent, who had placed many of his short stories in American journals. 
By the mid-1950s Cary was famous and regarded around the world (and especially in the USA) as one of Britain's most eminent novelists. He had always enjoyed travel: during the Second World War, while writing 'The Horse's Mouth', he had gone on a risky expedition to Africa with Thorold Dickinson, director of 'Men of Two Worlds' (for which Cary had written the film script). After the war he travelled extensively in India, on a similar but abortive project; then he had made a series of demanding lecture tours in Europe and the United States. At the height of his success he fell seriously ill with what was diagnosed early in 1955 as motor neurone disease. He was hospitalized for treatment, but this failed to halt the progressive atrophy of his muscles. By mid-1956 he was confined to bed, but was enabled (by an ingenious invention of his own to support his wasting right arm) to continue his prolific writing: short stories, the Clark lectures (published posthumously as 'Art and Reality' and delivered at Cambridge by a nephew, Robert Ogilvie), and finally a novel, 'The Captive and the Free'. For this, in his final months, he needed the devoted help of his friend Winifred Davin who acted as his amanuensis. To the end Cary was uncomplaining, sociable, and unremittingly creative. He died at his home on 29 March 1957. Davin, now acting as Cary's literary executor, edited 'The Captive and the Free' for posthumous publication in 1959, and also a selection of his fine short stories, 'Spring Song and other Stories' (1960). 
A prolific, independent, wide-ranging writer with a place in three literatures (English, Irish, Nigerian), difficult to categorize because his writing integrates the traditional and experimental, Cary left behind a mass of unpublished material now held in the Bodleian Library. His reputation as a novelist, so high at the time of his death, has since dwindled. A varied, active life fed into his writings, giving even the most imaginative a strong basis in personal experience. His philosophical, historical, and political conclusions, sometimes criticized as simplistic, convey a profoundly moral, thoughtful, and generous response to human existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 32319


Case, Thomas (1844-1925), philosopher and college head, was born in Liverpool on 14 July 1844, the second son of Robert Case, a stockbroker there and later in London, and his wife, Esther, daughter of Alexander MacMillan. From Rugby School, where he earned a reputation for his intellectual, cricketing, and footballing skills, he entered in 1863 Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained first classes in classical moderations (1865) and 'literae humaniores' (1867). He was elected in 1869 fellow of Brasenose College. Pressed by his father, he joined the stock exchange for a year, but, claiming that Aristotle had spoiled his nerve for money-making, he returned to Oxford in 1870. In that year he married Elizabeth Donn Bennett ('b'. 1848), daughter of the composer Sir William Sterndale Bennett; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Invited by Jowett, who had just been elected master, Case joined the staff of Balliol College and lectured on Aristotle's 'Ethics', ancient history, and logic. Later he became lecturer at Corpus Christi College and in 1876, although Jowett wished to retain him, was persuaded to become a tutor of that college, adding Plato, English moral philosophy, Bacon, and Mill to his repertory. From 1883 to 1889 he also taught at Christ Church. In 1889, on the death of Henry William Chandler, Case was elected Waynflete professor of moral and metaphysical philosophy and fellow of Magdalen College. In 1904 he succeeded Thomas Fowler as president of Corpus Christi College; he held the two posts until 1910, when he resigned the professorship. He was elected an honorary fellow of Magdalen in 1914. In 1924, resigning the presidency, he retired to Falmouth. 
Case was a realist philosopher at a time when the idealist school dominated British thought. As an undergraduate at Balliol College, surrounded by idealist influences, Case was initially drawn to idealism. The prominent idealist T. H. Green was a tutor at Balliol; the college also attracted students who were especially interested in speculative philosophy. But he began to move away from idealism; Aristotle, Bacon, and Newton engaged his attention much more than Plato, Kant, or Hegel. He decided to take up a position at Corpus Christi College primarily because he wished to develop an independent philosophy and he felt that the Balliol milieu was not conducive to this ambition. By 1877, when he published 'Realism in Morals', Case had parted company with the idealists, maintaining that they failed to understand the dualism of human nature and underestimated the power of physiological instincts to shape mind and spirit. Describing the position developed in this essay as 'realism without materialism', Case defined realism as 'the theory that things really exist whether we know them or not' ('Realism in Morals', 1877, 5). He sought to disentangle realism from materialism by arguing that realism was consistent with Christian theology. In this he was much influenced by Aristotelian natural theology. The moral act was not produced solely by strong desires or instincts, Case stated, but also by a consideration of what is good; human will, therefore, moderated human desires. Although this seems similar to a utilitarian explanation of moral conduct, Case rejected utilitarianism and instead believed that Christianity and its creed of duty were the most binding moral force in society. 
This position was developed much more fully in 'Physical Realism', published in 1888. In this book Case explored the implications of recent physiological research for theories of knowledge and moral philosophy. He argued here that metaphysics ought to begin with the objects of scientific knowledge; the sense data provided by science enabled the philosopher to infer the nature of an insensible and imperceptible world. He was very much opposed to what he called the 'Kantian fashion' of doubting the possibility of a complete knowledge of things: 'But truth is not in this parlous condition; it only requires us to compare our judgements with things known -- a condition practical enough' ('Scientific method as mental operation', 'Lectures on the Method of Science', ed. T. B. Strong, 1906, 24). 
Case intended to write a second volume of 'Physical Realism' which would have applied physics and physiology to knowledge of time and space, motion, and causation, but this project was never realized. He wrote articles on 'Metaphysics', 'Aristotle', and 'Logic' for the eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', but most of his energies were expended on the duties of teaching, college and university administration, and on his many and varied interests. 
A 'laughing philosopher' of genial and at times even rollicking temper, who understood young men, and was keen for their advancement, Case was an excellent tutor. He taught H. H. Asquith, Charles Gore, Alfred Milner, L. T. Hobhouse, and J. Cook Wilson, later Wykeham professor of logic. Students recalled in particular his lectures on Aristotle and Bacon. He was an authoritarian and forceful president, prompting college tutors to unite against what they regarded as an invasion of their own affairs. 
'I am not a tory, I am what I always was, a Palmerstonian liberal', Case said in his seventieth year. As such he opposed alike Liberal changes and tory concessions in church, state, and university. Believing in 'never doing anything by law if it could be done by voluntary means', he opposed such forms of state 'interference' as state funding for the university and industrial legislation (Case, 1927, 24). He was also opposed to trade unionism. His notable letters to 'The Times' punctuated his campaigns, especially those against the admission of women to Oxford and against the abolition of compulsory Greek. Both were 'thirty years wars', finally determined against him in 1920. His supporters, in 1911, after a signal success in the Greek question, presented him with two silver-gilt Homeric cups. Of the proposal to admit women to certain examinations for the bachelor's degree, Case wrote in 1884: 'Finding that women cannot come up to the standard of men, the University will gradually have to reduce the standard of men to that which can be attained by women... Still more disastrous will be the effect on the life of Oxford, which is not only a place of learning, but a school of manliness. (Case, 'Letters', 33)' Young men would learn to like what young women like, 'light literature and the art of conversation at tea-parties' (ibid., 34). He was also distressed by plans in 1890 to admit women to examinations for the degree of bachelor of medicine, on the grounds that if women were to investigate 'those delicate matters which are of the very essence of medicine' in the company of young men, the moral well-being of the university would be compromised (Case, 'Objections', 5). Case's last letters to 'The Times' (1919-22) criticized Einstein's theory of relativity. 
Case's skill in architecture was shown in the restoration of the hall roof at Magdalen, where he materially assisted G. F. Bodley, in that of the spire and pinnacles of St Mary's, where he strove to control Thomas Graham Jackson, and in the new lodgings at Corpus Christi. A good pianist, his knowledge and taste in music were full and keen down to about the period of Mendelssohn. He loved the old English anthems and glees, and himself published two volumes of songs. His acquaintance with Shakespeare was exhaustive, and he was an ardent admirer of Nelson and a collector of Nelsoniana. He was a distinguished cricketer and played in the Oxford eleven from 1864 to 1867 as well as excelling in other games. 
Beside playing, and writing on, cricket, Case persuaded the university, in the teeth of opposition, to admit that and other games into the university park, and was a most popular and efficient treasurer of the university cricket club. 
As well as being a benefactor himself -- he restored the east window of the hall at Magdalen and rebuilt the lodgings at Corpus -- Case showed an astonishing power of attracting to his college large gifts from others. While some believed that Case's opposition to idealism was vindicated by the new realists of the early twentieth century, the realism that Case expounded, which looked back to the natural philosophy of the eighteenth century and was characterized by a rapidly outdated understanding of the connection between physiology and the mind, failed to engage the attention of contemporary realists ('The Times', 2 Nov 1925). 
Case died of heart failure at his home, Tredourva, Falmouth, on 31 October 1925, at the age of eighty-one. His funeral was held at Corpus Christi, the college to which he had been so closely affiliated for almost fifty years, and he was buried on 4 November in Wolvercote cemetery, near Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 32320


Casement, Roger David (1864-1916), diplomatist and Irish rebel, was born on 1 September 1864 at Doyle's Cottage, Lawson Terrace, Sandymount, near Dublin, the youngest son of Captain Roger Casement (1819-1877) of the 3rd dragoon guards. His father was of Ulster protestant stock and his mother, Anne Jephson (1834-1873), was of a Roman Catholic branch of a protestant family from Mallow, co. Cork. The children were brought up as protestants, though his mother had Roger secretly baptized a Roman Catholic in Rhyl, north Wales, in August 1868. The Casements moved about frequently, living in France, Italy, and St Helier, Jersey. Casement's mother died in childbirth in 1873, and his father in 1877. The children became wards in chancery, and were dependent on their relatives, especially their uncle, John Casement, of Magherintemple, near Ballycastle, co. Antrim. 
Casement lived with his uncle and was sent as a boarder to the diocesan school, Ballymena, in 1873. He left school in 1880 and there followed twelve years of peripatetic living. Casement went to Liverpool to live with Grace Bannister, his mother's sister, and her family. He was found a position as clerk in the Elder Dempster shipping line company, which was active in west Africa. But he found office work tedious and when only nineteen he became purser on the 'Bonny', an Elder Dempster ship bound for the Congo. 
In 1884 Casement returned to Africa and stayed, with only brief intervals, for nearly twenty years. Between 1884 and 1889 he worked in various employments, travelling and acting as 'surveyor' on behalf of the commercial interests of several countries working under King Leopold of the Belgians' Congo International Association. Between December 1889 and March 1890 he was companion to Herbert Ward on a lecturing tour in the United States of America. In 1892 he returned to Ireland and in the same year he accepted his first British official post on the Gulf of Guinea, functioning as 'travelling commissioner and in other capacities for the government'. By October 1892 he was signing himself 'Acting Director-general of Customs' (Reid, 17). His first consular appointment came in 1895 at Delagoa Bay on Delagoa Bay in Portuguese East Africa, and in July 1898 he was given a new appointment as consul for the Portuguese possessions in west Africa south of the Gulf of Guinea, to reside at Luanda. He was given further consular responsibility for the Congo state and Gabon. At this point in his career he was stridently pro-British, fulminating against the Boers and Kruger, and was awarded the queen's South Africa medal, but he showed signs of his later involvement in Ireland when he tried, unsuccessfully, to have a collection of poems, 'The Dream of the Celt' published by T. Fisher Unwin in 1901. His interest in Africa was still paramount, and he hoped that the Congo, if it were to be governed by Belgium, would be subject to a 'European authority responsible to public opinion, and not to the unquestioned rule of an autocrat whose chief preoccupation is that autocracy should be profitable' (ibid., 32). 
In the spring of 1902 Casement persuaded the Foreign Office to move him to Boma, near the Congo mouth. It was at this stage that his homosexual relationships were first entered in his diaries. In June 1902 the Foreign Office authorized him to go into the interior and send reports on the misgovernment of the Congo. He amassed evidence of cruelty and even mutilation of the natives. In November 1903 he was recalled to London to write up his report, which condemned the Congo administration as a ruthless enterprise. His report had less impact that he had hoped, and he was disappointed that the British government did not set up consular courts to protect its own subjects in the Congo. But he was rewarded for his work with a CMG in 1905, which he accepted, though with some misgivings, for he was now more involved in Irish nationalism, particularly the Gaelic League, founded by Douglas Hyde and others in 1892 to further Irish culture and language. 
In May 1904 Casement walked the Glens of Antrim and was busy learning Irish, a 'delightful study' (Reid, 61). He hoped to work out a future for himself in Ireland as one of those 'men of leisure, who would love her [Ireland] for herself' (ibid., 73) and give to Ireland what the English aristocracy gave to English public life, but he was poor, and he had to find more remunerative employment. He informed London in September 1905 that he was seeking a position, but his brief stay in one of the best consular posts, Lisbon, and his refusal of Bilbao, annoyed the Foreign Office and he was obliged to wait. In July 1906 he received overtures from the Foreign Office, and in August he was offered the consular post at Santos, Brazil. 'I am a queer sort of British consul' he mused, one who 'ought really to be in jail instead of under the Lion & Unicorn' (ibid., 79). He hated Santos, and a visit to Ireland in 1907 reinforced his rather incoherent, but increasingly fervent, desire to do something for Ireland. In November he left Santos for Para, which he disliked even more, showing an aversion to the Brazilians because of their mixed race -- a 'human compost' (ibid., 86), as he called them, but his improved financial position enabled him to donate money to Irish causes. 
In 1908 Casement went to Rio as consul-general, and in the following year began to show a revived interest in his work, through investigating atrocities in the Putumayo basin in Peru. The Foreign Office decided that an investigation into abuses there was needed and Casement was the obvious choice, in view of his Congo experience and the high regard in which humanitarian societies in England held him. On 13 July 1910 his appointment was confirmed and he showed his great competence through a careful study of the papers, his thoroughness in investigation, and the indignation with which he described human rights abuses. He wrote up his report in 1911 and it was subsequently published as a blue book. Casement was rewarded with a knighthood (1911), which, like his CMG, occasioned some self-reflection. He naturally wished to accept the honour, but he worried about its reception in Irish nationalist circles. His response was open to criticism. He accepted, writing in fulsome terms to the foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, while confessing to Alice Stopford Green (another protestant nationalist), 'How I should have rejoiced if I could have said to the King what is really in my heart instead of the perfunctory words of thanks (cold and formal enough)' (Inglis, 188). 
Casement was now at the height of his British official career; but there remained a void in his life, which was soon filled by Ireland. In 1912 two decisions reflected this mood. He became patron of the Irish summer school on Tawin island, co. Galway; and he wrote in reply to a request from the headmaster of his old school in Ballymena for a subscription to a school extension fund that 'I should be glad to help... were I sure it was not to help an institution that was doing its share to denationalise my fellow-countrymen' (Parmiter, 95). In that same year Irish politics entered a new and dangerous phase, when the Ulster unionists pledged themselves to resist the imposition of home rule, by force if necessary. Casement, like many nationalists, was radicalized by the crisis. In 1913 he became a member of the provisional committee set up to act as the governing body of the Irish Volunteer Force (IVF), created to emulate the Ulster Volunteer Force, but to defend the cause of home rule. His belief in Germany as the obstacle to the machinations of the British empire now found vocal expression: 'Oh! How I sometimes in my heart long for the thud of the German boot keeping guard outside the Mother of Parliaments', he wrote to Mrs Green in November 1913 (Reid, 184). He helped organize local IVF units, and in May 1914 he declared that 'It is quite clear to every Irishman that the only rule John Bull respects is the rifle', hoping that he could make the solution of the 'English Question' the 'chief case of Europe' (Sawyer, 'Casement', 114). 
On 2 July 1914 Casement set off for the United States to raise support for the IVF. When the First World War broke out in August he resolved to travel to Germany via Norway in order to urge on the Germans the 'grand idea' of forming an 'Irish brigade' consisting of Irish prisoners of war to fight for Ireland and for Germany (Sawyer, 'Casement', 115), since Germany was 'fighting the battle of European civilization' (Reid, 203). By now British intelligence was on Casement's trail, and was becoming aware of his homosexual proclivities. Casement arrived in Berlin on 31 October and negotiated what he called a treaty, of ten articles, one of which stated that in no circumstances would the Irish brigade fight directly for Germany, thus avoiding a charge of treason. But Casement's German experience was an unhappy one. He felt slighted that a man of his stature should not be received by the chancellor, von Bethmann-Hollweg, and his attempts to persuade Irish prisoners to enlist in his brigade met with a poor response. His arrogance surfaced in his description of the Irish soldiers as having 'retaliated in a manner characteristic of their class' (Sawyer, 'Casement', 118), and in his anger at being mistaken for an Englishman; he dismissed them as 'Englishmen, pure and simple' (ibid., 122). Ireland became more of an abstraction to him, the 'poor old woman' whose 'four Green fields' (ibid., 119) must be redeemed. His homosexual activity became more overt, troubling his hosts. He returned the insignia of his decorations to the British, but he confessed that he was 'very lonely often' and wished that he had a father and a mother 'to go to now' (Reid, 241); a young Irishman who had been interned and then released by the Germans described him as 'unhinged' (ibid., 291). 
The contacts between Irish separatists who were planning a rising and Germany came to Casement's attention only through Robert Monteith, who had served in the British army in the South African War, and was now in Germany to enlist in the Irish brigade. Monteith was informed of the plan on 4 or 5 March 1916, and told Casement that a 'move' was on, asking him to come to Berlin to discuss the details (Reid, 329). Casement's old energy and animation revived, but he was shocked to learn that the Germans had, as their foreign office representative Nadolny remarked to Casement, 'no idealistic interest in Ireland... if it were not that we hope for a diversion there, we should not give the rifles' (McHugh, 182). There would be no German soldiers, no officers sent to Ireland, yet Casement was told that the rising was seen in terms of compelling England 'to surrender to us!!' (Reid, 330). Casement now resolved on the contradictory objects of making sure that Germany supplied rifles to the separatists; but also of preventing the rising taking place at all. He decided to go to Ireland, but the Irish-American nationalist John Devoy, who always had his doubts about Casement, tried to ensure that he stayed in Germany. 
On 4 April 1916 Casement was told that he could go, but final arrangements were delayed until 6.30 p.m. on 7 April, when he was informed that a submarine would be provided to take him to the west coast of Ireland, where he would rendezvous with a ship carrying arms. Casement was overjoyed. The 'Aud', carrying the weapons, set out from Lubeck on 9 April with instructions to land the arms at Tralee Bay between 20 and 23 April. On 12 April Casement set out in a submarine which broke down, and he was transferred to another U-boat. The 'Aud' was at its rendezvous on 21 April but the two vessels failed to meet because of an error in navigation. The U-boat waited, but then Casement and two companions, Monteith and David Julian Bailey, embarked in a dinghy and landed, exhausted, on Banna strand in the small hours of 21 April. Monteith described them as 'three men in a boat -- the smallest invading party known to history' (Reid, 351). The fugitives -- for that is what they were -- were arrested by the police and Casement was held in Tralee police barracks, where he called for a priest and urged him to carry a message to Dublin emphasizing the futility of a rising. He was taken to Dublin and then London, where he was lodged in the Tower in room 2A. He was given a preliminary examination by magistrates at Bow Street on 15 May, transferred to Brixton prison, and then committed for trial. 
Casement surmised that the British, while finding him guilty of treason, would not dare hang him, following the adverse reaction to their executions of ringleaders of the rising. The trial began on 26 June with F. E. Smith leading for the crown. But the most controversial aspect of the trial took place outside the courts. Casement's diaries, detailing his homosexual activities, were now in the hands of the British police and intelligence officers shortly after Casement's interrogation at Scotland Yard on 23 April. There are several versions about precisely when and how the diaries were discovered, but they seem to have come to light when Casement's London lodgings were searched following his arrest. By the first weeks of May they were beginning to be used surreptitiously against him. They were shown to British and American press representatives on about 3 May and excerpts were soon widely circulated in London clubs and the House of Commons. This could not have been done without at least an expectation that those higher up would approve, though Smith opposed any use of the diaries to discredit Casement's reputation, as did Sir Edward Grey. The cabinet however made no attempt to stop these activities, the purpose of which was not to ensure that Casement would be hanged -- that was inevitable -- but that he should be hanged in disgrace, both political and moral. 
On 29 June 1916 Casement was found guilty of high treason. He made a speech from the dock, which was unremarkable except for its significance in showing how he had accepted the mantle of Irish nationalist martyrdom. He was removed to Pentonville prison to await execution. On 30 June he was stripped of his knighthood and on 24 July an appeal was rejected. A campaign for a reprieve was supported by leading political and literary figures, including W. B. Yeats, George Bernard Shaw, John Galsworthy, and Arthur Conan Doyle, but not only the British, but the Irish public remained unmoved. Mrs Green admitted on 19 July that it was indeed true that 'Ireland does not care about this case' (Reid, 413). America also was unconcerned. 
Before his execution at Pentonville prison on 3 August, Casement was received into the Roman Catholic church, having declared himself ready to die 'a glorious death, for Ireland's sake' (Inglis, 370). But the contents of his diaries were more controversial than his martyrdom. The British continued to use them to discredit Casement after his death; Alfred Noyes, on a visit to the United States in the winter of 1916, referred to Casement as having touched 'the lowest depths that human degradation has ever touched' (ibid., 377). Irish nationalists, for their part, denied that the diaries were genuine, thus implying that no real Irish patriot could be a homosexual. The diaries were opened to public inspection by R. A. Butler in 1959. 
The controversy over the authenticity of the Casement diaries continues. Recently Angus Mitchell has made strenuous efforts to discredit them, claiming that they 'were manufactured in an age when acts of homosexuality were considered sexually degenerate', and that 'painstaking analysis', including the use of computerized analysis of key words and expressions, proves that the diaries were forged (Mitchell, 9). But Mitchell undermines his case by claiming that they were forged, not only to discredit Casement because of his treason, but also because of his Putumayo report. Thus the diaries, Mitchell alleges, enabled the British to divert attention from the inquiry, which they found damaging because of their own involvement in South America. But since the inquiry report was published in 1912, it seems unlikely that the forgers would wait until 1916 to publish their work. Roger Sawyer's explanation is more convincing. The problem with accepting the diaries' authenticity is, he points out, compounded by the fact that Sir Basil Thomson, in British intelligence, offered two different accounts of when the diaries were first discovered. The first was that they were found in the Easter weekend of 1916; the second, that they were found 'some months earlier, when we first had evidence of Casement's treachery' (Sawyer, 'Diaries', 9). Sawyer concludes that Thomson's contradictory statements are characteristic of history written from memory, and concludes that the diaries are genuine. Certainly the British authorities had enough evidence, gathered from decoders in Room 40 of the Admiralty old building, to convict Casement of treason; they hardly needed to begin work on a forgery as early as 1914. The motivation for publishing the diaries, Sawyer argues, was because the British realized that, having executed the leaders of the Easter rising, they must prevent Casement from achieving martyr status. And of course the diaries could hardly have been forged in the short time available during Casement's trial and execution. Discrepancies in the handwriting can be attributed to Casement's returning to the diaries to revisit his sexual encounters. Moreover, he may have fantasized about some of the incidents recorded in the diaries. As Sawyer points out, it is hardly likely that a forger would have included a reference to homosexuality as a 'terrible disease'; and, in any case, if the diaries were indeed forgeries, it would have made more sense for the British to destroy them once they had accomplished their purpose. Sawyer's conclusion, that the 'complexity of insider detail' (ibid., 25) bears out their authenticity, is hard to refute. A reading of the published 1910 diary is convincing evidence that it is genuine; the nature of the text, the jottings, the sense of a man writing about what came from his nature, attest to the diary's authenticity. Forensic tests carried out in 2002 by the Giles document laboratory, commissioned by Professor Bill McCormack of Goldsmiths' College, University of London, provided further -- and surely final -- proof that the diaries are genuine. 
It is all too easy to make connections between Casement's homosexuality and his treason, citing the apparently parallel cases of the Cambridge Apostles and the like. But Casement made little secret of his growing disenchantment with the British empire, and because he was, as Joseph Conrad remarked, 'all emotion' (Reid, 15), his hatred of England soon dominated his life, as did his rather abstract love of Ireland. The key to his personality lies not in his sexual choices, but in his Anglo-Irish background, and his behaviour is more readily understood in the context of the Anglo-Irishman in revolt against the English part of his inheritance. His forebears are Robert Emmet and William Smith O'Brien, rebels against the English part of their Anglo-Irish nature, for Casement's outlook was essentially that of an Irish protestant, despite his brief encounters with Catholicism. 
Casement's remains were returned to Ireland on 23 February 1965 and on 1 March reinterred in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, with full nationalist ceremony; his nearest relatives in Ireland ignored the rites. Casement met a last, equally significant fate at the hands of the country he once served. His 'Who's Who' entry was not transferred into the 'Who Was Who' volume after his death. He became in this sense a non-person, which was a measure of the hatred that he inspired in the British establishment. And yet Stephen Gwynn's 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry of 1927 concluded that 'those who knew Roger Casement knew him to be honourable and chivalrous as well as able far beyond the ordinary measure of men'. It is this difference in perception between contemporaries who saw him as a fighter for human rights on the one hand, and a traitor to the country that honoured him with a knighthood, only to see that betrayed, on the other, that ensures that not only Casement, but his diaries, will remain a matter of the most profound controversy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32321


Casey, William Francis (1884-1957), newspaper editor, was born in Cape Town on 2 May 1884, the son of Patrick Joseph Casey, theatre proprietor, of Glenageary, co. Dublin. He was educated in Ireland at Castleknock College and Trinity College, Dublin, of which in later life he was made an honorary LLD. He spent two years reading medicine before changing his mind and turning to law. He was called to the Irish bar in 1909. But again he was undecided on his career. He described his period in the law as 'one year, one brief, one guinea' ('History of The Times', 5.165). His thoughts had been drawn instead towards the theatre and, while reading for the bar, he became interested in the work of the Abbey Theatre when the directors included W. B. Yeats and Lady Gregory. He worked for a time on the business side, and then in 1908 two of his plays, 'The Suburban Groove' and 'The Man who Missed the Tide', were produced at the Abbey and with their success he decided to try his luck in London. He took with him a letter to Bruce Richmond, editor of the 'Times Literary Supplement'. Richmond saw the young writer's promise and it was agreed that Casey should review for the supplement. In 1914 he married Amy Gertrude Pearson-Gee, a widow, daughter of Henry Wilmott. They had no children. 
Shortly before the outbreak of the First World War, Casey was offered a post as a sub-editor in the sporting department of 'The Times' and from then until his retirement he was a permanent member of that paper's staff. He then served as a foreign sub-editor, with his interest and skill leading to a posting to Washington in 1919, then to Paris in the following year. He returned to London in 1923 as chief foreign sub-editor, regarded as one of the most arduous and anxious positions on the paper. He held this post until 1928. He was part of the group of proprietors and editorial staff who attempted to produce the paper during the general strike of 1926. Afterwards a souvenir volume, 'Strike Nights in Printing House Square', was printed for private record. One of its pictures bore the caption 'Amateurs in the foundry' and showed Casey and Captain Shaw, the chairman's secretary, hard at work on a mechanical process, as 'the champion pair of matrix moulders'. 
In 1928 Casey was promoted to the foreign leader-writing staff. He attended many of the Geneva sessions of the League of Nations. In the 1930s his concern grew as to German aspirations in Europe. He was known within the senior ranks as a francophile, but within 'The Times' of that period he 'knew that his judgement on foreign matters carried little weight' ('History of The Times', 4.929). He was part of the group of senior journalists who gathered in 1936 in the office of the paper's deputy editor, R. M. Barrington-Ward -- a strong supporter of appeasement with Hitler, as was the editor, Geoffrey Dawson -- to demand the paper take a stronger line to 'stand up to Hitler' (Heren, 36). They were ignored. But on the retirement of Dawson in 1941, the new editor, Barrington-Ward, appointed Casey his deputy; the selection was welcomed by the staff, partly because of his greatly more relaxed style. He was a member of many clubs and he would declare that, if he could squeeze in a game of billiards in his dinner break, work went much more easily on his return. Iverach McDonald described him as 'never over-eager to work' ('History of The Times', 5.164). 
Barrington-Ward's health was deteriorating and his death in 1948 threw the burden of the editorship on to Casey's shoulders sooner than he had expected: he himself had never wished to be editor. Only a few months before he had agreed with Barrington-Ward that he 'should very soon retire' ('History of The Times', 5.164). Stephen Koss says it was 'clearly a stopgap appointment' (Koss, 643). John Pringle, on 'The Times' staff, said of Casey's editorship that 'as time went on, he found it harder to face the detailed administrative work and constant decisions... [his deputy, Donald] Tyerman... often had to get the paper out for days on end without much guidance from the editor' ('History of The Times', 5.199). Yet his willingness to listen to staff and the fact that, unusually for an editor, he 'seemed to have all the time in the world' (Heren, 90), made him a popular figure among the journalists under him. He retired as editor in 1952 and died in a nursing home at 10 Porchester Terrace, Paddington, London, on 20 April 1957. He was cremated at Golders Green on 26 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 32322


Cash, John Theodore (1854-1936), physician and pharmacologist, was born at Manchester on 16 December 1854, the younger son of John Walker Cash, who retired from business and took up farming near Leeds, and his wife, Martha Midgley. He was educated at Bootham School, York, and the Edinburgh collegiate school, and studied medicine at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MB CM, and qualified MRCS (England), in 1876, and gained a gold medal for his MD thesis in 1879. In 1881 he married (Margaret) Sophia (died 1924), daughter of the statesman John Bright; the couple had two sons and two daughters. Sophia Cash was an accomplished artist and painted the beautiful watercolours used to illustrate her husband's lectures on materia medica. 
After graduation Cash studied the methods of pharmacological research in Berlin, Vienna, and Paris. He was then house physician at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, but returned to Berlin and afterwards moved to Leipzig, where he worked with the celebrated physiologist Carl Ludwig. On arriving in London he began researches with T. L. Brunton at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and from 1880 to 1884 published many valuable pharmacological papers which were representative of a new and accurate scientific approach to the elucidation of the actions of drugs. His elaborate and precise researches upon the various alkaloids of aconitum, begun prior to 1886, paved the way for his pioneer endeavours, by researches on the substituted ammonias and benzene compounds, to lay the foundations of a relationship between chemical constitution and pharmacological action; this investigation, published jointly with Brunton in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' in 1884, indicated to synthetic chemists paths towards the discovery of new remedies. In the years that followed he made other communications to the Royal Society on this subject. 
The high scientific standard of Cash's researches led to his appointment to the regius chair of materia medica and therapeutics in Aberdeen University in 1886 and to his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in the following year. He was a skilled experimentalist, ingenious in devising recording apparatus, and imbued with the axiom that in order to obtain true results the least disturbance of the tissues was of paramount importance. His gracious manner and cultured language as a lecturer inspired honourable work by his students and his scientific example encouraged Arthur Robertson Cushny to adopt pharmacology as his life work. 
Cash was dean of the faculty of medicine at Aberdeen University and from 1911 to 1919 a member of the General Medical Council when he took a large share in editing the 'British Pharmacopoeia' of 1914. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Edinburgh and Aberdeen. 
Cash's chief recreation was a passionate devotion to salmon and trout fishing: he was an expert on the pathology of diseases of the salmon, and a particular salmon fly bears his name. The opening of the salmon fishing season could always be dated by his disappearance from the laboratory after months of continuous research. He retired from his chair in 1919 and settled at Hereford where, on the Wye, he enjoyed his favourite pastime but continued to be keenly interested in pharmacological researches. Cash died at his home, Albyn House, Broomy Hill, Hereford, on 30 November 1936 and was buried at Hereford. 


@@@@@


doc= 32323


Cassel, Sir Ernest Joseph (1852-1921), merchant banker and financier, was born on 3 March 1852 in Cologne, Germany, the youngest of the three children of Jacob Cassel (1802-1875) and Amalia, 'nee' Rosenheim (died 1874). Jacob Cassel had a small banking business, founded by his father, Moses Cassel, which provided a modest but comfortable income. Since at least the late seventeenth century the Cassels had been active in financial affairs in the Rhineland; several of them were advisers or agents for the prince electors. Ernest had a brother, Max Cassel, born in 1848, who died in 1875, and a sister, Wilhelmina Cassel (later Schoenbrunn), to whom he remained close and who managed his household in England in later years. In later life Cassel gave entirely conflicting accounts of the atmosphere of his early home life and the truth is difficult to establish. 
Ernest was educated in Cologne until the age of fourteen, when he started work with the banking firm of Eltzbacher. In 1869 he emigrated to Liverpool, where he is said to have arrived with a bag of clothes and a violin, and no evident promise of a job. He soon started work with a firm of German grain-merchants in Liverpool, but a little over a year later he moved to a clerkship with the Anglo-Egyptian Bank in Paris. The outbreak shortly afterwards of the Franco-Prussian War forced him, as a German subject, to return to England, this time to a clerkship at the London merchant bank, Bischoffsheim and Goldschmidt, where he was closely associated with Henri Bischoffsheim. This move was probably facilitated by an introduction from the powerful but mysterious European financier Baron Maurice de Hirsch. Cassel was linked with the independent and enterprising businessman until the latter's death in 1896, and he may have modelled his career on Hirsch's. 
Within a year Cassel, aged only nineteen, had demonstrated his flair by rapidly saving the affairs of a Jewish firm in Constantinople in which Bischoffsheims had an interest. In 1874 he was appointed manager, at an unusually early age, at a salary said to have been $5000 a year, following a series of further highly successful negotiations, especially in connection with South American loans. In addition to his salary he obtained substantial commission from the rescue or liquidation of troublesome ventures on Bischoffsheims' behalf. Such activities gained for him international contacts through whom he became profitably involved on his own account in American and other overseas enterprises. When his father died in 1875, leaving Ernest a half share with his sister of RM 91,286 ($4500), Cassel could afford to settle more than his own half ($3000) upon his sister, who was now divorced, and her two children. When he married in 1878 he was able to put aside capital of $150,000. 
In 1878 Cassel married Annette (died 1881), daughter of Robert Thompson Maxwell, of Croft House, Croft, Darlington, and on the day of his marriage he became a naturalized British subject. His wife died of tuberculosis three years later, to his great grief. They had one daughter, Maud. Mrs Cassel had been converted to Roman Catholicism and by her wish Cassel, never devoutly Jewish, was received into the Roman Catholic church shortly after her death. His devotion to his new religion was never very evident, nor was his conversion widely known until, at his appointment to the privy council in 1902 he chose, to general surprise, to be sworn in on the Catholic 'Bible'. He never remarried and is not known to have had any intimate relationships for the remainder of his life. He was known as a warm and sociable man, devoted to his daughter and to what remained of his family, and he sustained a number of close and lasting friendships. Margot Asquith described him as 'a man of natural authority... dignified, autocratic and wise; with a power of loving those he cared for'. She added that 'he had no small talk and disliked gossip' (Adler, 328). Others who knew him less well described him as kind but cold. He was a very private man who left no intimate record of his life or feelings and destroyed most of his personal papers. After his wife's death his sister and her children, Anna (later Anna Jenkins) and Felix (later knighted, and a prominent barrister and Conservative assistant attorney-general) moved to live with him, and they adopted the name Cassel. First Wilhelmina and then Anna acted as his official hostesses. 
Thereafter Cassel's main preoccupations, other than his family, were with international finance and entry into high society. He increased his fortune vastly and rapidly through investment in the mining, transportation, and processing of Swedish iron ore (he was responsible for introducing the Gilchrist-Thomas processing technique into Sweden) and in the rapidly expanding American railways. In the early 1880s his association with Bischoffsheims was on a profit-sharing rather than a salaried basis, but he never formally became a partner. In 1884 he left the firm, though he continued to occupy part of their offices until 1898 while working on his own account. He did not join another finance house until 1910, preferring to work independently or to associate in consortia with other financiers for specific projects. 
International finance in the fast-growing international economy of the late nineteenth century was risky, requiring a cool head, good contacts, and a shrewd capacity to keep on good terms with powerful people in many countries. At this Cassel was adept. He was known for the sharpness of his dealing and he aroused considerable suspicion, antagonism, and jealousy, though no proof of actual dishonesty was ever disclosed. His great wealth endowed him with a useful capacity for flexibility in his dealings when necessary. In Sweden, for example, he countered the hostility of influential men to the degree of economic power he wielded by allowing Swedish representatives to dominate the board of his company (the Grangesborg-Oxelsund Traffic Company Ltd) and by selling many of its fast-rising shares to Swedish bankers, politicians, and journalists at below the market price, though still at considerable profit. His enemies referred to these tactics as 'Cassel's greasing system' (Grunwald, 131). He played an important role in the economic development of Sweden. 
At least as important in determining Cassel's great success as any dubious dealing in Sweden and elsewhere was his immense, unremitting capacity for hard work. He was constantly in touch with a multitude of simultaneous transactions, delegating effectively yet never losing control, always available for the key meeting or decision, yet rarely working from his office, constantly travelling among business locations or entertaining contacts. He never neglected to keep in contact with the world of influence wherever it was to be found, whether at the card table, the dinner table, or at Cowes. Also important was his capacity to choose shrewd people to assist him with his affairs or to run specific projects. From 1902 he employed the influential Reginald Brett, Viscount Esher, who was succeeded in 1904 by Sir Sidney Peel. He appointed the talented former public servant Sir Henry Babington-Smith to head the National Bank of Turkey in 1909. They remained close friends and associates and Babington-Smith was an executor of Cassel's will. But the essential ingredients of Cassel's success were his own keen observation and judgement of international and financial affairs, which drew on information from his huge range of contacts worldwide. 
From his earliest days with Bischoffsheims, Cassel had been profitably involved with American enterprises, notably the disentanglement of the affairs of the New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio Railway. In the course of such activities he had become a close and lasting friend of Jacob H. Schiff of the banking house of Kuhn, Loeb & Co., through whom he became profitably interested on his own account in other American enterprises. One of his first operations after becoming independent of Bischoffsheims was the reorganization of the Louisville and Nashville Railway, which he carried through in conjunction with Kuhn, Loeb and with Wertheim and Gompertz of Amsterdam. 
From the late 1880s Cassel's interests expanded into South America. He arranged the finances of the Mexican Central Railway for some time and in 1893 he issued the Mexican government's 6 per cent loan. In 1896 he issued the Uruguay government's 5 per cent loan. To a lesser extent he was also active in China, still concentrating on transport and mining, and also in 1895 issuing a 6 per cent government loan. Between 1890 and 1910 he was also involved in arranging loans for Japan, Egypt, Turkey, and Russia. He took relatively little interest in domestic investment, though he did play a part in financing the building of the London underground from 1894, through participation in the Electric Traction Company. However, this did not prove to be a profitable investment. From 1897 Cassel began a long and more rewarding association with Vickers, Sons & Co., the shipbuilding and armaments firm. He organized their purchase of the Barrow Naval and Shipbuilding Construction Company and of the Maxim Gun and Nordenfelt companies. For some years he underwrote the financial issues for Vickers and its subsidiaries. 
Cassel was an early investor in gold and diamond mining in South Africa, and this was an important source of his increasing fortune in the 1890s and 1900s. In 1897 he agreed to finance the Aswan Dam and Asyut barrage on the upper Nile, another successful intervention in an underdeveloped economy. He later moved, also profitably, into financing the development of sugar production and marketing (through the Daira Sanieh Company) and also of railways in Egypt. In 1898 he established the National Bank of Egypt and the Agricultural Bank of Egypt, which played an especially important role in financing agricultural development. So also did the Societe Anonyme de Wadi Kom Ombo, which he played a leading role in establishing for the purpose of irrigating the great desert plain from the Nile to Gebel es Silsila. A similar attempt to stimulate the economic development of Morocco by establishing the State Bank of Morocco, which Cassel reluctantly undertook in 1906 at the urging of the British and French governments, was less successful. The National Bank of Turkey, which he established in association with other London bankers at the urging of the Turkish government in 1909 with the aim of expanding British commercial and financial involvement in Turkey (in particular for the development of mineral resources), was also unsuccessful. It proved impossible to defeat the strength of French financial and commercial interests in Turkey. 
Characteristically Cassel calmed the potential for opposition in Egypt by winning the friendship of the khedive of Egypt. He arranged for him to meet Cassel's other good friend, King Edward VII, in 1903 and in 1904, and he made him a loan of $500,000 at the low rate of 2.5 per cent, in return for commercial and land concessions. This infuriated the consul-general, Lord Cromer, who had encouraged Cassel's initial ventures in Egypt as a means of increasing British influence, but who had the thankless task of attempting to curb the khedive's expenditure. In 1903 Cassel also donated $341,000 to equip and operate travelling eye hospitals in Egypt. This may have been motivated by a desire to mollify opposition. His motives were probably mixed, as he also gave generously to philanthropic causes in Britain. Whatever the motive, the outcome was a major contribution to combating the ravages of eye diseases such as trachoma in poverty-stricken rural Egypt. 
Cassel was suspected of demanding honours in return for services to governments and this was a persistent theme in London society gossip of the time. There is certainly an interesting congruence between his progress through the honours lists of the world and his financial services. He became KCMG in 1899, following his major Egyptian deals, and was sworn of the privy council in 1902, after the accession of Edward VII. He had been the friend and companion of the prince of Wales at racing and cards, and as Edward's financial adviser (in succession to Hirsch) he was reputed to be responsible for the surprising fact that Edward ascended the throne free from debt. He became a commander of the Legion d'honneur and received the British GCVO in 1906, following the establishment of the State Bank of Morocco. He was made GCB in 1909, following his agreement to a Foreign Office request to put a further $500,000 into the ailing Bank of Morocco. His collection of decorations, of which he was immensely proud, came to include: commander, first class, of the royal order of Vasa, Sweden (1900); the grand cordon of the Imperial Ottoman order of the Osmanieh, conferred by the khedive in 1903; the crown of Prussia, first class (1908); the grand cross of the Polar Star, Sweden (1909); the order of the Rising Sun, first class, Japan (1911); and the Red Eagle of Prussia, first class, with brilliants (1913). 
Cassel penetrated the elite with the same determination and with some of the same methods by which he achieved business success. From the time of his marriage he cultivated, at a succession of rented and, later, personally owned country houses, the social and political elites -- on the hunting field, with the shooting party, at the racecourse, and at the card table. By the 1890s he was an accepted house-guest of the Devonshires at Chatsworth. He took up hunting despite a certain dislike of horses and his incompetence at riding them. He started to own and breed racehorses in 1889, and continued until 1894 in company with Lord Willoughby de Broke, and thereafter alone. Among the chief stallions owned by him were Cylgad and Hapsburg; among his mares were Gadfly, Sonatura, and Doctrine. He had some successes on the course, though the nearest he came to winning the Derby was to come second with Hapsburg in 1914. It took him thirteen years to achieve election to the Jockey Club, in 1908. The patronage of Edward VII enabled his entry to circles otherwise closed to a largely self-made German Jew, but it could not win him entire acceptance. 
Some prominent politicians were more welcoming to Cassel. Both Randolph and Winston Churchill were his good friends, as were the Asquiths. Cassel's own politics appear to have been Conservative, but he was never active in the political world. Like other prominent financiers his advice was sought on financial matters by politicians of both parties and by civil servants. He was described in 1903 by Sir Edward Hamilton, joint permanent secretary at the Treasury, as 'one of the representative men -- Natty Rothschild, John (Lord) Revelstoke (the head of Barings) and Cassel, whom I now regard as my first counsellors' (Hamilton diaries, BL, Add. MS 48658, 16 Nov 1903). Cassel was consulted by Sir Michael Hicks Beach and by Asquith when they were chancellors of the exchequer. Lloyd George dined with him while he held the office but was more reserved. A certain aloofness towards party politics was one of the keys to Cassel's business success; in 1909, at the height of the budget crisis, when the City was organizing against Lloyd George's proposed taxes, Cassel wrote to his son-in-law, Wilfred Ashley, stressing his 'absolute loyalty to whatever government I happen to be serving, and if whoever happened to be in power could not be certain of this he would not give me, and I certainly would not wish, his confidence' (Cassel to Ashley, 18 Aug 1909, Broadlands Archive, Cassel MS, folder X6). He did not sign the City's anti-budget petition, though he did cautiously arrange to shift funds to the United States to avoid the new taxes. He was an early, though anonymous, contributor to the Tariff Reform League. Also in the 1900s he opposed the City's Jewish-led boycott of Russian finance in retaliation for the persecution of the Jews. He argued that negotiation and alliance with Russia were more likely to mute their antisemitism than was a boycott. 
Especially in his earlier years Cassel mixed widely in theatrical and artistic circles. Alma-Tadema and Burne-Jones were both grateful for his friendship and patronage. He amassed an impressive collection of old masters, including important works by Van Dyck, Franz Hals, Romney, Raeburn, Reynolds, and Murillo, and he acquired French and English furniture, Renaissance bronzes, Dresden china, Chinese jade, and old English silver. He gave away at least $2 million in charitable donations, including $200,000 in 1902 for the founding of the King Edward VII Sanatorium for Consumption at Fenhurst, near Midhurst, with a further $20,000 in 1913; $10,000 in 1907 to the Imperial College of Science and Technology; in 1909 a half share of $46,000 with Lord Iveagh for founding the Radium Institute; $210,000 in 1911 for setting up the King Edward VII British-German Foundation for the aid of distressed people in Germany; $30,000 for distressed workers in Swedish mines; $50,000 to Hampshire hospitals in memory of his daughter; in 1913 $10,000 to Egyptian hospitals; and $50,000 for the sick and needy of Cologne. 
Despite his formal conversion to Roman Catholicism, Cassel still regarded himself as Jewish and devoted a considerable amount of money and effort to the international attempts of wealthy Jews to acquire a national home for Jews fleeing from Russia, a movement in which Hirsch had been prominent. During the First World War, Cassel gave at least $400,000 for medical services and the relief of servicemen's families. In 1919 he donated $500,000 for an educational trust fund which was used to establish a faculty of commerce at the London School of Economics, to support the Workers' Educational Association, to finance scholarships for the technical and commercial education of working men, to promote the study of foreign languages by the establishment of professorships, lectureships, and scholarships, and finally to support the higher education of women. He gave $212,000 for the founding of a hospital at Penhurst, Kent, for functional nervous disorders. 
In 1910-11 Cassel came to a turning point in his life, for a mixture of personal and political reasons. He felt great personal grief at the death of Edward VII, as well as losing much of his social and political influence, to the undisguised and often openly antisemitic glee of certain members of high society. The friendship between Edward and 'Windsor-Cassel' was close and strong. The two had met at the racecourse about 1896, possibly introduced by Hirsch, and were friends thereafter. They even looked somewhat alike: substantially built, bearded, and moustached in similar style. 
Equally tragically, in 1911 his only daughter died after a long battle with tuberculosis. Cassel devoted much care to her in her last year. In 1901 she had married Lieutenant-Colonel Wilfred Ashley, grandson of the great earl of Shaftesbury and great-grandson of Lady Palmerston, through whom he had inherited Broadlands House in Hampshire. Ashley had been Conservative MP for Blackpool since 1906; he served as minister of transport in 1924-9, and was created Baron Mount Temple of Lee in 1932. He was on friendly terms with Cassel, who provided him with financial advice. After his daughter's death Cassel's affection centred upon his two granddaughters, especially the elder, Edwina. 
Having decided to reduce the volume of his activity, in 1910 Cassel became a partner in the merchant bank of S. Japhet & Co., but he kept up independent interests and an office close to his sumptuous new home, Brook House in Park Lane. He had previously lived at 48 Grosvenor Square. Brook House had six marble-lined kitchens; an oak-panelled dining room, designed to seat one hundred in comfort; and the entrance hall was panelled in lapis lazuli alternating with green-veined cream-coloured marble and was described as the 'giant's lavatory' by Edwina's friends. Until his death Cassel lived there much of the time. He also had a flat in Paris, a Swiss villa (Villa Cassel, at Riederfurk, in the canton of Valais), another villa in the south of France, a stud farm at Moulton Paddocks, Newmarket, bought in 1899, and three country houses bought between 1912 and 1917. These were the Six Mile Bottom estate, Cambridgeshire, purchased in 1912; Branksome Dene, Bournemouth, bought in 1913; and Upper Hare Park, Cambridgeshire, which he acquired in 1917. 
The more general curtailment of Cassel's activities may have been due to anticipation of that great disrupter of international finance, a major war. Certainly his personal investments were safely concentrated in North America by 1914. He was strongly aware of the danger of war with Germany as early as 1908. Between 1908 and 1912 he and the German shipowner Alfred Ballin made secret efforts to bring together German and British political leaders to try to avert conflict. When war came he made one of the largest contributions to the war loan and was a member of the Anglo-French financial mission to the USA in 1915, which resulted in a large American loan. Such activities did not prevent Cassel from suffering constant attack in Britain for his German birth, including an unsuccessful attempt to remove him from the privy council. 
Thereafter Cassel confined his attention to a limited amount of American business and to racing and shooting parties with old friends, and he was cared for by Edwina. He died on 21 September 1921, sitting at his desk at Brook House, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London, according to Roman Catholic rites. Shortly afterwards Edwina married Lord Louis Mountbatten (Earl Mountbatten of Burma), bringing Broadlands House, which she inherited, into the Mountbatten family. Cassel left an estate worth $7,333,411 gross (with a probate value of $6 million), most of it to his immediate family. He left small items from his art, china, and jade collections to a list of old and valued friends who included the Asquiths, Mr and Mrs Winston Churchill, Lord Birkenhead, Mrs Keppel, Lord Revelstoke, Lord and Lady Reading, and the marchioness of Winchester, as well as some banking friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 32324


Cassels, Sir Robert Archibald (1876-1959), army officer, was born at Bandra, near Bombay, on 15 March 1876, the son of John Andrew Cassels, merchant, of Red Litten, Prince's Risborough, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Helen, daughter of Thomas White. He was educated at Sedbergh School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, was commissioned in 1896, and went to India in the following year, before joining the 32nd Lancers in 1901. He acted as aide-de-camp to his divisional commander (1906-7), was brigade major (1909-11), and general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO2) in 1911-13. He had married on 9 June 1904 Florence Emily, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Halkett Jackson, and they had one son, the army officer Sir James Halkett Cassels. 
In 1915 Cassels became deputy adjutant-general at the headquarters of the force, the nucleus of which had landed in Mesopotamia late in 1914. Before the end of 1915, however, he became GSO1 with the 3rd Indian army corps; he moved to the 14th division in May 1916, and by August 1917 had served in the same capacity with the small cavalry division and as brigadier-general, general staff, of the expeditionary force. When in early April 1917 Sir Stanley Maude advanced north astride the Tigris, Cassels manoeuvred with masterly skill on the left flank, and on 22 April at Istabulat he was sharply engaged. 
By now regarded as a coming man, Cassels took command of the 11th cavalry brigade in November 1917. When his great opportunity came in the final offensive of 1918 he revealed himself as an even more outstanding cavalry leader than his promise had foretold. His orders were to reach with his brigade the Little Zab River 25 miles above its junction with the Tigris. He marched 77 miles in 39 hours, but unexpectedly found about a thousand Turks holding the ford for which he was making. None the less he decided to cross, managing to do so by another ford about a mile downstream. Ismael Hakki, his flank turned, skilfully crossed to the right bank of the Tigris and broke up his floating bridge. On 25 October the brigade received orders to cross the river next day above Sharqat and cut off the enemy. Cassels decided he must find a ford near Huwaish, but had to go farther north before one was discovered, all three channels of which were highly dangerous. Most of the horses had to swim; Cassels led the way and rode at a gallop to Huwaish. He had ordered another regiment to join him, but the ford could not be crossed in darkness, so he was isolated and in considerable danger. He estimated the Turkish force nearest to him, 21/2 miles south of Huwaish, at four hundred or more. 
Early on 27 October, Cassels took the bold decision to attack, mainly to disguise his weakness. The action disclosed the Turkish strength to be between eight hundred and a thousand. Cassels therefore drew back and dug in. The Turkish main body facing the infantry under Sir A. S. Cobbe was doing the same thing at Sharqat. In the early hours of 28 October, Cassels was reinforced by an infantry brigade which had marched 33 miles to join him, and he felt encouraged to try a bluff. A considerable force of the enemy was moving towards him from the south and he sent the 7th hussars, less two squadrons, to meet it. A brilliant dismounted attack drove the enemy back, and though they came on again and forced the hussars to retire, they showed no further signs of attacking. The brigade suffered about a hundred casualties and lost many more horses. In the course of the action the 7th cavalry brigade arrived, and a few more reinforcements came up later. 
On 29 October the 13th hussars carried out a dashing attack, first galloping into dead ground unscathed, then dismounting, swarming up a height known as Cemetery Hill, driving off the Turks, and taking 730 prisoners. 29 October was the day of the battle of Sharqat. How great was the part played by Cassels is made clear by the fact that, although the British infantry attack was repulsed, nevertheless next morning white flags fluttered all down the Turkish line. 
Cassels next led his forces north to occupy Mosul, but could not induce the Turks to abandon the place until they received the terms of the armistice. He was appointed CB and DSO in 1918 and promoted major-general in 1919. In June of that year serious unrest in southern Kurdistan disturbed the tribes north and north-east of the Mosul vilayet. His commander, Sir Theodore Fraser, being absent, Cassels took immediate steps to prevent the spread of the rebellion. He acted with his usual vigour, with the consequence that after some months of fighting the Kurds had been so handled that they scarcely stirred in the subsequent general Arab revolt. 
Cassels was cavalry adviser in India (1920-23), commandant of the Peshawar district (1923-7), and adjutant-general in India (1928-30), being promoted lieutenant-general in 1927 and general in 1929. He next held the Indian northern command (1930-34) in the course of which he became colonel of the 7th light cavalry. (He was appointed colonel of his regiment, which had become the 13th (DCO) Lancers, in 1939.) In 1935 came his final promotion to commander-in-chief of the army of India and member of the executive council of the governor-general, an appointment lasting until 1941 when he went on retired pay. Within a few weeks of taking over Cassels had to face one of the familiar troubles on the north-west frontier. Afridi bands, set in motion by the 'Red Shirt' movement, which in its turn was coached by Russian agents, penetrated to Peshawar, and one Indian battalion refused duty. Cassels speedily restored order. Later he undertook the building of a series of blockhouses across a plain which actually lay outside the administrative borders of India. The creation of these defences brought another threat of frontier war but this he succeeded in averting. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 brought a host of problems, foremost among them the expansion of the Indian army, which grew with a rapidity so great that it far outstripped the available equipment. One of the strategic factors Cassels had already anticipated when in May 1936 he had been directed to examine road and rail facilities for moving a division to the Burma frontier and its maintenance there. He estimated that the programme would take eight years, or five if sole reliance were placed in a road from Manipur. He was eager to go ahead at once, but this project was not accepted. Many officers of promise served under Cassels, but the protege who seemed to excel them all was Claude Auchinleck, a close friend to whom he acted to some extent as mentor and who served with him in Mesopotamia and on his staff in India. Auchinleck, who was to succeed him as commander-in-chief, for his part thought Cassels had certain of the characteristics of Rommel. 
Cassels was appointed KCB in 1927, GCB in 1933, and GCSI in 1940. After his retirement he lived at Copthorne, in Sussex, where he took a prominent and useful part in local affairs. He was always very uncommunicative about his military experiences and never spoke of them even to his son, who was to become General Sir James Cassels, chief of the general staff, Ministry of Defence (1965-8). 
Cassels's greatest assets were his determination and his 'coup d'oeil' on the battlefield. He was prepared to gamble, as he did at Sharqat, and gambling boldly and skilfully is proverbially a necessity for the successful leader, but he did not make a single mistake in that campaign and was never abandoned by fortune. His sense of duty and probity equalled his extreme modesty. Cassels died at Ticehurst House, Ticehurst, Sussex on 23 December 1959. Lady Cassels survived her husband. 
Cyril Falls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32325


Cassels, Walter Richard (1826-1907), religious controversialist, fourth son of Robert Cassels, for many years British consul at Honfleur, and his wife, Jean, daughter of John Scougall of Leith, was born in London on 4 September 1826. The family, which liked to trace its pedigree to Alfred the Great, was of mercantile capacity. 
Walter, who early showed literary ability, with two volumes of poetry published (1850, 1856), became partner with his brothers Andrew and John in the firm of Peel, Cassels & Co. at Bombay. That position he held until 1865, publishing 'Cotton: an Account of its Culture in the Bombay Presidency' (1862). From 1863 to 1865 he was an active member of the legislative council of Bombay. Referring to a debate in the council on 8 September 1864, the 'Bombay Gazette' distinguished Sir William Rose Mansfield and Cassels as 'men known not only throughout India but in England for the knowledge and ability they have shown in discussing the most important questions of commercial law and practice'. Returning to England, Cassels lived in London, save for an interval spent in the neighbourhood of Manchester. 
In 1874 Cassels published anonymously two volumes entitled 'Supernatural Religion: an Inquiry into the Reality of Divine Revelation', in which he impugned the credibility of miracles and the authenticity of the 'New Testament'. This publication, which was calculated to provoke antagonism, was a 'succes de scandale'. The wildest conjectures as to its author were rife; it was attributed among others to a nephew of E. B. Pusey, and to Connop Thirlwall. Joseph Barber Lightfoot, moved by what he deemed its 'cruel and unjustifiable assault... on a very dear friend', began in the 'Contemporary Review' a series of nine articles entitled 'Supernatural religion', which appeared at intervals up to May 1877; though left unfinished, these articles materially reduced the anonymous writer's pretensions to scholarship, and were regarded as giving new strength to the defence of the 'New Testament' canon; they were collected into a volume of 'Essays' in 1889. 
Meanwhile Cassels's book passed through six editions by 1875; in 1877 a third volume was added; a revised edition of the complete work appeared in 1879; popular editions in one volume, after compression and further revision, were issued in 1902 and 1905. To Lightfoot's first essay the author had replied anonymously in the 'Fortnightly Review' (January 1875); this and other rejoinders he collected in 'A Reply to Dr Lightfoot's Essays by the Author of 'Supernatural Religion'' (1889). Lightfoot reverted to the controversy in a paper in the 'Academy', the last he wrote (21 September 1889), to which Cassels replied anonymously in the 'Academy' (28 September). In 1894 appeared 'The Gospel According to Peter: a Study by the Author of 'Supernatural Religion''. The secret of this authorship was marvellously well kept: Lightfoot wrote in 1889 that he knew neither his name nor 'whether he is living or dead'. On the appearance in the 'Nineteenth Century' (April 1895) of an article, 'The Diatessaron of Tatian', signed Walter R. Cassels, the statement was made in the 'Manchester City News' (20 April 1895) that Cassels (described as 'a Manchester poet') 'has now avowed himself the author of 'Supernatural religion''. There was no public avowal. Further articles appeared in the 'Nineteenth Century' entitled 'The virgin birth of Jesus' (January 1903) and 'The present position of apologetics' (October 1903) and signed Walter R. Cassels, yet the public was slow to connect them with the author of 'Supernatural Religion'. 
Cassels was long a collector of pictures. Five were sold at Christies on 30 June 1906; they had cost him $1685 5's'., and they realized $8547. Among them was Turner's 'Rape of Europa', which he had bought in 1871 for 295 guineas and which sold for 6400 guineas, and the portrait of John Wesley by Romney. Cassels died, unmarried, at his house, 43 Harrington Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 10 June 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 32326


Cates, Arthur (1829-1901), surveyor, was born on 29 April 1829 at 38 Alfred Street, Bedford Square, London, the son of James Cates and his wife, Susan, daughter of John Rose. After education at King's College School, London, he joined the office of Sydney Smirke RA as a pupil in 1846. From 1852 to 1859 he was an assistant to Sir James Pennethorne, and in 1870 succeeded him as architect to the land revenues of the crown under the commissioners of woods and forests, a position he held until 1898. This gave him considerable artistic control over the architecture of the crown estates in London. His temperament ideally suited him to this position. Cates's friends described him as pugnacious but professional, though sometimes 'a little too prone to show and use his strength'. Cates saw himself as a drill sergeant, and was never happier than when in charge ('RIBA Journal', 353-4). His own architectural works were few but included St Mary, Cowes, Isle of Wight (1867), and a number of houses and commercial buildings in London. In 1887 as surveyor to the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple he designed the archway and gatehouse that lead from Tudor Street to King's Bench Walk. 
Cates joined the Architectural Association in 1847, and became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1856, a fellow in 1874, and a member of the council in 1879; he served as vice-president from 1888 to 1892. He was important in pressing for a systematic course of training for architects, with the particular aim of improving their practical knowledge. From 1882 to 1896 he was chairman of the institute's board of examiners, and under his guidance a system of progressive examinations (preliminary, intermediate, and final) was established. He was also a fellow of the Surveyors' Institution. From 1858 to 1892 Cates was honorary secretary of the Architectural Publication Society, and contributed to its six-volume 'Dictionary of Architecture' (1852-92), edited by his friend Wyatt Papworth. He was first chairman of the tribunal of appeal under the 'London Building Act' from 1894 until his death. 
In 1881 Cates married Rosa, daughter of William Rose. They had no children. He died at his home, 12 York Terrace, Regent's Park, London, on 15 May 1901, and was cremated at Woking on 18 May. His wife survived him. He left an estate valued at over $197,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 32327


Cathcart, Edward Provan (1877-1954), physiologist, was born on 18 July 1877 in Ayr, Scotland, the son of Edward Moore Cathcart ('c'.1849- 'c'.1886), merchant, and his wife, Margaret Miller. His father died at an early age, leaving the mother with three small children, of whom Edward, the eldest, was only nine. He was on the classical side in Ayr Academy and graduated MB, ChB, from the University of Glasgow in 1900. The following year he went to Germany to study bacteriology in Munich and chemical pathology in Berlin. In Munich he also attended lectures by Carl Voit, the foremost authority on human metabolism. 
After returning to Britain, Cathcart spent three years (1902-5) in the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine, London, as assistant to S. G. Hedin. For his work on enzyme activity and in bacteriology Cathcart received the MD of Glasgow (1904), with honours and a Bellahouston gold medal. In 1905 he was appointed to the Grieve lectureship in physiological chemistry in Glasgow, which he held until 1915. During those years Cathcart conducted many experiments on protein metabolism, including a study of human starvation, for which he received the degree of DSc in 1908. In 1912 he published his 'Physiology of Protein Metabolism'. 
In 1908 Cathcart spent five months in Ivan Pavlov's laboratory in St Petersburg and in 1912 a year with F. G. Benedict in Boston at the nutritional laboratory of the Carnegie Institution. With Benedict, Cathcart studied the efficiency of a trained cyclist, using the technique of indirect calorimetry, which involves collecting and analysing expired air. 
In 1913 Cathcart married Gertrude Dorman (1876-1960), daughter of Henry Bostock (1833-1923), shoe manufacturer of Stafford, and his wife, Alice Susannah. She graduated in science, then in medicine, at Glasgow; and their three daughters all graduated in medicine from the same university. 
In 1915 Cathcart became professor of physiology in the London Hospital medical school, but gave much of his time to war service, first in anti-gas duties, then as lieutenant-colonel, Army Medical Services, engaged on special work in connection with the feeding of the army. He employed indirect calorimetry during and after the war to assess the food requirements of recruits, the most efficient rate of marching, and the weight of equipment that troops should be expected to carry, and in tests of new designs of army clothing. The later projects were carried out under the Army Hygiene Advisory Committee, of which Cathcart was a member from 1919 to 1944. 
In 1919 Cathcart returned to Glasgow to the new Gardiner chair of physiological chemistry; in 1928 he transferred to the regius chair of physiology, a transfer which did no violence to his interests, which continued to be centred on the human scene. Indeed, in his later years he was out of sympathy with much conventional physiological experimentation on animals. 
As a member, and later chairman, of the Physiology of Muscular Work Committee of the Industrial Fatigue (later Health) Research Board (of which he also became a member, and then chairman), Cathcart became concerned with industrial physiology. He supervised a study of weight carrying by women and the physique of women in industry, which was published in 1928, and which was followed by a study on the physique of men in industry, published in 1935. 
In his views on industrial and political problems, Cathcart showed no sympathy with what he regarded as the sentimental attitudes of the political Left; nor did he approve of the growing trends towards automation. In 'The Human Factor in Industry' (1928), and elsewhere, Cathcart emphasized that workers should not be reduced to 'machine-tickling aphids'. 
Cathcart became increasingly interested in human dietary habits. He supervised five dietary studies of different parts of Great Britain, which were published between 1924 and 1940 and funded by the Medical Research Council, on which he served. These studies employed methods pioneered in Britain by Cathcart's predecessor in the regius chair, D. N. Paton. Cathcart, like Paton, attempted to assess 'maternal efficiency' and to explore its relationship to the adequacy of household diets and the nutritional condition of children. He also followed Paton in being sceptical about the practical value of vitamins, and during the 1930s offered an alternative viewpoint on nutrition to that of vitamin-enthusiasts such as F. G. Hopkins, and E. Mellanby. Cathcart's view that such nutritional problems as existed were caused mainly by ignorance rather than poverty, and could be tackled most effectively by education, was also counter to the position of his former student and colleague J. B. Orr. During the 1930s Cathcart was a member of the Ministry of Health's advisory committee on nutrition, of the committee on nutrition in the colonial empire, and of several committees of the League of Nations which were concerned with nutrition. 
Cathcart also served on the Agricultural Research Council during the 1930s, and as honorary interim director (1928-30) of the Hannah Dairy Research Institute. 
In 1933 Cathcart was appointed to the Scottish health services committee, of which he became chairman. The Cathcart committee published one of the most complete official surveys of the country's health services and gave information of value in the framing of the National Health Service. From 1933 to 1945 Cathcart represented his university on the General Medical Council; and he served as assessor of the senate on the court of the university. He inevitably had less time for teaching and research; and yet, to the day when he retired in 1947, he shouldered the responsibility for the majority of the lectures in physiology to the elementary medical class. 
Cathcart was elected FRS in 1920 and FRSE in 1932. In 1924 he was appointed CBE. He received the honorary degree of LLD from St Andrews in 1928 and Glasgow in 1948. 
Cathcart was tall, dark-haired, and swarthy, with light steel-grey eyes. His voice was deep and resonant and his accent showed his origins in south-west Scotland. He could be grim and gloomy, especially when confronted with lazy or dishonest work, but could arouse deep emotion and enthusiasm in his undergraduate audiences ('Obits. FRS'). He was remarkably fit until struck down with coronary thrombosis at the age of seventy. He played no sport but loved literature, the theatre, and good talk, sometimes physiological 'shop', more often not. He attended the university chapel regularly; he was a friend and admirer of J. S. Haldane, with whose philosophical outlook he had sympathy. Cathcart died in Glasgow on 18 February 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 32328


Catto, Thomas Sivewright, first Baron Catto (1879-1959), merchant and banker, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 15 March 1879, the fifth son and seventh child of William Catto (1835-1885), shipwright, of Peterhead, and his wife, Isabella, daughter of William Yule, sea captain. His father had moved to Tyneside with his family in search of steadier employment, but died within a year, and the family returned to Peterhead. Catto attended Peterhead Academy, but after a move back to Newcastle he won a scholarship to Heaton School (now Rutherford College). Catto's formal education ended at the pre-university stage, though in 1945 he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Manchester. Catto married in 1910, at Smyrna, Gladys Forbes, daughter of Stephen Gordon, a partner in MacAndrews and Forbes there and a native of Elgin in Moray. They had one son, Stephen Gordon Catto (1923-2001), a partner in Morgan, Grenfell & Co., who succeeded to the title. They also had three daughters, the eldest of whom, Isabel, was elected president of the World YWCA in 1955. 
Catto's career began at the age of fifteen, when he entered the office of the Gordon Steam Shipping Company. Although by 1898 his wages had risen from 4's'. to 10's'. a week, Catto sought wider opportunities; through a newspaper advertisement he applied for, and obtained, the post of secretary to W. H. Stuart, managing partner of F. A. Mattievich & Co. of Batumi, at a salary of $8 a month. He sailed from Cardiff, barely nineteen, with a small trunk, a bicycle, and $3 in cash. For six years he worked in Batumi and Baku, learned to speak Russian, and on his twenty-first birthday was made office manager. While working for Stuart, Catto met Vivian Hugh Smith (1867-1956), later Lord Bicester, who was to have an important influence on his subsequent career. 
Among other friends made in Baku was David Forbes junior, a Scottish merchant, whose business was soon to be absorbed in MacAndrews and Forbes, Russian and Near Eastern merchants with headquarters in the United States. In 1904 Catto was offered the management of their new European selling agency and, with Stuart's goodwill, found himself organizing an office in London. He became a member of the Baltic Exchange and learned London ways of merchanting and the chartering of ships; but after two years he returned to the Near East as second-in-command to Forbes in Smyrna, a post entailing much travel in the Near and Middle East. In 1909 he was transferred to the New York office, becoming a vice-president. The United States was to provide his home base for the next eleven years. 
When war broke out in August 1914, Catto was in England. His lack of inches prevented military service, but on the introduction of Vivian Smith he was employed in the organization of transporting supplies to Russia, and the same connection led to his becoming the British Admiralty representative on the Russian commission to the United States from 1915 to 1917. When Russia collapsed, he transferred to the British food mission in the United States, and in 1918 he became chairman of the allied provisions commission and head of the British Ministry of Food in the USA and Canada. In recognition of his war-time service, in 1918 he was appointed CBE, in 1919 a commander of the order of Leopold of Belgium, and in 1921 he received a baronetcy. 
Catto never returned, as he had intended, to MacAndrews and Forbes. In 1917 Vivian Smith's firm, Morgan, Grenfell & Co., had acquired a predominating share in Andrew Yule & Co. of Calcutta and its associated business, George Yule & Co. of London, the great Indian commercial empire built by Sir David Yule, whom Catto was invited to succeed. With a young family, Catto had no mind to take up residence in India, but what decided him was that his mother's name was Yule (though no relationship was ever established). The position of head of Andrew Yule & Co., which he assumed in 1919, led to Catto's playing an active part in financial and economic affairs in India: he became president of the Bengal chamber of commerce, and served as a member of the Inchcape committee on Indian government retrenchment in 1922-3. Closer to home, he also served on the United Kingdom committee on coal-selling in 1926. In 1928 he became a partner in Morgan, Grenfell & Co., and retired from India. He remained chairman of Andrew Yule & Co., and of the London business, which became Yule, Catto & Co., until 1940. 
Established in London, Catto became a director of the Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation, the Mercantile Bank of India, the Tobacco Securities Trust Company Ltd, the Union Castle Mail Steamship Company Ltd, the Oriental Telephone and Electric Company Ltd, and the Royal Bank of Scotland. One other task he undertook in the 1930s was to act with Sir Ernest Harvey (deputy governor of the Bank of England) in reordering the affairs of the Royal Mail and the Elder Dempster shipping companies, an unpaid post to which he was drafted by Montagu Norman (1871-1950), the governor of the Bank of England. On 24 February 1936 he was created a baron, taking his territorial title from Cairncatto, a farm which he had purchased in Buchan, Aberdeenshire, whence his forebears had come. 
On 3 April 1940 Catto became a director of the Bank of England, and until July 1941 he served on the bank's advances and discounts committee, staff committee, and securities committee, and paid supervisory visits to the bank's branch in Newcastle. These were, however, secondary activities, because, only a fortnight after his appointment as a director of the bank, Catto succeeded Lord Woolton as director-general of equipment and stores at the Ministry of Supply. In July 1941 he resigned his directorship of the bank and moved to the newly created post of financial adviser to the Treasury. Catto thus joined the influx of outside experts assembled to assist the Treasury war effort, working alongside, among others, John Maynard Keynes. In this context, Catto represented commercial and banking experience, the kind of practical man of business Keynes had once scorned; he and Keynes, hitherto strangers, held widely contrasting economic views, but developed a strong mutual respect, and also friendship, and eventually became known to the press as lords 'Catto and Doggo'. 
By the close of 1943 it had become evident that illness was about to end Montagu Norman's long reign at the Bank of England. In April 1944 Catto, then sixty-five, was chosen as Norman's successor and, having been released from his position at the Treasury, was elected on 18 April to the governorship in a brief ceremony held in Norman's room at the bank. Catto was in many respects well equipped by his merchant banking knowledge and by his recent experience in Whitehall to oversee the middle position which the bank occupied between government and the City, but he faced some important difficulties. Following Norman was in itself a problem, for the great man had occupied the governorship for twenty-four years and, during that time, had transformed the organization and outlook of the bank and had come to be regarded as the perfect partner for the 'Old Lady'. Moreover, in spite of his City background, Catto was initially regarded with some suspicion by senior bank staff, who felt that he had become too much a Treasury man. Most important, however, was the fact that Catto's tenure of the governorship coincided with the end of the war, the problems of domestic and international reconstruction, and the nationalization of the bank. 
In dealing with these problems, Catto relied for the most part on the team that he inherited from Norman, which reassured those who had viewed him as a Treasury 'new broom'. In his first year he occupied himself with the main questions likely to arise in the post-war period, notably in the field of industrial finance, where he was much concerned with the establishment of the Finance Corporation for Industry and the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation -- institutions designed to meet inter-war criticisms of the City's neglect of British industry. But he had been in office little more than a year when a Labour government was returned, pledged to an early nationalization of the Bank of England and ready to introduce new measures of control over the banking system as a whole; and it is with these questions that his name as governor is principally associated. 
Catto accepted that the bank had already been converted, 'de facto', into a public institution, aligning its monetary policy with the general economic policy of the government of the day, and no longer seeking to provide for its stockholders more than a constant dividend. Accordingly he took the view that there was nothing in the proposal for public ownership which need diminish the utility or standing of the bank, provided its independence in thought and work was fully safeguarded. Similarly, he did not oppose the provision of a new measure of control over the banking system, provided that it was general in character and operated on the initiative of the bank. Catto's protracted negotiations with Hugh Dalton, the Labour chancellor at the time of the bank's nationalization, bear ample testimony to the tenacity with which he sought to achieve these ends. 
Catto judged correctly that he could best defend the bank's own position, and that of the banking world more generally, by not actively opposing the general policy of nationalization. As a result the bank was taken into public ownership with the minimum public controversy and the maximum retention of operational independence. Catto's own speeches in the House of Lords were important here, for they established some of the principles for future interpretations of the legal intention of the nationalization statute. His successor, Lord Cobbold, instructed bank staff to read these speeches as the best indications of the bank's position, and in the 1950s the Treasury solicitors accepted their significance when they undertook a detailed examination of the constraints on the government's limited powers over the bank. Catto was appointed as the first governor of the publicly owned bank in March 1946, and on 25 July 1947, midway through his term of office, he was sworn of the privy council. In his last years as governor Catto divided his time equally between consolidating the bank's new domestic role and involvement in the financial aspects of international post-war reconstruction; in the latter context he played a significant part in discussions on the role of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank). He resigned the governorship on 28 February 1949, two weeks before his seventieth birthday -- by that time the statutory age limit for the office. 
In retirement, Catto served as chairman, in 1950-52, of a committee to report on the practicability of determining the financial and economic relations between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. Scottish matters indeed, and particularly those of the county of Aberdeen, were a lifelong concern. In addition to the farm of Cairncatto, he had bought the nearby Schivas House, Ythanbank, which he restored fully on his return from India. In August 1957 he became the first freeman of Peterhead, an honour which gave him particular pleasure. 
In appearance Catto was short of stature, with a fresh complexion and clear blue eyes. His open countenance and quiet manner perhaps tended to conceal his shrewdness and skill as a negotiator, so well displayed while he was governor of the bank. If there was occasion for controversy he avoided a head-on collision, and used his judgement to carry his objective without sacrificing any point of importance. As the head of a large organization he imposed his will with courtesy and with sensitivity towards his subordinates. 
Catto's career formed a bridge between the pre-1914 world, in which informal business contacts and the presence of individual merchant companies, especially from Britain, were responsible for much of the world's commerce, and the post-1945 world, in which international financial institutions and conglomerates, and the emergence of world trading blocs, had become the engine of increasingly complex capital and trade flows and relationships. He was in the Middle East when the Baghdad to Berlin railway was projected, and when oil was discovered in Iran; he was still involved in business and economic development in the era of the International Monetary Fund, decolonization, and the emergence of the European Economic Community. Catto's business career is of intrinsic interest, but it is his period as governor of the bank that marks him out as a figure of historical importance. On a purely biographical level his ascent from humble Scots origins to the pinnacle of City, and ultimately national, financial rank is a story of great personal achievement. More broadly his brief period as governor of the bank witnessed a remarkable period of transition in international, national, and bank affairs. 
Clement Attlee remarked with some justification on Catto's retirement that 'no governor has had to face such a difficult world situation' (Bank of England Archives, G 21) and Catto played a significant part in calming some of the turbulence which characterized post-war economic and financial reconstruction. But Catto's most important contribution to post-war history was his handling of the bank's nationalization. In the short term his adroit management of bank and City opinion indeed helped to ensure a minimum of public controversy. In the long term, however, his successful attempt to preserve much of the bank's independence was to prove crucial in shaping the future role of the financial sector and the governance of the post-war economy. 
Catto suffered from Parkinson's disease and died in his sleep at his house, Holmdale, in Holmbury St Mary, Shere, Surrey, on 23 August 1959, at the age of eighty. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 23 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 32329


Cave, George, Viscount Cave (1856-1928), lawyer and politician, was born on 23 February 1856 at 67 Cheapside, London, the second son of Thomas Cave (1825-1894), a City of London merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth (1827/8-1925), daughter of Jasper Shallcrass of Banstead, Surrey, who were married in 1849. Cave's father was sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1863-4 and Liberal MP for Barnstaple from 1865 to 1880; his mother outlived her husband by thirty years, dying at the age of ninety-seven. His elder brother, Thomas, became a solicitor, and of his two younger brothers Edmund became a master of the Supreme Court and Basil was consul-general in Zanzibar and was knighted. In 1866, Cave was sent to the Lycee Imperial de Caen, where he stayed for three years. He then went to Merchant Taylors' School, London. In 1874 he gained a closed scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, where he also held a Pitt Club exhibition and a Taylorian exhibition in French. Cave was a successful scholar: he obtained first-class honours in classical moderations in 1875 and went on to be in the first class in Greats in 1878. In 1916 he was made an honorary fellow of his college. He attempted an All Souls fellowship but was unsuccessful. 
In May 1876 Cave was admitted to the Inner Temple, and in June 1880 he was called to the bar and took up practice in chambers at 26 Old Buildings, Lincoln's Inn. He soon gained a steady if not brilliant practice at the Chancery bar. By 1890 he was earning $1000 a year and by 1904 between $4000 and $5000. On 6 January 1885 he married (Anne) Estella Sarah Penfold Mathews (died 1938), daughter of William Witney Mathews of Chard, Somerset. They had one child, who died at birth. 
Cave's father had been active in local government in Richmond-on-Thames, Surrey, and in 1886 George Cave was elected to Richmond vestry. In 1890, after Richmond was incorporated, he was elected to the new Richmond borough council. He went on to be a member of Surrey county council. In 1892 he was made alderman and in 1897 became deputy lieutenant of Surrey. Cave became chairman of Surrey quarter sessions in 1894. Here his advice was influential in the nomination of candidates to the magistracy. In 1904 he took silk and became a bencher of his inn in 1912. He was appointed attorney-general to the prince of Wales in 1914. 
Cave was elected to parliament in 1906 as Conservative MP for Kingston upon Thames and was re-elected subsequently until he was elevated to the peerage. His parliamentary style was quiet, unemotional, and persuasive and he was valued for his tactful approach to difficult problems. He made his name in 1908 with his speech opposing the 'Licensing Bill', where his experience as a licensing justice in Surrey was of considerable value. From 1905 to 1909 he was a member of the royal commission on land transfer. In 1913 Cave moved the minority report of the select committee which inquired into the circumstances surrounding the purchase of shares in the American Marconi Company by Sir Herbert Samuel, Lloyd George (then chancellor of the exchequer), and Sir Rufus Isaacs. This condemned their conduct as a 'grave impropriety'. Cave emphasized the concern that the head of the Treasury, who 'desires the respect of the City of London', was unwise to engage in such transactions (Heuston, 413). 
In the debates on the 1913 'Home Rule Bill', Cave followed the Unionist view that Ulster must either be persuaded to be included under the terms of the bill or be excluded by parliament. He went further than his party in claiming that such an important change in the constitution of Ireland required the assent of the electors, saying that if the Liberal government failed to hold a referendum before the bill was passed, the king would be entitled to dissolve parliament without the consent of the prime minister. Here he was supported by both Dicey and Anson, who argued that the king had power to dissolve parliament in order to secure the consent of electors to fundamental change. Lord Esher dissented, pointing out that Cave's view was contrary to the provisions of the 'Act of Settlement' 1701 and would bring the king into party politics, which 'No loyal subject could contemplate without misgivings'. In a letter to Asquith, Birrell thought it was 'odd that a mouldy Equity draftsman and conveyancer should be so 'bold'' (Heuston, 414). The issue of the king's prerogative arose later, in 1923, when Cave was lord chancellor. On the ground that the king must be kept out of political debates, he advised Stamfordham that the king could not be bound to grant a dissolution to Ramsay MacDonald if the minority Labour government were defeated in the house. 
In 1915, unusually for a back-bencher, Cave was sworn of the privy council and was knighted. That autumn Carson resigned as attorney-general and F. E. Smith secured the succession for himself, with Cave as solicitor-general. They appeared for the crown in the prosecution of Roger Casement for high treason in 1916. In a contentious decision, F. E. made a formal request to Cave to support his decision not to allow Casement to appeal to the House of Lords, with which Cave concurred. Cave became home secretary in December 1916. In that capacity, he agreed that the chief secretary for Ireland could allow 'a Roman Catholic dignitary' to examine the controversial Casement diaries. One of his first acts as home secretary was to steer through the bill which doubled the size of the electorate, reduced seven franchise qualifications to three, and gave the vote to women over thirty. During the passage of the bill he was offered the mastership of the rolls, to which as a Chancery lawyer he would have been well suited, but he declined it. In June 1918 he led a mission to The Hague to negotiate an agreement with the German government over the exchange of prisoners of war. In August that year, he offered his resignation when the commissioner of the Metropolitan Police resigned in the wake of a police strike. It was refused. 
On 13 November 1918 Cave was appointed a lord of appeal in ordinary and was created a viscount. He did not surrender the seals as home secretary until 14 January 1919 which created the odd situation of a law lord discharging the duties of a cabinet minister. 
In 1919 Cave led a commission to South Africa to decide on the appropriate compensation to be awarded to the British South Africa Company for the loss of investment in Southern Rhodesia. The question had been who owned the land: the British South Africa Company, the Matabele (Ndebele) people, the white settlers, or the British crown. Originally referred to the judicial committee in 1914, the case was heard in 1918. The judicial committee held that the unoccupied lands were held by the crown, and the question remained of compensation to the British South Africa Company for developing the land. Cave's commission set the compensation at $4.5million, half the company claim. Cave received the GCMG for this task. 
On the formation of the Bonar Law cabinet in October 1922 Cave was made lord chancellor. His appointment was due to the refusal of the post by Pollock, who had opposed Bonar Law at the Carlton Club meeting of the Conservative Party on their continued membership of the coalition. Cave was reappointed by Baldwin in 1923, and served as lord chancellor until the election of January 1924. When Haldane, who was in failing health, was made lord chancellor, Cave helped him by continuing to perform his judicial duties during Haldane's ten-month tenure. Cave resumed office as lord chancellor in November 1924, and held it until his death in March 1928. 
Cave's approach as lord chancellor was orthodox. He made reforms to advisory committees responsible for appointing magistrates, making members retire by rotation every three years and fixing their term of appointment to six years. He was instrumental in seeing through the 'Law of Property Act' 1925, and its six ancillary statutes, which together modernized and simplified the law governing the ownership and transfer of land in England and Wales. They were the fruit of many years' work by many hands and much debate. They were opposed by large sections of the legal profession, and Cave himself had spoken against the reforms when Birkenhead promoted them in 1922. But when they were reintroduced later the same year, after Cave had taken office as lord chancellor, he accepted that they must pass. All seven acts became law in 1925. Cave also presided over the passing of the 'Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act' 1925 clarifying and reforming the law governing the administration of the courts. In 1926 Cave was criticized for his handling of a debate on the 'Trades Disputes Bill' in the wake of the general strike. When Labour peers tried to filibuster, and the leader of the house moved the closure, Cave accepted the motion without a debate. A debate followed over the next four days on the propriety of Cave's judgment; Lord Ullswater, who had been speaker from 1910 to 1913, questioned Cave's decision, but Cave refused to admit he was wrong. 
In 1925 Cave was approached to stand as chancellor of the University of Oxford. He was very reluctant, as he and others felt that should he lose against the other candidate, Asquith, it would reflect badly on the Conservative Party, and only after considerable persuasion did he accept. Cave was elected, owing to the votes of people described by Asquith as 'cavemen': 'half literate followers in rural parsonages' (Koss, 275). 
Cave died at his Somerset home, St Ann's, Burnham-on-Sea, on 29 March 1928, and was buried at St Mary's, Berrow. He had sent his resignation to Baldwin a week earlier and the day before he died he was told that he had been made an earl; his widow was subsequently granted the title Countess Cave of Richmond. For a successful barrister, he left surprisingly little money, and Hailsham arranged for a number of people to subscribe to an annuity to support his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 32330


Cavell, Edith Louisa (1865-1915), nurse and war heroine, was born on 4 December 1865, the first child of the Revd Frederick Cavell (1825-1910), Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Louisa Sophia (1835-1918), 'nee' Warming, in Swardeston vicarage, Norfolk. Her father, a graduate of King's College, London, met his future wife in the Islington parish of St Mary, where he was curate. The Cavells had three other children, Florence, Louisa, and Jack. Life at Swardeston was dominated by the family's strict evangelical beliefs. The children were educated at home, taught mostly by their mother: Edith showed a talent for drawing, as is evident in a surviving sketchbook. In her early teens she was sent to boarding-school to prepare her for earning a living. She attended Belgrave House School, Clevedon, Somerset (1883-4), and then schools in the Kensington area of London (1884) and in Peterborough (1884-5). The latter school, Laurel Court, had a good reputation for finding suitable employment for its pupils, and she became governess to the family of the vicar of Steeple Bumpstead, Essex. After a short time money from a legacy offered her the opportunity to travel on the continent. In 1889 Miss Gibson, the headmistress of Laurel Court, provided her with an introduction for the post of governess to the children of the Francois family in Brussels, with whom she remained for six years. She was liked and appreciated by the family, but religious and cultural differences, and her reserved nature, were always in evidence. 
Cavell returned to England in 1895 to help nurse her father, who was seriously ill, and then decided to train as a nurse. After gaining experience at Fountains Fever Hospital, Tooting, she registered at the London Hospital school of nursing on 3 September 1896. The London Hospital was a leading voluntary hospital, situated in the East End, whose matron, Eva Luckes, was later opposed to state registration for nurses, preferring to keep control of training and accreditation in the hands of the matron and governors. After an initial period at the recently opened preliminary training school in Bow, Cavell moved to the hospital in Whitechapel. Reports indicate that, though she had a competent and intelligent approach to her work, she did not adapt easily to the hospital community. She seems to have been most successful when working outside the hospital, caring for wealthy private patients in their homes (the London Hospital had a private nursing staff), or for victims of a typhoid epidemic in Maidstone. 
Cavell spent only a brief time as a staff nurse at the London Hospital before moving, in 1901, to be night superintendent at the St Pancras Infirmary, a poor-law hospital. She then moved, in 1903, to be assistant matron of Shoreditch Infirmary, where she took on both training and managerial responsibilities. When she left Shoreditch in 1906 she had a reputation as someone with a great sense of duty, a kind but very reserved person. She left to join her friend, and former Londoner, Eveline Dickinson, on a trip to continental Europe. Not long after their return, Dickinson married and went to live in Ireland, leaving Cavell without a close friend or a job. She took a temporary position as head of the Queen's Nursing Institute (district nurses) in Manchester, but left this after a short time to take up a post, in 1907, as director of a nurses' training school in Brussels. 
The school, the first of its kind in Belgium, and one of the first in Europe, was being set up by Dr Antoine De Page, an acquaintance of the Francois family, one of the leaders of a movement for change among the medical profession in Belgium. De Page and his associates wanted to diminish the influence of the religious orders on the care of the sick. He saw that they had a role to play, but believed that they were too powerful: they distrusted modern medicine, and this was preventing the introduction of new techniques. The institution that Cavell took on was not only a training school, but also a clinic. It was financed by funds raised by De Page and his associates, and was governed by them and a group of their wives. Although Cavell was the director, she was answerable to committees and above all to De Page who, though professionally effective, was arrogant and quick-tempered. She remained in constant contact with Eva Luckes, depending on her for professional advice and personal support, and recruited former Londoners to help her. (Her only constant companion was her dog, Jack, a Jack Russell terrier, later to become an exhibit at the Imperial War Museum.) Her main obstacle was to recruit the right sort of trainee. She required educated middle-class laywomen, in a country where nursing was carried out by members of religious orders, assisted by members of the working class. She had to convince her potential recruits, and members of her committee, that nursing was a respectable profession that required professional training. She showed skill and tact in doing this and in working with the committees. In 1910 the first certificates of competence were awarded; at the same time a new hospital opened in the St Gilles district of Brussels and state registration of nurses was introduced. 
Cavell's reputation, and that of the school, spread, and the number of recruits, from Germany as well as France and Belgium, began to grow. In 1912 plans were drawn up for a new building, and a site was found close to the new hospital at St Gilles. The building programme and the expansion of the training programme were, however, halted in late 1914 by the German occupation of Belgium. The work of the clinic continued but Cavell was frustrated in her plans for the school. Her energies, however, were soon redirected towards assisting in the escape of allied soldiers. A network of opposition to the German occupation, and of assistance to prisoners of war, centred on the aristocratic De Croy family. Members of the Brussels bourgeoisie were involved, and through Cavell's contact with them the training school and the clinic came to be part of the network. The organization provided soldiers with hiding places and with false papers, and facilitated their escape into allied territory. Use was made of the clinic, with soldiers often disguised as patients. During this period Edith Cavell was correspondent of the 'Nursing Mirror' and had accounts published of the impact of the war on Belgium. 
In a short space of time the work with the escape organization took over Cavell's life. Many of those working for her were uneasy, and aware that they were at risk; the Germans became suspicious and began to pay frequent visits to the clinic. Her arrest on 5 August 1915, together with that of one of her assistants, was not unexpected, coming shortly after that of Philippe Baucq, one of the leaders of the organization. Cavell was detained and on 7 August put in solitary confinement in the prison at St Gilles. Others involved in the escape organization were also arrested and imprisoned, but the Germans were careful to keep them too in solitary confinement while evidence was assembled for their trial. Each prisoner made a statement: Edith Cavell's amounted to a confession, and it named several of her accomplices. It is not known why she agreed to sign this statement; nor is it evident that she was aware of its likely consequences. It was clear from her past, and from her very strong religious belief, that she was unwilling to lie, and it may be that she underestimated the Germans' intentions. 
Nine people were court-martialled on 7 October 1915, and the following day five were sentenced to death, the remaining four to periods of hard labour. All were accused of assisting the enemy and of trying to damage the German war effort. Three of those condemned to death had their executions adjourned while pleas of clemency were heard, but Cavell and Baucq were ordered to be executed immediately. Cavell remained outwardly calm, and prepared for her death by praying and reading, and by writing to her family and nurses. In spite of intense diplomatic activity across Europe, particularly on the part of the Americans through the tireless efforts of the US minister in Brussels, Brand Whitlock, and an international outcry against the Germans, she was shot at dawn on 12 October 1915. 
Initial shock at Cavell's death was quickly succeeded by international protest, and to many she became, overnight, a heroine and martyr. For the Germans her death provided an opportunity to show how tough they were prepared to be with those judged to be traitors and spies. The fact that Cavell confessed and was not willing to defend herself seemed to justify their actions. A propaganda war followed, leading to increased recruitment for the allies. The Kaiser later ordered no more women to be shot without his permission. 
Edith Cavell's memory was immortalized in statues: the most famous, by Sir George Frampton, situated in London at the junction between Charing Cross and Trafalgar Square, in St Martin's Place, was erected in the early 1920s. It was inscribed with the words 'Patriotism is not enough', part of her final message from prison. Roads, bridges, streets, and institutions in Belgium and throughout the British empire were also named after her. Her death was the subject of a famous painting by the American war artist George Wesley Bellows whose 'Murder of Edith Cavell' was the most famous in his 'War Series' of 1918. She clearly showed personal courage and humanity in her willingness to help wounded soldiers in enemy territory. She also undertook pioneering work in establishing the clinic and training school, and in shaping the profession of nursing in Belgium and neighbouring countries. But it was the timing of her death, the manner of it, the reaction to it, and the fact that she was a woman and a nurse that secured her lasting reputation as a heroine. After the war there was a funeral service at Westminster Abbey, and on 15 May 1919 her body was buried just outside Norwich Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 32331


Cavendish, Spencer Compton, marquess of Hartington and eighth duke of Devonshire (1833-1908), politician, born on 23 July 1833 at Holker Hall, Lancashire, was the eldest son of William Cavendish, second earl of Burlington and afterwards seventh duke of Devonshire (1808-1891), and his wife, Lady Blanche Georgiana ('b'. 1812), daughter of George Howard, sixth earl of Carlisle. His mother died on 27 April 1840, leaving also two younger sons, Frederick and Edward, and a daughter, Louisa. 
The sons were educated at home, chiefly by their father, a learned man particularly interested in science, who disapproved of the narrow and undemanding educational regime practised in most public schools. He was also devout, solemn, silent, and withdrawn, and an isolated, motherless upbringing in such circumstances may have contributed to some of the most striking characteristics of his eldest son, who remained self-contained and unemotional, prey to self-doubt, and uninterested in behaving or dressing to impress, in softening his remarks about others, or in social repartee. Known at first as Lord Cavendish, he was sent to Trinity College, Cambridge, at eighteen, in 1851. Without much reading he gained a second class in the mathematical tripos of 1854, graduating MA the same year. During the following three years he led the life of a young man of high social position. In January 1858 his cousin, the sixth duke of Devonshire, died. Cavendish's father succeeded to the dukedom and estates, and he himself became marquess of Hartington, the name by which he became famous (frequently shortened, in political gossip, to Harty or Harty-Tarty, though to his family he remained Cav or Cavvy). 
Hartington quickly discovered an addiction to the turf, and many of his happiest hours were spent at Newmarket, where he later built himself a house. He spent lavishly on horse-breeding, but not with commensurate success, though horses of his won the One Thousand Guineas in 1877, the Gold Cup in 1891, and the Stewards' Cup three times. He was also a keen shot and bridge player. Hartington continued to indulge these tastes throughout life, playing bridge most days until the small hours at one of his clubs (the Turf, the Travellers', and Brooks were his favourites) and rising late. From a young age he was a member of the social circle of the prince of Wales, later Edward VII. His high social position worked together with his natural secretiveness to obscure from contemporaries and posterity much of his early private life, though he is known to have had a long and deeply felt affair with the young society courtesan Catherine Walters (Skittles) (1839-1920) between 1859 and 1863. 
His habits of life were not viewed favourably by his father, on whom Hartington remained financially dependent until he was fifty-eight (receiving a regular allowance and periodic debt settlements). Parental influence, in two senses, led to his return to parliament for North Lancashire as a Liberal and a supporter of Lord Palmerston in 1857. The leading men of the Liberal Party, concerned by the amount of recent middle-class criticism of the failings of the traditional governing classes and by the lack of able young aristocratic whigs interested in a political career, quickly identified Hartington as a man of promise. Despite having made only two major speeches he was appointed junior lord of the Admiralty by Palmerston in March 1863 and under-secretary at the War Office two months later. In the latter capacity he helped in promoting the organization of the volunteer force, in which he had participated keenly. Palmerston, who influenced Hartington's political outlook greatly, died in 1865. In February 1866 Hartington became secretary of state for war in Lord Russell's brief administration, thus entering the cabinet in his thirty-fourth year. 
In the early 1860s Hartington formed a lifelong attachment to Louise Montagu, duchess of Manchester (1832-1911), the daughter of Count von Alten of Hanover ['see 'Cavendish, Louise Frederica Augusta]. Her husband, the seventh duke of Manchester, whom she had married in 1852, did not die until 1890, and in 1892 she married her long-term lover. For nearly thirty years, therefore, Hartington combined a bachelor lifestyle with an adulterous affair which was common knowledge in aristocratic circles, though successfully shielded from the world at large at a time when it would almost certainly have damaged his political prospects. He sometimes accompanied the duke and duchess abroad, but in public in England he and she always addressed each other formally. This lifestyle both testified to, and deepened, Hartington's reserve. It gave him more time for politics and self-indulgence, though at the expense of not fathering an heir, of enduring many tedious social events unaccompanied, and of being unable to run a political salon. 
Like a number of Lancashire Liberals, Hartington lost his seat at the general election of December 1868. Gladstone, the new Liberal leader, offered him the post of lord lieutenant of Ireland, which he declined. He accepted instead the office of postmaster-general, with a seat in the cabinet, and in early 1869 obtained a new seat from the Radnor boroughs in Wales. His chief work as postmaster-general was the nationalization of the telegraphs. In 1869 he was appointed chairman of the select committee appointed to investigate parliamentary and municipal electioneering. Following its report in 1870 he introduced the first of three government bills to establish voting by ballot. The proposal became law in 1872. He himself was a reluctant convert to the need for secrecy in voting. 
At the end of 1870 Hartington, much against his will, became chief secretary for Ireland, a job which required him to spend long periods away from his mistress and from London society. His acceptance indicated the extent of his commitment to politics. It also brought him into daily contact with the Irish problem at a time when it was beginning to pose a severe strain on British, and especially Liberal, politics. The Devonshires owned 60,000 acres in Cork and Waterford, and Hartington was naturally conscious of the need to defend the security of Irish property. He never wavered in his belief that the firm administration of law was the prerequisite of peace, stability, and prosperity in Ireland, and the primary duty of Liberal government. His first major act as chief secretary was to urge the suspension of habeas corpus in co. Westmeath in early 1871 in response to the campaign of agrarian outrages known as Ribbonism. Anxious to prevent the extension of priestly control over Irish education, he staunchly defended the mixed national education system and the independence of the protestant Trinity College, Dublin. He strongly disliked Gladstone's proposal of 1873 to reform Irish university education by subordinating Trinity to a federal university examining board, which Roman Catholic colleges might dominate and which had the option to restrict the scope of examination in deference to Catholic susceptibilities. The scheme was defeated in parliament, leading to the government's temporary resignation. Hartington's view was that the future stability and prosperity of Ireland would best be secured by encouraging investment, and to that end he argued in vain that the state should purchase and run the Irish railway network. 
The Liberal government was defeated at the general election of 1874. In early 1875 Gladstone announced his retirement as Liberal leader in the Commons, and on 3 February, despite his reluctance, Hartington was elected his successor at a party meeting held at the Reform Club. This was, not least, because he was almost the only cabinet minister to have enhanced his reputation during the 1868-74 government. Many Liberals also considered that Gladstone's Irish, religious, and foreign policy had alienated too many propertied voters and that a move in the direction of a more Palmerstonian approach would help to restore electoral confidence in the party. And Hartington's lack of clerical sympathies reassured those nonconformists who were hostile to the only serious rival candidate, W. E. Forster, on account of the privileges conferred on church schools by his 1870 'Education Act'. 
Though at first characteristically doubtful about his qualifications for this new post, Hartington developed a quiet mastery of it by the same qualities of hard work, fair-mindedness, and independence of thought that he was to demonstrate in all the offices he held. He was not a natural orator; one wit dubbed him 'Lieder ohne Worte'. But his speeches quickly became effective; they were clear, incisive, unpretentious, and unvarnished, and they exuded trustworthiness. The years 1875-80, in opposition, were difficult for the Liberals, not least because of an internal difference of opinion about how to respond to the 1874 defeat. Some, like Hartington, argued that a Conservative spirit was dominant in the nation and that the Liberals would remain united and recover power only by patience and consolidation. But others believed that the Conservative victory did not reflect public feeling and that the Liberals could build a majority by arousing popular fervour. The young Birmingham radical Joseph Chamberlain took this view. So, though nominally in retirement, did Gladstone, and his behaviour, especially on foreign policy, was a severe trial to Hartington. 
Disraeli's foreign policy aimed to strengthen imperial sentiment at home and British prestige abroad. Hartington did not object to these goals, and thought that opposition to them would be politically counter-productive. For this reason his criticism, in 1876, of the purchase of the Suez Canal shares and the bestowal on Queen Victoria of the title empress of India was limited. However, he did not approve of Disraeli's presentation of imperial policy, which he thought placed too much emphasis on empty pomp and display. His view was rather that the colonies were maturing, at various speeds, into a loose federation of progressive self-governing communities which would be beacons of commercial and constitutional liberalism, spreading 'all over the world the language, the civilisation, the laws and the customs of England'. 
On the Eastern question, which dominated politics between 1876 and 1878, Hartington criticized Disraeli's pursuit of grandeur, taking the view that Britain should have co-operated with the European powers in order to force through reforms in Ottoman administration of her European provinces, rather than ostentatiously breaking ranks and so bolstering Constantinople's intransigence. But he could not accept Gladstone's suggestion that the European provinces should be given autonomy, believing that the mixture of races there would provoke conflict, perpetuate instability, and encourage Russian penetration. And he was alarmed at the agitation mounted by provincial Liberals against Turkish misrule in Europe (which Gladstone inflamed). In his eyes it elevated sentimental above informed and pragmatic judgements of British and European interests in the region, and it looked damagingly unpatriotic, especially after England's traditional 'bete noire', Russia, declared war on Turkey in April 1877. Both in May 1877 and in the spring of 1878 Hartington refused to accept that there were no circumstances in which British military support of Turkey against Russia would be justified. The Liberal parliamentary party split at these times, a substantial number of MPs following Gladstone in a rigidly anti-Turkish viewpoint. However, Hartington regained control of the situation after the congress of Berlin of 1878, taking the view that the government was unwise to commit Britain single-handedly to maintaining the integrity of the Ottoman empire, given the impossibility of forcing through administrative reforms, and that the only viable solution was for the powers to deal with Turkey in concert. This policy, balancing pragmatism and moralism, maintained party unity in the approach to the 1880 election. At that election Hartington also condemned the aggrandizing impulsiveness which he felt had led the government into the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80), and developed a general critique of Conservative foreign policy -- that it sought to dazzle voters with empty, foolish, and costly gestures. He claimed that the government had lowered the standing of parliament, both by marginalizing its input into foreign policy and by failing to maintain a regular diet of useful legislation to meet domestic grievances. 
Though an electioneering gambit, this argument accurately reflected Hartington's constitutional outlook. He never deviated from the whig view in which he was educated, that a vigorous parliament, active in legislative reform, was the key to the working of the British constitution, forcing government to take account of public demands, but filtering those demands in the course of discussion by independently minded men of property and education. However, Hartington did not think that parliament was now the only important forum for discussion of reforms, in the light of the growth of the press, elected local authorities, voluntary bodies, and the professions, all of which played valuable roles in shaping opinion and demonstrated the welcome pluralism of British public life. In an inaugural address as lord rector of Edinburgh University in 1879 he argued that the health of the British polity depended on the continuation of this diffusion of effective power among a great variety of free associations of informed people, but that this placed a heavy responsibility on the universities to train future members of these agencies. He urged a training in scientific and philosophical method, as most likely to cultivate the independence of mind and disciplined imagination that the prominent men of the future would need in order to resist 'clamour and exaggeration' and to supply cogent, disinterested leadership. 
Hartington was anxious that Liberals should commit themselves only to policy innovations which were rational or unmistakably advocated by public opinion, rather than those agitated by vocal but unrepresentative pressure groups within the party. In November 1877 he told the advocates of Scottish disestablishment and temperance reform that they must 'induce their Countrymen to agree' with them by a reasoned campaign of persuasion. Nor did he consider it his place, as leader of the whole parliamentary party, to associate with the National Liberal Federation set up by Joseph Chamberlain, which at this stage represented a selection of the large borough constituencies and sought to generate a policy programme out of the views of local activists in those places. At the 1880 election Hartington sought to rally the Liberal Party by a three-pronged attack on landed complacency. The extension of household franchise to the counties would weaken the grip of the tory squirearchy and make more Commons seats available for representatives of landed Liberal families. The introduction of elected authorities would make rural local government more accountable, more efficient, and more active than most magistrates had been, so improving standards of education and health and increasing popular respect for the propertied classes. Measures to free land of the restrictions on its sale would assist encumbered landlords and might pump investment into the under-capitalized agricultural economy, checking the drift of labour to the towns and hence the rise in urban unemployment, and diminishing the appeal of protection. 
The Liberals won the election and Queen Victoria invited Hartington, who had been returned MP for North-East Lancashire, to form a government. However, Gladstone, who had dominated press coverage of the election owing to his speeches in Midlothian, told him that, as a former prime minister, he would not serve in cabinet beneath him. At this moment, the most crucial in his career, Hartington's diffidence overcame him. Sensitive to the difficulties of disciplining the party at any time, he rejected the notion of leading a government of which Gladstone might well become a back-bench critic. Instead, Gladstone became prime minister on 23 April. 
Hartington was appointed secretary of state for India. His most important work in this post was to help settle the Afghan question. Amir Abdurahman was installed in power and all the British forces were withdrawn from Afghanistan, except from the Sibi and Pishin frontier districts, which with Quetta were permanently added to the empire. 
On 16 December 1882 Hartington became secretary of state for war -- soon after the virtual establishment of the British protectorate over Egypt, for which he had argued vigorously. In January 1884 the British government decided to send General Charles George Gordon to superintend the Egyptian army's safe evacuation from the Sudan after it had encountered trouble from the forces of the Mahdi. Hartington, together with Lord Granville, the foreign secretary, was most responsible for this decision. Gordon's duties were defined imprecisely, partly because Hartington and Lord Wolseley, the adjutant-general, on whose military advice he relied heavily, doubted the practicability of the swift disengagement for which others in the government hoped. When it became apparent in March that peaceful evacuation had become impossible, and that Khartoum and Berber were threatened by the Mahdi, Hartington, supported by strong memoranda from Wolseley, repeatedly urged the prime minister and the cabinet as strongly as he could to prepare a relief expedition. Opposed throughout by Gladstone, he was unable to induce the cabinet to agree to do so until the end of July 1884, and then only by a threat of resignation. Consequently Wolseley's expedition -- sent by the War Office up the Nile, contrary to the advice of those on the spot -- arrived near Khartoum just too late to save that city from capture and Gordon from death on 26 January 1885. The government decided at first to retake Khartoum, and in parliament on 25 February Hartington pledged himself to this policy in the strongest terms, believing that the reputation of the empire, not least among its Muslim subjects, was affected by it. But the feeling died away; the momentary probability of a war with Russia in connection with the Afghan frontier enabled Gladstone to withdraw from the undertaking, which he had never liked; and Hartington had the mortification of seeing the complete abandonment of the Sudan, resisting in vain the proposal to evacuate even the province of Dongola, which had not as yet fallen to the Mahdi. In retrospect Hartington considered the Sudan episode to be the most shameful which he had ever witnessed in politics. 
This imperial crisis intensified Hartington's unhappiness at the state of domestic politics, which had been manifest throughout the early 1880s; more than once he talked of retiring. One difficulty in these years was the impending democratization of the electoral system due towards the end of the government's term of office. Chamberlain exploited the uncertainty over the consequences, presenting himself as the exponent of a new programmatic politics capable of mobilizing and integrating the new electorate. Hartington was angry at Chamberlain's behaviour and tone, which he considered were creating unrealizable expectations among poorer voters, but he lacked confidence that his own brand of politics could compete. So from the early 1880s he was thrown back on the defensive, and was generally seen as the leader of a whiggish section of the party. In this guise he opposed, in late 1883, the proposal to separate the franchise and redistribution parts of the electoral reform package, fearing that the latter would then be determined by a more democratically elected parliament. This did not happen, but more small boroughs were disfranchised in the 'Redistribution Act' of 1885 than he wished, despite his participation in the inter-party discussions which led to it. 
The dominance of the Irish question increased Hartington's defensiveness in these years. Indeed his anxiety about electoral reform in 1883-4 was largely caused by concern that the protestant minority in Ireland would be swamped in a more democratic representative system. Since 1880 Hartington had been a strong supporter of coercive measures to check agrarian crime and the power of the Land League. The regime of violence culminated in the assassination of his brother, Lord Frederick Cavendish, the new chief secretary for Ireland, on 6 May 1882. Though Hartington characteristically did not vent his feelings in public, this tragedy, and the serious threat of continuing agitation, strengthened his view that it would at present be 'madness' for Britain to diminish her responsibility for order in Ireland by granting significant power to locally elected bodies. In 1885 Hartington and his cabinet allies successfully resisted Chamberlain's scheme for a central board and elected county boards throughout Ireland. 
Hartington's experience of Gladstone's attitude to imperial and Irish issues between 1880 and 1885 explains his view, expressed in March 1885, that Gladstone was 'in a fool's paradise about everything'. Yet throughout this government he appreciated that in general politics Gladstone was a conservative influence. One reason why Hartington never carried out his half-threats to resign was the fear that it would throw Gladstone, and the party, more into the hands of Chamberlainite elements. However, the situation changed by the end of 1885. Gladstone's administration was defeated in parliament and resigned in June; Lord Salisbury formed a minority Conservative government, upheld by Parnell's Irish nationalists; and an election late in the year removed the Liberals' majority. Chamberlain's exuberant radical rhetoric was largely blamed for this, and his position 'vis-a-vis' Hartington (who was returned for the new division of Rossendale in Lancashire) was weakened. Meanwhile, the fact that the Parnellites held the balance of power enabled Gladstone to avoid retirement and instead to recover office by embarking on a policy of home rule for Ireland. Most of the members of the previous Liberal cabinet decided to follow him, but a minority, led by Hartington, declined to accept office in the government which he formed in February 1886 after defeating Salisbury in parliament. On the introduction of the 'Home Rule Bill' (8 April), Hartington declared his opposition to it. He insisted that Britain had a responsibility to secure law and order in Ireland and to protect property -- not least that of protestants with capital to invest in economic development. Gladstone claimed that his scheme guaranteed the continuing supremacy of the imperial parliament over Irish affairs, but Hartington regarded this as naive. Hartington's opposition was assisted by Chamberlain, and on 8 June 1886 the bill was defeated on a second reading by a majority of thirty, with ninety-four Liberal MPs voting against it. Gladstone obtained a dissolution of parliament, leading the dissident Liberals to form a distinct Liberal Unionist group under Hartington's leadership and to fight the ensuing election in tandem with the Conservatives. 
The 1886 election returned 316 Conservatives and 78 Liberal Unionists. Gladstone himself considered that Hartington had contributed most to the victory of the Unionist alliance, and that his political standing was extremely high. Salisbury, with Queen Victoria's warm encouragement, asked him to form a coalition government or, alternatively, to serve under him in one. Hartington was tempted, because he was worried that the Conservatives, governing alone, would be too weak to resist Irish pressure. But he feared that acceptance would split the Liberal Unionists and encourage Chamberlain and others to revert to the Gladstonian fold, imperilling the Union; while he had not yet abandoned the hope that Gladstone might retire, allowing him to return to the Liberal Party as leader on a Unionist basis. Salisbury renewed the proposal in January 1887, after the crisis due to the sudden resignation of Lord Randolph Churchill; but Hartington again rejected it, for the same reasons. During the next five years Hartington continued with the strategy of keeping the Conservatives in power in order to uphold the Union, while hoping that this might force the Liberals to abandon home rule. However Gladstone did not retire, and the breach between the two Liberal factions widened owing to the government's strict public order policies in Ireland, which Gladstone opposed in an emotional and contentious manner. As a result, by 1891 the bond between Conservatives and Liberal Unionists was much stronger. 
On 21 December of that year Hartington became eighth duke of Devonshire on his father's death and so left the House of Commons. He became leader of Liberal Unionism in the House of Lords, while Chamberlain led in the Commons. With Salisbury confirmed as leader of the whole coalition by the events of 1895, Devonshire's position was from now on that of an influential elder statesman. This was assisted by his marriage on 16 August 1892 to the dowager duchess of Manchester, because she developed Devonshire House and Chatsworth as prestigious social centres. Probably the most famous festivity was the historic fancy-dress ball given at Devonshire House in 1897, in celebration of the diamond jubilee, which was regarded as the most splendid London social event for over twenty years (the duke himself appeared as the emperor Charles V). 
When, after three years in opposition to an ineffective Liberal government, the Unionists returned to power in June 1895, Salisbury offered five cabinet posts to the Liberal Unionists. A strong coalition government was formed, which lasted until Salisbury's resignation in 1902. The duke declined the foreign secretaryship. Instead he became lord president of the council, with particular responsibilities for the two political problems which most interested him for the remainder of his career, imperial defence and education. 
In 1890 the duke had presided over a royal commission which identified weaknesses in defence planning. From 1895 he was chairman of a cabinet committee on defence set up in order to tackle these weaknesses, though its powers were inadequately defined, the service chiefs were not members, and it was unable to overcome obstruction in the individual defence departments. The duke also chaired the committee which oversaw the conduct of the South African War. The progress of the war intensified concern about the lack of co-ordination in defence matters, and the defence committee meeting that he chaired in December 1902 drew up proposals to strengthen itself. During 1903 and 1904 these ideas bore fruit and a new committee of imperial defence evolved, including military advisers from outside the cabinet and, by invitation, colonial governors and dominion ministers. Devonshire chaired the committee until he resigned from the government in October 1903. He was also president of the British Empire League, formed in 1894 to promote harmony between the countries of the empire through informal discussion of problems of defence, communications, and commerce. 
As lord president of the council Devonshire was in charge of government educational policy. He headed that group which believed that the state must respond to international competition by establishing a systematic policy for secondary education, for which it had not taken responsibility up to that point. After several abortive attempts, local education authorities for secondary education were established by the 1902 'Education Act'. The duke was the politician most responsible for this act, and in particular for insisting that it should also deal with elementary education. As introduced, it encouraged the transfer of responsibility from school boards to local education authorities. In the interests of efficiency, authorities would, where established, also maintain the voluntary schools, which educated half of English schoolchildren. These had previously been funded not by the rates but by central government, because nonconformists had objected to paying from their rates for Anglican teaching. Characteristically, Devonshire rejected the argument of Chamberlain that the threat of agitation by partisan dissenters should obstruct the furtherance of a national interest. Indeed, during its passage the bill was amended in the direction of uniformity, so that all localities were required to set up local education authorities with these duties. After the South African War, Devonshire also became interested in the movement to investigate deficiencies in the physical condition of children, hoping that it would lead local authorities especially to address problems of overcrowding, nutrition, and physical education. He helped to establish an interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration, which reported in 1904, and he publicized its findings in a speech in the Lords in 1905. 
Like his father, the duke was also anxious to encourage technical, scientific, and higher education. He was made FRS in 1892, and was president of the Royal Agricultural Society for 1893-4. He succeeded his father as chancellor of Cambridge University in 1891, and discharged his duties there with energy, being especially interested in promoting the teaching of applied science. He was, for example, responsible for securing funding from the Drapers' Company for a chair of agriculture, established in 1899. At a meeting under his aegis at Devonshire House leading members of the university decided to launch a public appeal to rectify the lack of funding for laboratories and professorships in modern subjects. Devonshire gave $10,000 and used his personal contacts to encourage other contributions. But the appeal was a failure, raising only $100,000 in all. He discovered that successful businessmen were reluctant to support the university financially, believing that its education was of little relevance to their world. He came to the opinion that a wide-ranging royal commission should be established, with a view to changing the content and tone of the courses by diverting powers and financial resources from the colleges to university teachers. He also remained interested in the university extension movement and, at the privy council, facilitated the grant of charters to Birmingham, Manchester, and Liverpool universities. He was chancellor of Manchester University from 1907. 
Many honours and responsibilities devolved on the duke in consequence of his political and social standing. He was made KG by Queen Victoria in 1892, lord lieutenant of Derbyshire in the same year and of Waterford in 1895, and GCVO in 1907. In the control and management of his large estates in England and Ireland he was recognized as an excellent landlord and public-spirited benefactor; he took a particularly close interest in the development of Eastbourne. He presided over the successful restructuring of the family's finances, which had been hit by the agricultural depression and by the collapse of demand for the ships and steel produced in Barrow in Furness, in which his father had invested over $2 million. He took advantage of the 'Land Purchase Acts' to sell a lot of his Irish land and reinvested the proceeds in the stock market. By these means the family debt was reduced from $2 million to $0.5 million. He also continued the family tradition of opening Chatsworth to the public; there were 80,000 visitors a year by the end of his life, testifying in some degree to the respect in which he and his order were held. 
Devonshire believed very strongly that the survival of the Unionist coalition government was the best safeguard of the political ideals which he upheld -- the defence of the Union and empire, and the pursuit of educational reform and other measures of national efficiency through thoughtful administration. Yet his hopes for its longevity were dashed soon after the retirement of Lord Salisbury in July 1902 and the succession of Arthur Balfour to the premiership (Devonshire himself became leader in the Lords). Moreover the cause, in Devonshire's eyes, was a manifestation of the problem which had alarmed him since the 1880s, the irrational impulsiveness to which democratic politicians were prone. The crisis was created by Chamberlain's campaign for the introduction of preferential duties on imported goods, which he launched in the spring of 1903. The duke, schooled in the principles of political economy by his father, was an instinctive advocate of free trade, unlike the majority of government supporters. Moreover, his involvement in the City encouraged him in the view that invisible earnings, which protection might jeopardize, would continue to underpin British economic success. He was willing to accept an inquiry into the merits of protection, in view of the damage then being suffered by elements of British industry. But careful consideration of the economic arguments did not change his mind, nor that of a minority of his cabinet colleagues. Three of them resigned after the cabinet meeting of 14 September. The duke would have followed suit, had not Balfour informed him that Chamberlain had also resigned. Conscious of the supreme importance of holding the government together, and of his own indispensability, as leader of the Liberal Unionist forces, in that task, he allowed himself to be persuaded by Balfour to stay in office. But Balfour's strategy depended on leading the party some way down the road of fiscal reform, and as this quickly became clear Devonshire soon found that his position in cabinet was untenable. On 2 October he resigned, taking advantage of strong expressions in favour of a change in fiscal policy used by Balfour in a speech at Sheffield. The government never recovered from these events. The duke strongly opposed the new policy of tariff reform in the House of Lords. In May 1904, recognizing that the Chamberlainites controlled the party's constituency organization, he resigned his chairmanship of, and connection with, the Liberal Unionist Association, over which he had presided since its formation in 1886. 
But the duke was not among those free-traders sympathetic to an association with the reviving Liberal Party, believing that the Union was an even more important cause than that of free trade. So, having been a supporter of the dominant governing force during his entire political life, Devonshire's last years were spent out of sympathy with both major parties. In June 1907 he suffered a sudden collapse of health through weakness of the heart. Having recovered to some degree, he left England on 24 October and went to Egypt for the winter. On his way home, on 24 March 1908, he died almost suddenly at the Hotel Metropole at Cannes. His body was brought to Derbyshire and buried at Edensor, close to Chatsworth. He left no children, and the title and estates passed to his nephew Victor, son of the late Lord Edward Cavendish. 
Hartington's success in hiding his feelings disguised from most observers how wholeheartedly he was devoted to the game of politics. Without it he would have been bored to distraction, for he had little taste for society, few cultural interests, and, for most of his existence, an undemanding private life. He was far from unambitious, and his refusal of the premiership on a unique three occasions should not be taken to imply that he was uninterested in political eminence on the right terms. But his overriding commitment was to the defence of a certain approach to politics, which he embodied better, and did more to safeguard, than any man of his generation. He inherited the whig belief in the duty of political leadership, afforced by the intellectual notions characteristic of well-educated, propertied early to mid-Victorian Liberals: a confidence that the application of free trade, rational public administration, scientific enquiry, and a patriotic defence policy would promote Britain's international greatness -- in which he strongly believed -- and her economic and social progress. Though no intellectual, and affecting indolence, his powers of industry and of unprejudiced insight into practical problems were undoubted, and allowed him to live up to the ideal of a safe, high-minded, disinterested, equable Liberal administrator. He worked slowly and steadily to make himself master of the issues with which he was charged; never swayed by received opinion or sentiment, he read and enquired doggedly until he had made up his own mind. His speeches set out his reasoning clearly, bluntly, and logically; he was never caught dissembling or romanticizing. He knew he was not an exciting speaker and disliked the limelight; so he was diffident about his ability to compete for a popular following with colleagues such as Gladstone and Chamberlain. But he distrusted the democratic impulse in both of them, and blamed the consequences of their behaviour for the destruction, in turn, of the two great propertied governing coalitions to which he devoted his political life. 
None the less, the span of Hartington's period of real political power, at over thirty years, was remarkable. His rank, his character, and his reputation for pragmatic and patriotic common sense gave him unique public standing; many regarded him as representing the middle ground of opinion. Despite his unorthodox private relationships and his indifference to his public appearance (W. H. Smith, meeting him at Cannes, thought he looked like 'a shabby seedy sailor'), he became a model of the dutiful aristocrat. His integrity and public-spiritedness were undoubted; as Hartington himself noted, with mock puzzlement, 'whenever a man is caught cheating at cards the case is referred to me'. It was said of him, late in life, that he was 'the best excuse that the last half-century has produced for the continuance of the peerages'. To bolster the position of the traditional governing classes was his most important, and most intentional, achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 32332


Cavendish, Victor Christian William, ninth duke of Devonshire (1868-1938), politician and governor-general of Canada, was born on 31 May 1868, the eldest son of Lord Edward Cavendish (1838-1891) and his wife, Emma Elizabeth Lascelles (1838-1920). He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1891. After leaving university he trained for several months in an accountant's office and studied law in the Inner Temple chambers of Judge Lush-Wilson. This pioneering form of management training prepared him for his responsibilities on the board of such family businesses as the Barrow Hematite Steel Company and the Furness Railway. Following the death of his father, who was Liberal Unionist MP for West Derbyshire, he was returned unopposed in June 1891 for the constituency, which he held until March 1908, when he succeeded his uncle (Spencer Compton Cavendish, marquess of Hartington and eighth duke of Devonshire) in the dukedom. On the death in December 1891 of his grandfather William Cavendish (the seventh duke), he inherited the Holker Hall estate in north Lancashire. On 30 July 1892 he married Lady Evelyn Emily Mary (1870-1960), elder daughter of Henry Charles Keith Petty-Fitzmaurice, fifth marquess of Lansdowne. They had two sons and five daughters. 
As a politician who preferred listening to speaking, Cavendish was treasurer of the royal household (1900-03) in the last Salisbury government. Under Balfour he was a painstaking financial secretary to the Treasury (1903-05). He became a privy councillor after losing office in 1905, and was created GCVO in 1912, but rued his exclusion from the Commons after 1908. 'The Duchess says he can't think what to do in the evenings and that he writes all sorts of needless letters to kill time' ('Crawford Papers', 108). However, he became an assiduous and influential member of the Lords during the tense years of the Asquith administration. His political opponent John Morley considered his interventions 'simple, direct, weighty and balanced' (FitzRoy, 460). In 1912 he was recruited to Bonar Law's shadow cabinet where he had a deserved reputation as a 'safe man' ('Crawford Papers', 348). 
Devonshire assumed numerous responsibilities after succeeding to the dukedom, together with some 186,000 acres. He was lord lieutenant of Derbyshire and high steward of Derby from 1908, honorary colonel of the 5th battalion of the Sherwood Foresters (the Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire regiment) from 1908, mayor of Eastbourne (1909-10) and of Chesterfield (1911-12). He was also chancellor of the University of Leeds from 1910, and high steward of the University of Cambridge from 1923 (sitting on the council of Selwyn College). From 1908 he was president of the British Empire League. He was twice elected president of the Royal Agricultural Society (1908, 1932). 
The duke, who was vice-president of the Navy League from 1909, returned to government in the wartime coalition as civil lord of the Admiralty (1915-16). His replies on behalf of the Admiralty in the upper house were 'capital' (Sandhurst, 325). He received the Garter in January 1916, and in June succeeded the duke of Connaught as governor-general and commander-in-chief of Canada. He was created GCMG in July, and after landing in Canada in November during a critical phase of the war, consistently strove to sustain patriotic morale. The imposition of conscription had been resented, especially among the Quebecois, and the wartime upheaval was followed by economic dislocation and social unrest. Devonshire's skilful treatment of different sections of Canadian opinion was widely acknowledged. His interventions in the intricacies of post-war Canadian party politics were deft and harmonious. He enjoyed discussing political tactics with his aide-de-camp Harold Macmillan, who married his daughter Dorothy Evelyn Cavendish in 1920. The prince of Wales, touring the dominion in 1919, thought the duke was 'a damned good fellow and has no side', although stuck in a 'hopelessly narrow groove' (Davenport-Hines, 163). His appointment expired in August 1921. 
Devonshire's sale of Devonshire House in Piccadilly for $750,000 in 1920 inspired Siegfried Sassoon's 'Monody on the Demolition of Devonshire House'. His refusal in March 1922 to serve as secretary of state for India under Lloyd-George damaged the prestige of the coalition government. An evolved whig rather than a tory die-hard, he supported the Irish settlement of 1922. After the fall of the coalition Devonshire joined Bonar Law's cabinet as secretary of state for the colonies in October 1922. As colonial secretary he issued the Devonshire declaration of 1923 that the interests of African natives must be paramount over those of immigrant settlers in Kenya colony. This announcement was pregnant with significance for future colonial policy, and was generally unexpected. It accorded with Devonshire's generous whiggish inclinations, and he withstood pressure to withdraw or amend the principle of paramountcy. Sir Maurice Hankey, the cabinet secretary, observed that Devonshire resembled 'an apoplectic idol and gives little counsel' (Roskill, 2.323). Crawford, however, described him in 1923: 'what a solid person he is -- uncouth in gesture, ponderous in appearance, slow in style -- yet giving the impression of saying all that requires statement and doing so without any effort to score a success. There is a massive imperturbability about him which gives confidence. He will never let one down, never play for his own advantage, never do anything brilliant. ('Crawford Papers', 486)' In cabinet he resisted attempts by Amery and other protectionists to extend safeguarding of industry. Baldwin's handling of the American debt question disquieted him, and he deplored the new prime minister's decision to go to the country on a protectionist platform. He left the Colonial Office in January 1924, and was not invited to hold office when Baldwin resumed power in November. It was believed that Baldwin contemplated offering him the lord presidency of the council until Curzon insisted on that office. 
Devonshire in middle life resembled a solemn, ruddy-complexioned walrus with a strong jaw. Despite looking stolid and even sleepy, he was shrewd, tactful, observant, and clear-headed. His authority rested on real though unostentatious ability. During 1924-5 he served as chairman of the British Empire Exhibition held at Wembley and unobtrusively became one of its financial guarantors. In 1925 he accepted further public responsibilities, including the chairmanship of both a privy council committee to enquire into the Channel Islands' contributions to the imperial exchequer and the Sadler's Wells theatre trust. He went for the Easter holidays to Lismore Castle, where on 12 April 1925 he suffered a paralytic stroke. This changed him from a calm, impassive, and patient man into at best a querulous, morose invalid and at worst a ferocious bully. Although he relished the presence of his grandchildren, his domestic rages became increasingly unpleasant. The cold, authoritarian, and frugal duchess had anxiously reorganized the management of the Devonshire properties after 1908, and rose to greater ascendancy as her husband's mental condition deteriorated. She introduced nettle soup to Chatsworth menus to save expense, had Sir Joseph Paxton's great conservatory there dynamited in 1920, and replanted his garden with rhododendrons and bamboo. The duke continued to fulfil certain public duties until shortly before his death on 6 May 1938, at Chatsworth. On 9 May he was buried at Edensor church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32333


Cawood, Sir Walter (1907-1967), chemist and civil servant, was born on 28 April 1907 in York, the son of Walter Cawood, civil servant, of New Earswick, York, and his wife, Elizabeth McSall, the daughter of a Lincolnshire farmer. He had one sister. He was educated at Archbishop Holgate's Grammar School, York, and at the University of Leeds, where he took his PhD degree in chemistry (1932), having obtained an external BSc from London in 1929. He was a Ramsey memorial fellow (1931-3), and a Moseley scholar of the Royal Society (1933-8). His early research was concerned with the properties of aerosols and the theory of coagulation, and he always maintained an interest in physical chemistry. In 1934 he married Molly, daughter of Fred Johnson, a schoolmaster of York. They had one son and a daughter. 
In 1938 Cawood joined the Air Ministry, working with a team investigating chemical warfare. This involved him in the design of proximity fuses but, from 1942, his most valuable work was in instrumentation. He was responsible for the development of bomb and torpedo sights and for synthetic training aids, particularly for night flying. He improvised a simple pre-set rangefinder for use in aircraft attacking the V1 flying bomb, and to improve this device flew in operations as an honorary wing commander. 
Cawood was deputy director at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, from 1947 to 1953 and during this time he acquired his interest in aviation and avionics. From 1953 to 1959 he was at the headquarters of the Ministry of Aviation, where he was responsible for the aeronautical research programme. In 1954 he enthusiastically supported the creation of the Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development, which did much to restore European aeronautical collaboration. During the group's early years he served as national delegate. 
Cawood was a scientist who believed in identifying the few important growth points from a wide range of promising alternatives, and single-mindedly supporting them. He foresaw the potential of vertical take-off and as early as 1958 provided support for Sir Sydney Camm's deflected thrust aircraft, the forerunner of the Harrier jump jet, which later served with the Royal Air Force. He understood the need to supplement wind-tunnel measurements with actual flight trials. He encouraged the investigation of light weight-lifting engines in experimental aircraft, and of low-speed handling properties of slender wings which did so much to validate the design of the revolutionary supersonic passenger aircraft Concorde. 
In 1959 Cawood became the first chief scientist of the War Office and later, in 1964, the first scientist to be a member of the army board. His wide experience in rationalizing research and development was invaluable in unifying the various scientific and engineering organizations within the War Office, and in building up relationships between scientists and their military colleagues. His knowledge of aviation technology was particularly useful to the army, which was beginning to invest in helicopters and air transportability, and his training as a chemist found application in the affairs of the Chemical Defence Establishment at Porton and the ordnance factories. 
In 1964 Cawood returned to the Ministry of Aviation as chief scientist and became involved in the integration of the Ministry of Aviation into the new Ministry of Technology. His particular concern was to extend the mandate of the defence establishments so that their resources would be more directly available to civil industry. He suffered poor health during his last year, but continued to carry his heavy responsibilities. He died at the Cambridge Military Hospital in Aldershot on 6 March 1967, survived by his widow. 
Cawood was an enthusiastic yachtsman and crewed in many offshore races as well as sailing single-handed in his own boat, 'Cobber'. He was an active member of the Royal Ocean Racing Club, of the Royal Southern Yacht Club, and of the Royal Aeronautical Society, of which he was a fellow. He was appointed CBE in 1953, CB in 1956, and KBE in 1965. 
Robert Cockburn', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32334


Cawthorne, Sir Terence Edward (1902-1970), ear surgeon, was born in Aberdeen on 29 September 1902, the only child of William Cawthorne, a customs official, and his wife, Annie England. Cawthorne was educated at Denstone College and at the medical school of King's College Hospital, London. He qualified MRCS, LRCP, in 1924, and became FRCS in 1930. In 1929 he met Lilian Eve Blanche (1907-1975), daughter of William Southworth, musician, at the King's College Hospital annual ball, and they were married on 23 January 1930. They had one son and one daughter. 
Cawthorne held a number of junior appointments at King's before becoming registrar to the ear and throat departments. He was appointed to the honorary consultant staff of the hospital as assistant surgeon to the now united ear, nose, and throat department in 1932, and became full surgeon in 1939. For a time he was also a consultant at the Metropolitan Hospital, the Royal Hospital, Richmond, and the East Surrey Hospital. In 1936 he became aural surgeon to the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases. In 1948 he was appointed consulting adviser in otolaryngology to the Ministry of Health, and he held this position until 1967. 
At King's, Cawthorne began to concentrate on the problems of aural disease and the close relationship between some forms of deafness and vertigo with neurology, which made his appointment at the National Hospital peculiarly appropriate. Seeking to restore hearing by making a new fenestra for the entry of sound waves to the internal ear in certain types of deafness, he visited the pioneers in this field in various countries. He did much to introduce Lempert's fenestration operation to Europe, and was the first in this country to recognize the value of the operating microscope in ear surgery. It was a natural step for Cawthorne to become interested in the form of vertigo known as Meniere's disease, and with C. S. Hallpike he did much to further the understanding, diagnosis, and treatment of this condition. His third great neuro-otological interest was in the anatomically neighbouring facial nerve and in the various forms of paralysis of this. These matters, of which he made himself an authority, brought a constant stream of visitors, which must have been very wearing, but he received them all with characteristic patience and courtesy. 
Although fully appreciative of the value of laboratory and clinical research and of the need to be closely associated with research workers, Cawthorne was essentially a clinical diagnostician and accurate technical surgeon. His influence attracted the Wernher research unit on deafness to King's and he was clinical director of this from 1958 to 1964. He was an excellent teacher of students and graduates, and was dean of the medical school at King's (1946-8). He was president of the Royal Society of Medicine (1962-4) and received its Dalby (1953) and W. J. Harrison (1961) prizes; and he was master of the second British Academic Conference in Otolaryngology in 1967. 
A prolific contributor at gatherings and in learned journals, Cawthorne had numerous invitations to meetings all over the world. He delivered various endowed lectures and was awarded medals in the United Kingdom and other countries. He was particularly well known in the United States and Canada. He was created honorary MD of Uppsala in 1963, honorary LLD of Syracuse, New York, in 1964, and honorary FRCS, Ireland, in 1966. He was knighted in 1964. 
Cawthorne was an imposing figure: he combined a calm, reassuring manner with being a good listener, traits which made easy his approaches to patients. The apparent solemnity of his later years covered an innate diffidence and schoolboyish sense of humour. As a graduate student he had worked for a time in an endowed dispensary in London's Drury Lane, meeting many of the odd characters connected with the stage and Covent Garden. No doubt these contacts stimulated his lifelong interest in the arts and led to his membership of the Garrick Club. Cawthorne also became interested in the history of his specialism and its relationship with famous figures. For instance, he wrote papers to show that Julius Caesar and Dean Swift suffered from Meniere's disease. 
In 1964 Cawthorne had his first warning of the heart trouble of which ultimately he died. He was obliged to retire from King's, but he found it hard not to remain involved and he continued to travel. He died in Middlesex Hospital, St Marylebone, London, on 22 January 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 32335


Cecil, (Edgar Algernon) Robert Gascoyne-, Viscount Cecil of Chelwood (1864-1958), politician and peace campaigner, always best-known as Lord Robert Cecil, was born on 14 September 1864 at 11 Duchess Street, Portland Place, London, the third son in the family of five sons and three daughters of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), politician, and his wife, Georgina Caroline Alderson (died 1899). 
As the son of a long-serving Conservative prime minister, Lord Robert Cecil inherited a party affiliation which, though reinforced by his devout high-Anglicanism, was in conflict with his progressive political instincts. As his nephew Lord David Cecil observed, he 'lacked his father's melancholy and scepticism', being instead 'sanguine and positive and impetuous like his mother' (D. Cecil, 294). He was educated by governesses and tutors at home until he was thirteen, a segregating experience which, though congenial, may have contributed to the individualism and propensity to resign which were to mark his political career. He then spent four not very agreeable years at Eton College, followed by another spell with a private tutor, after which, in January 1883, he went to University College, Oxford, where he flourished, becoming friendly with Edward Grey (the future Liberal foreign secretary), being elected to the Canning Club, speaking at the Oxford Union Society, playing real tennis against Cambridge, and taking a second in jurisprudence in 1886. 
Cecil was employed for the next two years as his father's private secretary, during which time he was called to the bar (Inner Temple) in 1887. He established himself comfortably as a barrister, specializing in parliamentary work but also publishing a joint work on the principles of commercial law in 1891, and took silk in 1900. He also made a successful marriage in 1889 to Lady Eleanor Lambton (1868-1959), daughter of George Frederick D'Arcy Lambton, second earl of Durham: their relationship was always close, despite her almost complete loss of hearing from the age of about twenty-six; she died five months to the day after he did. In addition to maintaining a succession of London residences of increasingly fashionable location, of which 16 South Eaton Place was the apogee, they built a modest country house, which they called Gale on account of its exposed location, at Chelwood Gate, between East Grinstead and Uckfield, in Sussex: surviving a Luftwaffe bomb which fell just outside its front door in November 1940, it remained their best-loved home for more than half a century. 
Cecil's political career began when he was returned as Conservative MP for Marylebone East at the 1906 general election. He soon made his mark as a diligent opposition back-bencher, though he was uneasy about the direction his party was taking: he was a free-trader, albeit of the moderate kind that accepted the case for retaliatory duties, and with a landowner's disdain for the rising commercial wing of his party dismissed tariff reform as 'a rather sordid attempt to ally Imperialism with State assistance for the rich' (R. Cecil, 'All the Way', 244). He was also a supporter of women's suffrage on the same basis as men's and of industrial co-partnership; and he disapproved of the rejection of the People's Budget by the House of Lords. Fear of opposition from tariff reformers within his constituency association caused him to quit East Marylebone; and at the two general elections of 1910 he unsuccessfully contested Blackburn and the Wisbech division of Cambridgeshire respectively, before winning a by-election for the Hitchin division of Hertfordshire in November 1911 as a Unionist free-trader. 
Too old to enlist when the First World War broke out, Cecil worked for the Red Cross in France, helping to organize its department of wounded and missing, an experience which helped to persuade him that war prevention was 'the only political object worth while' (R. Cecil, 'A Great Experiment', 189). When Asquith broadened his Liberal government into a coalition in May 1915, Cecil entered it as parliamentary under-secretary of state for foreign affairs, a post he held for over four years, and was also sworn of the privy council. He joined the cabinet in February 1916 with the additional title of minister for blockade; and, despite disapproving of Lloyd George, who replaced Asquith as prime minister in December of that year, he remained in office under him, though the cabinet was replaced by a small war cabinet of which he was not a member. Cecil's experience of administering the blockade persuaded him that economic sanctions could prove a powerful yet non-military means of enforcing international law. The creation of a league of nations had become progressive opinion's leading war aim; and Cecil, who regarded his support for it as a logical development of the respect for the concert of Europe shown by his father, became the first ministerial convert to the league idea. He circulated a Foreign Office paper on the subject in September 1916, and thereafter pressed determinedly for a governmental commitment to it, though he did not join the League of Nations Society. He was promoted to the rank of assistant secretary of state for foreign affairs in June 1918, thereby becoming deputy to his cousin A. J. Balfour, but formally resigned from the government on 21 November 1918 because as a loyal Anglican -- who indeed had co-authored a book entitled 'Our National Church' in 1913 -- he opposed the disestablishment of the Welsh church, which was due to be implemented once the war was over. 
None the less Cecil stayed in office on a caretaker basis and was re-elected at the December 1918 general election as a coalition Conservative. In January 1919 he finally left the Foreign Office to take up an appointment as adviser on league issues to Britain's delegation at the Paris peace conference, where he played an important part in establishing the League of Nations and shaping its covenant -- unquestionably the most significant achievement of his career. 
This work having been completed by the summer of 1919, Cecil severed his governmental links. He agreed to represent South Africa at the first three League of Nations assemblies (1920-22). With British politics in flux owing to the continuation of the coalition government, the Liberal split, and Labour's advance, he came close to changing parties. He sent a message of support to Asquith when he contested a by-election at Paisley in February 1920 -- a gesture which proved controversial when a coalition Conservative decided to stand and lost his deposit -- and also tried to persuade Grey to offer himself as the leader of a new party of the centre. After Austen Chamberlain became Conservative leader in March 1921, Cecil lost the party whip and moved to the opposition benches. Moreover, although he was regarded as the official Conservative candidate in the 1922 general election, which followed the collapse of the coalition, he described himself in 'Who's Who' as an independent Conservative. 
Meanwhile, instead of returning to the law Cecil devoted an increasing amount of his time to the League of Nations Union (LNU), which had been formed in November 1918 as a merger of the League of Nations Society and a rival body, the League of Free Nations Association. Cecil became its acknowledged leader: he took over from Professor Gilbert Murray, with whom he was to develop a strong working relationship, as chairman of its executive committee in June 1919; and he made his first public appearance on an LNU platform the following month. As an influential Conservative, he brought the LNU authority and respectability, helping it to develop into one of Britain's most remarkable voluntary associations, with more than 400,000 paid-up members at its peak in 1931. Moreover, as a political maverick with great confidence in his own judgement, he was willing to insist that the LNU do more than educate the public in league principles, as its general secretary Maxwell Garnett merely wished it to do. Cecil wanted the LNU to press successive British governments to be more supportive of the League of Nations even at the risk of being thought 'political'. In 1922, for example, he persuaded the LNU to oppose Lloyd George's proposed bilateral pact with France, as a relapse into the old diplomacy, and to support a strengthening of the league's security provisions through a draft treaty of mutual assistance instead. 
Though omitted from Bonar Law's government in November 1922, Cecil was made cabinet minister responsible for league affairs, with the title of lord privy seal, when Baldwin took over as prime minister in May 1923, though he was not allowed to base himself in the Foreign Office. He handed the chairmanship of the LNU's executive committee back to Murray, but became its president in 1923, at first jointly with Grey, an office he held for the remainder of the LNU's existence (until 1945). The tension between his positions as minister and leader of a major pressure group did not have time to become acute in 1923: Baldwin failed to receive the mandate for protection which he sought in a general election in December, and resigned the following month. Cecil, who had refused to seek re-election on a protectionist programme, went to the House of Lords as the first -- and, being childless, only -- Viscount Cecil of Chelwood (24 December 1923). 
Rumours that Viscount Cecil might join the first Labour government proved to be unfounded. But when Baldwin returned to office in November 1924, Cecil was reappointed to the cabinet, this time with the title of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, though once again excluded from the Foreign Office. Baldwin presumably hoped that Cecil would be tamed by office; but instead he was irritated by his lack of influence within the government, and by 21 March 1926 was complaining to the prime minister: 'I cannot remain as a kind of guarantee to supporters of the League in the country, that the policy they so much desire is safe, unless I am given some means of delivering the goods' (Middlemas and Barnes, 360). What Cecil saw as his colleagues' foot-dragging approach to arbitration and disarmament caused him to resign on 9 August 1927; and though, in response to entreaties from Austen Chamberlain, Cecil's resignation letter was progressively toned down in the course of five drafts, it none the less embarrassed the government. Moreover, he followed his resignation with an LNU campaign over the autumn and winter of 1927-8 which even Murray feared might seem anti-Conservative. And in the 1929 general election Cecil urged the electorate to ignore party considerations and vote only for pro-league candidates. 
Cecil was rewarded by being appointed by the second MacDonald government as a British delegate to the League of Nations: he was given a room at the Foreign Office, and enjoyed excellent relations there with Arthur Henderson and his junior ministers Hugh Dalton and Philip Noel Baker (this last having at one time been Cecil's private secretary). When this administration fell in the financial crisis of 1931 he felt obliged to support the National Government which replaced it, and so stayed on as a league delegate. However, in the light of the new ministry's half-hearted policy on the issue he declined to represent Britain at the World Disarmament Conference, which opened at Geneva in February 1932. 
The collapse of that conference in October 1933, when Germany also gave notice of leaving the league, produced a vocal anti-Geneva reaction among both left and right in Britain. Cecil's challenge to this essentially isolationist response led to his most impressive campaigning achievement. The 'Ilford Recorder', whose editor was chairman of his LNU branch, had run a local poll which suggested that public opinion was more pro-league than politicians realized; and this result was confirmed by a number of other local newspapers. Cecil persuaded the LNU to hold a national poll on the same lines: a prodigious organizational feat as well as a major financial and political gamble, the National Declaration on the League of Nations Union and Armaments (or Peace Ballot, as it was colloquially known) secured responses from 38 per cent of the adult population between November 1934 and June 1935. These revealed not only overwhelming support for the league but also majority support for military sanctions, though Cecil later privately conceded that not enough emphasis had been placed on the latter in LNU propaganda prior to 1936. The success of the Peace Ballot encouraged the National Government to support the application of mild economic sanctions against Italy when it attacked Abyssinia and to take a pro-league line in the November 1935 general election. It also caused it to dismiss its foreign secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, the following month when a leak of his discussions with his French opposite number revealed that he was privately seeking a deal with Mussolini. 
However, Cecil's greatest triumph led directly to his greatest frustration. The Peace Ballot highlighted the weakness of efforts to arouse pro-league sentiment in Europe. When, as an offshoot of popular-front politics, a collective security campaign known as the Rassemblement Universel pour la Paix was launched in France in the autumn of 1935, Cecil was determined that the British league movement support the continental initiative in order to lend it some of its own prestige. However, when extended to Britain in 1936 under the name International Peace Campaign (IPC), the Rassemblement ran into three difficulties. First, its timing was unlucky: the league was discredited in the spring of 1936 by its inability to stop Mussolini conquering Abyssinia, with the result that many former supporters of collective security began to advocate appeasement instead. Second, the IPC duplicated the LNU's work and drew funds away from it at a time when these were anyway drying up because of the league's unpopularity. Third, its communist links offended the labour movement and the Roman Catholic church in particular. 
Cecil underestimated these difficulties, and hinted at resignation if the LNU did not co-operate with the IPC. The LNU agreed to do so, but despite several attempts failed to work out a satisfactory constitutional relationship to the new body. Cecil grew irritated, and suggested that the Nobel peace prize which he was awarded in 1937 was a tribute to the IPC rather than to the LNU. At that year's LNU staff Christmas party he was further enraged by a satirical sketch written by a Catholic member of staff known to dislike the IPC which depicted him as not only fanatical about the IPC but also senile. In the ensuing row he forced the LNU's general secretary, Garnett, to resign. 
However, for all Cecil's exertions, and those of loyal associates in the LNU such as Noel Baker, the IPC failed to make headway in Britain, either as a committee of the LNU, or as an independent body on which the LNU was represented on the same basis as other supportive associations, or even (in a desperate last throw) as a wholly separate organization. In 1939 Cecil wearily resigned as president of the IPC's British national committee (though he remained co-president with Pierre Cot of its parent body). He was to experience further disillusionment when as a result of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact the IPC's communist element revealed its true loyalties by trying to turn the IPC against collective security in line with Soviet policy; and by the end of 1940 the IPC and its parent body had both, in effect, collapsed. Within Britain, Cecil's preoccupation with the IPC had thus hindered rather than helped the campaign for British rearmament and the containment of Germany, to which he was fully committed from 1936 onwards. And although on the continent the Rassemblement had made more political impact, it too ultimately failed. 
A further tribulation for Cecil was that during 1939-40 the younger generation of British and American internationalists lost faith in confederal organizations such as the league and became converted to federalism. They therefore devoted their energies to a new organization, Federal Union, rather than to the LNU. Cecil remained doggedly loyal to the latter, however, and towards the end of the Second World War was rewarded by the revival of the confederal cause in the form of the allied agreement to replace the defunct league with a somewhat similar United Nations Organization. By his eightieth birthday in 1944 he was honoured by public praise from Winston Churchill, who also made a warm speech when the Royal Institute of International Affairs presented Cecil with a bust. He was invited to the final session of the league assembly at Geneva in the spring of 1946, where he ended his speech with the phrase: 'The League is dead; long live the United Nations'. 
Thereafter Cecil's public work was virtually over. He was made an honorary life president of the United Nations Association, which succeeded the LNU without achieving anything like the same public support. In 1948 he wrote a pamphlet, 'An Emergency Policy', warning of the need for a western union against the Soviet threat. And on 23 April 1953, in what turned out to be his last speech in the House of Lords, he argued that 'Christian civilisation is the only real alternative to dialectical materialism' ('Hansard 5L', 181, 1953, 1159). In 1956 he was made a Companion of Honour. 
Cecil, who from the late 1930s was increasingly deaf, was very tall, with a pronounced stoop, prominent eyes, a mobile and expressive face, an eagle-like profile, and a forehead which became more pronounced as his hair receded. Throughout his career he was in demand for honorific positions, and at various times served as chancellor of Birmingham University, rector of Aberdeen University, and visitor of St Hugh's College, Oxford. He died at the Lonsdale Nursing Home, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 24 November 1958. Paying tribute to him in the House of Lords two days later, the fourteenth earl of Home, whose father had been a league supporter prior to 1936, recalled of Cecil's visits to his home that 'many a time at dinner... I would watch him, with his long figure, slide more and more under the table, until only the distinguished head was left above his plate, and he would tell us all of his plans for the future peace of the world. ('Hansard 5L', 212, 1958, 838)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32336


Cecil, Lord Edward Herbert Gascoyne- (1867-1918), army officer and administrator, was born in London on 12 July 1867, the fourth son and sixth of eight children of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), prime minister, and his wife, Georgina Caroline (1827-1899), daughter of Sir Edward Hall Alderson and his wife, Georgina Drewe. Known to his family as Nigs, and to friends as Ned, Edward Cecil was educated privately and at Eton College, and was commissioned in the Grenadier Guards in 1887. On 18 June 1894 he married Violet Georgina ['see 'Milner, Violet (1872-1958)], the brilliant daughter of Admiral Frederick Augustus Maxse. He was aide-de-camp to Lord Wolseley in Ireland and from 1896 to Sir Horatio Kitchener, then sirdar (commander-in-chief) of the Egyptian army, who valued the intermediary role Cecil could play with his father in pressing for the reconquest of the Sudan. Cecil served in the Dongola campaign and, in 1897, accompanied the Rodd mission to Abyssinia. He was present at Kitchener's decisive victory over the Sudanese Mahdists at Omdurman in September 1898. His ensuing service in South Africa was spent almost entirely under siege at Mafeking. Sir Reginald Wingate, newly appointed to succeed Kitchener as sirdar and governor-general of the Sudan, thereafter persuaded Cecil to join the Egyptian army and the Sudan government, and appointed him to the important if ill-defined post of Sudan agent in Cairo. There Cecil's administrative abilities were recognized by Lord Cromer, the famous pro-consul, who made him successively under-secretary for war and under-secretary for finance in the Egyptian government. 
Between 1907, when Cromer was succeeded by Sir Eldon Gorst, and 1911, when Kitchener returned to Egypt as agent and consul-general, Cecil endured a disagreeable eclipse. In 1912, however, his years of efficient administration were rewarded with his appointment as financial adviser to the Egyptian government, the second position in the byzantine hierarchy of British Egypt. With the outbreak of war in 1914 Cecil's personal authority was further enhanced; during the interregnum caused by Kitchener's appointment as secretary of state for war and, indeed, during the ensuing high commissionership of Sir Henry McMahon, who was without Egyptian experience, Cecil was pre-eminent. 
The death of Kitchener in 1916 and succession of Wingate as high commissioner led to Cecil's departure from Egypt. Wingate challenged the powerful financial adviser who, after repeated political and personal disagreements, finally resigned in 1918, ostensibly for war service in Europe. But Cecil was ill in any case, with what was eventually diagnosed as tuberculosis. He spent most of the last year of his life in a sanatorium at Leysin in Switzerland, where he died in the Grand Hotel at midnight on 13-14 December 1918. 
Edward Cecil was an important figure in Anglo-Egyptian history. Willingly overshadowed by a succession of imperial grandees -- Cromer, Kitchener, Wingate -- he epitomized the competent stewardship that has since been hailed as Britain's most notable achievement in Egypt. That he was unhappy in his personal life -- his marriage soon broke down, and the couple lived apart for most of their marriage -- may account for a single-minded devotion to his work. He found fault more easily than pleasure in his eastern postings, though ironically is remembered for 'The Leisure of an Egyptian Official', the sometimes smug and acerbic sketches written only for his own and his friends' amusement, which was published by his widow in 1921. There were two children of the marriage: George, who was killed in action during the First World War, and Helen, who married the second Baron Hardinge of Penhurst. 


@@@@@


doc= 32337


Cecil, Hugh Richard Heathcote Gascoyne-, Baron Quickswood (1869-1956), politician and educationist, was born at Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, on 14 October 1869, the fifth and youngest son of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), and his wife, Georgina Caroline Alderson (died 1899). Educated at Eton College and University College, Oxford, he laid the foundation of a life devoted to Anglican principles and Conservative politics in a family circle and historic house consecrated to both. Tradition has it that before he was seven he had indicted his nurse as a Socinian and admitted that for long he himself had not been quite orthodox. 
Equipped with a first class in modern history and a prize fellowship at Hertford (1891), Cecil prepared to take holy orders like his brother William, later bishop of Exeter. Instead he was persuaded to become assistant private secretary to his father, who simultaneously held the offices of prime minister and foreign secretary. This apprenticeship led in 1895 to his election as Conservative member of parliament for Greenwich, a seat he held until his advocacy of free trade helped to ensure his defeat in the general election of 1906. Religion, nevertheless, remained the mainspring of his life; and even had the tenacity of his Conservative beliefs not deterred him from crossing the floor of the house in the wake of his lifelong friend Winston Churchill, the strength of nonconformity in the Liberal Party would no less surely have repelled him from so drastic a change of political faith. So his allegiance rested with the tories and in January 1910 he secured a congenial seat when elected unopposed as burgess for the University of Oxford which he retained until 1937. He received the honorary degree of DCL (1924) and was an honorary fellow of Hertford, Keble, and New colleges. 
Cecil was perhaps the most accomplished classical orator of his generation. He was handicapped by a frail physique, restless mannerisms, and a voice pitched too high for sonority. But Lord Curzon, himself a majestic exponent of the art of eloquence, was not alone in holding that Cecil's words combined 'the charm of music with the rapture of the seer'. His most memorable speeches were delivered during debates on the 'Education Bill' in 1902 and on the 'Welsh Church Bill' in 1913. The intensity of his beliefs sometimes provoked him to less edifying interventions and the hysterical animosity which he and his friends bore against Asquith for daring to lay hands on the constitution in the 'Parliament Bill' of 1911 earned them the style of 'Hughligans'. 
Although well past the age of forty and never in robust health, Cecil joined the Royal Flying Corps in 1915. His intrepid manoeuvres while learning to fly eventually brought him his pilot's wings -- on condition that he never again made a solo flight. In 1918 he was sworn of the privy council, an exceptional honour for a back-bench parliamentarian whose independence of mind and reverence for individual liberty unfitted him for the discipline of office. 
During the years between the wars Cecil's interest was captured increasingly by the church assembly, which he had helped to create. As in the Commons, he relished an arena where Christian principles as he saw them could be defended by forensic logic and an artful grasp of procedure. In 1927, however, and again in 1928 he unexpectedly failed to persuade the Commons to accept the revised prayer book. Too often in controversy he spoke with the tongue of an ecclesiastical lawyer, not of an angel. The subtle magic of his eloquence fascinated as of old but did not convince; and many who thought themselves no less loyal churchmen than Cecil found his interpretation of Christian doctrine so rigid as almost to exclude the charity of Christ. In 1933-4 he exercised his authority in Anglican affairs by successfully challenging the right of a bishop (A. A. David) to admit Unitarian ministers to the pulpit of a cathedral. A later demand that the church assembly should pass a measure prohibiting the use of the marriage service to all divorced persons was overwhelmingly rejected. 
In 1936 Cecil was appointed provost of Eton in succession to M. R. James. He delighted in the services in college chapel and as its ordinary would preface his sermons with the words, 'I speak as a layman to laymen without the authority of the priesthood', then go on to be very authoritative indeed. His tall swaying figure surmounted by a green eyeshade, his incisive and often provocative commentary on biblical texts, and his oblique anti-clericalism were all memorable. So too were his destructive 'obiter dicta' on talks to the boys by distinguished visitors. 'I hope I am not boring you', one of them said nervously in the middle of an address. 'Not yet', the provost replied with a tigerish smile. He regarded the war as a vulgar intrusion on well-established routine and scorned to abandon his habit of dining in knee-breeches. As chairman of the governing body he amused some of his colleagues and exasperated others by insisting that under its statutes Eton was responsible only for educating the boys, not for providing air-raid shelters for their protection. The relentless analysis of a medieval schoolman to which he subjected human problems was not always appreciated. But fellows, masters, and boys alike loved him for the ingenuity of his fancy and the felicity of his phrase. 
'Linky' Cecil, who had been best man at Churchill's wedding in 1908, was touched when in 1941 the prime minister recommended him for a peerage. He took the title Baron Quickswood but did not often speak in the Lords. Three years later he retired from Eton. 'I go to Bournemouth in lieu of Paradise', he told the assembled school, and there he bore the growing infirmities of age with cheerful courage. His last act before he died there, on 10 December 1956, was to dictate a characteristic letter in support of the local Conservative member of parliament whose political opinions he had not always shared but whose freedom of action he felt to be intolerably threatened by pressure from the constituency association. 
Although Cecil never married and had no house of his own until appointed to Eton, he enjoyed unbroken domestic happiness. For most of his life he lived at Hatfield in rooms set aside for his private use. He took his meals, however, with the rest of the family, who readily forgave his unpunctuality in return for the sustained conviviality of his talk. At night he would retire early to read and to meditate. Unhappily he committed little to print except a small volume entitled 'Conservatism', published in the 'Home University Library' in 1912 and embodying a personal creed which remained unchanged to the end of his days. Pageantry and ceremonial appealed to him as reminders of the past. To aesthetic experience, however, he was immune and when a friend once drew his attention to a glorious sunset he replied, 'Yes, extremely tasteful'. Until well into middle age he was an occasional but adventurous rider to hounds. 
Kenneth Rose', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32338


Cecil, James Edward Hubert Gascoyne-, fourth marquess of Salisbury (1861-1947), politician and lay churchman, was born on 23 October 1861 at 21 Fitzroy Square, London, the eldest of the five sons and third of the eight children of Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-Cecil, successively Viscount Cranborne and third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), politician and later prime minister, and his wife, Georgina Caroline Alderson (1827-1899). With his similarly distinguished brothers (Rupert Ernest) William Gascoyne-Cecil (1863-1936), who became bishop of Exeter, (Edgar Algernon) Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, Edward Herbert Gascoyne-Cecil, and Hugh Richard Heathcote Gascoyne-Cecil, and his two formidable sisters, (Beatrix) Maud ['see 'Palmer, (Beatrix) Maud, countess of Selborne] and Gwendolen Gascoyne-Cecil, James Cecil obtained his principal intellectual, religious, and moral education from his parents. 
Contrary to contemporary aristocratic conventions, the Cecil children remained at home for most of their childhoods. From an early age their parents treated them as near equals and involved them in their own lives, expecting them to think for themselves, to justify their opinions, and to participate in the household's adult conversation. As their father was a leading politician and expert controversialist, whose many guests included statesmen, diplomats, churchmen, and intellectuals, this was an unusually bracing atmosphere which gave his children intellectual precision, robust dialectical skills, and an addiction to debate on public affairs as much between themselves as with others, continuing throughout their lives in a huge family correspondence. The children also absorbed a deep Christian faith and attachment to the Church of England, together with their father's sophisticated Conservative politics and elevated conception of aristocratic responsibilities. The effect was a distinctive practical idealism, fusing loyalty towards established institutions with a belief that privilege imposed duties, and tough-minded attention to public business with 'formidably developed social and political consciences' (Cecil, 259). While Lords Robert and Hugh Cecil became famously mercurial exemplars of these characteristics, James Cecil -- 'Jem' to his family and styled Viscount Cranborne from 1868 -- came to embody them with the diligence, deliberation, and dignity he thought necessary as heir to a great family tradition, to Hatfield House, and to his father's formidable legacy as prime minister, foreign secretary, and leader of the Conservative Party, the unionist alliance, and the House of Lords. 
By comparison with his family upbringing, Cranborne learned little from his formal education at Eton College (1875-8) and University College, Oxford (1880-84), where he graduated BA with second-class honours in modern history -- an education diversified by accompanying his father on diplomatic missions to Constantinople in 1876 and to the congress of Berlin in 1878. Cranborne had no interest in team games or field sports but became an enthusiastic volunteer soldier, 'the second dominant secular interest in his life' ('DNB'). He joined the 4th (militia) battalion of the Bedfordshire regiment while a student, was commissioned as major in 1887, and later commanded the battalion for nearly twenty years. In his primary secular interest of politics Cranborne's family advantages were manifest, but his father nevertheless expected him to serve an apprenticeship. He became candidate not for a safe Conservative parliamentary seat but for a marginal constituency, the Darwen division of north-east Lancashire. After intensive campaigning in the general election of 1885, he defeated the Liberal candidate by five votes. He increased his majority at the general election of 1886, and thereafter received further training as one of his father's links with House of Commons opinion and as a confidant on party and government business. Only after he was defeated at Darwen in the general election of 1892 did he receive a secure seat. He was returned unopposed in 1893 in a by-election at Rochester, which he held until succeeding his father in the House of Lords in 1903. 
While Lord Cranborne, and still more on becoming Lord Salisbury, Cecil conscientiously undertook the many local and county duties expected of the territorial aristocracy. Beginning with the eldest son's estate around Cranborne Manor in Dorset, then with the rest of the properties in Hertfordshire and Lancashire, he administered family estates totalling over 20,000 acres. He was an attentive and sympathetic landlord, who regularly visited his tenants, invested in improvements, and in Dorset and Hertfordshire built some 500 cottages, often to his own design. On receiving his full inheritance in 1903 he found that the family agents had allowed urban properties in Liverpool to degenerate into slum housing. He rejected advice to sell out to speculators, as Lord Derby was doing with neighbouring properties, because he felt this 'a cowardly way of evading one's responsibilities' (Jones, 2.192). Instead he spent about $40,000 on reconditioning the houses for the existing tenants, without raising their rents. Thereafter he retained a close interest in the problems of working-class housing, and until 1917 was president of the Garden Cities and Town Planning Association, the body dedicated to implementing Ebenezer Howard's progressive housing schemes. At Hatfield he restored the early Tudor bishop's palace, and created a muniment room for the considerable family archives. In 1919 he sold the family's London house at 20 Arlington Street which his father had enlarged for official entertainments, only to move next door to number 21, which became almost as significant as a political venue. He was a JP for Hertfordshire and chairman of its quarter sessions from 1896 to 1911, an alderman of Hertfordshire county council, a member of the visiting committee of St Albans prison, and president of numerous county associations. He was high steward of Westminster (1903) and of Hertford (1905). 
Cranborne became a leading lay churchman, a dimension of his life he considered as important as his political career. He gave land and substantial funds for building churches and church schools. As a member of Hatfield parochial church council he served on St Albans diocesan conference, from which he was a representative in the house of laymen of Canterbury convocation and the Representative Church Council. As a founder member of the church parliamentary committee in 1893 and its chairman from 1895 to 1900, and from 1894 a member of Archbishop Benson's church committee for defence and instruction, he took a prominent part in defending and reforming the Anglican church establishments in the face of increasing radical nonconformist and secular pressures. In the House of Commons he helped organize efforts to secure increased public provision for church schools and the Unionist resistance to Welsh church disestablishment. In 1896 he introduced a private benefices bill to reform lay patronage and maintain worthy clergymen in the parishes, some provisions of which were adopted by the Unionist government in 1898. He was chairman of the Canterbury house of laymen from 1906 to 1911, and a member of the standing committee of the body supervising Church of England schools, the National Society. To the end of his life successive archbishops of Canterbury consulted him as a matter of course on political and secular aspects of church affairs. 
Cranborne was personally devout, notably courteous and considerate towards others, and sensitive to the religious and moral dimensions of public life. His 'whole life was dominated by his resolution to be a Christian. He believed that personal Christian endeavour was the only way of life and that it was worth while to take infinite trouble to achieve that end. If he had to make an important decision he wore himself out till he was sure that he was taking one that was right. ('The Times', 17 April 1947)' This did not contribute to his personal ease, for all his wealth and privilege. An entirely unjustified sense of his own sinfulness and an exacting standard of public conduct aggravated a melancholic and hypochondriacal disposition, leading to periodic descents into nervous exhaustion and depression. 
Cranborne married Lady (Cicely) Alice Gore (1867-1955), the second daughter of Arthur, fifth earl of Arran, on 17 May 1887. High-spirited and a sympathetic conversationalist, she soothed her husband's self-doubts and as an energetic and popular hostess complemented his public life. She herself acquired political significance through friendships with and mediations between public figures -- most notably as Lord Kitchener's unofficial channel of communication with the cabinet during his dispute with Curzon over Indian military arrangements in the early 1900s. She was appointed a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Alexandra in 1903. Cranborne and his wife had four children: Robert Arthur James Gascoyne-Cecil, who succeeded to his titles and political prominence; Lord David Cecil, the literary critic ['see 'Cecil, Lord (Edward Christian) David Gascoyne-]; Beatrice, who married the politician William Ormsby-Gore, later fourth Baron Harlech; and Mary, who married the future tenth duke of Devonshire. 
In the early 1900s Cranborne reaped the public advantages of being the prime minister's eldest son. Now a lieutenant-colonel, he led the 4th Bedfordshire battalion in February 1900 on campaign in the South African War. Although not involved in combat, he was mentioned in dispatches and created CB. He was recalled early, on being appointed under-secretary to the Foreign Office in November 1900 -- retaining a Cecil presence there on his father's relinquishing the foreign secretaryship (which he had previously held concurrently with the premiership). Cranborne's promotion was among those criticized as creating a government packed with the prime minister's relatives, satirized by Labouchere as the Hotel Cecil, and it caused particular comment because apart from his zealous churchmanship he had made little mark in the Commons. He soon attracted further criticism for tactlessness, especially in answering parliamentary questions, when personal honesty tended to prevail over departmental obfuscation in 'blazing indiscretions'. Nevertheless, after his father's political retirement in 1902 his advancement continued under his cousin the new prime minister, A. J. Balfour. In November 1903, following his father's death in August and his succession as fourth marquess of Salisbury, he was promoted by Balfour to the cabinet as lord privy seal in the government reshuffle caused by the tariff reform crisis. He soon proved more effective in the House of Lords' discursive exchanges than in the House of Commons' debating contests. Loyal to Balfour's efforts to create a fiscal 'via media' that could hold the Unionist government together, he received the additional post of president of the Board of Trade in March 1905. He retained both offices until the government resigned in December 1905. 
Salisbury's politics were rooted in tradition, and over three decades he was associated with three successive 'die-hard' movements. Nevertheless he was not a reactionary. His fundamental political creed was church-and-state Conservatism, linking religious establishment as the custodian of spiritual values, a balanced secular constitution as the check upon political excess, and a propertied and dutiful elite as the guarantee of freedom and stability. He remained loyal to his father's commitment to the union with Ireland, and adopted an imperialism conceived as an alliance of the dispersed British peoples and trusteeship over less developed peoples brought under their charge. He did not believe that democracy was necessarily good, nor that the most vocal 'public opinion' was automatically right or representative. While acutely conscious of social and political change, he neither accepted that his aristocratic rank distanced him from modern life nor assumed that the middle classes were better attuned to its demands. He was astounded when before the general election of 1923 Baldwin told him that 'his own social circumstances made him a better judge of popular opinion' than Salisbury, 'born in the purple', could be (Cowling, 'Impact of Labour', 415), and was not surprised when Baldwin was proved wrong. While regarding defence of property and private enterprise as obviously essential, he considered preservation of social solidarity no less vital and disliked the middle-class ethos of money-making as narrow, materialistic, and likely to provoke working-class resentment. He feared the labour movement as destructive, because socialistic and tending to incite class hatred, but was otherwise sympathetic towards working-class hardships and aspirations. 
Salisbury did not oppose reform or state intervention in principle, but considered them matters to be judged according to circumstance and merits. On economic and social issues he was pragmatic, and even progressive if the purpose was to assist individual effort and avoid class conflict. He supported various ideas for a Unionist social policy, including contributory pensions and state-organized unemployment insurance, and in 1913 chaired a party agricultural committee which proposed a minimum wage. Nevertheless he believed that the ultimate solution for social problems was 'beyond the sphere of politics' and could not lie in 'public alms-giving', because they originated in 'moral evils and must be combatted with moral weapons' (Sykes, 669). He understood the Conservative and Unionist Party to have 'two main functions... To defend certain capital institutions and in everything else to go slow' (4 Sept 1916, in Boyce, 196), and judged the party's natural strategy to be 'the rallying of cautious men' in resistance to 'restless change'. 
Although Salisbury thought that limited preferential tariffs might have merits, he deplored the tariff reform movement for its clamorous radicalism and doctrinaire insistence on unpopular food taxes. In his view it jeopardized not simply Unionist electoral prospects but also the very principles and institutions that Conservatives and Unionists properly stood for: 'If it may be said to have finally made possible the destruction of the constitution, the prostitution of the Prerogative, the Repeal of the Union and the Disendowment of the Welsh Church, it will probably rank as the most costly policy in history. (Salisbury to Bonar Law, 1 May 1912, in Blake, 108)' After the general election defeat of 1906 he tried to prevent tariff reform proscription of Unionist free-food MPs, including his brothers Robert and Hugh, but even his neighbouring East Hertfordshire Unionist Association succumbed to pressure from the tariff reform 'confederacy', and in 1909 he resigned as its president. Nevertheless he acquiesced in Balfour's modified version of tariff reform so far as this seemed to offer an alternative to the Liberal government's increasingly radical financial and social policies. 
Salisbury's own efforts were concentrated on assisting Lord Lansdowne's use of the House of Lords to check Liberal measures, and Archbishop Davidson in opposing successive education bills which threatened the privileges of church schools. In 1909 he took a leading part in the House of Lords' defeat of Lloyd George's 'people's budget'. Personally sanguine about how the increased taxes would reduce his own wealth, his chief objection was to the government's transparent attempt to circumvent House of Lords power. After the Unionist defeat at the general election of January 1910 had created the prospect of legislation to limit the Lords' power, Salisbury's constitutional concerns became paramount. Seeking to defeat what he regarded as an attempt to erect single-chamber government, he paradoxically became an advocate of constitutional innovations. He supported proposed modifications in the composition of the House of Lords as a means to preserve its authority, and with his brother-in-law Lord Selborne, with whom he now began a close alliance in the House of Lords and in church affairs, he adopted the idea of a popular referendum as a further check on radical majorities in the House of Commons. As tariff reform had not secured election victory and so failed as a buttress for other Unionist purposes, Salisbury now pressed strongly for its abandonment and approved of Balfour's offer to submit it to a referendum. After the further general election defeat of December 1910, the Liberal introduction of the 'Parliament Bill', ending the House of Lords' veto on legislation, established a leading cause for the rest of Salisbury's life: House of Lords reform. During July 1911 he was among the shadow cabinet rebels who repudiated Balfour's and Lansdowne's advice to abstain on the 'Parliament Bill', and with Selborne he rallied the 'die-hard' Unionist peers who unsuccessfully voted against the bill. Afterwards, however, he sought restored party unity for the fight against further constitutional changes, and declined to join the organization of die-hard peers and MPs, the 'Halsbury Club'. Following Balfour's replacement as party leader by Bonar Law, Salisbury was a major figure in the prolonged House of Lords opposition to both the 'Irish Home Rule Bill' and the 'Welsh Church Disestablishment Bill'. 
On the outbreak of the First World War, Salisbury mobilized his Bedfordshire battalion for war service, and later at Kitchener's request took command of training a Territorial Army division, with the rank of major-general. He made Hatfield House Park available for secret trials of the original army tank, and chaired an advisory committee of the captain-general's office, supplying chaplains to the army. From June 1916 to September 1917 he chaired the central tribunal dealing with conscientious objectors' appeals for exemption from military service. On the creation of the Lloyd George coalition government in December 1916 Salisbury was offered the leadership of the House of Lords. He declined, however, ostensibly because he would have no cabinet or departmental position, but also because he retained his pre-war distrust of Lloyd George -- 'a windbag and a liar'. Instead, in June 1917 he succeeded Carson as chairman of the Unionist war committee, which expressed the independent views of back-bench Unionist peers and MPs, and made representations to ministers across a range of policies. Already made a GCVO in 1909, he was made KG in 1917. 
Salisbury was active in several aspects of post-war reconstruction. He led Unionist peers in calling for enfranchisement of all soldiers on active service, but resigned from the speaker's conference on electoral reform in December 1916 when more radical changes were proposed. He chaired the Ministry of Reconstruction's advisory housing panel, which momentously recommended in August 1917 ('Parl. papers', 1918, 26, Cmd 9087) that in order to remedy the war-induced shortage of houses the state and local authorities should take responsibility for building working-class houses -- the origin of the 'Addison Housing Act' (1919). He also chaired from 1917 to 1919 the ministry's advisory committee on the post-war disposal of surplus government property, and in early 1920 a committee which recommended ('Parl. papers', 1920, 18, Cmd 658) a three-year extension of wartime rent control. 
Salisbury was also important in reform of the Church of England's organization and constitutional position, following the report in 1916 of the archbishops' committee on church and state chaired by Selborne. He helped manage the parliamentary passage of the 1919 'Enabling Act', which created an elected national assembly of the church with independent legislative powers. Salisbury was a member of the national assembly's house of laymen from its inception in 1920 until 1945, and served on its original standing committee. With Selborne chairing the house of laymen, and with Lord Hugh Cecil and Selborne's son Lord Wolmer and son-in-law the fifth Earl Grey as further leading members, the lay leadership of the church was substantially in Cecilian hands for the next twenty years. 
During 1919 Salisbury declined invitations to chair the Church of England's central board of finance, and to become the British ambassador to the United States. He did so because he was increasingly concerned to prevent the Unionist Party's identity from being dissolved by its peacetime participation in the Lloyd George coalition government. In Salisbury's view Lloyd George and other Coalition Liberal ministers were not just indifferent or hostile to Unionist principles; they were also amoral, opportunistic, and a corrupting influence on their Unionist ministerial colleagues and on public life generally. He believed that the government was likely to alienate solid middle-class Unionist supporters, to create disillusion with existing institutions among new working-class voters, and to heighten class tension and strengthen the Labour Party and socialism. 
Salisbury's preoccupation with public standards dated from pre-war Unionist campaigns against supposed misdemeanours under Asquith's Liberal cabinet, notably Lloyd George's entanglement in the Marconi scandal. In 1917 and 1918 he and Selborne publicly raised the issues of the proliferation and sale of honours and the appointment of newspaper owners to government posts. To them the 'honours scandal' of 1922, during which they helped force an inquiry, was a vindication. In August 1919 they opposed the archbishops as well as the government over a compromise settlement on disendowment of the Welsh church. They criticized concessions toward Indian and Irish nationalists, and were appalled when the Irish treaty of 1921 ended the Irish union. They criticized the levels of government expenditure -- ironically, given Salisbury's wartime contributions to housing policy. They were also annoyed by the Unionist ministers' delay in proceeding with House of Lords reform, and the failure of their eventual bill in 1922. 
Salisbury's vigilance over the coalition government was conducted through several channels. In March 1919 he and Selborne formed an association of independent Unionist peers. Sitting on the opposition benches in the House of Lords, they engaged in relentless verbal battles with Birkenhead, the lord chancellor, who later retaliated by satirizing them as 'the Dolly sisters', after the music-hall comediennes. Until March 1920 Salisbury remained chairman of the Unionist war committee's successors, the Unionist reconstruction committee and the Unionist parliamentary committee. In July 1920 he helped organize the People's Union for Economy, intended as a respectable alternative to Rothermere's Anti-Waste League. He also refined the art of using letters to newspapers as manifestos. In January 1920 he attacked the coalition's lack of principles, and from March began supporting Unionist candidates standing in by-elections against Coalition Liberals. Initially aiming only to preserve an independent unionism, in June 1921 he finally called upon all Unionist associations to support the replacement of the coalition government by a purely Unionist government. 
Success came slowly, but Salisbury made a large contribution to the fall of the coalition government and the overthrow of the new Unionist Party leader, Austen Chamberlain. Although he disliked the fanaticism of the post-war breed of 'die-hard' MPs, Salisbury welcomed them as useful allies. In March 1922 he joined their leaders in a 'statement of conservative and unionist principles' -- the 'die-hard manifesto' -- and in July was elected leader of 'the conservative and unionist movement'. His real impact, however, lay less through these 'die-hards' than in his own authority as a highly respected public figure and embodiment of a central Conservative tradition, able to confer confidence upon diverse groups of Unionist dissidents and to cast doubt among coalition supporters. As he helped encourage a groundswell of constituency and back-bench discontent during 1922, so the coalition itself fragmented. Salisbury held a meeting in his Arlington Street house to steel dissident MPs before the decisive party meeting at the Carlton Club on 19 October 1922. His pivotal importance was indicated the following day, after the coalition cabinet's resignation, as a member of the deputation which asked Bonar Law to accept nomination as the Unionist Party leader. 
With the re-establishment of Unionist government Salisbury withdrew from his die-hard associations and rejoined the party leadership, as lord president of the council, deputy leader of the House of Lords, and, until May 1923, chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. His brother Lord Robert Cecil was a cabinet colleague. Salisbury's main work was as chairman from March 1923 of a committee of imperial defence (CID) sub-committee appointed to consider the co-ordination of national and imperial defence. Its report, completed in August and published in 1924 ('Parl. papers', 1924, 10, Cmd 2029), led to the creation of the chiefs-of-staff committee -- vital in defence planning during the 1930s and in supervising British forces during the Second World War. The sub-committee also recommended an enlarged RAF as the vital defence force, and decided that the Fleet Air Arm should remain under RAF rather than Admiralty control. On Bonar Law's retirement in May 1923 Salisbury was asked to advise the king on his successor. He recommended Curzon, but was nevertheless content to serve under Baldwin's premiership. Difficulties arose, however, when in October Baldwin decided to call a general election on the issue of tariffs. As in the 1900s Salisbury thought the adoption of protection perverse, needlessly exposing fundamental public and Unionist Party interests to a large electoral risk, and probably to a further socialist advance. He was also offended by Baldwin's reluctance to take himself and other ministers into his confidence, and by his apparent readiness to replace them with the former Unionist coalition leaders, Austen Chamberlain and, shockingly, Birkenhead, whom Salisbury considered 'disreputable'. Salisbury, Cecil and the other so-called 'free trade' ministers came close to resignation, but allowed themselves to be persuaded by Baldwin that the cabinet had to keep together. 
In the aftermath of the general election in December 1923, which, as he had feared, led in January 1924 to the formation of a Labour government, Salisbury reluctantly acquiesced in reunion with Chamberlain, Birkenhead, and the other Unionist coalitionists. He was now conscious of a new need: to offer a positive contrast to socialism, appealing to the idealism of new voters and distinguishing Conservatism from any 'hard-shelled defence of the Haves against the Have-nots'. In two statements -- 'Conservative policy' ('The Times', 18 and 19 March 1924) and 'An outline of Christian anti-socialism' ('The Nineteenth Century and After', 97, 1925) -- Salisbury presented the Conservatives as the truly national party, concerned with all classes, seeking mutual trust in industry, and promoting the values of service and self-sacrifice. 
In Baldwin's second government, from November 1924 to June 1929, Salisbury was lord privy seal and, after Curzon's death in April 1925, leader of the House of Lords. He chaired or served on numerous committees of the cabinet, CID, and Committee of Civil Research, on pensions, expenditure, imperial affairs, coal, and Ireland, though his visceral unionism baulked against signing the 1925 settlement on the Northern Irish boundary. Now considered a defence expert, he often chaired CID meetings and committees on naval limitation, disarmament, and belligerent rights. In 1926 and 1927 he visited Canada and Australia to review arrangements for imperial defence. Although much involved in disarmament policies, he shared only some of his brother Robert's confidence in the League of Nations, and felt only personal rather than political regret when Robert resigned from the government in October 1927. He had his own doubts on other matters, however. He was dismayed by the cabinet's wavering commitment to strengthen the House of Lords, and its abandonment of its own reform bill in 1927. Although he admired Baldwin's work in elevating public thinking after the coalition years, he was uneasy about what he judged to be concessions towards Liberal or Labour thinking. His colleagues received painfully fastidious notes of qualification, as he sought to square their policies with his sensitive political conscience. They were, he thought, 'without ballast or tradition', and he wondered 'if any of them know why they are Conservatives' (Salisbury to Selborne, 18 March 1929, Selborne papers, 7/203-5, Bodl. Oxf.). 
Nevertheless, after the government defeat in the election of 1929 Salisbury continued as Conservative leader in the House of Lords. He persuaded Conservative peers to exercise restraint in dealing with Labour government measures, negotiating a compromise over the controversial 'Coal Mines Bill' in early 1930. But he had growing reservations about the shadow cabinet's reversion to tariffs and acceptance of Indian constitutional reform, while remaining publicly loyal to Baldwin. When he retired from the collective leadership in June 1931 it was on the public grounds of ill health, though he privately noted to Baldwin that 'Alas, you and I do not belong to the same school of Conservatism' (Hatfield House archives). 
Once his health was restored, however, Salisbury resumed an active political role, independent of the Conservative-dominated national coalition governments of the 1930s. By now he was the most respected and influential peer in the House of Lords, where a remarkable family group accumulated: three of his brothers, two sons-in-law, Selborne, and his own and Selborne's eldest sons, both elevated by special dispensation in 1941. In March 1932 Salisbury assembled an unofficial joint committee of Unionist peers and MPs on House of Lords reform. Its report in October proposed that the House of Lords should have powers to refer legislation to the verdict of a general election, and should be composed of members elected from among the hereditary peers and by county councils. Although it obtained substantial Conservative Party support, although Salisbury's bill containing its recommendations obtained a second House of Lords reading in May 1934, and although he continued to make representations to ministers for three more years, the government judged the scheme too divisive to be adopted. From late 1931 Salisbury again became allied with Conservative 'die-hards', now including Churchill, as a leading opponent of the government's policy of establishing native Indian responsibility in the central government of India. He felt deeply that this constituted an abdication of British moral obligations towards the Indian masses. Appointed by ministers in April 1933 to the joint select committee on their proposals in the hope of constraining his criticism, when the committee reported in November 1934 he led nine of its members in repudiating its principal recommendations. Defeated in the Conservative Party's central council in December, he persisted to the very end, breaching House of Lords conventions by opposing all three readings of the 'Government of India Bill' during 1935. Salisbury was also associated with Churchill in directing attention to what they considered to be the inadequate rate of government rearmament against the military threat from Germany. In July and November 1936 he participated in deputations of privy councillors to express their disquiet to Baldwin and other ministers. During the abdication crisis, however, he advised and supported Baldwin, regretting Churchill's efforts to assist Edward VIII. At King George VI's coronation he was high steward, and bore St Edward's crown. 
Salisbury was acutely anxious about the spiritual and ideological challenges of the 1930s: materialism, irreligion, communism, and fascism. Remarkably, this great upholder of establishment religion turned for an antidote to the unecclesiastical evangelism of Frank Buchman's Oxford Group, renamed Moral Re-Armament in 1938. While doubtful about several of its practices and never himself an adherent, he was much impressed by its apparent success in stimulating Christian belief among the young of all classes and among influential persons in many countries. From 1935 he became the most prominent British figure prepared to support the group. In October 1936 he invited other leading public figures to meet Buchman at Hatfield House; and in the House of Lords, in letters to newspapers, and in representations to ministers and bishops he promoted its appeal for wholehearted acceptance of guidance from God. Salisbury defended the group against its many critics, and when in 1941 the cabinet upheld a Ministry of Labour ruling that its workers were not exempt from conscription, he initiated a House of Lords debate in protest, though without success. 
Appalled during the late 1930s by the character and actions of the Nazi regime, Salisbury became increasingly critical of Neville Chamberlain's appeasement of Germany, especially after his son Cranborne, under-secretary at the Foreign Office since 1935, followed Eden in resigning from the government in February 1938. He disliked the Munich agreement and, sceptical of the cabinet defence preparations, joined public appeals late in 1938 for the introduction of national service. After the outbreak of war in 1939 he called for the formation of an all-party national coalition and a small war cabinet. Troubled by the apparent military inertia of the following months, he formed in April 1940 a secret group of non-ministerial peers and MPs, including Lord Cecil, Cranborne, and Wolmer, to act as a 'watching committee'. Its criticisms of the direction of the war meant that Salisbury was soon doing to Neville Chamberlain what he had done to Austen Chamberlain in 1922 -- contributing to the destruction of his leadership. During the political crisis of May he made representations to ministers on reconstruction of the government, and Churchill on becoming prime minister considered making him leader of the House of Lords. The watching committee remained in existence for the rest of the war, raising significant issues, on occasion criticizing Churchill's management of the war effort, and making proposals for reconstruction. In 1942 Salisbury published 'Post-War Conservative Policy', a pamphlet which recognized the inevitability of larger government, but argued the cases for individual freedom, private property, religious education, and a reformed House of Lords. 
Salisbury was 'about five feet eight inches in height, clean shaved with moustache, well proportioned, and handsome in appearance. In London he was always immaculately dressed in the frock coat and top hat which had been 'de rigueur' in his youth and which he was one of the last to wear. ('DNB')' A long career as party grandee was formally recognized in his presidency of the National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations from 1942 to 1945. His last letter to 'The Times' in 1946 was on House of Lords reform. His last major House of Lords speech, in February 1947, was a protest against British abandonment of the care of 50 million Indian 'untouchables'. His last public act was to lead a deputation to the archbishop of Canterbury calling for church union and a stand against post-war materialism and irreligion. He collapsed during the meeting and died a week later, at 25 Westminster Gardens, London, on 4 April 1947. He was buried in the family graveyard of St Etheldreda's Church, Hatfield. A bust of him was placed in the House of Lords 'by peers of all Parties in token of their affection and esteem'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32339


Cecil, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne-, third marquess of Salisbury (1830-1903), prime minister, was born at Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, on 3 February 1830, the fifth of six children and third of four sons of James Brownlow William Cecil, second marquess of Salisbury (1791-1868), and his first wife, Frances Mary, only daughter of Bamber Gascoyne of Childwall, near Liverpool. Lord Robert Cecil, as he was styled until 1865, was a direct descendant of Elizabeth I's ministers Lord Burghley and Robert Cecil, and his father revived the family's tradition of political service by holding office, respectively as lord privy seal and lord president of the council, in the Conservative cabinets of 1852 and 1858-9. 
Having lost his mother before he was ten, and lacking a brother or sister nearer than four years in age, Cecil was a solitary and sensitive child, with a passionate temper. At Eton College, from 1840, he was well grounded in French and German in addition to the classics, and showed unusual aptitude for theology, but was so enthusiastically bullied that he had to be taken away from the school in 1845. He found botanizing and reading at Hatfield a more congenial form of education, until he went in December 1847 to Christ Church, Oxford, where, though poor health restricted him to an honorary fourth class in mathematics conferred by nobleman's privilege after only two years, he became secretary and then treasurer of the Oxford Union. 
Preparation for the bar was cut short by a voyage undertaken for the sake of his health from July 1851 to May 1853, during which he visited the Cape, Australia, and New Zealand, the only places outside western Europe he would ever visit (with the exception, briefly, of Constantinople). Beneficial though the stimulus to his physical and mental vitality was, it did not generate any enthusiasm for the possible careers of politics, religion, the law, or even journalism, about which he wrote to his father in September 1852, with the conclusion: 'all modes of life are equally uninviting' (Cecil, 'Life', 1.37). In August 1853 the influence of his cousin, the marquess of Exeter, returned him to parliament as Conservative member for Stamford, for which he sat for fifteen years without a contest. In the same year he competed successfully for a fellowship of All Souls, where he could claim the privilege of founder's kin. Ill health dogged his early steps in the House of Commons, and until a late age he would be liable to the crises he called 'nerve storms', bringing depression, lassitude, and hypersensitiveness of touch and hearing. 
Low animal spirits and bruising early experience left Cecil with little expectation of influence or popularity. He was rescued by his religion and his marriage. The critical and sceptical temper of his intellect was laid aside in what his daughter and biographer, Lady Gwendolen Cecil, called 'that personal surrender in love and trust to the living Christ, which lay at the heart of his religion' (Cecil, 'Life', 1.122). The core of religion, he insisted, was a mystery. Yet, if his faith was at bottom unreasoned and intuitive, it was not formless. He regarded a determinate creed as a precondition of firm belief and active zeal. No accommodation with other doctrines was acceptable to him which involved the dilution of the distinctive tenets of the Church of England, on the Tractarian wing of which he chose to lodge (Pusey House was to be launched at his London home in 1882). Religion was a sheet anchor of his personality, as the punctiliousness of his observance throughout his life suggested, but it was not a softening agent or a repository of guidance for the political fray. Cecil's combativeness made it hard for him to swallow the charitableness of Christian moral teaching except as an act of faintly grudging deference to divine authority. He wrote that 'the common sense of Christendom has always prescribed for national policy principles diametrically opposed to those that are laid down in the Sermon on the Mount' ('Saturday Review', 17, 1864, 129-30). 
The other sheet anchor was domestic life. Very tall, thin, stooped, and short-sighted, very shy, very serious, and deplorably dressed, Cecil was fortunate to find in Georgina Alderson (died 1899), daughter of the judge Sir Edward Alderson, a buoyant and forceful woman who could share his intellectual interests and encourage and facilitate his career. Married on 11 July 1857, they were to have five sons and three daughters, the eldest of whom, (Beatrix) Maud ['see 'Palmer, (Beatrix) Maud, countess of Selborne], became president of the Conservative and Unionist Women's Franchise Association. The happiness of his family life at once enabled Cecil to work more effectively in the world and increased his tendency to seclusion from it. Almost all his intimacy was within his own home and family; few outsiders ever penetrated beyond the grave, courteous, but largely aloof exterior. Marriage estranged him from his father, who thought the Alderson connection a poor match. Since Cecil had only some $400 a year, mainly from the interest of his mother's fortune, and his wife $100 more, they were obliged to begin married life modestly, and the birth of a daughter in April 1858 increased the pressure on Cecil to supplement their income by the journalism on which he had embarked in December 1856, shortly after his engagement, in the weekly 'Saturday Review', owned by his brother-in-law Alexander Beresford-Hope. Between 1856 and 1868, he contributed 608 miscellaneous unsigned pieces to the paper, and he was soon adding to this output in the short-lived 'Bentley's Quarterly Review', in 1859-60, and the leading tory organ, Murray's 'Quarterly Review', to which he contributed twenty-four long, mostly political, articles between April 1860 and July 1866, with nine more to follow up to 1883 (his published writings, 1853-94, and speeches, 1848-68, are listed in Pinto-Duschinsky, 157-201). This grinding work raised his income probably by more than $300 a year in the early 1860s. Company directorships brought in more. Although in 1866 he was seriously embarrassed by the Overend Gurney crash, he had enough business acumen to make a successful chairman of the beleaguered Great Eastern Railway Company from 1868 to 1872. 
Journalism elicited from Cecil a more extensive elaboration of his political ideas than almost any other British statesman has set down. He was not given to theorizing, but it was his bent always to set the issues of the moment in the context of the broader tendencies and historic experience of human society. His Conservatism was not of the mystical or sentimental variety, and he did not believe that it could rest safely on mere custom or complacency. The questioning nature of his mind required that established institutions and arrangements should be capable of justification in rational and empirical terms. The test was their capacity to further the stability, security, and prosperity which Cecil identified with the greatest happiness of the greatest number -- not least the security and prosperity of landed society, which he, 'essentially a squire' in Lady Gwendolen's perception, saw as fundamental to the national well-being. The political supremacy of the classes possessing property and education was justified as a natural product of social evolution and a necessary condition of political stability. Every community, he wrote in 1862, threw up 'natural leaders' and instinctively deferred to them, unless 'misled by the insane passion for equality'. Cecil acknowledged that they had to be 'checked by constitutional forms and watched by an active public opinion lest their rightful pre-eminence should degenerate into the domination of a class' ('QR', 112, 1862, 547-8). He did not think mid-Victorian constitutional forms perfect: he did not care overmuch for representative government. But he did come to think that the 'accidental equilibrium of political forces' obtaining after 1832 'presented the highest ideal of internal government the world had hitherto seen' ('QR', 130, 1871, 279-80). The destruction of that equilibrium by the introduction of a more democratic franchise was his predominant nightmare in the discussions of parliamentary reform which absorbed a large part of his polemical energies in the 1850s and 1860s. 
Cecil argued that working men should not be given an electoral preponderance overwhelming the voice of other classes of society. Believing that political power should be proportioned to 'the magnitude of interests' not 'the number of noses' ('Bentley's Quarterly Review', 1, 1859, 28), he dismissed as absurd and unjust any scheme in which 'two day-labourers shall outvote Baron Rothschild' ('QR', 116, 1864, 266). His fear was partly that democracy would lower the tone of politics: men of integrity and refinement would stand aloof and careerists and professional organizers would take over. It was still more that numerical majority would lead the poor into spoliation of the rich, not because they were more vulnerable to the promptings of self-interest than the classes above them, but because they were no less so. This expectation rested on a highly schematic and materialistic interpretation of history as a process of class struggle. Cecil liked to think of himself as a political scientist, proceeding strictly upon empirical evidence to investigate 'the pathology of states' ('QR', 110, 1861, 249). His conclusions about the dynamics of society and politics were more trenchant than subtle, embodying an almost Marxian view of the relations between economic and social substructure and political and ideological superstructure. Except when religious enthusiasm supervened, human beings were driven mainly by considerations of material interest and shaped their moral argumentation accordingly. Political contests found their most dramatic modern form in the struggle for power 'between the classes who have property and the classes who have none'. The struggle was not capable of final resolution: indeed it was a sign of vitality in a free state. 'We might as well hope', Cecil wrote in 1866, 'for the termination of the struggle for existence by which, some philosophers tell us, the existence or the modification of the various species of organized beings upon our planet are determined' ('QR', 120, 1866, 273). If the 'comfortable classes' could never eliminate the forces of innovation, however, they could at least temporarily halt their advance if they battled hard enough. 
To frighten the 'comfortable classes' out of a fatal complacency was a main aim of Cecil's politics. The almost apocalyptic tone and the savage invective of some of his discourse served that purpose. They owed something, too, to the need to make a journalistic name so as to earn money. Most of all, they derived from the anger, only imperfectly modulated into sarcasm, produced in him by the wickedness of the enemies and the backsliding of the allies who imperilled his universe by their aggression or their cowardice. There was no desire to understand the alien force or argument, no inclination to concede virtue in opponents; only a determination to pulverize them with an intellectual violence that repaid the physical humiliation he had had to suffer in impotent rage as a boy. Some of Cecil's harshest words were reserved for those of the possessing classes who were laggardly in their own cause. The party system, he believed, prolonged a fatal division between Conservatives and whigs, natural allies in the defence of property, but in their attachment to historic antagonisms and their eagerness for office playing the game of the advanced Liberals and radicals, who could exact concessions from both. Their coalescence was Cecil's urgent political desire. The virulence of his feeling brought his language close to the scatological when he spoke of the rival party leaders' eating dirt and bearing the device of a rat before the radicals, and pictured Disraeli, whom he regarded as an unprincipled adventurer, as 'the grain of dirt' clogging the political machine ('Bentley's Quarterly Review', 1, 1859, 346, 360). 
This assault on his Commons leader, in July 1859, ensured Cecil's notoriety, but emphasized the dissonance between the latitude he could permit himself in formally anonymous articles and the demands of his party career. With his first child on the way, he had applied for a place to Derby when the latter came into office in February 1858, mentioning 'difficulty about the means of support' (Cecil, 'Life', 1.65). Refusal may have accounted for some of his acerbity in print, but he voted steadily with the ministry on major questions, even when it introduced a reform bill. Disraeli was sufficiently alive to the usefulness of a talented young Cecil to ignore his insults and, as the Conservative Party settled after 1859 into coexistence with Palmerston's essentially conservative regime, Cecil was able to devote his full combative vigour to resisting the advance of radicalism. His maiden speech, on 7 April 1854, had opposed interference with the ancient endowments of the universities. The land was defended against inequitable taxation, the Christian legislature against the admission of practising Jews, the Church of England against efforts to erode its privileges on the part of the nonconformists. The catastrophic results of democracy were sardonically illustrated from the experience of the United States. For Cecil, the American Civil War demonstrated how the despotism of a democratic majority would leave an oppressed minority with no alternative but rebellion. He pressed for Britain to recognize the Confederacy, and the emotional strain entailed by his passionate identification with its fortunes caused his wife to fear for his mental equilibrium. He was slow to come to the front in the Commons, but by 1864 he was making a mark with criticism of Palmerston's foreign policy, not least in its abandonment of Denmark in the Schleswig-Holstein crisis (he was for British intervention), and by his prominence in exposing the education department's censorship of school inspectors' reports, which led to the resignation of the responsible minister, Lowe, though the manner of it magnified the impression that he lacked 'kindly instincts or the spirit of fair play' ('The Parliamentary Diaries of Sir John Trelawny', ed. T. A. Jenkins, 1990, 272). Awareness that the more hidebound tories were thinking of him as a possible Commons leader was perhaps an encouragement to his chiefs to take him into the inner councils of the party in that year, when Derby, anticipating office, put him down for the under-secretaryship for foreign affairs. Cecil's advance in political position no doubt helped, as it may have been helped by, the reconciliation with his father which in July 1864 brought him and his wife to Hatfield for the first time since their marriage, but still more effectual was the certainty, given the poor health of his unmarried elder brother, that he would eventually succeed to the title. He became Viscount Cranborne and heir to the marquessate when his brother died on 14 June 1865. 
The revival of the parliamentary reform question in the mid-1860s brought Cranborne further into prominence. Although he was prepared to consider schemes of voting which offered working men 'a share of political power proportioned to the share which their labour gives them in the country's wealth' ('QR', 117, 1865, 572), his fundamental instinct was not to move. 'The perils of change are so great', he wrote in 1865, 'the promise of the most hopeful theories is so often deceptive, that it is frequently the wiser part to uphold the existing state of things, if it can be done, even though, in point of argument, it should be utterly indefensible. ('QR', 117, 1865, 550)' He took an enthusiastic part in 1866 in the Conservative Party's resistance to the 'Franchise Bill' brought in by Russell and Gladstone, Lord Stanley classing him among those who 'abhor the idea of compromise, and enjoy a fight for its own sake' (J. Vincent, ed., 'Disraeli, Derby and the Conservative Party', 1978, 251). When the ministry fell, he became, on 6 July 1866, secretary of state for India in Lord Derby's third cabinet. He at once impressed the House of Commons with his characteristic rapidity in mastering a brief by successfully introducing the Indian budget after less than a fortnight in office, but his main concern was soon the efforts of the government to settle the reform question, despite its lack of a Commons majority. Cranborne was initially prepared to agree to the apparently radical proposal of household suffrage in borough constituencies, so long as it was restricted by the requirement of personal payment of rates and counterpoised by extra votes according to rateable value or house-tax payments. By February 1867, however, he had become convinced that Disraeli was trying to hustle his colleagues into a dangerously large measure. He secured acceptance of a $5 rating franchise as the basis of the government's proposals, but three days later Derby and Disraeli reverted to the plan of rated household suffrage with plural voting as the likeliest ground of a settlement. When the cabinet discussed the plan on Saturday 23 February, Cranborne was already calculating its effects on the constituencies. Concluding on the Sunday that in the smaller boroughs plural voting would not counterbalance household suffrage, so that some three-fifths of the constituencies would be controlled by the new voters, he wrote a letter which obliged Derby to hold a cabinet next day, less than two hours before the proposed bill was to be outlined to a party meeting as a prelude to Disraeli's presenting it in the Commons. Threatened with the resignations of Cranborne, the earl of Carnarvon, and General Peel, the cabinet cobbled together a plan on a $6 rating basis; but it was soon clear that the Commons would not have it and that a substantial body of Conservative members thought household suffrage the only recipe for success. When household suffrage was reinstated at the cabinet of 2 March, Cranborne, Carnarvon, and Peel resigned. 
Cranborne's fear that the exigencies of getting the bill through the Commons without a majority would lead Disraeli to whittle down its checks on household suffrage was fully realized, but the exhilaration of parliamentary triumph swept the Conservative Party along, and Cranborne made little attempt to organize a revolt. His gift was for the articulation of argument, not the leadership of men. In a lacerating 'Quarterly' article in October 1867, he charged Derby and Disraeli with conspiring to betray their followers into a sweeping measure of reform in order to assure themselves of office. In precipitating an unparalleled experiment in 'placing a great empire under the absolute control of the poorest classes in the towns' ('QR', 123, 1867, 534), they had ushered in a new political world in which Cranborne did not immediately see how he could function. There was no question of his responding to the feeler put out by Disraeli in February 1868, when the latter succeeded Derby as prime minister. 
On his father's death on 12 April 1868, Cranborne became marquess of Salisbury and entered into the role of a great landed magnate, with restricted enthusiasm. The boy's distaste for outdoor exercise was translated in the man into a lack of interest in country pursuits, bar a little rabbit shooting, supplemented by occasional tennis. As lord of 13,000 acres around Hatfield, he learned what he had to about farming, but more than half his gross income of $50,000 to $60,000 a year was soon coming from the Cecil property in central London and from building development on the Gascoyne inheritance of land on the outskirts of Liverpool and on the Bifrons estate at Barking. Urban and suburban revenue cushioned Salisbury against the agricultural depression beginning in the late 1870s, and enabled him to pursue his paternalistic instincts by endowing Hatfield town with a variety of public buildings and improving the housing on his estate. Hatfield House underwent improvement too, driven not by its master's aesthetic taste, for he displayed none, but by his regard for practical convenience and his interest in science and gadgetry. From an early interest in photography, he had progressed to experiments in chemistry and electricity, and at Hatfield he established a laboratory with the guidance of Professor Herbert McLeod, and equipped the house with electric bells in 1869 and subsequently with electric lighting. Experiments with the telephone followed. Work on polarization, magnetism, and spectroscopy fed the appetite for precise empirical procedure often frustrated in politics, and in 1873 he published a paper entitled 'On spectral lines of low temperature' ('London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine', 45, 1873, 241-5). He became FRS in 1869, and as chancellor of the University of Oxford, a position he assumed in the same year, if his first anxiety was to preserve the Anglican character of the institution, his second was to encourage better provision for the physical sciences, new chairs for which were envisaged in the bill to establish a commission on Oxford which he introduced in 1876. Salisbury's imaginative interest in the social implications of science appears in his suggesting to the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1889 that electricity, in enabling people 'to pursue in their own homes many industries which now require the aggregation of the factory', would help restore 'the integrity of the family upon which rest the moral hopes of our race' ('The Electrician', 24, 1889, 13). He was president of the British Association in 1894, his address being printed in revised form as 'Evolution: a Retrospect'. 
At Hatfield and his London house in Arlington Street, Salisbury could insulate himself from the casual social intercourse which bored him (his excuse being that he would only bore others), and indulge his taste for working in soundless seclusion behind firmly shut double doors, often into the small hours. He not only felt no need of others' opinions but found them an annoying distraction from the business of thinking out his own. Paradoxically, this somewhat disdainful distancing, which might have seemed to unfit him for political leadership, formed a qualification for it. Aristocratic aloofness combined with ability and a reputation for integrity was what many Conservatives liked in a leader. When Disraeli's gamble with reform was followed in 1868 by electoral defeat, the tendency to look to Salisbury as a future leader was strengthened, despite the misgivings engendered by what Carnarvon in 1870 called his 'Wild elephant' mood ('The Diary of Gathorne Hardy', ed. N. E. Johnson, 1981, 117). In 1869-70 strong support among Conservative peers for his taking the lead in the Lords was frustrated mainly because of the impossibility of his co-operating with Disraeli. Although he disclaimed any desire to come to the front, Salisbury's ambition was not insensitive to the expectations which centred on him, and translation to the House of Lords -- which he had at first contemplated resisting -- enabled him to take part in the politics of a more democratic era from a position detached from the necessity of intimate contact with the enlarged electorate or its representatives. 
It was his concern that the House of Lords should be strong and self-confident enough to supply both an adequate platform for his exercise of high political authority and the essential Conservative brake on the activity of an otherwise unrestrained majority in the House of Commons. Salisbury argued that the Conservative Party's proper role was to 'act the part of the fulcrum from which the least Radical portion of the party opposed to them can work upon their friends and leaders', even if that meant 'the moderate Liberals enjoying a permanent tenure of office, propped up mainly by their support' ('QR', 127, 1869, 560). In this self-denying strategy for the protection of religion, property, and the constitution, the Conservative majority in the Lords had a crucial place. Salisbury recognized that the Lords needed invigorating. In 1861 he criticized their poor attendance and feeble debates, and he was anxious to strengthen their influence by enlarging their representative character through the introduction of new blood from the business community, supporting Russell's bill for life peerages in 1869. He strongly backed their rejection of Gladstone's 'Paper Duties Bill' in 1860, and one of his first actions on joining them in 1868 was to support the rejection of the bill suspending Irish church appointments with the assertion that to become 'a mere echo and supple tool' of the House of Commons was 'slavery' ('Hansard 3', 193, 1868, 89). That they could not with safety reject a measure endorsed by the verdict of the constituencies he understood, and his role was vital in 1869 in securing the passage of the bill disestablishing the Irish church, for which the 1868 election had given Gladstone a mandate. That they should refer for the further consideration of the country any far-reaching measure hostile to Conservative interests which arguably lacked such endorsement, he was determined. Preparing to oppose the 'Ballot Bill' in February 1872, he defined his strategy. 'The plan which I prefer is frankly to acknowledge that the nation is our Master, though the House of Commons is not, and to yield our opinion only when the judgement of the nation has been challenged at the polls and decidedly expressed. (Cecil, 'Life', 2.26)' He saw that approach as '(1) Theoretically sound, (2) Popular, (3) Safe against agitation, and (4) so rarely applicable as practically to place little fetter upon our independence' (ibid.). 
Salisbury's recommended policy of bolstering the moderate Liberals against the radicals, until such time as the former's disillusionment should precipitate a reconstruction of political allegiances along the real lines of class interest, was nearly enough represented by Disraeli's post-1868 practice for Salisbury's sallies against his party leader to die away. When the Conservatives won the general election of 1874, it was inevitable that Disraeli should offer a cabinet place to the most powerful Conservative talent in the Lords. Unless he was to decline political responsibility and consign his career to the sidelines, it was inevitable that Salisbury, despite 'intense personal dislike', should accept. On 21 February 1874 he became again secretary of state for India. 
Not everything in the conduct of the second Disraeli ministry met with Salisbury's approval. He had been assured that the government would not support measures against the ritualists in the church. Although he disliked their excesses, 'he sympathises', Derby told Disraeli, 'with a great deal of what they teach, and (like Gladstone) he attaches more importance, personally, to that class of questions than to all political or national considerations' (Shannon, 'Disraeli', 201). His high-churchmanship was offended by ministerial co-operation in Archbishop Tait's 'Public Worship Regulation Bill' of 1874, and his refusal to endorse the measure in the Lords was the occasion of Disraeli's irritated but accurate characterization of him as 'a great master of gibes and flouts, and jeers' ('Hansard 3', 221, 1874, 1358-9). In the same year he thought the interests of the church inadequately served in the 'Endowed Schools Bill', as he did later in the government's policy on elementary education. The labour legislation of 1875 went further in concession to the trade unions than he felt justified. But these were not resigning matters, and his attention was largely absorbed in the conduct of his office. His traits as a minister were quickly evident in his apprenticeship at the India Office, both in his eight-month tenure in 1866-7 and in 1874-8. Intellectual self-sufficiency placed strict limits on the usefulness to him of subordinates' advice. His first experience in the office caused him to begin in 1874 by reorganizing departmental procedures to enhance the secretary of state's independence of, and authority over, the permanent under-secretary, and by instructing the government of India to submit legislative proposals for his approval before they were considered by the viceroy's council. Successive viceroys and presidency governors were firmly guided in the direction he desired by private correspondence. 
Salisbury was not a heedless imperialist. As a young man, he had seen that colonization all too easily involved exploitation (the white colonists' treatment of the New Zealand Maori was a case he cited) and that its advantages did not necessarily justify the expense and commitment incurred. But he did not escape conventional feelings of racial superiority, arguing in 1859 that some races needed the protection of stronger ones, and that India and Ireland were better off under English rule than they would be under their own. Derby recorded his saying ('truly enough') in cabinet in March 1878, when the occupation of a Mediterranean base was under consideration, that 'if our ancestors had cared for the rights of other people, the British empire would not have been made' ('The Diaries of Edward Henry Stanley, Fifteenth Earl of Derby', ed. J. Vincent, 1994, 523). He was quite clear that, once made, it must be sustained by force, though the force might have its benevolent side. Appalled by the Orissa famine of 1866, he was angered by the Indian administration's deficiencies in famine relief and the callousness of the Anglo-Indian press, and he wanted to raise the condition of the peasantry -- and lessen its potential for unrest -- by promoting cheaper credit and lower taxation. What he was determined not to see raised was 'a sort of bastard Home Rule cry' from the Anglo-Indians or any expectation of self-government in the native population. If England was to remain supreme, he told the viceroy, Lytton, in 1876, she must 'appeal to the coloured against the white as well as to the white against the coloured'. That meant some toleration of the political role of the Indian princes, and of participation by Indians in the administration, but Salisbury judged in 1877 that if the number of well-educated Indians able to secure posts by competition should increase, the government would face the 'indecent and embarrassing necessity' of closing that avenue to them (Blake and Cecil, 118, 140). The degree to which Indian interests were to be subordinated to British, and even to the electoral needs of the Conservative Party, was plain in his clash in 1875 with the viceroy, Northbrook, who sought to maintain the protective duties designed to foster an Indian cotton industry, which were bitterly opposed by the Lancashire cotton merchants. 
The overriding preoccupation in Indian affairs was security against the threat posed by the southward pressure of Russia on Persia and Afghanistan. Salisbury doubted the ability of the tsarist empire to overrun the subcontinent, but wanted to provide, by maintaining a British envoy in Herat, against its acquiring a dominant influence in Afghanistan and stirring up the Indian Muslims -- a policy which led to difficulties both with Northbrook, who opposed the idea of an Afghan client state, and with his successor as viceroy, Lytton, who was too inclined to adventure on the north-west frontier. When, however, revolts against Turkish rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1875, and the atrocities of Turkish irregulars against insurgent Bulgarian Christians early in 1876, reopened the Eastern question, the defence of India became subsumed under the wider problem of British relations with Russia, if that state should attempt to capitalize on the disintegration of Turkey to advance its power in the Near East and menace the security of Britain's communications with India via the recently opened Suez Canal. 
In the tense cabinet discussions of foreign policy in 1876-8, Salisbury's high-churchmanship, like that of his close associate, Carnarvon, set him strongly against the continuance of Turkish government over the Christian peoples of the Balkans. In any case, he believed that the Ottoman empire in Europe could not be sustained. 'It is clear enough', he told Lord Beaconsfield (as Disraeli had just become) in September 1876, 'that the traditional Palmerstonian policy [of British support for Ottoman territorial integrity] is at an end' (Cecil, 'Life', 2.85): an understanding with Russia would have to be sought. He was given the chance to seek it, when Beaconsfield selected him as plenipotentiary to a conference of the powers convened on British initiative in Constantinople, with the view of forestalling any Russian military enterprise by bringing pressure to bear on the Turks to concede administrative autonomy to the insurgent Balkan provinces. The conference, from December 1876 to January 1877, foundered on the refusal of the Turks to be coerced, which Salisbury was inclined to attribute to a conviction that they could always rely on British backing in the last resort. Throughout 1877, as Russia went to war with Turkey in April and, after early reverses, began to threaten complete military victory, he was anxious that Britain should not be drawn into what he regarded as a morally indefensible alliance with Turkey, but should rather sustain her interests, if need be, by securing a suitable vantage point in the Near East. In June he told the cabinet, according to Derby, 'that Russia at Constantinople would do us no harm: and that we ought to seize Egypt' ('Diaries of... Stanley... Earl of Derby', ed. J. Vincent, 1994, 410). Beaconsfield grumbled to the queen that he was 'thinking more of raising the Cross on the cupola of St Sophia, than the power of England', and by June was conveying the queen's displeasure at the Indian secretary's 'wavering language', and envisaging his departure from the government (Millman, 274; W. F. Monypenny and G. E. Buckle, 'The Life of Benjamin Disraeli', 1910-20, 6.145-6). Salisbury shifted towards a more anti-Russian stance at the cabinet of 21 July, but continued sufficiently in line with the peace policy of the foreign secretary, Derby, to join him in December in opposing the prime minister's call for an immediate summoning of parliament to vote an increase in the armed forces and for the intervention of Britain as mediator between the now defeated Turks and the Russians. He told Beaconsfield on 26 December that the country was not prepared for war with Russia; and at the cabinet of 12 January 1878 apparently stood ready to resign with Derby had the latter not joined in accepting his compromise proposal to ask Turkey for permission for the British fleet to take station in the Dardanelles and Russia for an assurance that her troops would not occupy Gallipoli. 
Yet Salisbury had no more patience than the prime minister with Derby's inability to impart a decisive tone to British diplomacy, inclining as always to think the firm and consistent execution of policy even more important than its content. By the beginning of 1878, with the Turks beaten and the Russians on the verge of taking Constantinople, it was possible to contemplate checking Russia without falling into a compromising alliance with Turkey. Beaconsfield thought Salisbury so far the key to bringing the cabinet round to a more assertive policy that he had made an appeal to him on 24 December: 'You & I must go together into the depth of the affair, & settle what we are prepared to do' (Millman, 348). At the cabinet of 15 January, Gathorne Hardy was 'much struck by Salisbury's resolution today' in standing for 'resistance to Russian encroachment' ('The Diary of... Hardy', ed. N. E. Johnson, 1981, 349). Henceforth Beaconsfield and Salisbury worked in close accord. When Derby offered an abortive resignation on 23 January, it was Salisbury whom Beaconsfield proposed to the queen as his successor. On 27 March, when the cabinet, in order to enforce British interest in the revision of the terms of peace forced on Turkey by the Russians at San Stefano, discussed calling out the reserves and sending Indian troops to occupy Cyprus and Alexandretta (Iskenderun), Beaconsfield's assertion that peace could not be assured by 'drifting' bore the marks of concert with the Indian secretary, who supported warlike preparations partly in order to guard against an adverse swing of sentiment among the peoples of Asia if there were not a visible demonstration of British power. Derby's definitive resignation that day was followed by Salisbury's appointment as foreign secretary. 
The determined tone Salisbury meant to give to the government's foreign policy was at once shown by his issuing on 1 April 1878, simultaneously to the European powers and to the public, a circular which insisted that the treaty of San Stefano, breaching as it did the treaty of Paris of 1856 and the treaty of London of 1871, must be submitted as a whole to the contracting powers, and castigated the provisions which, in infringing the independence of the Ottoman government, prejudiced vital British interests in the straits, the Persian Gulf, the shores of the Levant, and the region of the Suez Canal. In the ensuing months he negotiated the agreements which the Berlin congress of June-July 1878 would endorse, securing from Russia the reduction of the large Bulgarian state stipulated at San Stefano (seen as a Russian satellite), in return for her acquisition of Kars and Batumi and advance in Bessarabia; and from Turkey agreement to British occupation of Cyprus as a Mediterranean base and to reforms for the benefit of her Christian subjects, in return for a guarantee of her Asiatic possessions against Russia. At Berlin, Salisbury did the spadework, complaining wryly in letters home of Beaconsfield's lack of detailed grasp, and he received with his chief the Garter (30 July 1878) and the freedom of the City of London when they returned in triumph. Their policy secured British prestige, but the permanent gains were slender: the greater Bulgaria came into being in 1886, at the expense of the Turks, while Russia overturned the congress provisions by fortifying Batumi; and the system of installing special consuls in Asiatic Turkey to superintend the promised reforms proved futile. 
The general election of April 1880 swept the Conservatives out of office and left Salisbury wondering whether this was 'the beginning of a serious war of classes' (Williams, 40). The Eastern crisis had made him the second man in the Conservative Party. Beaconsfield's death in April 1881 left him in ability and prestige the first, though the leadership of the opposition was split between him in the Lords and Sir Stafford Northcote in the Commons, and a good many still inclined to think him disqualified from the head of affairs by the impetuosity which led Gladstone to dub him 'Prince Rupert'. In his last 'Quarterly Review' article, entitled 'Disintegration', in October 1883, Salisbury offered an alarmist analysis, both of the challenge posed to the integrity of the empire, in Ireland especially, by home-rule aspirations, and of the threat levelled at the social cohesion without which national power could not be sustained, by the alleged drive of radical extremists towards 'the equality not only of conditions but of possessions, and the extermination of religious dogma'. But his determination to frustrate radical designs led him into an approach with a radicalism of its own. Deriving a dubious authority from a mass electorate which gave attention to politics only 'partially and fitfully', its action distorted by the bargaining necessary to hold together the factions in the Liberal Party, and insufficiently disciplined by a weak executive, the House of Commons, he argued, was no longer capable of supplying that 'cool and deliberate judgement' of the 'generality of the nation' which was required to arbitrate between contending classes ('QR', 156, 1883, 565-8, 576). Against the unchecked pretensions of the popularly elected chamber, Britain lacked the safeguards built into the constitution of the United States, of which Salisbury now wrote almost wistfully. The only body capable of ensuring that vital national questions were presented for the considered verdict of the people, and of checking an imperfectly representative House of Commons, was the House of Lords. It was the peers' duty, he said in October 1881, to reflect 'the permanent and enduring wishes of the nation as opposed to the casual impulse which some passing victory at the polls may in some circumstances have given to the decisions of the other House' ('The Times', 12 Oct 1881). 
Against the Liberals' Irish land legislation of 1881-2, which Salisbury was anxious to resist as infringing the rights of property in a manner he thought likely to form a precedent for Britain, the Lords proved a weak instrument. On the 'Arrears Bill' of 1882, with the Irish landlords demoralized and some of his colleagues jibbing at his belligerence, Salisbury had angrily to acknowledge that he had been placed in a small minority on his own side. He was still feeling for an effective technique of leadership when, in 1884, the government's introduction of a bill for household suffrage in counties presented him with an issue in which the Lords could be made to play a decisive role. The assimilation of the county to the borough franchise was hard to resist indefinitely, but, scrutinizing the figures, Salisbury concluded that the Conservatives would suffer severely unless the new franchise were accompanied by a redistribution of seats which would enable what would otherwise be large Conservative minorities, especially in urban areas, to secure representation. The Conservative majority in the Lords rejected the bill in the absence of a redistribution scheme, but the pressure for a negotiated settlement exerted by the queen and his more cautious colleagues restrained Salisbury's original impulse to precipitate a general election on the existing franchise. Instead, he accepted Gladstone's offer to pass an 'Agreed Seats Bill' following the franchise measure. In November 1884 he took the lead for the Conservatives in negotiating with Gladstone and Dilke in a series of private meetings the details of a redistribution scheme based on single-member constituencies, which, in facilitating the separation of rural from urban areas and middle-class from working-class districts of towns, much improved the Conservative Party's electoral chances. In making the powers of his own house the key to the protection of Conservative interests in constitutional change, and in demonstrating his grasp of the details of electoral strategy, he made a large stride towards establishing himself as the first choice for the premiership if the Conservatives should regain office. 
Salisbury was demonstrating at the same time his ability to embark on the direct appeal to the people that was the corollary of the referendal role he was giving to the Lords. 'Power', he told his eldest son in February 1881, 'is more and more leaving Parliament and going to the platform' (Adonis, 175). Before 1880 he had rarely spoken outside parliament and his own locality. Between 1880 and 1886 he spoke on more than seventy platforms all over the country. The man who shrank from recognition by strangers and from gawping admirers at railway stations could be warmed by the enthusiasm of great audiences, which he addressed in clear, unpatronizing, and hard-hitting language. Nor was the power of the press neglected: from June 1884 Salisbury was briefing Alfred Austin of 'The Standard', whom he would later make the most pedestrian of poets laureate. Salisbury's interest in the facts of electoral sociology and geography and his anxiety to achieve the most efficient mobilization of the Conservative forces led naturally to involvement in the oversight of party organization, but it was always organization from the top down. It was on the alleged manipulation of the Liberal Party by caucuses of log-rolling activists that he partly relied to discredit it and to deny true representative status to the measures of Liberal governments. He had no intention of countenancing in the Conservative Party anything analogous with the pretensions of the National Liberal Federation to influence policy, and hence no sympathy for Lord Randolph Churchill's efforts in 1883-4 to encourage the middle-class provincial stalwarts of the National Union of Conservative and Constitutional Associations to claim a voice in the party's inner councils and take over the functions of the central committee of whips and party officials and notables which directed party organization. 
Churchill's use of the National Union was all the less welcome for forming part of the campaign to force himself to the front of the party that had begun with his subversion of Northcote's authority in the Commons through the activities of the 'Fourth Party', and was reaching its apogee in his proclamation of 'tory democracy', but the popularity that he was acquiring with the Conservative rank-and-file made a break with him inadvisable at a time when the 'Franchise Bill' was dividing Conservative opinion. A compromise suited both Salisbury's and Churchill's interests, and it was reached between them on 26 July 1884. Informing Northcote, whom he had not consulted, Salisbury represented Churchill as having been willing 'to fall into line' in return for a very limited integration of the union's management with that of the parliamentary party (Shannon, 'Salisbury', 43). In fact, the arrangement included also the abandonment of the central committee, the recognition of the Primrose League, and a taking of Churchill into the confidence of the leadership which, by implication or possibly by express understanding, meant the relegation of Northcote's claims to leadership in a future Conservative administration. Salisbury had steadily expressed support of Northcote as a colleague; he does not seem to have felt compelled to resist Churchill's undermining of him as a rival. 
After the consolidation of his primacy in the party by the events of 1884, Salisbury's professed taste for weak Liberal government as a constitutional preservative had to contend with the knowledge that the overthrow of the ministry would establish him as the Conservative candidate for the premiership, as well as with his desire to wrest control of foreign policy from Liberal hands at a moment of renewed crisis over Bulgaria. A decision that the Conservatives would be prepared to govern Ireland without renewing the 'Crimes Act' of 1881 made it possible to secure Parnellite votes to defeat the government in the Commons on 9 June 1885, and Gladstone resigned. With some appearance of reluctance, on 23 June 1885 Salisbury answered the queen's summons to form a caretaker ministry until an election on the new franchise and constituencies should be possible, embarrassedly accepting the necessity of dispatching Northcote to the Lords as earl of Iddesleigh in order to meet the terms of Churchill, who took the India Office. Salisbury joined the Foreign Office to the prime ministership, and quickly reinforced his credit by skilful maintenance of British interests in the Bulgarian crisis and dealings with Russia over Afghanistan, but by the end of the year the focal point of his administration was Ireland. 
Salisbury's analysis of the problem of social and political unrest in Ireland was that it was spineless conciliation since 1780 that had fostered it. The Irish were irreconcilable to 'English' rule, and concession only stimulated their efforts to break free of it by teaching them what leverage they could exert by intransigence. Self-government was unacceptable, within a United Kingdom framework because the home-rulers would never accept the position of a permanent minority at Westminster, within a purely Irish framework because the permanent minority would then be the protestant, landlord, and loyalist contingents whom Salisbury was determined not to abandon, both on grounds of moral obligation and because that dereliction would signal across the empire England's lack of will to hold what she possessed. The alternative, the steady and masterful imposition of authority, was closest to Salisbury's natural bent. If he had an Irish policy, it consisted of dogged endurance, tinged with baffled exasperation. 
However, a government which had come in with the help of Parnellite votes, had renounced the coercion embodied in the 'Crimes Act', and contained men like Carnarvon, Churchill, and Hicks Beach, who stood for constructive measures, could hardly rest on simple repression. Salisbury felt uncertainly for the means to keep Ireland quiet. Baling out the beleaguered landlord class and facilitating the emergence of a socially stabilizing peasant proprietary with state-assisted land purchase was an acceptably Conservative measure, pursued in the 'Ashbourne Act' of 1885. Carnarvon was allowed to meet secretly with Parnell, and though the cabinet declined in October to endorse Carnarvon's inclination towards home rule, the interview, coupled with the cautious tone of Salisbury's public pronouncements, encouraged Parnell's hopes of the Conservatives sufficiently for him to throw the Irish vote in Britain against the Liberals in the general election of November-December 1885. Some dozen gains brought the Conservatives back 250 strong to face 334 Liberals, with Parnell's 86 Irish nationalists occupying a key position. Salisbury fended off the queen's and Churchill's promptings for a centre coalition with whigs, in which he would have been marginalized. His line was given definition by Gladstone's approach in December to discover whether the Irish problem could be disposed of by Liberal support for a Conservative measure of concession to Irish aspirations, which was followed immediately by the public revelation that action on Ireland was in Gladstone's mind. 'His hypocrisy makes me sick' (Marsh, 85) was Salisbury's reaction to what he evidently read as an invitation to take the risks of an initiative for which Gladstone could claim the credit. The precedents for Liberal assistance in Conservative settlement of contentious issues which weighed in Gladstone's mind, those of 1829, 1846, and 1867, weighed in Salisbury's too, as examples of breach of faith by tory leaders with their followers which both honour and expediency forbade him to emulate. Producing proposals likely to disrupt the Conservative Party had small attraction compared with forcing Gladstone to declare his own and disrupt the Liberal Party. 
Salisbury now sought to move the cabinet towards a renewal of coercion in Ireland and a proscription of the National League, accepting Carnarvon's resignation, but defeat on the agricultural holdings issue supervened on 27 January 1886, and Salisbury resigned two days later. In the following weeks he began to concert with Goschen and Lord Hartington, leaders of the anti-home-rule Liberals, opposition to Gladstone's newly installed ministry, and on 14 April, the day of the first reading of Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill', the three shared a London platform in denunciation of it. On 15 May, with a long-remembered reference to the Khoi-Khoi (Hottentots) among others, Salisbury told the National Union that: 'this, -- which is called self-government, but is really government by the majority, -- works admirably when it is confided to people who are of Teutonic race, but... does not work so well when people of other races are called upon to join in it; (Cecil, 'Life', 3.302)' and he called for twenty years of resolute and consistent government of Ireland. Any possibility that had existed of a bipartisan approach to the Irish question had been overwhelmed by the attraction for Salisbury of a ferocious defence of the union with Ireland which would affirm the Conservatives' claim to be the party of nation and empire, rally the widespread popular anti-Irish prejudice of the large towns which had proved a novel source of Conservative strength in the 1885 election, and precipitate the realignment of the whigs with the Conservative Party which would bring political life into line with his political logic. Conservatives and Liberal Unionists together defeated the 'Home Rule Bill' in the Commons on 8 June 1886, and in the ensuing general election the two groups working in alliance secured an overwhelming anti-home-rule majority, 316 Conservatives and 79 Liberal Unionists being returned. Salisbury professed willingness to serve under Hartington in a Unionist coalition, but, designedly or not, he had defined his stance in terms too uncompromisingly tory for the Liberal Unionists to be able to enter the Conservative-dominated government, which he stipulated, and following Gladstone's resignation on 20 July he resumed the office of prime minister (25 July), which he would hold for thirteen of the next sixteen years. 
Salisbury never admitted to enjoying the premiership, complaining that its ostensible power was a sham, recoiling from what his wife called the 'exhibition of littleness' of the aspirants for office and reward who beset it, and bending under the incessant labour of combining it with the Foreign Office (as he did nearly the whole time), the official boxes pursuing him even to the Chalet Cecil, the family's holiday home near Dieppe, and later to Beaulieu, where he built his second French retreat. He was, one of his sons acknowledged, 'very averse to collaboration, and it was natural for him to think that his colleagues would equally dislike it' ('X' [Lord Robert Cecil], in 'Monthly Review', 13, 1903, 9). The latter, and even his own children, he might have difficulty in recognizing if coming on them unexpectedly, mental abstraction, aristocratic remoteness, and short sight combining in uncertain proportions. Masterful on paper and on the platform, he lacked stomach for imposing himself face-to-face, and ran his cabinets with so loose a rein that Cranbrook had to call upon him in November 1886 for 'your distinct 'lead' and your just self-assertion' (Cecil, 'Life', 3.326). Hicks Beach recollected that he often allowed important matters to be decided by a small majority, even against his own opinion. That his knack was more for diplomacy than for leadership, however, was not always a disadvantage in the task of balancing the elements of the Conservative Party and managing its alliance with the Liberal Unionists. Less helpful was his aloofness from the party rank-and-file, accentuated by his being in the Lords, and his tendency to draw around him in government a narrow circle of friends and relatives, most conspicuously his nephew Arthur Balfour, who entered the cabinet in 1886. Salisbury was strongly conscious of the growing importance of the middle-class contingent in his party, and worked well with its leading representative, W. H. Smith, but he did not readily bring middle-class politicians to the fore. The self-importance of the party's constituency activists was judiciously flattered, but the National Union was kept well hobbled by the party managers, notably the chief whip, Akers-Douglas, and the principal agent, Captain Middleton, with both of whom Salisbury frequently indulged his interest in the details of organization and control, and from whom he drew much of his sense of what the party and the country wanted. The after-effect of illness in 1880 was a gain in weight which turned his appearance from the lean and hungry to the portly and patriarchal and added physical mass to his reputation for ability and integrity, but the imposing combination, even when relieved by the negligence in dress which caused him to be refused admission to the casino at Monte Carlo, inspired respect more readily than affection. Middleton, in December 1886, thought that his personality was the great strength of the party among the 'uneducated', as Gladstone's was for the Liberals; but unlike Gladstone he never acquired a popular nickname, and even the caricaturists could find little to lighten the grave solemnity, or sombre resignation to duty, which appeared in his portraits, belying the charm and humour which he could display within his intimate circle. 
The most significant challenge to Salisbury's command of the party was posed by the restless ambition of the chancellor of the exchequer and leader of the Commons, Lord Randolph Churchill, who by November 1886 was complaining petulantly to Salisbury about tory incapacity for legislation in a democratic constitution. The prime minister had no desire to see Churchill's association with Joseph Chamberlain, the leader of the radical wing of the Liberal Unionists, colour the character of the whole alliance, and Churchill made matters worse by conducting unofficial contacts with foreign powers and drafting a budget which seemed to Salisbury hostile to the landed interest. When in December Churchill took issue with the army estimates, and sought to enforce his point by offering to resign, Salisbury, characteristically conducting the whole affair by correspondence, presented so unyielding a front as effectively to accept the resignation. Churchill's position with the party was wrecked by his action, and the consent of Goschen to take over the exchequer enabled Salisbury to move further towards the development of the Unionist alliance on a fundamentally Conservative footing. 
'We have so to conduct our legislation', Salisbury had explained in a vain attempt to teach Churchill the facts of Conservative life, 'that we shall give some satisfaction to both classes and masses. This is specially difficult with the classes -- because all legislation is rather unwelcome to them, as tending to disturb a state of things with which they are satisfied. It is evident, therefore, that we must work at less speed, & at a lower temperature, than our opponents. Our bills must be tentative and cautious; not sweeping & dramatic. But I believe that with patience, feeling our way as we go, we may get the one element to concede, & the other to forbear. (Marsh, 80)' His acceptance of the need for some legislative concession by the 'classes' reflected the change of life from thirty-three years in which he had sat in parliament with a Liberal majority in the Commons for all but six of them, to an epoch in which it began to seem possible that the junction of all the Conservative elements of the country in defence of the union would deposit the legislative machinery in safe hands for most of the time. The conduct of opposition was giving way to the practice of government, and Salisbury had never held that government should be stationary or inert. The needs of the alliance counted for something in this evolution. An 'extra tinge of Liberalism in our policy', he had told Churchill in December 1885, would be part of the bargain with the whigs when the moment came (Cecil, 'Life', 3.275). When the alliance materialized, it included not only the whigs but the radical Unionists under Chamberlain, who had to be given the means to reassure his followers that he was not sustaining a reactionary regime. The Liberal Unionists were not in a position to impose terms, because Salisbury and his party managers had taken care to couch the electoral compact in terms that gave them no chance of increasing their numbers, and they were captive so long as Gladstone adhered to home rule, but their presence made it easier for Salisbury to persuade his 'classes' to concede when an 'extra tinge of Liberalism' seemed necessary for the health of the alliance and the safety of the union, as well as for the consolidation of the (to Salisbury startling) advance of Conservatism in the big urban electorates which had revealed itself in 1885-6. 
Conventional Conservatism was appeased by Salisbury's efforts to aid the church, which he continued to regard as the only reliable agency for social as well as spiritual betterment. In October 1885, approaching the election, he had placed at the centre of his Newport speech the maintenance of church establishments and of religious education (an attraction not least to Catholic voters). His second ministry pursued legislation on tithes, patronage, and clerical discipline, and he took up free elementary education, enacted in 1891, largely in order to bring national taxation to the help of the Church of England's schools. Helping the clergy to gather their tithe, however, made that other reservoir of Conservative supporters, the landowners, feel more keenly the government's failure to shelter them against the agricultural depression. Profound though his conviction was of the crucial role of the landed interest in securing social and political stability, Salisbury did not think it feasible to bolster its position by measures which would expose the Conservatives to the reproach of being the party of protection, expensive food, and narrow class sympathies. The creation of the Board of Agriculture in 1889 was as much a gesture of goodwill as an earnest of practical assistance. 
If tone deaf to Churchill's boisterous rendering of 'tory democracy', Salisbury was not committed against secular efforts at social and administrative improvement. He had no intention to undermine the responsibility of the individual or much to enlarge the sphere of action and of expenditure from direct taxation of a state theoretically controlled by a democratic electorate. Yet when he said in 1891 that the Conservative Party had 'always leaned -- perhaps unduly leaned -- to the use of the State, so far as it can properly be used for the improvement of the physical, moral and intellectual condition of our people' ('The Times', 16 July 1891), he was sounding a note already evident in his Oxford Union days, his first election address at Stamford, and his early support for factory legislation and improved treatment of paupers. He advocated the provision of cheap money for building working-class housing in a 'National Review' article in 1883, secured in 1884 a royal commission on which he sat, and carried its recommendations into law in tandem with Sir Charles Dilke in 1885, increasing the availability of Treasury loans and taking new measures against slums. A second measure to facilitate slum clearance and rehousing received his backing in 1890. Though deeply disliking compulsory purchase of land to provide allotments for agricultural labourers, he swallowed the compulsory element of the bill of 1887, under pressure from back-benchers desperate for labourers' votes. If, at Newport, his support for a measure of popularly elected local government had been something of a sop to the provincial activists denied democracy in the management of the party, it was none the less implemented in the 'County Councils Act' of 1888, which he justified on the safe tory ground of resistance to excessive centralization. A still larger concession to full democracy was not inconceivable to him after the enfranchisement of the agricultural labourer. 'When I am told that my ploughmen are capable citizens', he wrote to Lady John Manners in 1884, 'it seems to me ridiculous to say that educated women are not just as capable. A good deal of the political battle of the future will be a conflict between religion and unbelief: & the women will in that controversy be on the right side. (Smith, 18 n.)' In Ireland the Liberal tinge was evident mainly in the continuation in 1887 and 1891 of land purchase legislation and in the programme of rural economic development embodied in the congested districts legislation of 1890. But the government saw Ireland as an ongoing problem of firm administration rather than a question which might be susceptible of an answer. To implement the renewed coercion necessary to combat the National League and agrarian resistance, Salisbury chose as Irish secretary Balfour, whose hard-handedness with the militant Skye crofters while at the Scottish Office had won his approval ('Everything seems to be going on charmingly in Skye. By steady deliberate pressure... you will get them under surely enough'; Williams, 163). Salisbury's determination to get the Irish under caused him to make the most of the revelations about Parnell which 'The Times' derived from the forger Piggott, and to lend his support to the paper even when their authenticity was challenged. 
Through its implications for imperial integrity and national defence, the Irish problem was part of the global picture which Salisbury surveyed from the Foreign Office, where he superseded Lord Iddesleigh in January 1887. He was to be foreign secretary for eleven of the next fourteen years. It was his post of predilection, where he could indulge his penchant for the conduct of politics as a detached intellectual pursuit little disturbed by the opinions of colleagues and only remotely hindered by parliament and public. 'We do not', he reminded the Lords in January 1887, 'usually discuss what goes on in the Foreign Office' ('Hansard 3', 310, 1887, 34). In this sphere his proximate superior was the queen. If she was occasionally hard to manage, her experience and her European family connections made her a valuable source of advice and intelligence, and as her foreign secretary Salisbury came closest to what was perhaps his ideal of ministerial service, the relationship of his Cecil ancestors to Elizabeth I. He was not himself an easy chief to serve. He could not or would not delegate decision making, and he did not find discussion helpful. Behind his impenetrable courtesy lay the reluctance to direct human intercourse that made it hard for subordinates to know what he wanted. Ambassadors, apt to miss or misunderstand the element of ironic humour in his remarks, sometimes found him inscrutable. 
Making his name as a polemicist on foreign affairs in the 1860s, Salisbury had stigmatized as a fatal confusion the attempt to apply to the relations of states, without a common law, the moral standards of civic and private life, and had castigated the reluctance of the 'commercial spirit' to meet the cost of the armaments required to secure British interests, which reduced the country to indulging popular pugnacity by bullying weak states like China and Brazil, while skirting confrontation with stronger ones. But he was convinced when he came to the helm that Britain, as a largely satisfied and so defensive power, found its highest interest in peace, and his conviction of the necessary egoism of state policy did not preclude a sense of international obligation. 'We are part of the community of Europe and we must do our duty as such', he declared in 1888, repudiating 'haughty and sullen isolation' (Cecil, 'Life', 4.90). The essence was to avoid truculence and to ensure that policy was backed by the necessary strength. 
The latter condition was not easy to meet in the era of the 'scramble for Africa' and the emergence of two great continental alliances, the triple alliance of Germany, Austria, and Italy, completed in 1882, and the Franco-Russian alliance formed in 1891-4. Salisbury's most delicate skills were perhaps displayed in fending off without conflict German and French challenges in east and west Africa respectively, and in settling in the convention of 1891 the dispute with Portugal over territory north and south of the Zambezi. His Near-Eastern policy was the continuation of that which he had pursued alongside Beaconsfield, its kernel being the containment of Russia in the East and the control of the straits, working with the central powers, Germany and Austria, in the hope of averting any resumption of their old alignment with Russia in the Three Emperors' League and of securing their support in the imbroglio with France created by the British occupation of Egypt, from which Salisbury would have been glad to negotiate a withdrawal on suitable terms. The acceptance in 1885-6 of the union of the Turkish province of Eastern Roumelia with Bulgaria was part of this approach, Bulgaria now appearing as an obstacle to, rather than a tool of, Russian designs. Co-operation with the triple alliance involved concession to Bismarck's desire for British support of Italy in the Mediterranean, likely though that was to impede the improvement of relations with Italy's most direct competitor, France. The Mediterranean agreements of February-March and December 1887 linked Britain to the triple alliance in defence of the 'status quo' in the Near East and secured Austro-German co-operation over Egypt. The mutual interest of Britain and Germany made it possible in 1890 for Salisbury to hand over Heligoland in return for recognition of British primacy in east Africa, including the Zanzibar protectorate. Britain's value as a partner, however, was lessened by doubts about her ability to fulfil her Near-Eastern role. The 'scare' over the adequacy of her naval power which was raised in 1888 led to Salisbury's sanctioning the formal adoption of the two-power standard and the establishment, in the 'Naval Defence Act' of 1889, of a five-year construction programme protected against the ordinary budgetary control of parliament. In 1892, the Admiralty's unwillingness to face the risks of forcing the straits in the event of conflict with Russia drove him to complain that, if Constantinople could not be protected, 'our policy is a policy of false pretences' (Lowe, 89). The inauguration of the Franco-Russian alliance increased the desirability of a better understanding with France, but as he left office in August 1892 Salisbury explained that he was afraid of 'too hurried a rapprochement with France, involving the abandonment of the Triple Alliance by Italy -- a reconstruction of the Drei-Kaiser-Bund and Russia on the Bosphorus' (ibid., 90). 
Despite the parliamentary relief afforded by the split among the Irish nationalists at the end of 1890, government and party were by that time in the doldrums, not least because of what Salisbury registered as the muttering of 'our right wing' about such apparent concessions to radical Unionism as the measures on county government and free education. The prime minister baulked at further provocations, sounding in January 1892 his old, resistant note of conviction that 'I can get better terms for property out of office, than I can in office' (Williams, 390). The desire of Balfour and Chamberlain to respond to defeat in the general election of July 1892 by meeting parliament with a programme of social legislation encountered Salisbury's habitual reluctance to risk alienating 'a good many people who have always been with us' (ibid., 430), and his fear that 'these social questions are destined to break up our party' (ibid.). The Liberals and Irish, with a majority of forty, turned the government out in August. Salisbury resigned on 12 August. His private secretary at the Foreign Office noted that he 'shewed indecent joy at his release' ('The Diary of... Hardy', ed. N. E. Johnson, 1981, 833). 
In opposition to a Gladstone ministry bent on home rule Salisbury was better placed to control his party. Home rule was bound to pass the Commons and there was thus no need to make policy concessions to the Liberal Unionists in order to block it. The crucial decision would be taken in Salisbury's own arena in the Lords. He had pursued the strengthening of the representative claims of the Lords by bringing in more peers from commercial and industrial backgrounds, and by introducing in 1888 a bill to permit the creation of up to fifty life peers, though it was dropped to avoid major difficulties in the Commons. Now, in a 'National Review' article of November 1892 entitled 'Constitutional revision', he denied that the government's 'motley majority', based on a 'multiplicity of questions', and non-existent in England and Scotland, supplied a mandate for home rule, and contended that, in the absence of a referendum procedure, only the peers could ensure adequate consultation of the nation over proposals for organic change. Every effort was made to maul Gladstone's second 'Home Rule Bill' in the Commons sufficiently to reduce the responsibility of the peers in rejecting it, but it was they who finally destroyed it by 419 votes to 41 in September 1893. Salisbury was anxious that the Lords should not seem to act along lines of class interest and warded them away from opposing Harcourt's death duties in 1894. He took out insurance against the election of another home-rule majority by declaring in April 1895 that a mandate for home rule would require 'a large majority of the nation in all its main divisions' ('The Times', 8 April 1895), thus turning the heavy Unionist preponderance in England into an insuperable barrier. In the event, the general election of July 1895 returned a Unionist phalanx of 411, as against 259 Liberals and Irish nationalists. 
Salisbury was already back in office (25 June 1895), having formed his third ministry after the defeat of the Liberal government in a Commons' vote on 21 June. He turned the Unionist alliance into coalition by introducing five Liberal Unionists into his cabinet, but there was no question this time of his offering the duke of Devonshire (as Hartington had become in 1891) the lead, though he did offer him the Foreign Office, which he eventually took himself. The overwhelming Unionist majority did something to dissipate Salisbury's fears of a democratic electorate, yet it lessened the degree of his authority, by moving the Unionist centre of gravity back into the Commons, where Balfour and Chamberlain were in charge, and by shifting the emphasis from a politics of resistance, at which Salisbury was adept, to the need for a creative response to the problems of a maturing industrial society and an increasingly challenged empire, which he showed little sign of supplying. He had recognized plainly, in two speeches of 1888 ('The Times', 11 April 1888, 1 Dec 1888), the pressing difficulties of reconciling the claims of rich and poor, and of meeting the needs of a growing population in a cramped island, in a world of accelerating economic and imperial competition. But he was not enthusiastic about the nostrums canvassed among Unionists. In face of the threat to British trade from increasing protectionism, he openly sympathized with the fair-traders' demands for reciprocity agreements and retaliation, but feared the class and party divisions that they were likely to provoke. He accepted the necessity of further social legislation, and cautiously endorsed Chamberlain's promotion of social reform as the centrepiece of the Unionist campaign in the 1895 election, but his personal interest in such measures went little beyond his long-established concern for housing, though he supported Chamberlain in passing an 'Employers' Liability Bill' in 1897. Salisbury's basic instincts were as usual to assist the church and the land, and he was disappointed by the failure of the 'Education Bill' of 1896 to negotiate the hazardous waters of state aid for denominational schools, though there was better success the following year. Remission of half the farmers' rates by an act of 1896 was at least a token alleviation of the deepening agricultural depression, and in 1899 clergymen's tithes were relieved of rates. In Ireland, Salisbury sympathized with the landlords' dislike of the 1896 'Land Act' and did all he could to compensate them for the loss of influence arising from the local government reform of 1898. Conducted by Arthur Balfour and his brother, Gerald, appointed chief secretary in 1895, Irish policy emphasized both the departmentalization of Salisbury's third ministry and its generous allocation of office to his connections. His addition of his eldest son, Cranborne, to the three nephews and a son-in-law already in office was openly attacked in the Commons in December 1900, but Salisbury was undisturbed. The air of massive imperturbability and remoteness increased with the girth (he now took little exercise but tricycle rides). This enhanced Salisbury's aura but began to erode his authority, and from 1896 recurring bouts of influenza, preying on a constitution weakened by incessant overwork, forced him abroad for convalescence and interrupted his grip on affairs. 
The effects were nowhere more evident than in foreign policy, where new challenges were arising, with the extension of great power rivalry in Africa and the Far East, and in 1895-6 friction with the United States over Britain's boundary dispute with Venezuela, when Salisbury demurred to the too brusque application of the Monroe doctrine; feeling soon moderated, however, and by the Hay-Pauncefote treaty of 1900 Britain fell in with American plans for an Isthmian Canal. The prime minister's 'practice of holding few & far cabinets', Lord George Hamilton wrote in January 1896, 'enhances his difficulties as he nurses a policy until the time comes for expression or action & he then finds his cabinet against him & has to retrace his steps. This for a strong & proud man must be very unpleasant. (BL, Add. MS 49778, fols. 31-32)' Hamilton had specifically in mind 'The German alliance, & safeguarding of Constantinople... the two objects for which he has persistently worked during the last ten years' (ibid., fol. 32). To Salisbury's immense chagrin, the cabinet had refused to support him in the autumn of 1895 in overriding the fears of the admirals and forcing the straits in order to restrain Turkish massacres of Armenians, the effect of which on British opinion undermined the policy of sustaining the Ottoman empire, now in any case seen by Salisbury as beyond hope. Salisbury continued to want to 'lean to the Triple Alliance without belonging to it' (Grenville, 98), as he put it, but the Kaiser's telegram of congratulation to President Kruger on the repulse of Jameson's raid into the Transvaal emphasized the precariousness of Anglo-German understanding. Salisbury was obliged to look rather to permanent occupation of Egypt as security for British Mediterranean interests and the route to India, and hence to the management of relations with France and her ally, Russia. With France, Salisbury hoped for what he called 'a mutual temper of apathetic tolerance' (ibid., 428) -- which perhaps expressed his practical ideal of international relations. It was possible to patch up conflicts of interest in Siam and on the Niger in the hope of obtaining France's good offices with Russia in the Far East, where competition for concessions from China was exciting the apprehension of British imperialists. Salisbury's policy tended to the shoring up of China, like the Ottoman empire and Persia, as a buffer state between competing imperial powers, with an 'open door' to the trade of all nations. But the lack of return from his willingness to make concessions to the Russians, together with the forceful intervention of Germany in taking Kiaochow (Jiaozhou) in November 1897, raised criticism, not allayed by the acquisition of Weihaiwei, that British interests were not being adequately asserted. It took Kitchener's conquest of the Sudan and the repulse of French ambitions on the upper Nile in the Fashoda crisis of September-November 1898 to repair Salisbury's image of strength and emphasize his success in maintaining the British position in the partition of Africa without open collision. 
From the spring of 1898, taking advantage of Salisbury's absences, which left Balfour in charge of the Foreign Office, Chamberlain and his cabinet allies set out to promote a new course which involved countering the supposed threat of the Franco-Russian bloc by alliance with Germany. The agreements with Germany on the future of the Portuguese colonies in Africa in August 1898 and on Samoa in 1899 have been taken to mark the influence of this group. Yet Salisbury was slow to give ground. His conviction of British commercial and imperial strength was, perhaps complacently, tougher than theirs. His references to the phrase 'splendid isolation', when it became current in 1896-7, were ironic rather than jubilant, but he did not think that Britain needed to commit herself to any alliance system. He did not expect that Russia and France would combine against Britain outside Europe. If favourable to accommodation with Germany, he believed that her long frontier with Russia would always predispose her to curry favour with her neighbour by throwing Britain over. Commitment to support the triple alliance powers against France and Russia would place a far heavier burden on Britain than the defence of Britain would impose on them. In any case, as he put it in a classic memorandum of 29 May 1901, using an argument he had often found convenient to repel importunity, binding commitments were excluded by the nature of parliamentary democracy: the British government 'cannot undertake to declare war, for any purpose, unless it is a purpose of which the electors of this country would approve', and there was no means of knowing 'what may be the humour of our people in circumstances which cannot be foreseen' (G. P. Gooch and H. Temperley, eds., 'British Documents on the Origins of the War', 1927-36, 2.68). 
The outbreak of the South African War in October 1899 cast further doubt on Salisbury's command of the imperial scene. While favouring a strong line towards the Boer republics, he was uneasy to find the high commissioner in South Africa, Milner, and his 'jingo supporters' drawing the government into a major military effort 'for people whom we despise, and for territory which will bring no profit and no power to England' (Grenville, 267). He displayed his customary hardness towards obdurate opponents. 'You will not conquer these people until you have starved them out', he told Brodrick at the War Office in December 1900 (Marsh, 297). He defended the necessity of farm burning and of concentration camps, accepting the high mortality in the latter as inevitable, 'particularly among a people so dirty as the Boers' (Russell, 230-31). Yet war did not suit him. The early reverses of the campaign brought out his contempt for the military experts and 'that phase of British temper which... has led detachment after detachment of British troops into the most obvious ambuscades -- mere arrogance' (Grenville, 20-21). They also exposed the failure of his government to plan for the needs of imperial security, despite the establishment of a standing defence committee of the cabinet in 1895. The size of his victory in the 'khaki' election of October 1900 (called to confront the Boers with the national will to press on to victory) made him worry lest the 'Reform Acts' should have exposed in the population 'a layer of pure combativeness' (A. E. Gathorne-Hardy, ed., 'Gathorne Hardy', 1910, 2.374), but he could no longer restrain the demands for increased defence expenditure which threatened the harsher taxation of property. 
His wife's second stroke in July 1899 and death on 20 November had depleted Salisbury's resources. His sluggishness in responding to the Boxer uprising in the summer of 1900 convinced his colleagues of his loss of grip, and they imposed on him an agreement for Anglo-German co-operation in China in which he had no faith. Reluctantly, in November, he gave up the Foreign Office to Lansdowne, taking the privy seal. In January 1901 the death of Queen Victoria and the accession of Edward VII, to whose mistresses Hatfield had remained a closed house, emphasized the passing of his world. His foreign policy was beginning to be dismantled. He could still hamper moves for a German alliance, but in 1902 did not prevent a Japanese, much though he disliked the extent of the commitment involved. By now profoundly miserable in office, he saw the South African War to a successful conclusion, and resigned as prime minister on 11 July 1902. 
Salisbury died at Hatfield House on 22 August 1903, after a fall from the chair in which the breathing difficulty caused by his great weight obliged him to sleep, and the development of blood poisoning from an ulcerated leg which exacerbated his heart weakness. 'It was just', his doctor said, 'that the machine was worn out' (Blake and Cecil, 69). He was buried in the family burial-ground at Hatfield churchyard beside his wife on 31 August, a memorial service taking place in Westminster Abbey on the same day. 
In addition to the Garter in 1878, Salisbury received the GCVO in 1902. He was lord warden of the Cinque Ports from 1895. Three of his sons, James Edward Hubert Gascoyne-Cecil (fourth marquess), (Edgar Algernon) Robert Gascoyne-Cecil (Viscount Cecil of Chelwood), and Hugh Richard Heathcote Gascoyne-Cecil (Baron Quickswood), followed him into Conservative politics; his fourth son, Lord Edward Herbert Gascoyne-Cecil, became a civil servant in Egypt; and his second daughter, Lady Gwendolen Gascoyne-Cecil, became his biographer, the intimate knowledge that only a member of the family could possess enabling her to paint an unrivalled portrait of the man, though the published volumes reach only 1892 (the manuscript of an unfinished final volume exists in the family papers). 
Salisbury's reputation rests on his ranking as one of the greatest of British foreign secretaries and on the long predominance achieved by the Unionists under his leadership. If, towards the end of his career, he had to acknowledge that the Near-Eastern policy which had been the corner-stone of his as of most British diplomacy in the nineteenth century was no longer viable, and if he had no recipe, such as Chamberlain offered, for the consolidation and energization of the empire to meet intensifying international competition, he has none the less received recognition for performing with patient and undramatic skill the formidable task of defending the worldwide interests of a satiated power without open conflict with powers less replete or onerous commitment to any ally. Peace was an integral part of his matured strategy of Conservatism. It made it possible to contain the direct taxation which Salisbury feared would be levied with punitive incidence on property, not least landed property, in a democratic state. His hostile and pessimistic view of the approach of democracy contrasts with his record as the most electorally successful Conservative leader of the nineteenth century. If his political discourse, which has been analysed for its unusually sceptical and utilitarian presentation of Conservatism (Gladstone thought he had 'no respect for tradition'; 'The Diary of Sir Edward Walter Hamilton, 1880-1885', ed. D. W. R. Bahlman, 1972, 2.741), conveyed an uncompromising, though not reactionary, stance, the flexibility of the political practice which accompanied it has been remarked. Salisbury has been credited with high political skills in imposing himself with no little ambition and toughness as first Conservative and then Unionist leader, developing his own brand of tutelary populism to reach the enlarged electorate, guiding his party through the concessions necessary to meet the demand for social and administrative reform and to keep the Liberal Unionists in countenance, and turning a reinvigorated House of Lords into a decisive check on radical projects. A less admiring view is that the limited and immature democracy which he faced was skilfully managed by the Middleton machine, and that he was little more than the dexterous beneficiary of a well-established middle-class drift to Conservatism, and a Gladstonian thunderbolt over home rule, which delivered to him the realignment of parties he had always wanted and made easy the establishment of the Conservatives as the party of English nationalism which Disraeli had initiated. The domestic strategy was as defensive as the foreign; it equally lacked the elements of creative imagination and hope of earthly betterment that were absent from Salisbury's nature. 


@@@@@


doc= 32340


Centlivres, Albert van de Sandt (1887-1966), judge in South Africa, was born at Newlands, Cape Town, on 13 January 1887, the third son and seventh of the eleven children of Frederick James Centlivres, director of companies and mayor of Rondebosch, and his wife, Albertina de Villiers. Matriculating with distinction at the South African College School in 1903 he went on, at the South African College, to academic achievements which included honours in classics and a Rhodes scholarship. At New College, Oxford, he took his BA (with second-class honours in jurisprudence) in 1909, and the following year, with third-class honours, his BCL. He had joined the Middle Temple and was called to the bar in 1910. In 1911 he was admitted as an advocate of the Cape provincial division, South Africa. 
At first Centlivres's was the usual fate of the young advocate and he had the time in which to edit 'Juta's Daily Reporter' and so consolidate and extend his knowledge of procedure. His practice began to prosper after two interruptions: a brief interlude in Southern Rhodesia and the eruption of the First World War, in which he served in South-West Africa as a private and after which he returned to civil life with, it is believed, a military discharge recording his education as 'fair'. In 1916 he married Isabel, daughter of George Short, accountant and merchant of Cape Town; they had one son, who predeceased his father, and three daughters. 
In 1927 Centlivres became a KC. It was as a lawyer rather than an advocate that he was achieving a reputation. His preparation was as comprehensive as it was thorough, his arguments were closely packed, yet precise, and he was considered an expert on the law of wills. He took part in a number of important cases, among them being the 'heresy trial', 'Du Plessis v. Synod of the Dutch Reformed church', and 'Hofmeyr v. Badenhorst', a defamation case resulting from an election at Riversdale. It was perhaps a portent that in 1920 he had been appointed parliamentary draftsman, a post which, during fourteen years, gave him a special insight into statute law. After acting as a judge of the high court of South-West Africa in 1922 and of the Cape provincial division in 1932, 1933, and 1934, he was appointed a puisne judge of the Cape provincial division in February 1935. Four years later, in 1939, he was elevated to the appellate division. He was appointed chairman of the public service inquiry commission in 1944 and his investigations into the salaries and conditions of service of civil servants were notable for their effective celerity. In 1950 he succeeded E. F. Watermeyer as chief justice and in 1957 he retired after a period in the appellate division which, in length, had been exceeded only by Sir William Solomon. 
While, in other legal fields, Centlivres was responsible for a number of notable judgments, as he was in the celebrated case 'R. v. Milne and Erleigh' (1951), it is his pronouncements in the three most important constitutional cases in the history of South Africa which, in particular, have ensured for him the attention of posterity. These, 'Harris v. Minister of the Interior' (1952), 'Minister of the Interior v. Harris' (1952), and 'Collins v. Minister of the Interior' (1956), represent a collision between cabinet and judiciary, and were the culmination of a government attempt to remove the coloured population from the common roll. Of the three cases the second is perhaps the most remarkable. Frustrated by the appellate division's insistence that the requirements for amending the entrenched clauses of the 'South Africa Act' be respected, the house of assembly and the senate constituted themselves a superior high court of parliament. This was unanimously declared unconstitutional by the appellate division, the chief justice rejecting the contention that parliament could decide bicamerally that no previous court had the right finally to decide whether an act conformed with the requirements of the 'South Africa Act'. His judgment in the first case was described by Professor E. N. Griswold, then dean of the Harvard law school, as 'a great judgement, deserving to rank with the best work of the judges who have contributed to the field of constitutional law' ('South African Law Journal', 1957, 4). In the end the senate was 'packed' and the number of judges of the appellate division was increased from five to eleven without consultation with the chief justice, who endured political attacks with dignified restraint. It was during this turbulent period that the chief justice represented South Africa at, for instance, the seventh legal convention of the Law Council of Australia (1952) and the conference on government under law at Harvard (1955). In his address at Harvard, 'The South African constitution and the rule of law', he forcibly reaffirmed his faith in the rule of law and the rights and dignity of the individual, causes for which he fought unceasingly after his retirement. 
In 1951 Centlivres had succeeded J. C. Smuts as chancellor of the University of Cape Town and, after his retirement as chief justice, was unremitting, through word and action, symbol, meeting, and procession, in his refusal to accept government insistence that, wherever possible, the university should be restricted to white students only. On his installation as chancellor he had emphasized his attitude in his 'Inaugural Address': 'To put it positively, academic freedom, as I understood it, means the unrestricted right on the part of a University to decide for itself what it shall teach, how it shall teach it and whom it shall admit to be taught, as well as the unrestricted right to select as its teachers the best men and women available, whether they happen to have been born in South Africa or elsewhere.' Sociable, unaffected, accessible, Albert Centlivres was typical of the English-speaking South African at his best. In action as well as word he was a democrat. Like Smuts, whom he knew well, he was happy climbing Table Mountain, and, when those days were over, his tall, craggy figure, with pipe, stick, and dog, could be seen ranging the walks of his neighbourhood. Honours burdened him little. He was an honorary DCL of Oxford, and an honorary LLD of the universities of Melbourne, Cape Town, and the Witwatersrand, and of Rhodes University. He was also an honorary fellow of New College and an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple. He died at Claremont, Cape Town, on 19 September 1966. 
A. Lennox-Short', rev. ' 


