@@@@@


doc= 32341


Chads, Sir Henry (1819-1906), naval officer, born at Fareham, Hampshire, on 29 October 1819, was the son of Admiral Sir Henry Ducie Chads (1788-1868) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1861), daughter of John Pook of Fareham. Major-General William John Chads CB was his younger brother. After two years at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth, Henry entered the navy in 1834, and served with his father in the 'Andromache', in the East Indies and against Malay pirates in the Strait of Malacca. In June 1841 he was promoted lieutenant, and as lieutenant of the 'Harlequin' was, in 1844, severely wounded in an attack on pirate settlements in Sumatra. For this service he was specially promoted commander on 31 January 1845. From 1846 to 1848 he commanded the steam sloop 'Styx' on the west coast of Africa with considerable success, and on 5 June 1848 was advanced to post rank. In 1863 he was appointed superintendent of Deptford Dock and victualling yards, from which, in April 1866, he was promoted to his flag. In 1869-70 he was second-in-command of the Channel Fleet; he was promoted rear-admiral in October 1872, and he was commander-in-chief at the Nore from 1876 to September 1877, when he reached the rank of admiral. On 27 October 1884, having reached the age of sixty-five, he was retired. He was made KCB in 1887. He settled at Southsea, where he devoted himself to naval charities, especially the Seamen and Marines' Orphanage, the committee of which he joined in 1868 in succession to his father. He died, unmarried, at his home, Portland House, Southsea, on 30 June 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 32342


Chadwick, Hector Munro (1870-1947), literary scholar, was born on 22 October 1870 at the vicarage, Thornhill Lees, Yorkshire, the third son of the Revd Edward Chadwick and his wife, Sarah Anne Bates, whose father had been in business in Oldham. Far the youngest child, he claimed that his sister, Dora, 'brought me up' (Navarro). From Wakefield grammar school he went, as Cave exhibitioner, to Clare College, Cambridge, in 1889, and became a scholar the following year. In 1892 he was placed in the third division of the first class of part one of the classical tripos. He had, however, been developing individually. As a day boy with an 8 mile trip into Wakefield and back each day, he had taught himself German on the train journeys, and his exceptional qualities began to appear when in 1893 he was placed in the first class of part two of the classical tripos, with distinction in the philology section, and was elected a fellow of his college. From 1895 he taught for section B of the medieval and modern languages tripos, the subjects of which ranged over the whole background of Old English. 
In 1899 Chadwick's first book, 'The Cult of Othin', appeared, already exhibiting the highest linguistic and archaeological competence in collecting evidence, together with remarkable ability in discerning the significant patterns which evidence yielded in combination. 'Studies on Anglo-Saxon Institutions' followed in 1905, and 'The Origin of the English Nation' in 1907 (reprinted 1924). In 1909 the board of medieval and modern languages at Cambridge reported that 'it would be of advantage to the University and a fit recognition of the scholarship and learning of Mr. Chadwick' if a university lectureship in Scandinavian were created for him. Quite exceptional as such a step then was, the advice was taken and the appointment made in 1910. In 1912 Chadwick published 'The Heroic Age'. Its main achievement was to bring together early Teutonic with Greek heroic poetry, to the better understanding of both. There were also 'Notes' on Slav and Celtic heroic poetry, indicative of the widening scope of Chadwick's studies. In 1912 he succeeded W. W. Skeat in the Elrington and Bosworth chair of Anglo-Saxon, which he occupied until 1941. He loved to recall the founder's wish that the subject should not be Anglo-Saxon only but 'the languages cognate therewith, together with the antiquities and history of the Anglo-Saxons'. The war years which followed gave opportunity to reconsider the studies carried on under the medieval and modern languages board. Modern linguists were declaring that Britain had been a tight little island too long, and needed a living interest in other peoples rather than academic concentration on language. Chadwick saw in this both reason and opportunity for removing English studies from the school of modern languages, and, at the same time, reshaping the study of the origins and background of English literature, so as to make philological scholarship serve the knowledge of history and civilization. For this far-reaching reform of Cambridge studies, Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch declared, in the Senate House, nine-tenths of the credit was due to Chadwick. 
On 4 May 1922 Chadwick married Norah (1891-1972), a former pupil, the daughter of James Kershaw, a cotton-mill owner of Farnworth, Lancashire, and his wife, Emma Clara, 'nee' Booth. (She was later, as Norah Kershaw Chadwick, to become a fellow of Newnham College, Cambridge.) Their marriage established a most remarkable literary partnership, of which their 'Growth of Literature' (3 vols., 1932-40) is an abiding monument. Meanwhile the study of modern English literature at Cambridge had greatly developed, and in 1927 Chadwick took the opportunity to transfer his department to the new faculty of archaeology and anthropology, where his group of studies might, like the classics, constitute an independent discipline. On reaching the age limit in 1940 he continued as head of the department until 1945. His last works were 'The Study of Anglo-Saxon' (1941), 'The Nationalities of Europe and the Growth of National Ideologies' (1945), and 'Early Scotland', which was unfinished when he died, at the Evelyn Nursing Home, Trumpington Road, Cambridge, on 2 January 1947, but was published by his widow in 1949. There were no children of the marriage. 
Chadwick was elected FBA in 1925, and received the honorary degrees of DLitt from Durham University (1914) and Oxford (1944) and of LLD from St Andrews in 1919. His talent as a teacher is reflected in some thirty of his pupils who held university posts. 


@@@@@


doc= 32343


Chadwick, Roy (1893-1947), aircraft designer, was born at Farnworth, near Widnes, Lancashire, on 30 April 1893, the elder son of Charles Henry Chadwick, a mechanical engineer in Manchester, and his wife, Agnes Bradshaw. Educated at a school in Urmston and at the Manchester College of Technology, Chadwick was early fascinated with the idea of flying machines, and made model gliders and aeroplanes. Having decided to make aeronautics his career, in 1911 he became associated with Alliott Verdon-Roe, a pioneer of British aviation. With R. J. Parrott and Roy H. Dobson they dedicated their lives to the design and manufacture of aeroplanes, in the small concern known as A. V. Roe & Co. Ltd, later one of the largest aircraft companies. Chadwick was, therefore, from the beginning closely associated with the design of practical aircraft, including the famous Avro 504. During the First World War he worked on the design of several twin-engined biplanes and experimental fighters, and when hostilities ceased he was recognized as one of the youngest and most experienced aircraft designers. In 1920 he married Mary, daughter of Hubert Gomersall, head cashier of the English Sewing Cotton Company, Manchester; they had two daughters. 
Chadwick next designed several big military aircraft and also a number of light machines, including the Avro Baby, probably the first real light aeroplane in the world, to be followed later by the Avro Avian, famous for the record-breaking flights from England to Australia by H. J. L. Hinkler (1928) and Charles Kingsford Smith in 1930. He also devoted his energies to the development of the all-metal aeroplane. 
Much of Chadwick's genius lay in an uncanny understanding of the need for perfect control in aeroplanes. This subtle characteristic was particularly noticeable in his trainer aircraft such as the Tutor which in 1932 replaced the 504, thus perpetuating the Avro tradition of training the Royal Air Force. Some years later, during the Second World War, another design by Chadwick, the Anson, was used extensively for training purposes. Already in 1935 events compelled him to turn his thoughts to military aviation. He designed the Manchester twin-engined heavy bomber which marked a gigantic step forward in aircraft design, although at first the project was almost abandoned on account of the failure of the engines to produce the power promised. Chadwick eventually proved the rightness of his design, however, and it was out of the Manchester that there emerged his greatest triumph, the four-engined Lancaster, capable of carrying a 10 ton bomb, and extensively used for night attack on Germany. Other wartime designs were the York and the Lincoln, followed after the war by the Lancastrian which, with the York, was used for civil aviation. 
Chadwick's first true post-war aircraft, however, was the Tudor, the first pressurized civil aeroplane in the world. A national controversy arose over the Tudor design, but throughout Chadwick never lost faith in his aeroplane. Although production was greatly curtailed, the Tudor later proved its worth on the Berlin airlift. The Ashton, a Royal Air Force research aircraft, was a direct development of the Tudor. It was a tragic irony that it was in a Tudor that Chadwick was killed, when the plane crashed into a field at Shirl Fold Farm, Adlington, Cheshire, during a test flight on 23 August 1947. 
Chadwick's death was an incalculable loss to the cause of British aeronautics which he had greatly served, particularly in the two wars. He designed some forty successful aircraft and the benefit of his last thoughts on design were seen in the Coastal Command Shackleton and the Avro delta-wing aircraft. Chadwick was friendly and good-humoured, but untiring in his quest for the better aeroplane. A combination of visionary and practical engineer, he could always see the next step clearly, and before he died he saw the enormous potential of jet propulsion, particularly in conjunction with the delta-wing form. He was appointed CBE and had received the honorary degree of MSc from Manchester University in 1944. He was a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society. 
Roy Dobson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32344


Chalmers, James (1841-1901), missionary and explorer, was born at Ardrishaig, Argyll, on 4 August 1841, the son of John Chalmers (1802-1869), a stonemason from Peterhead. His mother, Mary, 'nee' Glen (1808-1876), came from Luss on Loch Lomond. Brought up in Ardrishaig, Lochgilphead, and Glenaray, with three younger sisters, one of whom was adopted, he was educated at the village schools. Of these the most important was that run by the Scottish Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge in Glenaray under John MacArthur, where Chalmers frequently won prizes. He then went to Inveraray grammar school. He also learnt much from Gilbert Meikle, the young United Presbyterian minister at Inveraray, who encouraged his parishioners' interest in home and overseas missions. A letter from a Fiji missionary read to his Sunday-school class made Chalmers seriously consider becoming a missionary in September 1855, and at about the same time he took up a clerical apprenticeship with the Inveraray lawyers Maclullich and Macniven. During the powerful religious revival of 1859, which swept Argyll in the autumn, Chalmers underwent a religious conversion, and he was formally admitted a member of the United Presbyterian church in the spring of 1860. In November he joined the Glasgow City Mission, to earn money for his further education and ministerial training. Persuaded by Dr George Turner, a well-known missionary from Samoa working for the London Missionary Society (LMS), he applied to that society in February 1862 and was admitted for ministerial instruction to Cheshunt College in Hertfordshire in September. 
A boisterous student who found formal learning ever more difficult, Chalmers remained at Cheshunt until June 1864. He then spent a final year acquiring a specific missionary training, chiefly at the LMS's Farquhar House, Highgate, in London, but also at Plumstead, learning the Rarotongan language under the missionary William Gill. In October 1865 he was ordained a Congregationalist minister. He married Jane K. Robertson Hercus (died 1879), a schoolteacher, on 8 November 1865, and they set sail for the Pacific on 4 January 1866; they finally reached Rarotonga on 20 May 1867, after being shipwrecked on Niue and numerous other mishaps. 
Like many volunteers inspired by David Livingstone, Chalmers had once thought of Africa, but from 1871 he was anxious to join the new LMS initiative in New Guinea. First, however, he spent ten years in Rarotonga, most of them in charge of the LMS institution and training Rarotongan agents. Recognizing the revolutionary impact of a European presence and the necessarily gradual penetration of Christian belief, he placed every confidence in his charges and was anxious to build up their independence rapidly in both church and state. 'They must act for themselves... Unless the natives are taught to look after their own Island and prepare for the future they will not be able to resist the pressure of the white faces', he wrote in his 1874 report (Hitchen, 26). His methods were often seen as casual and unconventional, for he avoided genteel living and Anglicization, preferring instead the assimilation of missionaries into indigenous conditions of diet or housing where possible; he also encouraged the inculcation of the gospel through the ordinary experiences of everyday life. This attracted criticism from some colleagues devoted to the formalities of 'civilized' life in 'raising' the islanders, as well as from others who either drew the line at Chalmers's ready enjoyment of whisky or simply feared for his own and his wife's survival. However, many others were devoted admirers of Tamate, as the Rarotongans called him, and his friendships especially with the local people were powerful and lasting. 
New Guinea, with its reputedly wild and cannibalistic tribes, had long been the goal of LMS expansion in the Pacific, and Chalmers's offer to go there was finally accepted in December 1875. He left Rarotonga in May 1877, and visited W. G. Lawes in October at Port Moresby before settling himself for two years at Suau Island. Subsequently he lived at Port Moresby for nearly a decade, at Toaripi (1889-92; otherwise Motumotu), Saguane (1896-1900), and for the last months of his life at Daru. In New Guinea, Chalmers felt genuinely fulfilled as a missionary. Perhaps naturally restless, certainly relishing the pioneering aspects of his journeys, and able to satisfy his endless curiosity about new landscapes or peoples, he also believed theologically and practically that the true missionary should be constantly breaking new ground. There was for him no conflict between pioneering as a white person and the European missionary's role. He travelled endlessly, especially by boat, visiting village after village, often as the first European to be seen there. Establishing peaceful contact and fixing on potential stations were the essential complements of training the native agents, who were to be placed as soon as possible. However, this conception of his task, while acceptable to the LMS under Joseph Mullens in the 1870s, became much less so under Ralph Wardlaw Thompson's secretaryship. 
Chalmers's contribution to European knowledge of Papua New Guinea is still debated but was undoubtedly considerable. He gathered botanical and geographical information, especially around the Gulf of Papua. His ethnographic work brought a close friendship with the anthropologist A. C. Haddon, which in turn refined both men's investigations. Firsthand information, Chalmers believed, was a vital basis for his missionary strategy. From the mid-1880s he began to publish widely in learned journals such as the proceedings of the Glasgow Philosophical Society and the Royal Geographical Society, as well as with the Religious Tract Society. His first book, 'Work and Adventure in New Guinea, 1877-1885' (1885), and his 'Pioneering in New Guinea' (1887), became especially well known. Although preferring English as the language of instruction, he nevertheless translated the synoptic gospels into Motu, which others like Lawes regarded as a potential lingua franca spreading out from Port Moresby. 
His aim of 'New Guinea for the New Guineans' led him to cultivate good relations with the British naval and consular officials, many of whom became heavily dependent on his influence and advice. Naturally this won 'the tyrant missionary' enemies among some of the local traders and their supporters in the Australian press. Visiting Brisbane in 1883 he was active in the movement leading to the British imperial protectorate and to the official ending of Queensland's labour recruiting in New Guinea in 1885. He regretted the intrusion of outsiders while realizing its inevitability, and worked to minimize its impact, being as ready to help gold-diggers as government officials with advice which he believed would reconcile their interests and those of the Papuans. 
Chalmers left New Guinea infrequently, visiting New Zealand in 1877 and again briefly after his wife's death in 1879. He hated the work of missionaries on furlough, referring to it in 1884 as 'the begging-friar business' with its 'telling of excited painted tales... lying reports, [and] salted statistics' (Hitchen, 61-2). Nevertheless, his visits to Britain in 1886-7 to publicize New Guinea's needs, and in 1894-5 during the LMS centenary, were regarded as missionary triumphs and made his a household name. 
On 6 October 1888 Chalmers married Sarah Elizabeth (Lizzie) Harrison, 'nee' Large, old friend of his first wife and recently widowed. Happy enough with him she found the spartan conditions and loneliness during Chalmers's travels hard to bear. In the 1890s Chalmers attended particularly to the remote western districts on the Fly River, hoping to penetrate permanently well inland. He failed. With his energy and health declining, and his wife having died at Saguane, on 25 October 1900, he was forced to move to Daru. Finally, on 8 April 1901, on an expedition to Goaribari Island with the Revd Oliver Tompkins, Chalmers and his party were captured, clubbed, killed, and eaten. 


@@@@@


doc= 32345


Chalmers, Sir Mackenzie Dalzell (1847-1927), judge and civil servant, was born on 7 February 1847 at Nonington, near Barham, Kent, the second son of the Revd Frederick Skene Courtenay Chalmers, rector of Nonington and his wife, Matilda, daughter of the Revd William Marsh, honorary canon of Worcester Cathedral and perpetual curate of St Mary's, Leamington Spa. He was educated at King's College, London. His studies at Trinity College, Oxford, led to honours (second class) in the classical moderations in 1866, though he graduated in 1868 with only a pass degree. His connection with the college continued long after; indeed, in February 1907 some fellows approached him with a suggestion that he might succeed Professor H. F. Pelham as president of the college, though in the event nothing came of this. He made generous provision for the college in his will, leaving it the residue of his considerable personal estate, as well as his books and certain of his papers. 
After his call to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1869 and a short period as a member of the Indian Civil Service, Chalmers returned to London in 1872, joining the home circuit and taking chambers at 1 Paper Buildings. In 1875 he moved to the chambers of Farrer Herschell QC at 3 Harcourt Buildings. In 1880 he was appointed a revising barrister, and he followed Herschell in 1881 in a move to 11 New Court, Carey Street. 
In 1882, through Herschell's influence, Chalmers was appointed as standing counsel to the Board of Trade. As such he did much work on the reforming bill which became the 'Bankruptcy Act 1883'. About this time he also wrote 'The Cost of Litigation' (1880), 'Local Government' (1883), and, with E. Hough, 'The Bankruptcy Act 1883' (1884). 
In 1884 Chalmers became a county court judge at Birmingham, an office he held until 1896, apart from a short period in 1893 as acting chief justice of Gibraltar. In 1898 Herschell, then in his final year as lord chancellor, appointed Chalmers a commissioner of assize. His failure to promote him further, as it was said that he wished, may have been only through lack of opportunity, though transition from the county court bench to the High Court bench would then have been unprecedented. (Herschell's sole appointment to the Queen's Bench Division was in 1892, and went to William Rann Kennedy.) 
In 1878 Chalmers published 'A Digest of the Law of Bills of Exchange', a work of considerable scholarship. Written as a step on the way to a codification of the area, it was cast in the form of numbered propositions with added notes, much as if it were an act and a commentary on that act. After presenting a paper on this intended codification to the Institute of Bankers in 1880, he was instructed by the institute and by the associated chambers of commerce to draft a bill. This bill rapidly became the 'Bills of Exchange Act' of 1882. As well as the 'Digest', Chalmers wrote 'The Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 (India)' (1882) and the briefer 'The Bills of Exchange Act 1882' (1882). His next substantial task was the codification of the law of sale of goods. He produced a draft bill in 1888, 'an acknowledged masterpiece of draftsmanship' (R. F. V. Henston, 'Lives of the Lord Chancellors', 1984, 108) which Herschell introduced to the House of Lords with the express purpose of eliciting criticisms, and in 1890 Chalmers published a text, 'The Sale of Goods'. The bill was reintroduced to the house in 1891, and referred to a select committee of law lords. A proposal that the bill be extended to Scotland necessitated considerable delay, but it was eventually enacted as the 'Sale of Goods Act' of 1893. 
Marine insurance then claimed Chalmers's attention. In 1894 he produced a draft bill, which was introduced in the Lords and subjected to lengthy consideration in committee. In 1900 it was reintroduced, again considered in committee, and eventually passed by the Lords, but rejected by the Commons. In 1901 he produced (with Douglas Owen) 'A Digest of the Law of Marine Insurance'. The Commons reconsidered the bill in 1906, when Lord Chancellor Loreburn's intervention secured its passage as the 'Marine Insurance Act' of 1906. 
Chalmers returned to India in 1896 as the legal member of the viceroy's council. His work included revisions to the code of criminal procedure, and an act aimed at legal touting. He was made a CSI in 1898. On his return to England in 1899 he was appointed assistant parliamentary counsel, in 1902 succeeding Courtenay Ilbert as first parliamentary counsel. In September 1903 he succeeded Sir Kenelm Digby as permanent under-secretary of state for the Home department. Here he handled petitions for clemency, in consultation with Lord Halsbury: together, they constituted a 'de facto' criminal court of appeal prior to the formal constitution of this body in 1907. Chalmers was also on the standing committee for the revision of statute law: according to his 'Times' obituarist he enjoyed pruning obsolete laws, but was bored by factory and social legislation. The same memoir described him as 'A man of the world with a wide, if not perhaps very profound, knowledge of human nature, and untrammelled by any belief in its essential goodness or ultimate perfection' ('The Times', 23 Dec 1927). He was made a CB in 1904, and created KCB in 1906. He retired in 1908. 
In 1910 and 1912 Chalmers served as the British delegate at conferences at The Hague about the international unification of the law of bills of exchange. In 1911 he served as a member of the royal commission on Maltese affairs, and in 1916 of the royal commission on the Easter rising in Ireland. During the First World War he served on the war risks commission, and he was chairman of the commission which investigated German violations of the laws of war in Belgium. He was a member of the council of the Royal Aeronautical Society and vice-president of the London Fever Hospital, and he was keenly interested in the affairs of the order of St John of Jerusalem. The last three bodies were the recipients of considerable bequests in his will. 
Chalmers never married. In his later years he lived at Wimbledon, and was almost daily at the Athenaeum, where he had many friends. He was also a member of the Marylebone Cricket Club. In December 1927 he underwent a serious operation, and died at a nursing home at 4 Dorset Square, Marylebone, London, on 22 December. He was buried at his birthplace, Nonington. 


@@@@@


doc= 32346


Chalmers, Robert, Baron Chalmers (1858-1938), civil servant, was born at 14 Allen Road, Albert Town, Hornsey, Middlesex, on 18 August 1858, the only son of John Chalmers, a bookseller and publisher, originally from Aberdeen, and his wife, Julia, daughter of Robert Mackay. He was educated at the City of London School, where the headmaster, Dr Edwin Abbott, strongly influenced him in his commitment to scholarship and public service. In 1877 he entered Oriel College, Oxford, where he took a first class in classical moderations in 1878 and a second class in natural science (biology) in 1881. For a time he contemplated studying medicine at Edinburgh, but in 1882 he entered the open competitive examination for the upper division of the civil service and was placed first on the list with what was then a record total of marks. 
Chalmers entered the Treasury as a second-class clerk on 14 August 1882 and rose steadily thereafter: from first-class clerk on 15 April 1894 to principal clerk on 25 February 1899, and to assistant secretary on 1 April 1903. For most of that time he served in the Treasury's finance division, and on 28 October 1907 he was appointed chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, where he was largely responsible for the transfer of the excise from the Inland Revenue to a new board of customs and excise in 1908. In this role, and from 24 July 1911, when he succeeded Sir George Murray as permanent secretary of the Treasury, he was one of the principal advisers to successive chancellors of the exchequer: H. H. Asquith, David Lloyd George, Reginald McKenna, and Andrew Bonar Law. Chalmers had strong Liberal convictions and at first he got on well with Lloyd George, of whose 1909 budget he was one of the principal architects, but they fell out in 1913, when Chalmers believed that the chancellor had misled the House of Commons. On 26 September that year, apparently at his own suggestion, Chalmers was appointed governor of Ceylon, where he was able to indulge his hobby of the study of Pali, the ancient language of that country, on which he published several books. 
Chalmers's period as governor was marred by riots in May and June 1915, arising from tension between native Buddhists and Muslim immigrants from India, and he was glad to be asked in December that year to return to the Treasury, which was sorely in need of his talents as it sought to cope with the problems of war finance. For two months he worked in the Treasury while on leave from Ceylon and on 4 March 1916 he was appointed joint permanent secretary (in conjunction with Sir John Bradbury and Sir Thomas Heath). From May to September 1916 he acted temporarily as under-secretary for Ireland during the troubles. He returned to the Treasury, where in July 1917 he and his junior colleague, John Maynard Keynes, clashed with the governor of the Bank of England, Walter Cunliffe, who claimed that the Treasury officials had taken over the bank's functions in relation to financing purchases in the United States. The chancellor, Bonar Law, supported Chalmers and Keynes, and Cunliffe had to concede the Treasury's primacy for the duration of the war. Chalmers was due to retire in August 1918, but at Bonar Law's request he agreed to stay on, and did not leave until 31 March 1919. 
Chalmers had a reputation for tough efficiency and a sarcastic wit. However, behind a mask of pomposity and cynicism he hid a kind heart and a generous nature. As a young man he lived in the East End of London, where he worked under Samuel Barnett, then vicar of St Jude's, Whitechapel, giving up all the time not required by his work at the Treasury to helping by personal contact the poor and sick. As a senior official, he was a source of encouragement to younger members of his department, provided that they showed no fear of him (if they did he became irritated). He had a flair for bestowing nicknames: it was apparently he who first dubbed Lloyd George the Goat. 
Chalmers combined public service with scholarship. As a Treasury clerk he persuaded the master of the rolls to unlock the gates of the Public Record Office in Chancery Lane after dark, and there carried out the research that led to his 'History of Currency in the British Colonies' (1893). As a member of the Pali Text Society he contributed to the translation and editing of a number of Buddhist texts published between 1895 and 1932. In 1919 he was appointed a member of the royal commission on the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and, as a member of the commission, stayed for a time at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where his younger son had been an undergraduate, incorporating his Oxford degree at Cambridge and becoming a member of the college. He was elected master of Peterhouse in 1924, and during his seven years of office took a personal interest in the undergraduates, providing lavish hospitality and often helping poorer scholars unostentatiously from his own pocket. 
Chalmers was appointed CB in 1900, KCB in 1908, and GCB in 1916, and on his retirement was made Baron Chalmers of Northiam in Sussex. He was elected an honorary fellow of Oriel College in 1918, and he received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow (1913), Oxford (1923), Cambridge (1924), and St Andrews (1930). He was a trustee of the British Museum (1924-31) and president of the Royal Asiatic Society (1922-5), and was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1927. 
Chalmers married Maud Mary, daughter of John George Pigott, a musician, on 2 July 1888; they had two sons, Ralph and Robert, and one daughter, Mabel. Ralph became a professional soldier, Robert a barrister. Both were killed while on active service in May 1915. His wife died in 1923, and on 1 June 1935 he married Iris Florence, elder daughter of Sir John Harvard Biles, professor of naval architecture at Glasgow University, and widow of Robert Latta, professor of logic at Glasgow University. Chalmers died on 17 November 1938 at his home, 14 Crick Road, Oxford. His funeral service was in Oriel College chapel, and there was a memorial service in the Chapel of the Order of the Bath, Westminster Abbey. As he died without surviving male children, the peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 32347


Chamberlain, (Arthur) Neville (1869-1940), prime minister, was born on 18 March 1869 at Edgbaston, Birmingham, the only son of Joseph Chamberlain (1836-1914) and his second wife, Florence (1847-1875), the daughter of Timothy Kenrick of Birmingham. His childhood was by all accounts very happy, although the household in which he grew to maturity was affected by profound sadness. His father's first wife, Harriet Kenrick, had died while giving birth to Neville's elder half-brother, (Joseph) Austen Chamberlain, in 1863, and his own mother died in similar circumstances in 1875, the child on this occasion also perishing. This unquestionably left its mark on Joseph Chamberlain and imposed a certain strain on his relations with his children. Neville later recalled that for many years his feelings towards his father were characterized by respect and fear rather than love, noting that few could face his 'piercing eye' with composure (Feiling, 3). It is clear, though, that Joseph Chamberlain loved all his children equally, and that despite a busy life he spent considerable time with them and was in turn adored. Furthermore, the family remained remarkably close-knit and self-contained, providing Neville with a permanent haven of security and affection. 
Not unnaturally, age conferred a certain distance upon the relationship between the children of the first marriage -- Beatrice ('b'. 1862) ['see 'Chamberlain, Beatrice Mary] and Austen ('b'. 1863) -- and those of the second: Neville, Ida ('b'. 1870) ['see '(Florence) Ida Chamberlain 'under' Beatrice Chamberlain], Hilda ('b'. 1872) ['see '(Caroline) Hilda Chamberlain 'under' Beatrice Chamberlain], and Ethel ('b'. 1873). This was later compounded by Austen's absence at Rugby School. Neville, however, emerged as the leader of a junior family group, and in the process formed particularly close relationships with his sisters Ida and Hilda. There was also a large cousinage, mostly female, spawned by the Chamberlains' intermarriage with other members of the Unitarian and Quaker industrial aristocracy of Birmingham, which completed Neville's family circle. 
His Unitarian background and upbringing made Chamberlain aware of the need to promote progress and instilled in him a profound sense of duty. He also developed an understanding of the responsibilities that wealth and privilege incur. One of his cousins later wrote: 'You may say that Neville was a born social reformer, and brought up in an atmosphere of precept and example' (Feiling, 13). Another cousin commented: 'We always understood as children that as our lives had fallen in pleasant places it behoved us all the more to do what we could to improve the lot of those less happily placed' (NCP (Neville Chamberlain papers, University of Birmingham Library), 11/15/44, Lady Cecily Debenham to Anne Chamberlain, 11 Sept 194[1]?). In this respect, Neville was much more like his father than was Austen, who styled himself Liberal Unionist out of sentiment and respect for his father, but was at heart a 'born Conservative' (Dilks, 25). 
Neville Chamberlain, on the other hand, as he indicated on accepting the leadership of the Conservative Party, remained a Liberal Unionist from conviction. On 1 June 1937 he told the party that he: 'was not born a little Conservative. I was brought up as a Liberal and afterwards as a Liberal Unionist. The fact that I am here, accepted by you Conservatives as your leader, is to my mind a demonstration of the catholicity of the Conservative Party, of that readiness to cover the widest possible field which has made it this great force in the country, and has justified the saying of Disraeli that the Conservative Party was nothing if it was not a National Party. (Ramsden, 'Age of Balfour', 356)' For Neville Chamberlain, as for his father before him, issues such as slum clearance, urban development, and the provision of schools and hospitals were vital concerns and the proper preoccupations of politicians and statesmen. He never lost sight of these goals even during the most critical international crises of his premiership, informing a Conservative conference on 12 May 1938 that it was his observance of his father's 'deep sympathy with the working classes and his intense desire to better their lot which inspired me with an ambition to do something in my turn to afford better help to the working people and better opportunities for the enjoyment of life. (Chamberlain, 210)' The extent of his genuine concern for the quality of life of ordinary people is indicated in his shock at the condition of the working classes revealed by Birmingham evacuees during 1940, which no doubt would also have made clear to him the limitations of power. There can, however, be no gainsaying his anguish at his ignorance. 
Chamberlain grew up to be a man of broad interests and avocations. In his youth a keen entomologist, he later developed an even keener interest in flowers, becoming eventually a fellow of the Royal Horticultural Society. Ornithology was another of his passions, which he advanced by rising at five in the morning to learn to distinguish the songs of the various species. Even during the frenetic years of the 1930s, when occupying the most senior offices, he found time to indulge these pursuits. In 1914 he added angling to his list of hobbies. His range of interests, however, was not confined to natural history. There is probably no prime minister who knew his Shakespeare better than Chamberlain; witness his quotation from Hotspur in '1 Henry IV' at Heston Airport on leaving for Munich in 1938: that he hoped to 'pluck from this nettle danger, this flower, safety'. Moreover, he read other authors widely. Finally, he inherited from his mother's side musicality and a deep love of music. 
The only thing that disturbed Chamberlain's childhood happiness was school. He hated the preparatory school at Rugby and Rugby School itself, where he followed his brother in 1882. He was bullied and, perhaps as a result, became somewhat shy and withdrawn, not participating in the school debating society until the period of the home rule controversy in 1886, when he spoke in his father's defence. The real cause of his dislike of Rugby may, however, simply have been the reality of living away from the family and the associated loneliness. His father's decision that he be removed from the 'classical' to the recently introduced 'modern side' did nothing to endear him to the institution. A career in business had been predetermined for him by his father, who considered that the subjects taught in the modern curriculum would be more relevant. At the end of 1886 Neville left Rugby, but there was no question of his following Austen to Cambridge. Austen had been sent there by his father and thence on an extensive tour of Europe as preparation for a career in politics; but a university education was deemed an unnecessary expense for a career in business. In this Joseph Chamberlain, although unintentionally, did Neville a great disservice. A university education would in all probability have made him a better integrated, more self-confident, and poised personality, with a capacity to project his inner warmth beyond the confines of the family and intimate friends and an ability to appreciate that there were points of view as intellectually sound as his own. He certainly had the intelligence to benefit from the university experience, which his father later recognized. Comparing his two sons in 1902, Joseph Chamberlain observed that, while he thought Austen had a fair chance of leading a government, Neville was 'the really clever one' and that if ever he became interested in a political career he 'would back him to be Prime Minister' (Dilks, 86). 
Chamberlain's education was completed at Mason College, Birmingham, which became the basis for the University of Birmingham. There he studied science, metallurgy, and engineering. These were, however, disciplines which did not fully absorb him and at which he did not excel. Nevertheless, it was at this time that he developed a profound interest in natural science, reading the works of Darwin, Huxley, and Wallace. On leaving Mason College he was apprenticed to a firm of chartered accountants, being so successful there that he was offered a permanency. 
By 1890 Chamberlain was a serious young man with a very strong sense of duty, a sharp intellect, and clarity of thought. He could also empathize with the distress of the less well-favoured sections of society and he understood their needs. With these qualities he combined resilience, determination, and obstinacy, which served him surprisingly well and immediately in 1890. 
Having sold the family's business interests in 1874, Joseph Chamberlain was obliged to live off the profits of his investments in order to sustain his career in politics. By 1890 his South American investments had declined considerably, and he had not had a ministerial salary for four years. He was living off capital, and therefore susceptible to the suggestion that a fortune was to be made from growing sisal in the Bahama Islands. He instructed Neville to make his way to New York and proceed thence with Austen to the Bahamas to assess the profitability of sisal culture. 
On returning to Birmingham in January 1891, the two brothers reported that profits of 30 per cent could be anticipated. Joseph Chamberlain decided to go ahead, despite words of caution from his brothers and other associates, and it was determined that Neville should supervise the entire undertaking. Back in the Bahamas in May 1891, Neville decided that the island of Andros would be the best location for the Chamberlain plantation, and he arranged the purchase of the land. Unfortunately, by 1896 the worst forebodings of Joseph Chamberlain's brothers were realized, and it was necessary to wind up the business at a personal loss to Joseph Chamberlain of $50,000. It was clear that Andros and the Bahamas in general were a poor location for the cultivation of sisal on a large scale, and that much of the fibre produced was of inferior quality. This and a catastrophic fall in the price of sisal forced Neville Chamberlain to inform his father in April 1896 that: 'there is only one conclusion to be drawn... which I do with great reluctance and with the most bitter disappointment. I no longer see any chance of making the investment pay. I cannot blame myself too much for the want of judgment. You and Austen have had to rely solely on my reports but I have been here all the time and no doubt a sharper man would have seen long ago what the ultimate result was likely to be. (NCP, 1/6/10/114, Neville Chamberlain to Joseph Chamberlain, 28 April 1896)' There can be no doubting the personal sense of failure that Chamberlain felt, but the collapse of the enterprise could not be attributed to a lack of efficiency, skill, or determination on his part. Had the Andros Fibre Company ever had any prospect of success, the energy and single-mindedness of Neville Chamberlain would have ensured it. Merely to establish the plantation, he had had to endure demanding physical conditions and undertake substantial manual work himself. In truth, no amount of ingenuity on his part could have saved the plantation from the initial and critical misjudgement that sisal would grow on Andros. The responsibility for failure was as much that of his father and brother as it was his. 
Nevertheless, there were gains. Chamberlain had had to be self-reliant and learn to be confident of his judgement: as a result he became altogether much tougher and more resilient. Andros had confirmed in him too the sense of social obligation and duty to his neighbour, genuinely expressed in the anguish he felt at abandoning his good works and leaving his workers to relapse into their previous state. The solitude of Andros and the lack of sophisticated company had been a disadvantage in one sense, but it enabled him to read extensively. He took with him to Andros works by Darwin, Bagehot, George Eliot, and the botanist John Lindley. The 'Bible' and the complete Shakespeare followed, as did other scientific, historical, and biographical material. There were also the compensations of the local fauna, which absorbed him. In many respects, Andros was his university, although a more costly one than Cambridge. Nevertheless, so much solitude and experience of dissolute whites harmed his character: his shyness and reserve were reinforced and his sense of superiority and a certain conceit of himself confirmed. Yet at the same time he had become more tolerant and had learned to cope with human frailty. Even so, he still felt the need to prove himself: home and Birmingham provided him with that opportunity. 
Between 1897 and 1916 Chamberlain established himself as a leading figure in the industrial life of Birmingham. Shortly after returning to Britain from the Bahamas he secured a directorship in Elliott's Metal Company. He soon acquired a reputation for his direct involvement in all aspects of the company's operations and his willingness to consult the workforce. His main business interest, however, until his semi-retirement from the world of commerce immediately before the First World War, was the Bordesley firm of Hoskins & Son, manufacturers of ships' berths, which he bought at the end of 1897 with the help of his family. He continued, however, to be a director of Elliott's, to which he devoted one day a week, eventually becoming chairman of that company too. Later he joined the board of the Birmingham Small Arms Company, with which there was a family connection through an uncle. 
At Hoskins, Chamberlain added to his reputation as a hands-on manager. His practical involvement in the day-to-day running of the business was exceptional by the standards of the day. He was, nevertheless, prepared to entrust matters to proven and trusted subordinates and became an accomplished practitioner in the art of delegation. He was accessible to his workers and solicitous of their welfare to the extent of encouraging trade union membership, in which he was considerably in advance of his contemporaries. At Elliott's, Chamberlain introduced a surgery and welfare supervisors and, after 1914, instituted a scheme of war benefits for those too badly injured to resume work and their dependants. At Hoskins he was equally innovative in welfare and reform, devising a 5 per cent bonus on production and a pension plan. When business was slack he was reluctant to lay men off. Indeed, for his time he was an exemplary employer and could justifiably take pride in the fact that he never experienced a strike. 
Chamberlain's conspicuous success in business, besides enabling him to purge his sense of failure in Andros, gave him a base from which to involve himself in wider aspects of Birmingham life. He was an emphatic supporter of the creation of the University of Birmingham, which owed much to the determination of his father, who became its first chancellor in 1900. An indefatigable fund-raiser on its behalf, Neville was also on the university council. Perhaps more compelling, though, was his concern for health care. He was a member of and eventually chaired Birmingham General Hospital's board of management, and was treasurer of the Birmingham General Dispensary. As evidence of the rigour that he brought to these voluntary duties, he devised a scheme to relieve the general hospital of trivial outpatient cases that foreshadowed Lloyd George's 'National Insurance Act'. The acceptance of this scheme was a major success for Chamberlain, and the manner in which he promoted it -- meticulous planning, close attention to detail, acute grasp of the complexities of the problem, and skill as a negotiator -- demonstrated many of the attributes that made him a highly respected figure in local government. 
There were inevitably rumours that Chamberlain's entry into municipal or national public life was imminent. He felt, however, that he had to succeed in business and restore the financial losses of Andros before embarking on a political career. But he did speak for his father and others during election campaigns, and when his father left the Unionist government in 1903 to campaign for tariff reform Neville became 'an ardent adherent', confessing that he had for many years been a convert to the cause (NCP, 3/9/18, Neville Chamberlain to F. B. Matthews, 31 Aug 1903). As a businessman he was naturally aware of the external threat to local manufacturers, and like his father and brother he favoured imperial preference. He also took a lively interest in international developments and recognized the threat from Germany before 1914. He did not believe that the ententes concluded with France in 1904 and Russia in 1907 would do much to deter Germany, and so he became very active in the Navy League in Birmingham. He deplored reductions in the size of the army. 
The year 1911 was to be a significant turning point in Chamberlain's life. First, at the comparatively advanced age of forty-one he married, in January, Anne Vere, the daughter of William Utting Cole, an army officer, after a brief courtship and engagement. Until this time he had envisaged permanent bachelorhood, but to his everlasting joy he found in Anne Cole the perfect partner, although in many respects their characters were completely antithetical. He was precise, meticulous, and in control of his emotions; she was somewhat impulsive and volatile. Nevertheless, they were a devoted couple, and Neville later claimed that he owed everything to her. In 1911 their daughter, Dorothy, was born; in 1913 their son, Frank. Anne Chamberlain found immediate favour with her husband's family and particularly with Joseph Chamberlain, but her relationship with him was short-lived, for he died on 2 July 1914. 
Anne Chamberlain emphatically supported her husband's entry into politics, preferably in the House of Commons, for which she, as did many others, thought him equipped. It was not, however, the stimulus of his wife that prompted this step, but rather the passage of the 'Greater Birmingham Bill' in 1911 and the desire to participate actively in the development of the city which its provisions made possible. In November 1911, standing as a Liberal Unionist candidate, he was elected to Birmingham city council on a manifesto that emphasized town planning, the need to develop canals and inland waterways, and the importance of improved technical education. 
Chamberlain's rise to pre-eminence in local government was rapid. In 1914 he was elected as alderman, and in 1915 he became lord mayor. Lloyd George later jibed that Chamberlain was 'a good mayor of Birmingham in an off year' (Taylor, 256), but Chamberlain's actions and public statements throughout this period eloquently testify to his profound concern for social reform and for the welfare of ordinary people; it was even said that 'he should have been a Labour man' (Feiling, 52). To achieve his objectives, he became practised in the arts of persuasion and conciliation. 
On election Chamberlain was immediately made chairman of the town planning committee. Under his leadership and direction the first two town planning schemes in Britain were passed into law by the end of 1913. In the same year he became chairman of a special committee charged with investigating the housing conditions of Birmingham's poorest citizens. Its interim report, although accepted by the council, was not immediately implemented because of the war, but the vision remained. On becoming lord mayor in November 1915 he spoke of the need to move 'the working classes from their hideous and depressing surroundings to cleaner, brighter and more wholesome dwellings in the still uncontaminated country which lay within [the city's] boundaries' ('Birmingham Daily Post', 10 Nov 1915). 
Chamberlain's assiduity in local government ensured that his reputation for industry and efficiency spread rapidly beyond Birmingham. In 1915 Lloyd George, the newly appointed minister of munitions in the Asquith coalition, invited him to serve on the liquor control board, set up to minimize the impact of alcohol consumption on arms production. Chamberlain accepted, but after a brief period of distinguished service felt compelled to resign because service on the board was incompatible with the duties of lord mayor. Despite the constraints of wartime, his record as lord mayor was exceptional. He was indefatigable in organizing the city for war, and his schedule was punishing. Within six weeks of assuming office he had persuaded the Ministry of Munitions to underwrite the costs of increasing Birmingham's electricity supply, begun rationalizing the purchase of coal for the gas and electricity industries in the city through a joint committee, and prevented a strike by the council's workers by mediating an agreement between their leaders and the labour committee. 
The lasting monuments of Chamberlain's year as lord mayor, however, were the establishment of the Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and the Birmingham Municipal Bank. The former he proposed after a concert given in Birmingham in 1916 by the Halle Orchestra. He felt that a city of Birmingham's stature should be endowed with an orchestra of a high standard and that it should be funded partly from the rates. There was, though, an additional agenda: such an orchestra, located in a large concert hall, would, through cheaper seats, make music both accessible to a wider audience and simultaneously more self-financing. In 1919 an annual grant from the rates was voted and made possible the creation of the city orchestra. 
No less socially improving was Birmingham City Bank. The government was anxious by the end of 1915 to encourage investment in war loan by a population now enjoying high wages. The essence of the problem was to persuade those who had never before saved to invest. Chamberlain thought this could be done through municipal savings associations in which the workers could invest by means of regular contributions that would be deducted at source by employers; the deposited funds, not being generally available for withdrawal until the end of the war, would be available for war loan. Interest would be guaranteed by the municipalities. Despite petty obstruction from the Treasury and objections from the banks and trade unions, his tireless lobbying eventually ensured that his scheme for municipal savings banks became law in 1916. Such was the success of the Birmingham Municipal Bank that it was made permanent by an act of parliament in 1919 with the additional power to advance mortgages to depositors. It remained in existence until 1976, the only organization of its type in the country. 
Chamberlain would have liked to have achieved much more, but he recognized the limitations that war imposed and that social advance must wait. He believed that the German government's 'wicked ambitions had stayed the march of progress and had set back for an indefinite period reforms that might have bettered the lot of generations to come' ('Birmingham Daily Post', 10 Nov 1915). Even so, his undoubted achievements and popularity were such that he was elected lord mayor for a second term. He was, however, destined never to complete it. 
The need for the efficient organization of manpower for both the military effort and the industrial one that would sustain it had long been one of Chamberlain's convictions. When, therefore, in December 1916 the new prime minister, Lloyd George, on the suggestion of Austen Chamberlain, offered him the newly created post of director-general of national service, he was predisposed to accept the commission and resigned as lord mayor. His remit was to recruit 'volunteers' for essential war work; but, beyond that, despite three interviews with Lloyd George, he had no detailed instructions or even terms of appointment. Moreover, it was decided that he did not need a seat in the Commons. Given these difficulties, he was in a hopeless position from the start. In eight months only a few thousand volunteers were placed in employment essential for war work. The underlying problem, however, was that Lloyd George took an instant dislike to him, dismissing him as a 'pin-headed incompetent' ('Amery Diaries', 143); the contempt was reciprocated, Chamberlain later referring to Lloyd George as a 'dirty little Welsh Attorney' (Ramsden, 'Age of Balfour', 136). 
On 8 August 1917 Chamberlain resigned. This was a bitter experience, redolent, as he himself recognized, of Andros. He had made mistakes; he should have had experience of parliament before taking such a position; he should have insisted upon a seat in the Commons; and perhaps it had been imprudent to select as his principal assistant a man unversed in the intricacies of Whitehall, Birmingham's former town clerk. Chamberlain had, though, faced insuperable obstacles from the beginning. Both his successor, Sir Auckland Geddes, and the leader of the Conservative Party, Andrew Bonar Law, later publicly recognized the extent of his difficulties and acknowledged his contribution in very constrained circumstances. 
This was a depressing period in Chamberlain's life, but with the support of his family he had within weeks determined upon a parliamentary future for himself. There was, though, a further sting in the tail of the year 1917 that intensified the mortification of failure in governmental office. In December his cousin Norman, for whom he had the highest regard and great affection, was reported missing in action, and his death was confirmed in the new year. This not only reinforced Chamberlain's hatred of war, but undoubtedly also contributed to the depression which followed his unsuccessful directorship of national service. He wrote: 'My career is broken. How can a man of nearly 50, entering the House with this stigma upon him, hope to achieve anything?' (NCP, 2/20, diary, 17 Dec 1917). 
Chamberlain was elected to parliament in the general election of 1918 as the member for Birmingham, Ladywood, and remained a radical while sitting in the Conservative and Liberal Unionist interest. His election address urged that reconstruction should be a national enterprise that disregarded party. The best monument to the war dead would be social improvement that embraced proper pension provision, a minimum wage where necessary, shorter working hours, and a programme of state-aided housing construction. This was all consonant with his enlightened and highly acclaimed speech to the Trades Union Congress in Birmingham in September 1916. This had urged partnership between unions and employers. He was not himself averse to workers being represented on boards of directors, and he keenly advocated steadiness of employment. Neville's radicalism soon brought about a brief clash with Austen Chamberlain, by then chancellor of the exchequer in the Lloyd George coalition. Whereas Austen thought Neville 'wild', Neville thought Austen 'unprogressive and prejudiced' (NCP, 18/1/196, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 4 Jan 1919). 
As a back-bencher, Chamberlain made an immediate impression, precipitating an amendment to a bill in his maiden speech. It is said that he was lucid and penetrating in argument and had a style reminiscent of his father's. He dutifully supported the Lloyd George coalition government, but, already having declined a knighthood from Lloyd George, refused a junior post in the Ministry of Health when it was offered. His detestation of Lloyd George, which had its origins in the latter's criticisms of his father during the South African War, was now complete after his experience of the department of national service. 
His opportunity for ministerial advancement came with the fall of the coalition in 1922. Paradoxically, the Carlton Club meeting of Conservatives, which brought about the collapse of the coalition, also marked the end of his brother's leadership of the Conservative Party and the possibility of Austen's ever becoming prime minister, for he stood loyally by Lloyd George and paid the price. For Neville, who was in Canada and was spared the embarrassment of voting against Austen, it marked the threshold of his ministerial career. Bonar Law, who now became the prime minister of a Conservative government, offered Neville the post of postmaster-general outside the cabinet. After some hesitation, precipitated by fear of offending his brother, who -- he felt -- might have regarded his promotion as 'the last drop of bitterness in the cup' (NCP, 18/1/370, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 31 Oct 1922), he accepted with Austen's ultimately ungrudging approval. Simultaneously, Neville was sworn of the privy council. 
The new government was confirmed in the general election of November 1922, which surprisingly opened up for Chamberlain the prospect of immediate advance. The minister of health, Griffith-Boscawen, lost two seats, one in the general election and another in a by-election, which turned on the issue of rent decontrol. Law, after offering Griffith-Boscawen's post, for political reasons, to a number of senior Conservatives, was finally compelled to turn to the man he thought ideally suited to the task, and Chamberlain became minister of health in March 1923. He even named his terms: he would have complete authority over the government's policy on control of rents and would supervise housing policy. By the summer recess he had successfully put the 'Rent Restriction Act' on the statute book. This circumscribed landlords' power to evict and related rents to the state of repair of a property. He also provided, in the Chamberlain 'Housing Act' of 1923, a government subsidy for the construction of homes completed by October 1925. The subsidy focused on smaller properties, for their unsubsidized construction by private enterprise, which he wished to promote, would have been uneconomic. In Chamberlain's thinking it was only thus that a start could be made in providing adequate housing for the working classes. Moreover, only by building new houses could an effective policy of slum clearance be inaugurated. This act was succeeded in 1924 by Labour's Wheatley 'Housing Act', which increased the subsidy and shifted the emphasis to municipal building. 
In May 1923 Bonar Law could no longer continue in the premiership owing to ill health, and he was succeeded by Stanley Baldwin. There followed further elevation for Chamberlain, who, in Law's estimation, would have been a strong contender for the premiership itself had he possessed longer parliamentary experience. At first Baldwin continued as chancellor, combining the office with the premiership, while he endeavoured to induce a former Liberal, Reginald McKenna, to return both to the treasury and to the Commons. When he failed, he offered the post in August to Chamberlain, by whom he had already been greatly impressed. Baldwin's first government proved the beginning of a collaboration in government between Chamberlain and Baldwin which spanned a large part of the inter-war years. 
Baldwin and Chamberlain shared a business background; both had been active in local government before entering the Commons, and both entered national politics relatively late in life. But whereas Chamberlain was ruthlessly efficient and instantly decisive, Baldwin was somewhat relaxed, overcontemplative, and disinclined to come to hasty decisions. For all that, Baldwin understood people as Chamberlain never did, had an intuitive feel for the mood of the House of Commons and public opinion, and exuded common sense and goodwill. As Chamberlain put it, Baldwin had 'a singular and instinctive knowledge of how the plain man's mind works' (Ramsden, 'Age of Balfour', 295) and was essential for retaining the floating vote. Yet Chamberlain was the dominant legislative and administrative inspiration in the governments over which Baldwin presided. 
Their governmental collaboration in the short term, however, was brief and without significant consequence, for Baldwin chose on 25 October 1923 to call a general election on the issue of tariff protection. Chamberlain was naturally gratified by Baldwin's conversion to protectionism and loyally supported him. The election of December 1923 was, though, for the Conservatives a disaster. Although the tariffs Baldwin envisaged would not have added to the cost of food, the opposition parties were able to play on this fear, and the Conservatives lost. They were, however, back in office in October 1924, having dropped the idea of a general tariff, and as a fully united party. 
Chamberlain had been regarded from the moment he took office as a bridge to the disaffected coalition Conservatives, and his first act in opposition was to facilitate their re-entry into the shadow cabinet. Both Neville and Austen Chamberlain became members of Baldwin's cabinet of 1924-9. Neville did not, however, return to the Treasury. A place had to be found for Winston Churchill, now a Conservative again, and it was he who became chancellor of the exchequer. This was not a disappointment. Having triumphed over Oswald Mosley in the Ladywood constituency by only the narrowest of margins, Chamberlain was very conscious of Labour's growing electoral power and was convinced that only a programme of rigorous and conspicuous social reform would secure the future of the Conservatives in government. 
Chamberlain's concern with social reform was not, though, merely pragmatic and tactical: it was the mainspring of his involvement in political activity. For him social reform was essential for the social progress he believed to be desirable. Significantly, he did not consider himself to be a Conservative, and neither was his mode of thought consonant with the Conservative mind or tradition. He cannot even be placed in the Disraelian tory radical mould: he disliked Disraeli and disdained the paternalism associated with him. On the contrary, his background of Liberalism and Liberal Unionism remained with him to the end and informed his attitude towards domestic politics, where he shared many of the beliefs of the Fabian socialists. Indeed, in the formal sense Chamberlain was never even elected as a Conservative member of parliament, but rather as a candidate of the Birmingham Unionist Association. Chamberlain was a politician of radical inclinations, who having drifted towards the Conservative Party later wanted to change its name. In the wake of the formation of the National Government and the general election of 1931, which presented both Chamberlain and Baldwin with the centrist, consensual opportunity they had long wanted, Chamberlain wrote of his desire for the creation of a truly national party, which would 'discard the odious title of Conservative' (Feiling, 197). Moreover, he welcomed the secession of the free-traders from the National Government in 1932 in the anticipation that it would facilitate the formation of a 'fused party under a National name' (ibid., 216). For Chamberlain the National Government, when it came, was not a means of pursuing narrow Conservative interests, but rather a vehicle for the realization of truly national and social reform objectives. 
Given this mindset, Chamberlain was in 1924 not only content, but preferred, to return to the Ministry of Health. His four and a half years there witnessed a prodigious programme of legislation, all of it conceived by the beginning of the parliament. Of the twenty-five bills he proposed to enact over four years, twenty-one were on the statute book by the time parliament was dissolved in 1929. 
The two most significant pieces of legislation were the 'Rating and Valuation Act' of 1925 and the 'Local Government Act' of 1929. The 'Rating and Valuation Act' was the foundation of everything Chamberlain wished to achieve in social reform. Its four main provisions were to transfer rating powers from the poor-law guardians to the county, borough, and district councils, which he viewed as 'the real living bodies of to-day' (Macleod); to institute a single basis for rating valuation; to standardize the method of assessment; and to impose quinquennial valuations. An act of this type naturally affected the interests of some in his own party, and there was considerable resistance. The 'Local Government Act' abolished the poor-law boards of guardians and transferred their responsibilities to the county and borough councils. It also recast the relationship between national and local government. Chamberlain's principal difficulty was with Churchill, who wished to combine poor-law reform with the abolition of the rate paid by business and agriculture. After some disputation it was eventually agreed that the rate paid by manufacturers should be set at a quarter of the general rate, while agriculture should pay none at all. The loss sustained by the local authorities would be made up by a block grant from the Treasury. 
These two acts were very substantial accomplishments. They were not demagogic and 'were designed, within the framework of financial discipline, to improve the condition of the people, not to win plaudits at party conferences' (Jenkins, 339). None the less, Chamberlain received many accolades from Conservatives in the Commons for the 'Local Government Act', and the press was fulsome. Such was Chamberlain's record in government that by 1929 he was, with Churchill, a serious contender for the premiership. He had been in the Commons for just over a decade. 
Chamberlain's second term at the Ministry of Health involved close collaboration with Churchill. Their relationship was evidently cordial and is exemplified in the passage of the 'Widows, Orphans, and Old Age Pensions Act' of 1925. This was launched by Churchill in his budget, but it was steered through parliament by Chamberlain, who won the praise of the king for his compassionate and skilful handling of the measure. This compulsory and contributory act, which arguably built upon the achievements of the pre-1914 legislation and pointed the way to Beveridge, illustrated Chamberlain's underlying commitment to the welfare of ordinary people. His attitude towards the trade unions at the time of the general strike also indicates moderation and sympathy with the working classes. He opposed the enactment of anti-trade union legislation during the strike and favoured generosity in the aftermath. He also held trade union leaders such as Ernest Bevin, secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, and Arthur Pugh, chairman of the general council of the TUC, in considerable esteem. 
Yet from the mid-1920s onwards an acerbity entered into Chamberlain's relationship with Labour. This was connected with the measures he introduced to curb the practice of Poplarism, namely, setting rates of poor-law relief at levels beyond necessity. The 'Board of Guardians (Default) Act' of 1926 and the 'Audit (Local Authorities) Act' of 1927 engendered animus on both sides, which Chamberlain displayed too publicly for Baldwin's comfort. He was rebuked by the prime minister for treating the opposition as dirt, which Chamberlain thought intellectually they were, judged by the arguments the Labour leaders deployed. The mutual antipathy and bitterness was particularly poignant, for Chamberlain was by far the most progressive member of the government. It was on the basis of his act of 1923 and Wheatley's act of 1924, that 800,000 new homes were built during Baldwin's second government and fifty-eight slum clearance schemes approved. 
Before parliament was dissolved in 1929 Baldwin speculated that Chamberlain might like to move to the Treasury if the government were returned. Chamberlain declined this suggestion and volunteered his candidature for the Colonial Office. In the event, he went to the Treasury, although not until he had spent two years in opposition and a further very brief spell at the Ministry of Health. 
At the general election of 1929 Chamberlain moved from the marginal seat of Birmingham, Ladywood, to the safe Conservative constituency of Birmingham, Edgbaston, which he held until his death. Out of office as a result of Baldwin's defeat at the polls, Chamberlain spent the winter months of 1929-30 in east Africa as a frustrated colonial secretary. On his return from east Africa, however, he began looking to the future. Baldwin was prevailed upon in March 1930 to accept the formation of an inner shadow cabinet committee of business, and it was also agreed that Chamberlain should become the head of a new Conservative Party research department, of which he was the real founder. He retained the post until his death in 1940. In June 1930 he became chairman of the Conservative Party. 
The years of opposition between 1929 and 1931 were a period of crisis for the Conservative Party, as the leadership of Baldwin was under constant attack. Baldwin's temperament and style were not suited to opposition, and Chamberlain himself was forced to alert him to the discontent at his lack of drive. Chamberlain's position was invidious, for many of Baldwin's critics would have liked him to replace Baldwin. The difficulty was compounded by the hostility of the press magnate Lord Beaverbrook, who underpinned his personal dislike for Baldwin with a campaign for empire free trade, which in essence meant tariffs and imperial preference. During the election of 1929 the Conservative government had committed itself to imperial preference, but with the proviso that protective taxation on food should be excluded. Beaverbrook, on the other hand, after the election, argued that there should be a referendum on the issue of food taxes, ran crusader candidates in by-elections to campaign for one, and for a brief period organized his own United Empire Party. Beaverbrook, in harness with the other great press magnate, Lord Rothermere, was a formidable adversary and even induced Baldwin in the end to concede the referendum. Even so, despite the mediation of Chamberlain, who was himself, of course, by no means averse to tariffs and imperial preference, Beaverbrook could not be induced to end his attacks. In June 1930, at Caxton Hall, Baldwin put his leadership to the test at a meeting of the Conservative Party. The overwhelming vote of confidence that Baldwin received was gratifying, but it did not bring the question of his leadership to a final determination. 
On balance, Chamberlain conducted himself with great dignity throughout this crisis. He insisted that he would not play Lloyd George to Baldwin's Asquith, but was at the same time made aware that his position was strong. In July 1930 Rothermere plainly indicated to him that, if he were to become leader of the Conservative Party, he could rely upon his and Beaverbrook's complete support. The 'commonest loyalty' made it impossible for him to entertain such a suggestion, but the tragedy of it was 'that if S. B. would go the whole party would heave a sigh of relief' (Feiling, 180). From all sides Chamberlain was repeatedly alerted to the lack of confidence in Baldwin; so much so, that in February 1931 he felt compelled to confront his leader with a memorandum on the state of party opinion drawn up by the Conservatives' chief agent, Robert Topping. This argued that since the Caxton Hall speech Baldwin's position had steadily deteriorated and could not now be ignored. Given Chamberlain's own view of Baldwin, this memorandum could not have been totally unwelcome, for it also implied that he should be the next leader. After showing the document to senior Conservatives, on the rather disingenuous ground that he wanted to canvass their advice on whether Baldwin should see it, he sent it to him on 1 March 1931. On the afternoon of the same day he confirmed to Baldwin that the memorandum represented the views of his colleagues. Baldwin agreed that he should retire and that the announcement would be made at the shadow cabinet on the following day. 'The Times' even prepared an appropriate leader. 
The forthcoming by-election in the St George's division of Westminster had made it all the more necessary for Baldwin to see the Topping memorandum. This was particularly favourable ground for a Beaverbrook/Rothermere candidate, and if one had been elected it would have badly damaged Baldwin's leadership and the Conservative Party. By 1 March 1931 the press lords had an empire crusade candidate in place, but the official Conservative candidate had withdrawn. Having been dissuaded from retirement by his confidants, Baldwin informed Chamberlain on 2 March that 'he would go down fighting' and that he would do so by standing as the official candidate for St George's. To Chamberlain's remonstrance that he could not do this because of the effect upon his successor, he replied: 'I don't give a damn about my successor, Neville' (Jenkins, 42). This was a critical point, both for the defeat of Baldwin's opponents and for the future relationship between Baldwin and Chamberlain. Baldwin would retire when he was ready to do so and would not be pushed. As it happened, Baldwin did not have to resign his Bewdley constituency and Duff Cooper fought St George's as the official Conservative. To his credit, and whatever his personal feelings of disappointment, Chamberlain furnished Cooper with every support that the Conservative Party could provide. Baldwin, for his part, aided his own cause by a resounding speech at Queen's Hall in which he denounced the meretricious conduct of the press lords and asked the electors to reflect that they were not so much asked to consider who should lead the Conservative Party, but to determine who should appoint the leader. Duff Cooper was elected with a majority of 5000. 
The internal wrangling within the Conservative Party was played out against the backdrop of the economic crisis that finally caused in 1931 the fall of Ramsay MacDonald's second Labour government. By that year unemployment had risen to two and a half million. Moreover, in July 1931 the loss of foreign confidence in the British financial and economic system was demonstrated by the withdrawal from the City of some $66 million in gold and foreign exchange. Chamberlain diagnosed the core of the problem in the growth of government expenditure over income. This was borne out by the report of the May committee on national expenditure, which recommended economies of $96.5 million, to be achieved by reducing official salaries and unemployment expenditures. It was a programme that the Labour government could not put into effect. Neither could they devise any other strategy that would revive confidence and secure a foreign loan. The resources of the Conservative Research Department were fully employed by Chamberlain in preparing 'for debates in which Labour was impaled on a series of ever more difficult hooks of financial policy' (Ramsden, 'Appetite for Power', 280). Both Baldwin and Chamberlain had rejected earlier suggestions by MacDonald regarding the formation of a coalition government, but by the end of July Chamberlain had probably come round to thinking that a national government would be in the nation's best interests. The determination of Baldwin to continue his holidays at this critical juncture left the conduct of Conservative strategy in the hands of Chamberlain, who perhaps underestimated Conservative strength in persuading MacDonald to remain as prime minister. A national government under MacDonald was announced on 24 August 1931. Philip Snowden remained chancellor of the exchequer, while Chamberlain returned to the Ministry of Health. The fundamental objective of the government was the maintenance of the parity of the pound and the imposition of economies, after which parliament would be dissolved and party politics would resume as normal. 
Events, however, ensured that the National Government became permanent for the duration of the 1930s. The parity of sterling had to be abandoned on 19 September, when the government abandoned the gold standard. Furthermore, the reaction to the economies introduced by the government -- the Invergordon mutiny and demonstrations involving clashes with the police -- convinced Chamberlain that the emphatic approval of public opinion should be sought through a general election for any further measures deemed necessary. Provided that MacDonald would accept tariffs, he was happy for him to remain prime minister, for the continuance of MacDonald in office would probably make it that much easier to gain the electorate's endorsement. The final appeal to the country, though, was a curious mixture. The parties fought for their own policies, while the government sought a 'doctor's mandate', or, more accurately expressed, a free hand. Given that the Conservatives were committed to tariffs, and given that they were the overwhelming beneficiaries of the election of October 1931, the government would henceforth be committed to tariffs. 
In the Commons the National Government was now supported by 473 Conservatives, which meant that they could demand a larger number of cabinet posts. Chamberlain went to the Treasury, where he remained for five and a half years. He proved a powerful chancellor of the exchequer. Baldwin, who as leader of the Conservatives was happy to leave formal power in the hands of MacDonald, left the substance of power in Chamberlain's hands. From the beginning Chamberlain was in complete control of budgetary and economic policy and added to that social and industrial policy as well. Furthermore, once the international crisis of the 1930s deepened, he became a dominant voice in both rearmament and foreign policy. His was a formidable presence in the cabinet: not only did he read his own departmental briefs, but he seemed to read everyone else's as well. With considerable justification he confided to his diary in spring 1935: 'I am more and more carrying this government on my back. The P.M. is ill and tired, S. B. is tired and won't apply his mind to problems. It is certainly time there was a change' (NCP, 2/23a, diary, 8 March 1935). 
Chamberlain took immediate steps to achieve the protection of the home market and with it the realization of his father's ambitions. First came the 'Abnormal Importations Act' and then in February 1932 the general tariff of 10 per cent. This had several purposes: to improve the balance of payments deficit, to raise revenue, to stabilize sterling, and to decrease unemployment. This was an emotional occasion for Chamberlain, who made his feelings clear to the Commons. He stated: 'There can have been few occasions in all our long political history when the son of a man who counted for something in his day and generation has been vouchsafed the privilege of setting the seal on the work which the father began but had perforce to leave unfinished. ('Hansard 5C', 261.296)' Austen ventured to the Treasury bench to shake his brother's hand; the Commons gave him a tumultuous reception. Significantly, dominion goods were exempted from the tariff pending the Ottawa conference of July and August that year, when it was hoped to institute a regime of imperial preference. Baldwin led the delegation, but it was Chamberlain as usual who was the workhorse, subjecting his colleagues to endless preparatory seminars during the passage across the Atlantic. The dominion governments were, however, much less enthusiastic and more concerned with their national interests than with imperial economic unity. All that really emerged was a declaration of intent which affirmed the belief that the reduction or elimination of empire tariff barriers would increase trade and commended the agreements achieved at Ottawa as steps in the right direction. It could be said cynically that 'enough discrimination was achieved to give the Americans a running grievance, but not enough to produce any great stimulation of Empire trade' (Jenkins, 348). 
In 1932 Chamberlain attended the Lausanne conference on reparations that ran from June to July. His favoured outcome was the cancellation all round of both reparations and war debts, for which he bid at the opening session. Here, however, he ran into the objections of the French. Yet he managed to establish good working relations with the French prime minister, Herriot, and with the Germans. Owing to his mediation, it proved possible in the end to achieve agreement on a final lump sum to be paid by the Germans and a political statement that stressed the importance of improved political relations for financial confidence. 
The first of Chamberlain's budgets, introduced in April 1932, was castigated for its severity, although it could be argued that it merely continued the austerity introduced by Snowden's emergency budget of September 1931, with the addition of the 5 per cent cut in police pay that had been initially and accidentally omitted. His main purpose was to build up the gold and foreign currency reserves as a means of maintaining the stability of sterling, for which purpose he made provision to borrow up to $150 million to create the exchequer equalization account. The prospective deficit of $35 million he surmised would mostly be covered by the general tariff and the reimposition of the tax on tea. His strategy was to continue economies until expenditure and revenue were balanced. His caution was predicated on the prevailing economic orthodoxy, although it remains fashionable to criticize his lack of vision. Perhaps his major achievement in this year of frenetic activity was to save the exchequer $40 million in interest charges by converting $2000 million of war loan at 5 per cent to 3.5 per cent stock. This was an important prerequisite for the cheap money policy of the 1930s that greatly contributed to the decade's housing construction boom. 
Similar budgetary discipline followed, until by 1934 Chamberlain spoke of the possibility of moving from 'Bleak House' to 'Great Expectations'. He reduced the standard rate of income tax by 6died (2.5 per cent), restored the cut in unemployment benefit, and began restoring the cuts in the pay of state and local government employees. In the following year he confidently asserted that the nation had recovered 80 per cent of its prosperity. In essence, Chamberlain had aimed in his financial policy both at deflation sufficient to restore confidence and, by maintaining purchasing power in the economy, at inflation sufficient to promote recovery. He had done so with considerable courage and success, making his record as chancellor impressive. His economic policy was not, though, one of classic 'laissez-faire'. He believed in the control of markets and in using the power of government to determine the structure of industry. Two examples of this were the protection and cartelization of the iron and steel industry, which led to increased production, and the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board, with a subsidy of $35 million from the public purse, which presided over what was then the world's most efficient underground system. Nevertheless, the entwined problems of unemployment, low wages, and poverty remained, and from within the Conservative ranks Harold Macmillan criticized the government for not doing enough. From outside the Conservative Party, the Next Five Years Group was also highly critical. 
By 1935 Chamberlain felt that he was increasingly shouldering the burden of government and thought it was time for a change of leadership. He observed to his sister Hilda: 'As you will see I have become a sort of Acting P.M. -- only without the actual power of the P.M. I have to say 'Have you thought' or 'What would you say' when it would be quicker to say 'This is what you must do'. (NCP, 18/1/910A, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 23 March 1935)' The precipitous decline in MacDonald's ability to preside over the government did not, however, result in Chamberlain's elevation to the premiership in June 1935, although that would have been favoured by many. Baldwin succeeded and led the government into the general election victory of 1935. But Chamberlain was the principal author of the government's manifesto, though he had not been able, as he wished, to put defence to the forefront as an issue in the election. At the same time Chamberlain recognized that Baldwin's ability to reassure the electorate was a major element in the result. The prime minister, though, was soon buffeted by the crisis created by the Hoare-Laval pact, and throughout 1936 his health so deteriorated that he announced that he would retire in May 1937. There was little doubt that Chamberlain would succeed him. Following the Conservative Party conference at Margate in October 1936, Chamberlain noted in his diary that his position as heir apparent and acting prime minister seemed to be generally accepted. In the abdication crisis of 1936 he showed himself very apprehensive of Edward VIII's succession, which he thought unsafe, and backed Baldwin in his handling of the issue. 
Thus when Chamberlain became prime minister on 28 May 1937 it was George VI's hands that he kissed. It had proved an effortless succession, but it proved a far from effortless premiership. Chamberlain brought instant control to the business of government. As chancellor of the exchequer he had assumed a certain responsibility for ensuring that ministers were appropriately active, and he could now do this with all the authority of his office. Almost his first prime ministerial act was to ask ministers to inform him of their departmental plans for the coming two years. He read all cabinet papers assiduously and chaired all the major cabinet committees, in particular the foreign policy committee and the committee of imperial defence. His mastery of government business was prodigious. His main aid in this was Sir Horace Wilson, who kept Chamberlain briefed of departmental actions and who rendered the mass 'of information to the coherence necessary for effective supervision' (Beattie, 223). Wilson's official role was that of chief industrial adviser to the government, but he had been brought into Downing Street by Baldwin in a general advisory capacity and was retained by Chamberlain in that role. Given, however, that the main problems that faced the Chamberlain government were external, he increasingly focused his attention on foreign affairs. 
Chamberlain's management of the cabinet was not in fact authoritarian. He seldom spoke first, but was able to influence decisions by his capacity to reduce complex discussions to lucid conclusions in masterly summings-up -- which led Lord Swinton to liken his mind to a searchlight. Chamberlain was also able to impress his views on the cabinet as a whole through an inner cabinet, which consisted of himself, Simon, Lord Halifax, and Hoare. 
By the time he became prime minister, certain traits in Chamberlain's character had become marked. He was very averse to criticism, wanted to be in control, and was susceptible to flattery. The conviction that he was right undoubtedly contributed to his failure to court public and parliamentary support. Attention to public opinion and elections were low on his list of priorities, and he never socialized in the Commons smoking rooms. The importance of mollifying opposition with soothing language was not for him essential to the presentation of policy. He was, therefore, very easily misrepresented by opponents as cold, austere, and dictatorial. 
Yet, at the same time Chamberlain was very concerned that government policy should be presented properly, as he saw it, by the media. He recognized the power of modern methods of communication and became an adept performer on contemporary newsreels. Moreover, he perceived radio's potential as a means of creating popular support for governmental policy. It could, however, also be used to stimulate opposition, and by broadcasting talks critical of other countries, most notably Nazi Germany, it could damage the outcome of foreign policy. Thus governmental pressure ensured that such talks were cancelled or redrafted in such a way as to make them quite anodyne. With regard to the press, Chamberlain was the first British prime minister to practise news management on a substantial scale. The primary objective of this activity was to suppress opposition to foreign policy and to facilitate its success. Through George Steward, head of the press office at 10 Downing Street, the political journalists at Westminster, who constituted the lobby, were gradually organized so that they became disseminators of the official line rather than journalists competitively seeking news and other stories. 
In the wake of the Rhineland crisis in 1936, Chamberlain wrote to one of his sisters: 'If we could once get this trouble behind us and start Europe on a new basis we should I believe see a rapid expansion in trade for the undertone is firm and enterprise is just waiting for the restoration of confidence to go ahead. (NCP, 18/1/952, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 21 March 1936)' This was the agenda that Chamberlain would have preferred for his premiership; completion of recovery from the recession and further social reform on the basis provided by recovery. He could not, however, begin to contemplate such an agenda until the tensions in Europe provoked by the belligerence of Nazi Germany and fascist Italy had been resolved. In the past it has been suggested that he attempted to achieve this by introducing and pursuing the policy of appeasement. 
Chamberlain did not, however, produce appeasement as a new policy initiative. On the contrary, appeasement had evolved steadily as the foreign policy of the National Government from 1931 until 1936, when it assumed its classic form. What Chamberlain did after 1937 was to inject the policy with some vigour in the hope all the sooner to end the crisis created in Europe by the Nazi clamour for revision of the treaty of Versailles. For Chamberlain and his colleagues appeasement implied the object of policy -- namely, the pacification of Europe -- to be achieved through negotiating a European and general settlement that would in almost all respects replace the treaty of Versailles and bring Germany into satisfactory treaty relations with all her neighbours. Appeasement was a policy that sought to bring about genuine peace in Europe by removing all sources of grievance in a Europe-wide agreement to which Germany would also make appropriate contributions. It was not a craven, cowardly policy of surrender and unilateral concession, or a sell out, as it was later described. The essence of this policy was first suggested by the Foreign Office officials Orme Sargent and Frank Ashton-Gwatkin in 1931 and received the full backing of the permanent under-secretary, Sir Robert Vansittart. It was, however, too ambitious to be pursued in the first instance in all its aspects. Not until 1935, when Hitler's unilateral denunciation of the disarmament clauses of the treaty of Versailles further deepened the European crisis, did the Foreign Office resume the recommendation of such a policy. It was subsequently adopted by the government in the early months of 1936. 
The type of general settlement contemplated was the supplementation of the Locarno treaty arrangements with an air pact, in which France and Germany would guarantee Britain in addition to one another. As part of the deal, the demilitarized Rhineland zone would disappear. There would also be an arms limitation agreement. Provided that her aims were peacefully accomplished, Germany's preponderant interest in central and eastern Europe would be recognized. Finally, Britain would undertake not to impede the expansion of Germany's exports. For the time being it was deemed imprudent to raise the question of colonies or Germany's return to the League of Nations. On 6 March 1936, as an opening move, Anthony Eden, the foreign secretary, broached the issue of an air pact with the German ambassador, but on the following day Hitler remilitarized the Rhineland unilaterally. Although this denied Eden and the government a valuable concession, thereby placing them at a disadvantage in the negotiations they wished to start, it did not mean that those negotiations would not now be attempted. On the contrary, Eden thought them inevitable. Successive foreign secretaries -- Simon, Hoare, and Eden -- had all been complicit in the formulation of this policy, as had Chamberlain, on account of his dominating position in the cabinet and his office at the Treasury, where he had to bear in mind the financial implications of the rearmament necessary as long as Germany remained overtly dissatisfied and belligerent. 
Chamberlain also played a critical role in the early stages of rearmament made essential by Japanese aggression in the Far East and the reality of Nazi rule in Germany. Given the absence of a co-ordinating defence ministry, he was the arbiter of the forces' competing claims on the meagre funds available. He was unable to allow the costs of the full programme recommended by the defence requirements sub-committee (DRC) in 1934 and determined that the bulk of the spending should be allocated to aerial rearmament. The strength of the Royal Air Force was, therefore, to be increased by 50 per cent. Connected with this decision was his endorsement of the DRC's reversal of strategic priorities which now established Germany rather than Japan as the ultimate potential enemy. Chamberlain was, nevertheless, conscious of the threat posed to British interests in the Far East, and in agreement with the views of the head of the Treasury, Sir Warren Fisher, advocated the revival of the Anglo-Japanese alliance (1902-22), in substance though not necessarily in form. Here, however, he ran into the opposition of Vansittart, who deprecated the impact that such a course would have on American opinion. 
As Chamberlain's private papers testify, the German menace remained a constant preoccupation, leading to a further revision of the defence estimates. The defence white papers of 1936 and 1937, of which he was the principal author, outlined a rearmament programme costing $1500 million over a five-year period, $400 million of which was to be found from borrowing. These statements contemplated substantial increases in the strength of all the armed forces, with the RAF having a front-line strength of 1750 aircraft. To pay for this Chamberlain raised income tax to 5's'. in the pound in the budget of 1937, which he justified to the public at large in a Pathe newsreel item that for its time was a skilful performance. He was not so successful with his attempt to tax the 'growth' in profits attendant upon rearmament. His proposed national defence contribution aroused firm opposition and had to be replaced with a straightforward tax on profits. 
During the year before he became prime minister Chamberlain intervened decisively on three occasions in foreign policy. First, he gave a decisive lead in winding up sanctions against Italy, imposed during the Italo-Abyssinian War of 1935-6. On 5 May 1936 Italian forces entered Addis Ababa and the war was over. The lifting of sanctions posed a great moral problem as a member state of the League of Nations had been denied its independence. On the other hand, Germany, having taken advantage of the Abyssinian crisis to remilitarize the Rhineland in March 1936, continued to menace the peace of Europe. The maintenance of sanctions appeared in the circumstances gratuitous folly -- a measure likely to increase Britain's number of enemies. Aware that Eden, the foreign secretary, had been persuaded of the intellectual case for dropping sanctions, Chamberlain elected to give a lead. In a speech on 10 June 1936 at the 1900 Club he spoke of the maintenance of sanctions as 'the very midsummer of madness' (Dutton, 'Anthony Eden', 73). 
The other two occasions were not public, and both involved the nature of the response that Britain should make to Germany's claim for colonial equality of rights made in connection with her putative return to the League of Nations during the fallout from the remilitarization of the Rhineland. The committee chaired by Lord Plymouth to investigate the issue concluded that, while there were practical, legal, and economic difficulties in the way of returning colonies to Germany, the subject could not be avoided if a general settlement were to be achieved. Although Eden pleaded the case for a flat negative, Chamberlain's arguments in the cabinet committee on foreign policy were decisive, and in a Commons statement at the end of July 1936 the question was effectively left open. 
In the following month Hjalmar Schacht, the German minister of economics, told French ministers that in return for colonial satisfaction Hitler would agree to arms limitation and a European settlement. The Foreign Office, however, was sceptical of this approach, arguing that, if Germany wanted to achieve a settlement, this should be negotiated through the established diplomatic channels. Subsequently, the department effectively stifled any further contact with Schacht without any explanation to the cabinet. Within the Treasury this had a devastating impression. Sir Frederick Leith-Ross, the chief economic adviser to the government, was, in the course of his duties, in regular contact with Schacht, and he learned from the latter that serious proposals had been frustrated by Eden and the Foreign Office. Sir Warren Fisher, for his part, was most disparaging of the competence of the Foreign Office, and Chamberlain was undoubtedly prompted towards a similarly unflattering view. Through Chamberlain it was decided that Leith-Ross should visit Schacht in Germany to explore the latter's suggestions more fully. Excitedly, Chamberlain wrote that he had 'a scheme in hand' which ultimately might restrain Hitler (NCP, 18/1/991, Neville Chamberlain to Ida Chamberlain, 6 Jan 1937). When the cabinet committee on foreign policy discussed Leith-Ross's visit to Badenweiler in March 1937, it was Chamberlain's voice again that moulded policy. He commented that he understood that Eden shared his view that, if a general settlement could be achieved on the back of a colonial deal, such a procedure should not be ruled out. With regard to the suggestions made by Schacht, he emphasized: 'Any government which turned down this invitation without at least exploring the possibilities sufficiently to make sure that there was no possible basis of agreement would incur a very heavy responsibility. Even a slight improvement in the international atmosphere may lead gradually to a general 'detente', whereas a policy of drift may lead to a general war. (Crozier, 201-3)' It was decided, therefore, to try to advance on the basis of the Schacht proposals. In the event, it proved impossible. The French were by spring 1937 less willing to proceed, and the reality anyway was that Schacht had exceeded his function. 
By the time he became prime minister Chamberlain dominated the formulation of foreign policy. His involvement and interest were not new. He had been regularly informed by the foreign secretary about the international situation, and there was a strong identity of view between the two. Chamberlain continued the effort to secure a general settlement, but he doubted the willingness of the Foreign Office to play its part. He wrote that, in his opinion, 'the double policy of rearmament and better relations with Germany and Italy will carry us through if only the F.O. will play up' (NCP, 18/1/1010, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 1 Aug 1937). Within the Treasury there was a firm conviction that the Foreign Office had missed an opportunity of coming to terms with Hitler, a major reason being the slow British response to the Schacht initiative. By August 1937 there was a feeling that the Foreign Office was 'frigid' and that a 'fresh start' was required (Crozier, 205). This was emphatically the opinion of Sir Warren Fisher and unquestionably that of Chamberlain, who was fortified in his views by Sir Samuel Hoare. 
Chamberlain, therefore, wished to reinvigorate the policy of reaching a general settlement with Germany by himself taking, as prime minister, a more active role in foreign policy. Eden does not at first seem to have resented this. By December 1937, however, their relationship was undergoing considerable strain. For Chamberlain the principal object of foreign policy was to bring Germany, the main potential danger facing Britain, into a general European settlement. This ambition he believed would be achieved more easily if Britain and Italy were able to settle their differences, for such a development might also arrest the growing intimacy between Rome and Berlin. Finally, it would be important to complete the British rearmament programme, although within the necessary financial constraints. Germany was the central problem. As Chamberlain wrote: 'if only we could get on terms with Germany I would not care a rap for Musso' (Feiling, 329). It was, though, with Italy that he first attempted to improve relations. 
During summer 1937, much to Chamberlain's annoyance, Eden continued to assess Italy as a greater threat to Britain than Germany and still hoped that the latter could be brought into a general settlement. It was, however, Eden who suggested to Chamberlain in July that a personal letter to Mussolini might be the way to start an improvement in Anglo-Italian relations. Eden thought he himself should write it, but Chamberlain pre-empted him, possibly because he thought the foreign secretary was showing insufficient urgency. But Eden resented this action, which he considered to be an interference, and the incident was the first breach in what had hitherto been a harmonious relationship. It was not, however, possible to make immediate progress in improving Anglo-Italian relations because the Nyon conference took firm measures to counter acts of Italian submarine piracy in the western Mediterranean connected with Italian intervention on the side of the nationalists in the Spanish Civil War. 
An opening, however, to improved relations with Germany suggested itself when in November 1937 Lord Halifax, then lord president of the council, was invited by Goring to visit a hunting exhibition in Berlin. Far from opposing the visit, Eden in the first instance encouraged it, and Chamberlain was naturally enthusiastic. But, prompted by Foreign Office staff, Eden later raised objections, especially when it was learned that Hitler would receive Lord Halifax only at Berchtesgaden, an arrangement he felt redolent of servility if accepted. His differences over the Halifax visit eventually came to a heated disagreement with Chamberlain, but Eden eventually accepted that it might bring positive results. 
An immediate consequence of this disagreement was that Chamberlain finally took the opportunity, as he put it, to stir up the Foreign Office 'with a long pole' (Crozier, 225). Vansittart, who had demurred at the prospect of the Halifax visit, was removed from the day-to-day running of the Foreign Office and elevated to the specially created rank of chief diplomatic adviser. He was replaced by Sir Alexander Cadogan, who was very enthusiastic for a policy of direct engagement with the dictators. Undoubtedly, the prime minister was determined that Vansittart should not inhibit contact with Goring as he had previously done with Schacht. Chamberlain, though, was a little unfair to Vansittart. The latter supported his policy towards Italy and had played a decisive part in formulating the government's policy towards Germany. He, therefore, had some justification for telling Chamberlain that he had always favoured his foreign policy, 'but had been obstructed by others!' (NCP, 18/1/1031, Neville Chamberlain to Ida Chamberlain, 12 Dec 1937). Chamberlain, however, did not believe him. 
Lord Halifax concluded from his visit to Germany that Hitler and the German government might be amenable to a general settlement if Germany were conceded colonial satisfaction. Chamberlain was very satisfied; contact had been made and a picture of the German attitude obtained. It seemed that colonies had now assumed rather greater importance in the minds of the Germans, but nothing could be done without a German quid pro quo or French consent. At the end of November 1937 the French prime minister and foreign minister visited London for talks at which there was a large measure of agreement about the nature of a general settlement, and the French proved surprisingly compliant in the matter of colonies. 
During December 1937 the cabinet also considered the financial implications of rearmament. It was decided to accept the $1500 million quinquennial estimate and not to exceed it, on the grounds that too lavish an expenditure on rearmament might damage the economy. Moreover, as British participation in any war against a major power was likely to result in a long-drawn-out war of attrition, it was thought best to maintain her financial resources intact. Finance now emerged as the fourth arm of Britain's defence preparations. During the same month the chiefs of staff reported that Britain's forces were still insufficiently developed to meet her global commitments: although Britain's forces could probably act as a deterrent to Germany, the nub of the problem was that a war with Germany would in all probability extend as well to war with Italy and Japan. This, therefore, emphasized the need to reduce the number of Britain's potential enemies. 
On 24 January 1938 Chamberlain presented to the cabinet committee on foreign policy a scheme for a new approach to Germany in which the colonial question had been placed at the forefront. None the less, Chamberlain emphasized that the colonial question could not be settled independently of a general settlement; to meet the objections that other countries might raise to the renewal of German colonial activity he proposed the institution of a new colonial regime in Africa south of the Sahara and north of South Africa and the Rhodesias, in which all colonial powers would subscribe to a uniform code of colonial administration. Chamberlain's aim was to stimulate German interest in a general settlement by offering to negotiate in principle the prior settlement of the colonial question. It was agreed to accept this approach, and the British ambassador in Berlin was to broach this whole issue with Hitler in spring 1938. 
By this time Eden had resigned. His resignation was not founded upon some great issue of principle connected with Germany. If his confidant, Oliver Harvey, thought that negotiations with Germany could only be beneficial, provided that they resulted in a general settlement, Eden's view would not have been that far distant. His resignation was based rather upon Chamberlain's rejection out of hand of a rather hazy proposal from President Roosevelt for a conference in Washington to discuss issues relating to world peace. Chamberlain felt this would cut across his own efforts to secure agreements with the European dictators, and, in any case, he doubted whether the United States government would contribute anything effective to world peace. Eden, who had throughout 1937 been pursuing the chimera of close Anglo-American co-operation, was furious with Chamberlain. Had the Roosevelt proposal not been secret, Eden would probably have resigned on that issue. 
Eden was, however, provided with another opportunity when Chamberlain determined to press ahead with an Anglo-Italian agreement in February 1938. This was accompanied by some rather unorthodox manoeuvring involving contacts with the Italians via Lady Ivy Chamberlain, Sir Austen's widow, who was spending the winter in Rome, and Neville's angling companion, Sir Joseph Ball, a former M15 official but now director of the Conservative Research Department. Eden was convinced that he was being sidelined. He also felt that Italy's position was worsening as a result of her involvement in Abyssinia and Spain and the threatened absorption of Austria by Germany. Thus it was unnecessary to court the treacherous Italians too assiduously. Chamberlain felt, however, that delay would result in yet another lost opportunity. On 20 February Eden resigned and was succeeded by Lord Halifax. On 16 April 1938 an Anglo-Italian agreement was concluded in which Britain undertook to recognize the Italian conquest of Abyssinia, while Italy agreed to accept a British scheme for the withdrawal of the so-called Italian volunteers assisting the nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War. In the long run this agreement proved worthless, in the sense that it did nothing to deter Italy from ever closer involvement with Germany. 
The approach to Germany did not even produce an agreement. When Sir Nevile Henderson, British ambassador in Berlin, outlined to Hitler on 3 March 1938 the British proposals, it was to be the first and last occasion on which the offer of a general settlement was put directly to the German government. Henderson did not use the term, out of deference to Hitler's hostility to it, but that was what he clearly implied in both this interview and a previous one with Ribbentrop on 1 March. The interview was to prove a complete fiasco for British policy. The Fuhrer bluntly rejected any possibility of being brought into a general settlement in exchange for a colonial settlement. This and the 'Anschluss' of Austria and Germany effected by force a few days later were depressing results for Chamberlain's policy. Both the Foreign Office and Chamberlain were reconciled to the idea that it might not be possible to maintain Austria's independence in the long term, but the manner of its achievement was an ugly portent for the future. Furthermore, Chamberlain had failed to wrest the initiative from Hitler, who now proceeded to encourage the Sudeten German separatists in Czechoslovakia. 
On 24 March 1938 Chamberlain, in a speech to the Commons, reviewed the situation following the 'Anschluss'. After referring to the 'disturbance of international confidence' created by the German action, he mentioned the demands of the German minority in Czechoslovakia as one of the issues continuing to give rise to anxiety. A peaceful resolution of the problem could, however, do much to advance stability in central Europe. Reviewing Britain's defence commitments, he stated that a British guarantee of Czech independence would not be advisable, for it would effectively remove from the British government control over the decision on whether to go to war. But, he continued: 'Where peace and war are concerned, legal obligations are not alone involved, and if war broke out, it would be unlikely to be confined to those who have assumed such obligations. It would be quite impossible to say where it would end and what Governments might become involved. ('Hansard 5C', 333.1405-6)' This was a clear warning to the German government of what might happen if they had recourse to force to solve the question of the German minority in Czechoslovakia. It also implied the threat of dragging Germany into a world war, a theme enlarged upon by Lord Lothian in a speech to Chatham House on the same day. 
The situation in Czechoslovakia, however, continued to deteriorate. Chamberlain still aimed to bring Germany into a general settlement, but progress in that direction could not be achieved while uncertainty persisted in German-Czech relations. Lord Runciman was sent to mediate. On 5 September 1938 President Benes virtually conceded all the demands in the Karlsbad programme; this offer, though, was rejected by Henlein, the leader of the Sudeten Germans. On 12 September, in a speech at Nuremberg, Hitler demanded self-determination for the Sudetens and promised them all assistance. One central problem for Britain was the fact that France was pledged to defend the territorial integrity of Czechoslovakia. Chamberlain himself recognized that, if France became embroiled in a war with Germany over central Europe, Britain would be in a difficult and dangerous situation, for she could not afford to see France destroyed. Britain might, therefore, become involved in a war before she was ready. On the other hand, Chamberlain suspected that the French were not prepared to honour their obligations to the Czechs, and this perception encouraged him in his belief that it was his duty to solve the Czech question. On 13 September he decided to activate a plan already conceived at the end of August; he would see Hitler personally, and on 15 September he flew to Germany, where he met Hitler at Berchtesgaden. It was the first time in his life that he had flown. At Berchtesgaden he accepted in principle the proposition of self-determination and secession of non-Czech areas, subject to endorsement by the cabinet, and Hitler agreed to refrain from using force. 
Upon Chamberlain's return to London, the cabinet quickly agreed with the principle of secession combined with a guarantee of Czechoslovakia's new frontiers. Chamberlain informed his colleagues of his impression that Hitler's ambitions were limited and that he was sincere when he said that he wanted only a solution of the Sudeten problem. On 18-19 September the French prime minister and foreign minister flew to London and endorsed Chamberlain's proposals. The French subsequently informed the Czechs that the French government would not honour its alliance obligation to come to their assistance should a German attack follow Czech rejection of the Anglo-French proposals. 
When, however, Chamberlain flew to Germany a second time and presented his hard-won concessions to Hitler, he was astonished by the Fuhrer's reaction. There could be no further delay. There had to be a solution by 1 October, and German forces would start to occupy the Sudeten areas on 28 September. Moreover, Polish and Hungarian claims on Czech territory would also have to be settled. After a second meeting Hitler stated that German troops would only begin occupying Czech territory on 1 October and insisted that the document containing his proposals was a memorandum and not an ultimatum. Despite this depressing turn of events, Chamberlain felt bound to recommend to his colleagues, the French, and the Czechs the terms of Hitler's Godesberg memorandum. He now, however, began to face resistance. Lord Halifax felt it would be improper to coerce the Czechs into accepting the Godesberg terms, and the cabinet became divided, with Chamberlain's position supported by a minority. Furthermore, the French were now seemingly determined to stand by the Czechs, who rejected the Godesberg terms. War seemed inevitable, for Britain could not stand by with equanimity, whatever the formalities of treaty commitments, if France went to war in support of the Czechs and was in turn threatened with subjugation by Germany. The Royal Navy was mobilized, air-raid trenches were dug in Hyde Park, and gas masks were distributed. 
With the agreement of the French, and on Chamberlain's suggestion, Sir Horace Wilson was sent to Berlin to make a further appeal to Hitler to settle the Sudeten dispute peacefully with instructions to state that, should Hitler be resolute in his determination to solve the crisis by force, then Britain would be obliged, if France took active measures in support of Czechoslovakia, to go to war with Germany. In the early morning of Monday 26 September 1938, Wilson made his appeal, but Hitler was adamant that he wanted Czech acceptance of the Godesberg terms by 2.00 p.m. on Wednesday 28 September. The German leader followed this with an intemperate broadcast to the German nation. After some hesitation, but fortified by Chamberlain, Wilson on 27 September warned Hitler of the consequences of a resort to force. Hitler merely replied that within six days all parties interested in the dispute would be at war. That same day Chamberlain broadcast to the British nation. It was, he said, 'horrible, fantastic, incredible' that Britain should be preparing for war on account 'of a quarrel in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing' and he affirmed that he 'would not hesitate to pay even a third visit to Germany' if there were a prospect of success (Feiling, 372). That same evening the British ambassador in Rome was instructed to act on his own suggestion and propose to Mussolini that he use his influence with Hitler to persuade him to delay his proposed military action against Czechoslovakia. 
This manoeuvre worked. At 3.00 p.m. on the afternoon of 28 September Chamberlain was opening a Commons debate on the European situation when an urgent message arrived from the Foreign Office informing the prime minister that Hitler had delayed mobilization by twenty-four hours and that he, the French prime minister, Daladier, and Mussolini had been invited to a conference the following morning in Munich. In a welter of tumult, Chamberlain informed the Commons of this development and said that he would accept the invitation. Neither the Czechs nor the Soviets were invited to the conference, where on 29-30 September the issue of the Sudetenland was disposed of in the Munich agreement, under which the Czech government was to evacuate specified areas by 10 October, an international commission was to determine Czechoslovakia's new frontiers, an international force was to occupy the areas subject to plebiscite, and the four signatory powers agreed to participate in a guarantee of the newly defined state. 
After breakfast on the morning of 30 September, Chamberlain persuaded Hitler to sign the so-called Anglo-German declaration. Obtaining Hitler's signature on this document was undoubtedly a major aim of Chamberlain's visit to Munich, for it was in his mind a potential guarantee of future peace. Yet he had doubts, telling Lord Dunglass, his parliamentary private secretary, who accompanied him to Munich, that peace could not be a certainty, given Hitler's 'volatility'. He went further, opining that Hitler was 'without question the most detestable and bigoted man with whom it had been his lot to do business' and that Munich represented the 'last throw' (Home, 64-5). The Anglo-German declaration, therefore, had more than one dimension to it. As he informed Dunglass, it would also 'ensure that if war did break out the international community would know on which nation the responsibility' should fall (Thorpe, 83). This was of particular importance with regard to opinion in the United States. 
The declaration emphasized the importance of Anglo-German relations for the future of European peace, recognized the Munich agreement and the Anglo-German naval agreement as symptomatic of the desire of the two nations never again to go to war with one another, and affirmed the determination of the two governments to remove further outstanding causes of difference. On landing at Heston Airport Chamberlain waved the Anglo-German declaration as he emerged from the aircraft and stated: 'The settlement of the Czechoslovakian problem which has now been achieved is, in my view, only the prelude to a larger settlement in which all Europe may find peace' (Parker, 180-81). For Chamberlain the Munich agreement and the Anglo-German declaration were, therefore, the essential preliminaries to the general settlement that since 1936 had proved so elusive. Later in the day, when he arrived at 10 Downing Street, Chamberlain appeared before the deliriously enthusiastic crowds at a first-floor window and against his better judgement declared that for the second time in British history peace with honour had been brought back from Berlin. He stated: 'I believe it is peace for our time' (Feiling, 381). 
The relief that the Munich agreement brought to Britain cannot be overestimated, and Chamberlain's popularity soared. On the return from Munich, the drive from Heston Airport to Downing Street took one and a half hours because of the density of the crowds lining the route. There had been nothing like it since the armistice in 1918. In the words of the Scottish socialist James Maxton, Chamberlain had done 'something that the mass of the common people in the world wanted done' (Feiling, 379). He was effusively greeted by George VI and feted on the balcony of Buckingham Palace to scenes of jubilant clamour. Downing Street was inundated with flowers, poems, and the icons of Chamberlain's public and private lives, umbrellas and fishing rods, as ordinary people sought to express their release from the abomination of war. A Mass-Observation survey reported that 54 per cent of the sample endorsed Chamberlain's actions, with only 10 per cent expressing outright opposition. In Germany, Chamberlain's contribution to peace was equally joyously received. In October 1938 a former German naval officer conveyed the following message: 'I feel like one having been condemned to death, and set free in the last minute... It is my fervent wish to let Mr. Chamberlain know that we will thank him and bless him, all our life long' (ibid., 380-81). Chamberlain's stock had reached its zenith. Had he decided to call an election in autumn 1938 his government would undoubtedly have been returned with a massive majority, despite the reservations of Conservative central office, which contributed to the prime minister's restraint. 
The opposition of the Labour Party and a minority of Conservatives led by Churchill, and the resignation of Duff Cooper from the cabinet, did little immediately to dent the mood of optimism. But events proved that the quest for a general settlement was an increasingly forlorn aspiration. In November 1938 the disagreeable face of national socialism was brutally displayed in the anti-Jewish pogrom known as the 'Kristallnacht'. For a time Britain seemed to fare better with Mussolini. During November 1938 the Anglo-Italian agreement was ratified, but the results of a visit by Chamberlain and Halifax to Rome in January 1939 were almost wholly negative. In the months after Munich, Halifax remained sceptical about the long-term prospects for peace, but Chamberlain still aspired to a general settlement, although that was contingent upon the Germans renouncing the use of force. In March 1939 Hitler demonstrated that such a renunciation was not imminent. 
While Germany had at Munich agreed to participate in an international guarantee of Czechoslovakia, there was no intention on Hitler's part of honouring this commitment. On the contrary, he was preoccupied with destroying Czechoslovakia as soon as he could. In the separatist Slovak movement he had a willing ally. With the encouragement of Hitler, the Slovak parliament declared independence on 14 March 1939. The Czech president and the foreign minister subsequently requested a meeting with Hitler to persuade him to agree to the continued existence of Czechoslovakia. Hitler, however, bullied the Czech leaders into signing away their country's independence. On 15 March German forces entered Prague and the provinces of Bohemia and Moravia became protectorates of the Reich. 
This created profound shock in Britain. Chamberlain's speech in the House of Commons on 15 March was rather bland in its condemnation, but two days later in Birmingham he displayed his anger in a number of rhetorical questions. Was the destruction of Czechoslovakia the beginning of a new phase of German policy? Would other small states now be attacked? More ominously, was this the first step in an advance towards domination of the globe? He warned that because Britain opposed war as absurd and barbarous it did not mean that Britain would flinch from resisting a challenge if it were made. On the same day a scare story was started by the Romanian minister in London that suggested an imminent German attack upon Romania. This proved ultimately to have been bogus, but it galvanized the attitude of the British government. On 18 March Chamberlain told the cabinet that he had come to the definite conclusion that 'Hitler's attitude made it impossible to negotiate on the old basis with the Nazi regime... No reliance could be placed on any of the assurances given by the Nazi leaders' (Colvin, 188) He thought that the next step should be to ascertain who would join Britain in resisting aggression. Poland, he felt, was the key to the situation. Two days later the cabinet again met and discussed a draft declaration of agreement to consult interested powers if the independence of European states was threatened further. Chamberlain emphasized that the central issue was to be able to confront Germany with war on two fronts if she really intended to attempt the domination of the world, and he said: 'We should attack Germany not in order to save a particular victim but in order to pull down the bully' (Colvin, 190). Herein lay the origins of the policy of guarantees pursued by the British government during the spring and summer of 1939. It was a commitment to go to war should Germany undertake a further unprovoked act of aggression; a commitment that was given public form the following month with the introduction of conscription. 
Chamberlain's scheme for a declaration of agreement to consult was frustrated by the Polish refusal to be associated with the Soviet Union. By spring 1939 the Poles were in a desperate situation. In October 1938 the German government had suggested the resolution of all outstanding problems between the two countries. Danzig should be returned and there should be extra-territorial road and rail rights in the Polish corridor linking East Prussia with the Reich. The Poles refused to concede these demands, and neither a visit to Hitler by the Polish foreign minister, Beck, nor a visit to Warsaw by the German foreign minister, Ribbentrop, altered the situation. By March 1939 the Poles were not going to budge, however firm the pressure from Berlin. Moreover, they were determined to fight rather than surrender. The Poles concealed much of the reality of this from the British and the French. Nevertheless, scare stories at the end of March 1939 of an imminent German attack on Poland disseminated by the journalist Ian Colvin and a fear in London that the Poles might come to some agreement with the German government prompted Chamberlain into the offer of a guarantee to Poland on 30 March, for either eventuality was considered damaging for British policy, in that it would render resistance on a two-front basis difficult. The guarantee was accepted and made public on the following day. It was the measure that committed Britain to war five months later. Subsequently, the policy of guarantees was extended to Greece, Turkey, and Romania. 
The seizure by Germany of the German-speaking Lithuanian city of Memel on 23 March had contributed to the anxieties that provoked the reversal that now gave Warsaw an influence over British policy. But further anxiety was occasioned by Mussolini's annexation of Albania on 7 April and by the conclusion of the so-called pact of steel between Germany and Italy. In addition, Hitler's denunciation of the Anglo-German naval agreement and the Polish-German non-aggression pact in a speech to the Reichstag of 28 April made it clear that German-Polish relations were reaching a point of crisis. Chamberlain was now persuaded by Halifax that the concept of the grand alliance, incorporating the Soviet Union, was the only remedy against the belligerence of Berlin. The problem here, though, was the reality that neither the Poles nor the Romanians wanted Soviet troops on their soil. The question of transit facilities for the Red Army bedevilled the negotiations from start to finish. Equally problematic were Soviet suspicions of the intentions of the Western powers, which prompted the Soviet government to conduct parallel negotiations with the Germans culminating in the Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact of 23 August 1939. Hitler was evidently determined to destroy Poland and to realize German ambitions in Danzig by force, whatever the risk of war. Chamberlain's response on 25 August was finally to convert the guarantee of Poland into a formal, reciprocal military alliance. This gave Hitler some pause, and the attack on Poland was postponed from 26 August until 1 September. 
When the invasion of Poland began the German government refused to comply with Anglo-French ultimata demanding withdrawal, and at 11.00 a.m. on 3 September a state of war was deemed to exist between Britain and Germany. In his broadcast to the nation announcing this, Chamberlain stated: 'Everything I have worked for, everything that I have hoped for, everything that I have believed in my public life, has crashed into ruins. There is only one thing left for me to do: that is, to devote what strength and powers I have to forwarding the victory of the cause for which we have sacrificed so much. (Feiling, 416)' Chamberlain immediately sought to widen the basis of his government, but neither the Labour nor the Liberal leader would agree to serve under him. None the less, Eden returned and, more importantly, Churchill, who went to the Admiralty, joined it. Chamberlain disliked the role of war leader. Nevertheless, his commitment to victory and what was tantamount to unconditional surrender was absolute. On 5 September 1939 he informed the archbishop of Canterbury: 'I pray the struggle may be short, but it can't end as long as Hitler remains in power' (Feiling, 419). While Chamberlain remained open to a negotiated settlement with Hitler right up to the outbreak of war, a point on which in the eyes of even favourably disposed critics he remains vulnerable, it is necessary to set against statements that he made to that effect the record of implacable opposition to a peace on any other than allied terms once the war had begun. He was certain that Britain 'ought to reject' any proposals that Hitler might make following the fall of Poland, convinced that the restoration of any civilized standards in Europe was contingent on putting 'an end to Nazi policy' (ibid., 424). When on 6 October 1939 Hitler suggested a European conference to resolve the problems arising from the collapse of Poland, despite the favourable American response, he excoriated Hitler's proposals in a letter to his sister Ida. There was 'no real advance in mind or spirit towards a reasonable peace'; no reliance could be placed on anything that Hitler said; and, finally, 'the only chance of peace is the disappearance of Hitler and that is what we are working for' (Macleod, 279). Such resolve proved crucial at the end of May 1940. In his determination the prime minister would have been fortified by the virtual unanimity of the empire in going to war with Germany. Both Australia and New Zealand declared war on 3 September. Although for constitutional reasons Canada did not declare war until 10 September, she was effectively at war as soon as Britain was. Whatever the difficulties in other parts of the empire, such as South Africa and India, the reality was that, from the beginning, a large part of the earth's surface was hostile territory as far as Germany was concerned. 
Given the absence of Labour and Liberal members, Chamberlain's war cabinet consisted of the old inner core -- Halifax, Simon, and Hoare -- together with Churchill, Lord Chatfield, Lord Hankey, Sir Kingsley Wood, and Leslie Hore-Belisha. The success of the team, however, depended upon the partnership that was soon forged between Chamberlain and Churchill. As early as the beginning of October 1939 the latter was informed by the prime minister that their relationship need not remain strictly formal, and thereafter their dealings were marked by a steadily increasing warmth. In February 1940 Churchill for the first time accompanied Chamberlain on a visit to Paris for a meeting of the supreme war council; two months later he was effectively presiding over the general running of the war by chairing the military co-ordination committee. 
It did prove necessary, however, to reconstruct the cabinet in January 1940. Chamberlain greatly admired the 'courage, imagination and drive' (Macleod, 284) of Leslie Hore-Belisha, whom he had included in his cabinet as secretary of state for war in 1937; but the defects of his qualities soon became evident with the onset of hostilities. Hore-Belisha's self-confidence and lack of tact soon led to difficulties with Lord Gort, the commander-in-chief of the British expeditionary force (BEF) in France. The manner in which he criticized what he perceived to be the defensive inadequacies of the BEF was easily interpreted by Gort as outright condemnation of his ability as a general. Chamberlain correctly concluded that continuing friction of this kind was unsatisfactory and determined to reassign Hore-Belisha rather than lose him. But the latter would not accept a transfer to the presidency of the Board of Trade (the preferred option of the Ministry of Information having been vetoed by the Foreign Office), and he left the government. Oliver Stanley replaced him at the War Office and Sir John Reith went to the Ministry of Information. Further minor changes occurred in April 1940 when Lord Chatfield retired from the war cabinet. 
Throughout the first six months of the war Chamberlain's eye was fixed firmly upon the defeat of Germany and the destruction of Hitler. This can be seen in his attitude towards the Russo-Finnish War that lasted from November 1939 until March 1940. Soviet motives were undoubtedly defensive and were connected with their desire to improve their strategic position in the Baltic. The Finns declined to respond to Soviet proposals for a territorial exchange that would have enhanced the defence of Leningrad, and Moscow elected to secure Soviet aims by recourse to war. Chamberlain, nevertheless, was not beguiled by the mood of public sentiment for the Finns that soon engulfed opinion in Britain, France, and the United States. He thought 'Stalin's latest performance... no worse morally, and in its developments... likely to be much less brutal' (Feiling, 427) than Hitler's attack on Poland. He could not allow his indignation against the Soviet action to blind him to the reality that it was not very likely to damage the allied war effort. Thus to conclude peace with Germany in order to pursue a crusade against Russia, as one correspondent urged, was not practical policy. He wrote: 'I still regard Germany as Public Enemy No. 1, and I cannot take Russia very seriously as an aggressive force... I am afraid that, although the Germans would like to make peace on their own terms, they are very far from the frame of mind which will be necessary before they are prepared to listen to what we should call reason. (Feiling, 427-8)' The capitulation of the Finns on 12 March 1940 finally saved the British from madcap schemes, particularly from those elaborated by the French that would have involved military confrontation with the Soviet Union. 
Although Chamberlain believed it prudent to remain on the defensive until Hitler attacked, he was convinced that Germany would ultimately be defeated by an economic pressure that would lead to economic failure and social collapse in Germany. This assumption was somewhat complacent, but there was intelligence information, though misguided, to support such an interpretation. He also believed that the longer Hitler delayed in taking the initiative the better it was for the allies. Nevertheless, it was unfortunate that he publicly declared on 4 April 1940 that 'Hitler missed the bus' (Taylor, 470), for within days the Wehrmacht overran Denmark and Norway. This had been prompted by German fears of allied interdiction of iron ore supplies from Sweden. While there was little that could be done to save Denmark, an allied expeditionary force endeavoured to eject the Germans from Norway, but without success. 
Although Churchill was the minister primarily responsible for the Norwegian fiasco, it was Chamberlain who incurred the odium for the failure. He won the Commons debate on the Norway campaign on 7-8 May by 281 votes to 200; but it was a Pyrrhic victory, for thirty-three supporters of the government had voted with the opposition and there had been more than sixty abstentions. There had also been many wounding words, not least from Leo Amery, a former colleague and fellow Birmingham MP of many years' standing, who, quoting Cromwell, said: 'You have sat here for too long for any good you have been doing. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God go!' (Macleod, 289). The previous September, on the eve of the outbreak of war, it had been Amery who had scathingly criticized his own government when he had urged the Labour leader, Arthur Greenwood, to 'speak for England!' (Cameron Watt, 579). What was critical was that Chamberlain himself realized that there must be now a full coalition government incorporating the Labour and Liberal opposition. As, however, the chancellor of the exchequer and his former parliamentary private secretary, Sir Kingsley Wood, advised him, he could not remain in office while Labour refused to serve under him. 
On 10 May 1940, the day the 'phoney war' ended, as Hitler's forces attacked the Low Countries and France simultaneously, Chamberlain resigned. He had not been outstanding as a war leader and he knew it. There were, however, problems with his only really credible replacement, Winston Churchill, who was not popular in the Conservative Party. Chamberlain's preferred successor was Lord Halifax, but Halifax in effect declined on the grounds of his peerage and a self-recognition that his qualities did not match the hour. The premiership, therefore, passed to Churchill by default. Churchill, though, did not possess the immediate support of the Conservative Party, and Chamberlain continued as leader while remaining in the government as lord president of the council, in which post he served with distinction during the little time that was left to him. 
It was as well that Halifax declined the premiership: he proved an appeaser for all seasons. At the end of May 1940, as France and western Europe were falling under the Nazi juggernaut, he argued the possibility of a negotiated peace, but he was opposed by Chamberlain, who was now in favour of seeing the struggle through to the bitter end. After relinquishing the premiership he had broadcast to the nation, stating: 'And you and I, must rally behind our new leader, and with our united strength, and with unshakeable courage, fight and work until this wild beast, that has sprung out of his lair upon us, has been finally disarmed and overthrown. (Feiling, 441)' Now, at crucial war cabinets on 26, 27, and 28 May, he lent Churchill his decisive support, as Halifax, following discussions with the Italian ambassador, Signor Bastianini, suggested that a European conference might achieve 'peace and security in Europe' and assure Britain's 'liberty and independence' (Lukacs, 109). Chamberlain agreed with Churchill that there were no terms which Hitler would endorse that Britain could accept. Had he sided with Halifax it is likely that Churchill's position would have been fatally weakened. It was a critical moment in British history and perhaps that of the world. 
The excellent relations that had developed between Churchill and Chamberlain became more important following the former's assumption of the premiership. On 10 May 1940 Churchill wrote the following to Chamberlain: 'my first act on coming back from the Palace is to write and tell you how grateful I am to you for promising to stand by me, and to aid the country at this extremely grievous and formidable moment... With your help and counsel, and the support of the great party of which you are the leader, I trust that I shall succeed... In these eight months we have worked together I am proud to have won your friendship and your confidence in an increasing measure. To a very large extent I am in your hands -- and I feel no fear of that. (Feiling, 442)' Following the war cabinet split at the end of May 1940 he informed Lloyd George, no friend of Chamberlain's: 'I have received a very great deal of help from Chamberlain. His kindness and courtesy to me in our new relations have touched me. I have joined hands with him and must act with perfect loyalty' (Lukacs, 121). 
In his new role Chamberlain's position was far from negligible. He was responsible for co-ordinating internal policy, while Churchill focused upon the elaboration of war policy. During the latter's absences he chaired the full cabinet. As chairman of the lord president's committee, in effect a subcommittee of senior cabinet ministers, he was responsible for determining a plethora of domestic issues. It was Chamberlain who was responsible for enacting the 'Emergency Powers (Defence) Bill'. He also, at Churchill's behest and with the assistance of Malcolm MacDonald, attempted to secure the abandonment of Eire's neutrality. On the eve of his departure from public life, 'railway fares, rating problems of local authorities in coastal towns and war damage compensation' were listed by Churchill as issues on which he needed his predecessor's advice in addition to the fundamentals of general policy (Macleod, 295). War truly dissolved old enmities. In Clement Attlee's memoirs there appears the following encomium: 'He was Lord President. Very able and crafty, and free from any rancour he might well have felt against us. He worked very hard and well: a good chairman, a good committee man, always very businesslike. You could work with him. (Attlee, 37)' 

There can, however, be no gainsaying Chamberlain's mood of depression at the prospect of so much death and maiming. In a letter to his sister Hilda, he expressed his relief on retiring from the premiership, as he knew 'the agony of mind it would mean... to give directions that would bring death and mutilation to so many' (NCP, 18/1/1156, Neville Chamberlain to Hilda Chamberlain, 17 May 1940). Within a month the depression was accompanied by physical illness as he recorded the presence of abdominal pain. Following an X-ray on 24 July and an exploratory operation, terminal cancer of the large bowel was diagnosed. Chamberlain returned to 11 Downing Street on 9 September, as he put it, a partial cripple. He tendered his resignation as lord president on 22 September and resigned from public life on 3 October, having declined the Order of the Garter, preferring to remain simple Mr Chamberlain, like his father before him. He died on 9 November 1940 at Highfield Park, near the village of Heckfield, Hampshire. After a commemoration service in Westminster Abbey on 14 November, his ashes were interred beside the tomb of Andrew Bonar Law. On 12 November Churchill paid tribute to him in the House of Commons as a man who had 'acted with perfect sincerity according to his lights' and who had striven to save the world from the catastrophe into which it had fallen. 'This alone', he said, 'will stand him in good stead as far as what is called the verdict of history is concerned' (Macleod, 304). 
In recent years Churchill's prophecy might well be said to have been fulfilled. But Chamberlain's reputation was severely damaged for many years after his death by the writings of men such as Sir Lewis Namier and Sir John Wheeler-Bennett. His entire career was encapsulated in the concept of the man of Munich, and foreign policy during his premiership was condemned as crass and craven. Moreover, no opportunity was missed to stigmatize Chamberlain as a complete novice in foreign policy. 
The process of vilification began in earnest with the publication in July 1940 of 'Guilty Men' by the pseudonymous Cato. It was, in fact, written by three left-wing journalists who were then on the payroll of Beaverbrook newspapers -- Peter Howard, Frank Owen, and Michael Foot ['see 'Guilty men]. Its impact on Chamberlain's posthumous reputation is difficult to exaggerate. Published in the wake of Dunkirk and Hitler's conquest of France and western Europe, it caught a public mood agitated by the prospect of imminent invasion. The tract's central argument was that British defence policy during the 1930s left Britain ill-equipped and unprepared for war. Chamberlain was indicted as the first of the 'Guilty Men', who had inherited a 'great empire, supreme in arms and secure in liberty' and brought it to 'national humiliation' (Cato, 16, 19). More than that, he had wilfully ignored the sage advice of the Foreign Office in favour of the unaccountable Sir Horace Wilson, the second of the nominated guilty. In this way the myth was first disseminated that Chamberlain had preferred and acted upon 'the advice of shadowy figures such as Wilson and a small group of sycophantic ministers' (Dutton, 'Chamberlain', 76). With his scrawny neck inside a wing collar seemingly two sizes too big for him, and his umbrella, Chamberlain had always been an easy target for cartoonists; ridicule of him and the National Government that he effectively led for almost a decade was now 'de rigueur'. It was perhaps most scathingly encapsulated in the stigmatization of the appointment in 1936 of Sir Thomas Inskip as minister for the co-ordination of defence as the most extraordinary 'since the Roman Emperor Caligula made his horse a Consul' (Cato, 76). Some wanted to go further, advocating the hanging of Chamberlain and his colleagues from the lamp-posts in Downing Street. 

'Guilty Men' was followed by a series of imitation tracts, mostly published during the war, but the most cogent and sophisticated presentation of this view came in 1964 with the publication by Martin Gilbert and Richard Gott of 'The Appeasers'. In the following year Professor Cameron Watt referred in the 'Political Quarterly' to the rise of a revisionist school and asserted that the image of Chamberlain as a pro-German dupe, ignorant of foreign affairs, was less easy to sustain. In 1966 Martin Gilbert published a partial retraction of his earlier views in 'The Roots of Appeasement', which emphasized that appeasement had to be seen as a policy that was pursued before Chamberlain became prime minister, although he castigated Chamberlain for continuing it. He also pointed to the fact that appeasement was a policy of rather more sensible dimensions than sheer one-sided concession. In 1968 Keith Robbins published 'Munich 1938', which attempted to look at Munich in the context of fifty years of Anglo-German relations without the encumbering notion of appeasement. He indicated the identity of view between appeasers and anti-appeasers and rightly asserted that, at bottom, Munich was the consequence of the desire to avoid another Anglo-German war, rather than an attempt to gain peace at any price. 
Once the fifty-year rule regarding access to public archives was relaxed in 1968, the rehabilitation of Chamberlain could proceed and might be said to have started with Maurice Cowling's 'The Impact of Hitler: British Politics and British Policy, 1933-1940' (1975). This curiously constructed work sought to interpret British politics in the 1930s in the context of British foreign policy, but it stressed the responsible nature of foreign policy under Chamberlain, which was designed to match British commitments with resources. Full rehabilitation might be said to have been achieved with John Charmley's 'Chamberlain and the Lost Peace' (1989). According to Charmley, appeasement was justified to the last because Britain's involvement in war with Germany would be ruinous whether winner or loser. But he vitiates the argument for Chamberlain by concluding that the war itself was a mistake. Yet the degree to which Chamberlain's reputation has been enhanced is revealed in the way that post-revisionist critical works, such as R. A. C. Parker's 'Chamberlain and Appeasement', now recognize Chamberlain's intelligence, diligence, and administrative expertise. 
The problem with all these accounts, though, is that they concentrate upon Chamberlain's premiership and foreign policy. This focus distorts the true image of Chamberlain's mission and contribution, which lay in domestic policy and social reform. He has, however, fared better at the hands of his principal biographers. The earliest official biography of Chamberlain, written by Keith Feiling, is still the best account of Chamberlain's entire life. Its interpretations have stood the test of time, as they have been steadily confirmed and buttressed by archival research. Iain Macleod's biography, concentrating as it does on presenting Chamberlain as a social reformer, is a valuable corrective to the mountain of literature on Chamberlain's foreign policy. The same can be said of David Dilks's first volume of an official life, which concentrates upon the years down to 1929. 
On the eve of Chamberlain's becoming prime minister, Anthony Eden stated to a confidant that 'Neville Chamberlain had the makings of a really great Prime Minister' provided his health held out ('Diplomatic Diaries of Oliver Harvey', 33-4). Chamberlain's problem, however, was not health, but Hitler. He had the misfortune to be in office when the European crisis that began with Hitler's appointment as German chancellor began to peak. Inevitably, he was diverted from focusing upon those issues, covered by social reform, which would probably have made his premiership distinguished. Indeed, his eagerness to bring Hitler to terms was rooted in a desire to return as quickly as possible to domestic issues. This was never a realistic prospect as long as Hitler remained in office. The central charge directed against Chamberlain has been that, had he adopted a more confrontational policy, war could have been avoided. This has been in recent years more sophisticatedly argued by R. A. C. Parker. The suggestion is that a policy of a close Franco-British alliance and collaboration with the USSR would effectively have curbed the expansionist ambitions of Nazi Germany. Parker concludes: 'Led by Chamberlain, the government rejected effective deterrence. Chamberlain's powerful, obstinate personality and his skill in debate probably stifled serious chances of preventing the Second World War' (Parker, 347). 
The problem with this view, and that of its supporters such as Michael Roi, is that it takes no account of the intentions of Hitler. Some historians, such as Klaus Hildebrand and Andreas Hillgruber, argue that Hitler had a foreign policy programme of phased expansion whatever the cost; others, such as Timothy Mason, argue that the domestic structures created by the National Socialists ensured that Germany would eventually have to embark upon a war of plunder; finally, others such as Professor Cameron Watt have argued simply that Hitler 'willed, wanted, craved war and the destruction wrought by war' (Cameron Watt, 623). If any of these interpretations is correct, and the truth probably lies in an amalgam of all three, no policy pursued by Chamberlain could have maintained peace. That he strove to avoid war, conscious of the vast human misery and material destruction it wrought, should redound to his eternal credit, for in doing so, as he told Hitler at Godesberg, he risked his political life. 
Had Chamberlain retired with Baldwin in 1937 he would not have risked anything. He would still have been a considerable figure in British political history, his career a study in success. Like his father, Joseph Chamberlain, and his elder half-brother, Austen Chamberlain, he played a major part in British public life and, arguably, was more successful, for in 1937 he became prime minister. This was all the more noteworthy an achievement, for he had not entered the House of Commons until 1918 at the age of forty-nine. From then until the request by the crown that he form a government his political career might accurately be described as one of resounding achievement. The premiership, however, was to be the undoing of his reputation. He became prime minister precisely at the time when the international crisis of the 1930s, precipitated by the demands of Nazi Germany, was reaching its critical point and threatening to escalate into a major European war. In order to avert such a catastrophe, Neville Chamberlain attempted by an energetic policy of conciliation and redress of justified grievances to bring Germany into satisfactory and peaceable treaty relations with her neighbours. He did not succeed and war broke out in 1939, causing his premiership to be condemned as a failure for many years afterwards. His name became inextricably linked with the discredited, but much misunderstood, policy of appeasement and the shame and disgrace of the surrender to German demands at Munich in 1938. In short, he became the most maligned and vilified of twentieth-century British prime ministers. Foreign policy and war brought upon his premiership discredit for many years. Paradoxically, for his successor, Churchill, whose career up to 1939 has been described by Rhodes James as a study in failure, it was foreign policy and war that made his reputation. 
On the other hand, Chamberlain had all the attributes of an outstanding peacetime prime minister and a radically reforming one at that. Even during the turbulent 1930s, the governments in which he played leading roles did not lose sight of social reform. The 'Unemployment Act' of 1934 established the Unemployment Assistance Board, largely Chamberlain's creation. Its purpose was to remove the issue of relief from the political fray. Moreover, Chamberlain: 'saw the importance of 'providing some interest in life for the large numbers of men never likely to get work', and out of this realisation was to come the responsibility of the U.A.B. for the 'welfare', not merely the maintenance, of the unemployed. (Bruce, 271)' What a Chamberlain government would have done had there been no war in 1939 will never be known, but an election was due in 1940, and the manifesto proposals outlined by the Conservative Research Department embraced family allowances and the inclusion of insured persons' dependants in health cover -- about half the advances usually attributed to Beveridge. As Lady Cecily Debenham wrote to Chamberlain's widow, Anne, after his death: 'Neville was a Radical to the end of his days. It makes my blood boil when I see his 'Tory' and 'Reactionary' outlook taken as a matter of course because the Whirligig of Politics made him leader of the Tory party. (NCP, 11/15/44, Lady Cecily Debenham to Anne Chamberlain, 11 Sept 194[1]?)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32348


Chamberlain, Sir Crawford Trotter (1821-1902), army officer, was born in London on 9 May 1821, the third son of Sir Henry Chamberlain, first baronet, sometime consul-general and charge d'affaires in Brazil, and his second wife, Anne Eugenia, daughter of William Morgan of London. Sir Neville Bowles Chamberlain was an elder brother. 
After education at private schools and under tutors Crawford obtained a cadetship in the Bengal army in 1837, and was posted to the 28th Bengal native infantry. He was transferred to the 16th Bengal native infantry, and with the outbreak of the First Anglo-Afghan War he began his active service. He was present at the siege of Ghazni (23 July 1839) and at the operations around Kandahar. In September 1841 he was appointed to command the 5th Janbaz cavalry, and in October he became adjutant of Christie's Horse. Until the end of the Afghan campaign he was engaged in constant and severe fighting. In 1843 he was sent to Sind with two squadrons of Christie's Horse as an independent command, to be known as Chamberlain's Horse. 
In 1845 Chamberlain was invalided to the Cape, where he married Elizabeth, daughter of J. de Witt. She died on 19 January 1894. He returned to India in 1846 as second in command of the 9th irregular cavalry, into which his own regiment had been absorbed. During the Anglo-Sikh wars (1845-9) he was constantly in action. He was at the battle of Chilianwala on 13 January 1849. On 30 January he was again engaged in the neighbourhood; he was wounded, and was the subject of a special dispatch by Lord Gough (31 January). At the battle of Gujrat on 21 February, he had to be lifted into the saddle, where he remained throughout the day. He was mentioned in dispatches, and, being promoted captain and brevet major in November 1849, was given the command of the 1st irregular cavalry, formerly Skinner's Horse. He served with it in the Mohmand expedition of 1854. 
On the outbreak of the mutiny in 1857 Chamberlain displayed courage and resolution. The force of his influence and the discipline in his regiment were manifest when his men, in the midst of mutiny, suspected and overt, volunteered to shoot condemned rebels at Jullundur (4 June 1857). Chamberlain, although not the senior officer on the spot, was entrusted with the dangerous duty of disarming the 62nd and 69th regiments at Multan. He did this on 11 June with 'an extraordinary mixture of audacity and skill'. Sir John Lawrence in his report declared that the disarming at Multan was a turning point in the Punjab crisis, second only in importance to the disarming at Lahore and Peshawar. At Cheekawutne in September Chamberlain was attacked by an overwhelming force, and was compelled to take the unusual course of securing his cavalry in a caravanserai. Chamberlain was sick, but he succeeded in maintaining the defence, until he was relieved three days later. 
For his services in the mutiny Chamberlain was promoted lieutenant-colonel, a reward generally regarded as inadequate. The oversight was admitted and rectified long afterwards. In April 1862 he was made colonel, in 1864 he was appointed honorary aide-de-camp to the governor-general, and two years later was made CSI, and was included in the first list of twelve officers for a good-service pension. In 1866, too, he was transferred to the command of the Central India horse, and the next year to the command of the Gwalior district with the rank of brigadier-general. In 1869 he was officiating political agent at Gwalior, and received the thanks of government. From October 1869 to February 1870 he was acting political agent at the court of Sindhia until his promotion to major-general. 
During his unemployed time as major-general Chamberlain served on various commissions and courts of inquiry, and from 1874 to 1879 he commanded the Oudh division. He became lieutenant-general in October 1877 and general in January 1880. In that year he returned to England for the first time since 1837; with the exception of his visit to the Cape, he had never left India in the interval. In 1884 he was retired from the active list. In 1896 he married for the second time; his second wife was Augusta Margaret, daughter of Major-General John Christie. She survived him; there were no children from either marriage. In 1897 he was made GCIE. Sir Crawford, who retained his splendid physique until near the end, died at his residence, Lordswood, near Southampton, Hampshire, on 13 December 1902, and was buried at Rownhams. 


@@@@@


doc= 32349


Chamberlain, Houston Stewart (1855-1927), racialist writer, was born on 9 September 1855 in Southsea, the last of the four children (one daughter and three sons) of Rear-Admiral William Charles Chamberlain (1818-1878), and his first wife, Eliza Jane (1825?-1856?), daughter of Captain Basil Hall RN and granddaughter of Sir James Hall. His brother was Basil Hall Chamberlain, and he was nephew of Field Marshal Sir Neville Bowles Chamberlain, of General Sir Crawford Trotter Chamberlain, and of Major-General Thomas Hardy Chamberlain. Much of his early childhood was spent in Versailles, where he briefly attended the Lycee Imperial. From 1867 to 1869 Chamberlain went through a miserable period at Cheltenham College, and thereafter he saw as little as possible of England. In the years 1870-74 he was privately tutored by Otto Kuntze, a Prussian, during extensive travels and sojourns in France, Switzerland, and Italy. By the mid-1870s it was clear that nervous disabilities (which proved to be a lifelong affliction) would render him unfit for the military career otherwise almost dictated by his pedigree. On 9 April 1878 Chamberlain married Anna Horst, daughter of a Breslau lawyer, and then proceeded to study natural sciences at the University of Geneva (1879-84). Henceforth he survived on private family funds and through literary earnings, especially as author of works celebrating many aspects of Teutonic achievement. He lived in Dresden from 1885 to 1889 and began to produce articles about the Wagnerian cultural legacy. He then moved to Vienna, where he wrote not only his book on 'Das Drama Richard Wagners' (1892) and a life of the composer (1896), but also a biological study of 'Recherches sur la seve ascendante' (1897). During the latter part of this decade Chamberlain accepted a commission from the Munich publishing house of Bruckmann to prepare a historical work which, as the century reached its close, would take stock of the condition of civilization. It was this, 'Die Grundlagen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts' (2 vols., 1899), which made him famous. 
The book, as Geoffrey Field observes, 'turned Chamberlain almost overnight into the prophet of race for educated laymen in Central Europe'. It was breathtaking in its range of scholarship, but also crude in its political intent. The treatise focused principally on Europe from classical times to the French Revolution, yet was never continued into that more detailed study of the nineteenth century itself which the author had originally envisaged. Chamberlain presented modern civilization as having been shaped largely by five influences: the aesthetics and philosophy of Greece; the statecraft of Rome; the world-redeeming revelation of Christ; the alien and destructive influence of the Jew; and the regenerative power of 'der Germane', the hero of the Aryan-Teutonic races. These last, though initially deemed to embrace also the Celts and Slavs, become in the 'Grundlagen' ever more emphatically equated with their most illustrious branch -- that of 'die Deutsche', or Teutons in the narrower Tacitean sense of the term. The fulfilment of their racial destiny could not properly begin until the world-historical event of Christ's birth had converted the Graeco-Roman legacy into a form that they could exploit. Thus the Messiah who erupts into these pages is not merely non-Jewish, but also a haughty figure more akin to a Bismarckian Junker than to the conventional paragon of humility. This is a God well fitted to inspire the Teuton in his subsequent struggle against the Jew, fought for the survival both of Christian civilization and of racial virtue. 
The 'Grundlagen' places particular stress on the protestant Reformation, as a decisive Germanic act of liberation from the vacuous universalism of Catholic Rome. Even more strikingly, the Renaissance too is portrayed as a flowering of Teutonic genius, with artists such as Leonardo and Michelangelo being brought inside the fold of the great race. This exemplifies the way in which Chamberlain's 'method' depends on the opportunistic mixing of external physical qualities and inner spiritual ones, and thus on the process of validation by reference to 'intuition' whenever 'science' might seem to fail. Through such means he sought to present the most recent half-millennium of European history as a tale of progress. Yet he did so without implying that there was anything inevitable about this achievement. The Teutonic advances had been registered only in the face of an unrelenting Semitic peril. Therefore contemporaries must recognize the continuing challenge of 'Volkwerdung' -- not as a state of fulfilment already entirely attained, but as an ongoing struggle of racial 'becoming'. This was something that Wilhelm II, among others, was pleased to hear. In a letter of 31 December 1901 he told Chamberlain that 'it was God who sent your book to the German people'. The Kaiser treated the imperial family to readings therefrom, and also organized subsidies for a popularly priced edition. By 1914 German sales had exceeded 100,000. Meanwhile, the first Baron Redesdale (A. B. F. Mitford) had produced an enthusiastic introduction for the English translation, issued as 'The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century' (2 vols., 1911). It is perhaps particularly curious that, when the book received a predictably mixed reception in Britain, no one penned a warmer welcome than George Bernard Shaw. 
In 1906 Chamberlain separated from his first wife. On his divorce two years later, he entered on 26 December 1908 into a similarly childless marriage with Eva Wagner, the composer's only daughter. He settled now at Bayreuth, 'the home of my soul'. There he wrote many further works, including 'Goethe' (1912) and an intellectual autobiography called 'Lebenswege meines Denkens' (1919). At the outbreak of the First World War he had also embarked on producing polemical essays against his native land. While German soldiers were able to admire these in a 'Trench Edition', the British turned the venture to their own propagandist purposes by publishing in 1916 an English translation tellingly titled 'The Ravings of a Renegade'. Having been awarded the non-combatant's Iron Cross in 1915, Chamberlain at last took German citizenship in the following year. After the fall of the Wilhelmine regime he continued to correspond with the exiled Kaiser. Yet Chamberlain also began to forge ever closer links with the emergent Nazi movement. He celebrated his first meeting with its leader at Bayreuth in September 1923 by declaring in an open letter to Hitler in October: 'That in the hour of her deepest need Germany gives birth to a Hitler proves her vitality.' Two years later, on the seventieth birthday of the ailing author, the Nazis' official journal returned the compliment, praising the 'Grundlagen' as 'the gospel of the Volkish movement'. 
Chamberlain's final illness has been rather speculatively diagnosed as a form of multiple sclerosis. Certainly it was a condition of protracted weakening that took progressively heavier toll upon his energies from 1916 onward. He died in Bayreuth on 9 January 1927. His burial there, at the shrine of Wagnerism, was attended by Prince August Wilhelm, a son of the former Kaiser. However, far more significant for the posthumous cult of the author's reputation was Hitler's presence at the ceremony. A few months later Alfred Rosenberg, the principal 'philosopher' of Nazism, would publish a volume whose title hailed Chamberlain as the 'pioneer and founder of a German future'. As one of the earliest and most prominent intellectual promoters of the Hitlerite cause, this English renegade could hardly have been more deserving of such an ultimately damning panegyric. 


@@@@@


doc= 32350


Chamberlain, Joseph (1836-1914), industrialist and politician, was born on 8 July 1836 at 3 Grove Hill Terrace, Camberwell, Surrey, the first of the nine children of Joseph Chamberlain (1796-1874), cordwainer and metal manufacturer, and his wife, Caroline (1808-1875), daughter of Henry Harben, brewer and provisions merchant. Joseph Chamberlain -- the third member of the family, after his father and his grandfather, to bear that name -- was the first industrialist to reach the highest tier of leadership in British politics. Though he never became prime minister, he was generally considered by the beginning of the twentieth century to be the first minister of the British empire. He was a Unitarian by conviction until the death of his second wife and remained so afterwards by proud allegiance. That allegiance accentuated his difference from the established elite in politics, and especially from his eventual Conservative allies with their loyalty to the established church. But it was the background of his family and his own experience in manufacturing industry that more profoundly shaped his politics. 
There was an imperial element in that background. For four generations, from the mid-eighteenth century, the Chamberlains had earned their living near the Guildhall in London as cordwainers or makers of new shoes. Their industry prospered in wartime because all those foot soldiers had to be shod. Accordingly the Chamberlains differed from their most prominent fellow Unitarian, the minister Joseph Priestley, in supporting the war against revolutionary France. They appreciated the blessings of a belligerent state. Joseph Chamberlain's grandfather was a staunch supporter of the Honourable Artillery Company and early in the war became captain of its north-western division. 
Though the Chamberlains prospered from their industry, they continued to live modestly over their shop until young Joseph was about to be born, when they moved to a terraced house in Camberwell. The Chamberlains were an austere lot who stuck to business. But from his mother's side his family derived a richer literary culture, enjoyment of good food and drink, delight in the plays they put on for themselves at high days and family festivals -- in which young Joseph shone -- and, in an earlier age, involvement on the fringes of the world of high politics. His great-grandfather had managed the parliamentary constituency interests of two whig dukes, first for the elder Pitt's colleague the duke of Newcastle and then for the duke of Richmond. Young Joseph was a high-spirited boy and pugnacious as well as serious. He received the best education on offer for those destined for business. After early instruction at a dame-school in Camberwell and at a further school conducted by a Church of England clergyman in Islington, he was sent to University College School in London, an institution held in high esteem among Unitarians. He carried away prizes in Latin and French as well as mathematics and science. Upon graduation he was apprenticed to his father's business, briefly, to begin with, in the actual making of shoes but soon in bookkeeping, where the business was controlled. His horizons were broadened during this apprenticeship by a holiday trip to Belgium and France as translator for his uncle, another cordwainer. 
Although the family remained affluent, the business of cordwaining was flat in the comparatively pacific middle years of the nineteenth century. Joseph Chamberlain's father welcomed the opportunity to invest in a venture by his brother-in-law, J. S. Nettlefold, who manufactured wood screws in Birmingham. Nettlefold had been confronted at the 1851 exhibition in the Crystal Palace by machinery invented by an American for the automated manufacture of wood screws with an improved design. Whoever purchased British rights to the patent could dominate the domestic market. The cost of the patent, together with a supply of machines and construction of a factory to house them, was high. Nettlefold sought help from Joseph Chamberlain's father, who invested $10,000 initially and more later. He sent young Joseph to Birmingham in 1854, shortly after his eighteenth birthday, to look after the investment. The new arrival and the industrious town took each other to heart. 
In the course of the next fifteen years Joseph Chamberlain and his father, and J. S. Nettlefold and his son, yet another Joseph, turned themselves into the 'Screw Kings', as young Chamberlain called them. He began, as in his father's cordwaining business, on the accounting side. Moving up from that base, he assumed charge of marketing, leaving production to his cousin Joseph Nettlefold. The four men together made the decisions required to win monopoly control of the domestic market and carve out a commercial empire overseas. They extended their production vertically to include ironworks, the making of steel rods, and the drawing of the wire from which screws were made. On the accounting side Joseph Chamberlain scrutinized every category of cost, including the amount and kind of metal used, the steel cuttings from the nicks and threads of the screws which could be melted down with other steel to improve the quality of the mixture, and the processes involved, such as hot forging or the use of cold wire. He worked out percentages for the overhead costs at each mill as well as for packaging, warehousing, taxes, and the expenses of his sales organization. He took systematic note of the type of labour and the sex and age of the workers customarily employed to make each product. In this way he came to see that a shortened working day increased the productivity of labour. As a result he eventually introduced a nine-hour day, which earned the enduring gratitude of his employees and impressed the trade union movement nationally. He worked out a system of discounts, which prevailed throughout the industry into the next century, for cash payment or credit and for the sales organization, depending on the relationship of the sales agent to the firm and the nature of the competition in each particular market. He also paid attention to the idiosyncrasies of foreign markets, and produced an illustrated catalogue of the ever more varied wares of the firm. 
To secure the co-operation he needed from other branches of commerce, Chamberlain joined the board of directors of the Midland Railway, and he helped turn the private banking firm of Lloyds in Birmingham into a public joint-stock company. Able in all these ways to reduce its intermediate costs and finance expansion, Nettlefold and Chamberlain, as the business was known, cut the price of its products in order to absorb or crush the domestic competition. Abroad Chamberlain marketed his goods so successfully that producers in the United States, though protected by a wall of tariffs, paid his firm a large annual sum to stay away -- an achievement which left him long convinced of the compatibility of imperialism and free trade. He agreed with one French firm to divide continental Europe into spheres of influence, Nettlefold and Chamberlain taking the markets washed by the sea, leaving landlocked countries to the French company. He took advantage of the Franco-Prussian War to take over the markets of another French competitor. 
The expansion of the firm, however, did not impress Chamberlain as much as its social impact in Birmingham. He was the first industrialist to recognize that large factory operations like his own, which were springing up around Birmingham, posed a threat to the comparative harmony between classes fostered by the prevalence hitherto of small workshops in which the distance between employer and employee was narrow. He explored some possibilities for restoring class co-operation within large business through company-sponsored education and recreational clubs for workers, and profit sharing with senior employees. But disappointed by or uneasy about these options, he turned, along with other concerned businessmen in Birmingham, to elementary education. In 1869 they founded the National Education League. Rapidly extended in alliance with the Central Nonconformist Committee across the English provinces, the Education League sought parliamentary legislation to create a national network of schools under civic control, fully funded by taxation, to instil into every child, unless educated elsewhere, basic literacy and numeracy and, if need be, non-denominational religious instruction. This initiative catapulted Chamberlain into national politics in 1870, though he did not enter parliament for another six years. 
When the government of W. E. Gladstone met the demand with a measure which in effect retained the Church of England as the primary provider of elementary education, Chamberlain fomented a radical rebellion combining nonconformists and organized labour against the Liberal leadership. But the fruits of the rebellion indicated that he was as much out of touch with the Liberal rank and file as were the leaders of the party, and that divided from each other they would only incur defeat, which Disraeli duly inflicted in the general election of 1874. Standing for election at Sheffield, Chamberlain personally experienced the defeat to which he had contributed. 
The major phases in Chamberlain's career were reinforced with happy marriages which, however, in the first two cases terminated tragically. In 1861 he married Harriet Kenrick (1838-1863), daughter of Archibald Kenrick of Berrow Court, Edgbaston, a Birmingham businessman and fellow Unitarian, and brother of William Kenrick (1831-1919) ['see under 'Kenrick family (per. c.1785-1926)]. This marriage introduced Chamberlain to the pleasures of life enjoyed by Birmingham's upper-middle class. He moved out of lodgings into a house on Harborne Road. There, from his father-in-law and in common with his younger partner, Joseph Nettlefold, he acquired a love of gardening which endured for the rest of his life. But two years after their marriage, having already borne a daughter (Beatrice Mary Chamberlain (1862-1918), later a prominent opponent of women's suffrage), Harriet died giving birth to her second child, (Joseph) Austen. Grief-stricken, Chamberlain fled from his home, eventually moving into the home of Harriet's parents, where her older sister could take care of the children. He threw himself frantically into his business and also into the educational activities which led him into public life. In 1868 he married Harriet's first cousin, Florence Kenrick (1847-1875), the daughter of Timothy Kenrick of Birmingham. Serious of spirit though never physically sturdy, Florence was an advocate of the franchise for women. She furthered her own education while she bore Chamberlain four more children, (Arthur) Neville, Ida ['see '(Florence) Ida Chamberlain 'under' Beatrice Chamberlain], Hilda ['see '(Caroline) Hilda Chamberlain 'under' Beatrice Chamberlain], and Ethel. Florence edited the articles Chamberlain wrote for the 'Fortnightly Review' to proclaim the first of his radical programmes. She promoted the transformation of Southbourne, the home they acquired, into the after-hours headquarters for the radical captains of Birmingham. She looked forward to the political life of London once he gained election to parliament. But before that happened, in 1875, she died giving birth to a stillborn son. Once again Chamberlain fled, this time to the Mediterranean, after which he plunged himself deeper in work, now as mayor of Birmingham, to which he was first elected in 1873. He entered the House of Commons in 1876, but he never found the secure radical footing in parliamentary politics that Florence had helped him to find in the civic politics of Birmingham. 
The defeat of the Liberals in the general election of 1874 concentrated Chamberlain's energies on the civic arena in Birmingham and on his role as mayor. In June he retired from business. After arranging for the rest of his family, he was left with capital of $100,000, enough to keep him affluent for the rest of his life. 
Chamberlain devoted his talent for business to civic purposes. Taking over the local utilities, which were in private hands, first gas and then water, he consolidated and improved services, reduced costs, and at the same time broadened the town's revenue base. This remarkable financial accomplishment and its social benefits persuaded the town to extend its civic enterprise. Thus, early in his political career, Chamberlain constructed arguably his greatest and most enduring accomplishment, a model of 'gas-and-water' or municipal socialism widely admired in the industrial world. At his ceaseless urging, Birmingham embarked on an improvement scheme to tear down its central slums and replace them with healthy housing and commercial thoroughfares, both to ventilate the town and to attract business. This scheme, however, strained the financial resources of the town and undermined the consensus in favour of reform. 
Before his civic policy revived the partisan division of the town, Birmingham elected Chamberlain to be one of its members of parliament at a by-election in June 1876. He was sorry to leave the civic arena where he had performed so well. He never abandoned the belief that more good could be done in local politics than at the parliamentary level. He was almost forty when he secured election to parliament, and he knew that if he waited longer he would arrive too late to make his mark. Even so, after three years in the environs of Westminster, where his prospects for advancement looked good, he reaffirmed his attachment to Birmingham by building himself a new home there, much grander than Southbourne, on a crest of land at the southern edge of the town overlooking a still-rural valley. He named his new home Highbury after the district in London where he had spent his youth. He continued to lavish money on the building and its furnishings, to extend the attached greenhouses, and to elaborate the gardens in the 18 acres of grounds. Highbury was the centre of his universe, large enough to accommodate visiting colleagues from Westminster but away from its demands; it was close to his most intimate associates in Birmingham, with facilities for him to indulge in his favourite recreation of breeding orchids, and with space outside for the enormous garden parties that kept him in touch with his constituents. Once he became a cabinet minister he rented and then purchased a house on Princes Gardens in Knightsbridge, but it never became his residence of choice. 
In appearance alone Chamberlain impressed parliament from the outset. Belying expectations of what a provincial mayor would look like, he wore his monocle like a gentleman, as the fastidious Disraeli observed. The monocle and an orchid -- or three if they were small -- in his buttonhole became his trademarks in politics. He was shorter than many of his aristocratic contemporaries, but that rarely provoked comment. He was clean-shaven in a bearded age. More remarkably, he looked young -- as if he were in his twenties when he reached forty, in his forties when he passed sixty. Like his politics, he looked new. 
Chamberlain's arrival in parliament coincided with a deepening downturn in the economy. It fortified the critics of his civic policy in Birmingham. Chamberlain did not have a ready political response either locally or nationally to what became known as the great depression. He understood industry's need for governmental action in the social sphere, but he remained confident that industry did not need assistance in the workshop or market place. His experience of overseas sales, particularly in the American market, left him contemptuous of tariffs. He did not see how to apply the principles of gas-and-water socialism at the national level. In any case, the issues with which the politicians and the public were preoccupied when he entered parliament were imperial and foreign rather than social or directly commercial. 
Less interested in foreign affairs than in the set-back to radicals in common with all Liberals in the general election of 1874, Chamberlain sought to apply to the national party not the civic policy but the party organizational skills which he had helped to develop in Birmingham. The Birmingham Liberal Association mobilized its electoral support ward by ward through ascending levels of elective representation under the controlling leadership of Chamberlain and his lieutenants. He extended that model to industrial England with the establishment in 1877 of a National Federation of Liberal Associations. When Chamberlain presented the federation to Gladstone as a way to harness popular support for his agitation over the atrocities committed by the Ottoman empire in Bulgaria, the latter agreed to support the federation, and stayed with Chamberlain at his house, Southbourne, during the National Liberal Federation's inaugural meeting on 31 May 1877. Cautiously, Gladstone continued to defend the National Liberal Federation against its critics. For the next three years Gladstone and Chamberlain co-operated with each other, though always from a distance and with separate objectives, Gladstone reclaiming his leadership of the Liberal Party, Chamberlain climbing his way up towards its controlling echelons. There was little sign of the difference in imperial sentiment which would later divide them. Deterred by the cost of British imperial expansion in South Africa and south Asia, and delighted by the damage it did to Disraeli's government, for a while Chamberlain became a Little Englander. 
The contribution the National Liberal Federation made to the Liberal victory in the general election of 1880 helped Chamberlain to push his way into the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade when Gladstone formed his second ministry. That ministry frustrated Chamberlain as it did each of its members, though in different ways. Like the rest of the cabinet, he entered office without a defined domestic agenda, and in any case they were all immediately distracted by upheavals in Ireland and Africa. His legislative accomplishments in his five years at the Board of Trade were for the most part measures already in the administrative pipeline of the board, in particular those on bankruptcy and patents. His chief initiative was intrinsically admirable, but he handled it with impetuous clumsiness and a disastrous lack of tact. He sought to prevent shipowners from insuring themselves against financial loss and occasionally even guaranteeing themselves a profit from the loss of life, sometimes heavy, among merchant seamen who were sent out in ill-equipped vessels. But his attack on shipowners for their negligence alienated conscientious owners as well as the callous; it frightened small investors as well as large, and failed to attract much support in the electorate, among whom merchant seamen were a negligible force. 
The importance that affairs in Ireland and Africa acquired in the early 1880s might have diverted attention from Chamberlain, given his official responsibilities and known concerns for domestic matters. Yet from the outset of the ministry he assumed a prominent position on imperial issues. He responded with some sympathy to the agrarian unrest and accompanying nationalist agitation which erupted in Ireland. It gave him an opportunity to create a radical liaison between the cabinet and the Irish leader, C. S. Parnell, with whom he had sometimes co-operated in the previous parliament. But the intermediary upon whom in 1882 Chamberlain relied for this purpose, W. H. O'Shea, damaged Chamberlain's reputation and discredited the mediation. O'Shea wished to use his position as complaisant husband of Parnell's mistress to advance his personal ambitions in British politics, and his discretion was not equal to the demands of such an intrigue. These means nevertheless helped to release Parnell from gaol in 1882 and to give full effect to the previous year's transformation of Irish land law in the interest of the tenants. 
Developments in Africa also had an ambivalent impact on Chamberlain. In common with most other radicals he was, on balance, repelled by Britain's deepening involvement in Egypt, with which he concerned himself only as a participant in cabinet discussion. But he was called upon to play a prominent role on South Africa, and the turn of events there ended his interlude as a Little Englander. R. W. Dale, his leading nonconformist lieutenant in Birmingham, had made him aware of the interest of British missionaries in southern Africa. From that time Chamberlain publicly endorsed the opposition which Gladstone proclaimed in the dying months of the Disraeli ministry to the annexation of the inland Boer republics by the British colonies along the southern coast. When the Liberals took office Gladstone asked Chamberlain to speak in the House of Commons for the government on South African issues, the colonial secretary being in the House of Lords. Gladstone then proved reluctant to cancel the annexation; but Chamberlain encouraged him to accept the Boer demand of internal autonomy for their republics, and he continued to press for this even after the humiliating defeat which the Boers inflicted on the British at Majuba Hill. He was accordingly among the most prominent advocates of the convention of Pretoria, in which Britain made the demanded concession. But the refusal of the Boers thereafter to confine themselves within the terms of the convention, and simultaneous encroachments upon the region by Bismarck's Germany, turned Chamberlain to defiance. 
The prospect of a wide extension of the electorate in 1884 excited Chamberlain as promising a new chapter of domestic affairs in which his radicals could take charge. In the previous year, during a speech in Birmingham on 30 March, he had notoriously denounced the aristocracy as a class 'who toil not, neither do they spin' (J. Chamberlain, 'Speeches of the Right Hon. Joseph Chamberlain MP', ed. H. W. Lucy, 1885, 41). When the House of Lords resisted the government's 'Franchise Bill' he orchestrated the popular outcry, and in doing so marked himself out as Liberal leader for the future. At the beginning of 1885, after the 'Franchise Bill' became law, he proclaimed the most famous of his radical programmes to meet the needs and desires of the new electorate. In substance the programme was restrained. But the rhetoric Chamberlain employed, particularly his choice of the word 'ransom' to describe the social insurance which he wished the affluent to provide for the working class, raised fears among the propertied -- and the new electors still had to be householders. In the ensuing general election campaign he reduced his demands to what he considered minimal proportions. But they still included free education -- and that alarmed the supporters of Church of England schools, failed to satisfy the nonconformists who desired civic control of denominational schools, and repelled householders fearful of an increase in the rates. The results of the general election at the end of the year disappointed him. Although his proposals for small allotments of land, or 'three acres and a cow', attracted the new electors in the countryside, the Conservatives made headway in suburban constituencies and thus deprived the Liberals of their parliamentary majority outside of Ireland. The Irish nationalists under Parnell emerged with a much expanded Commons contingent, and thus gained decisive influence in the new house. 
The ensuing parliamentary crisis distorted Chamberlain's partisan alignment and deprived the Liberal Party of power for twenty years, to say nothing of the impact on Anglo-Irish relations. Though the part Chamberlain played in the crisis was essentially self-defensive, it proved pivotal to the outcome in the kingdom. 
At the beginning of 1885, giving his radical programme an Irish dimension, Chamberlain had offered Parnell a central board scheme framed to give Ireland an expanded version of the powers of local government that Birmingham had used to such good effect. But when, in the middle of the year, Conservatives indicated that they might be willing to make a more substantial bid for Irish nationalist support, Parnell turned Chamberlain down and, adding insult to injury, prevented him from receiving a civil reception in Ireland. Angered, Chamberlain dropped Ireland from his election programme. 
Afterwards, in an attempt to minimize the significance of the losses which the Liberals sustained in the general election, Chamberlain advised the party to lie low and leave the Conservatives in office to be discredited by their tacit alliance with the Irish. But instead Gladstone returned to office in January 1886, and replaced Chamberlain's radical agenda with a proposal for internal self-government of Ireland on terms acceptable to Parnell. Before this reorientation of Liberal priorities became clear, Chamberlain, who bid for the Colonial Office, declined the Admiralty, and returned to office apprehensively as president of the Local Government Board, attempted to act on his own agenda by initiating an inquiry into the use of local public works to alleviate unemployment; this resulted in his circular of 15 March, which became a famous paper of governmental initiative. But at the same time he precipitated the disclosure of Gladstone's intentions on Ireland. Once their direction was clear, Chamberlain and G. O. Trevelyan resigned from the cabinet in a dramatic gesture on 26 March 1886: 'Trevelyan and myself again tendered our resignations and left the [Cabinet] room' (Chamberlain, 'Political Memoir', 199). Declining friendly advice to leave quietly, he threw himself into the fight against Gladstone's proposals, for a combination of reasons, imperial, domestic, and personal: because they threatened to weaken the central government of the United Kingdom, because they took precedence away from his radical programme, and because they undermined his own standing in the Liberal hierarchy. Still he hoped that Liberals would appreciate the conscientiousness of his opposition when it so obviously deprived him of office and that they would welcome him back when the Irish debate was resolved and Gladstone retired. The conflict, however, became bitterly personal. Most Liberals, including radicals and the National Liberal Federation, interpreted Chamberlain's behaviour as a blatant bid to supplant the Grand Old Man as leader of the party; and Gladstone, though already seventy-six, was destined to live for another decade. 
Against Chamberlain's predilections and the grain of the major parties, he found himself allied not only with the Conservatives, led by the third marquess of Salisbury, whom he learned to respect, and Lord Randolph Churchill, whom he regarded as a kindred spirit, but also with whig defectors from the Liberal Party led by Lord Hartington, whom he disliked as a drag. This alliance of men who had denounced each other in vivid terms months earlier in the 1885 election was confirmed by the general election which Gladstone called in mid-1886 as soon as his 'Government of Ireland Bill' was defeated in the House of Commons. The general election of 1886 hardened the split in the Liberal Party and necessitated an electoral compact between Liberal Unionists and Conservatives. The electoral survival of Hartington in Lancashire depended on support from Chamberlain as well as Conservatives, which both gave. Chamberlain had more independent strength in Birmingham. He turned the town into a bastion of radical Unionism, excluding Gladstonians from the parliamentary representation of the town and conceding only one of its seven seats to the Conservatives. He thus established himself as that rare phenomenon in English politics, a strong regional as well as national figure. He helped to preserve a substantial Liberal Unionist contingent in the new House of Commons, enough to keep the Conservatives from reaping all the fruits of the Unionist victory. Yet his place in the line-up of parties remained anomalous. Though Salisbury depended on Liberal Unionists for his majority in the Commons, he refused to form a ministry that included Chamberlain, nor would Chamberlain join a combined ministry led by Hartington. Chamberlain thus delayed the formation of a coalition for a decade. 
During that decade Chamberlain carved out a distinctive position for himself, innovative in both domestic and imperial affairs. The role he developed proved vital to the success of the Unionist cause and restored the prospect of his gaining high, though no longer the highest, office. He found the first year after the 1886 election discouraging. Churchill, the member of the Conservative ministry upon whom Chamberlain relied to make his wishes effective, resigned in December. Immediately Chamberlain proposed a round-table conference of leading Unionist and Gladstonian Liberals with a view to reunion. The conference was duly convened. But it exposed the impossibility of agreement so long as Gladstone insisted on, and Chamberlain refused to concede the prompt granting of, a generous measure of domestic autonomy for Ireland. The last real prospect of Liberal reunion thus vanished. Chamberlain looked to the alternative possibility of a centre party composed of Liberals who would settle for less Irish autonomy and Unionists who would do more than defend the 'status quo'. But this alternative depended on Churchill, who petulantly went his own way, and on Hartington, who shied away from any constitutional change. Against all expectation, the one reliable relationship to develop among the Unionist leaders was between Chamberlain and Salisbury. Both strong-minded men, though one wished to arrest and the other to accelerate the pace of change, they learned to trust each other even when they disagreed. Still, the end of the summer of 1887 found Chamberlain near despair, afraid that Gladstonians and the Irish would sweep all before them. 
Chamberlain welcomed an opportunity for escape. Salisbury offered him the leadership of a diplomatic mission to Washington to deal with a fisheries dispute between Canada and the United States. The mission (November 1887 - March 1888) confirmed Chamberlain's Unionism. It also nourished his interest in imperial opportunities to strengthen Britain's international position, opportunities in pursuit of which he might also strengthen his personal position in British politics. He was gratified to discover that, belying Gladstonian reports, the leading men in American public life were closet Liberal Unionists. Though fear of the substantial and articulate Irish electorate in the United States made them unwilling to speak out, privately their memory of the hard fight to preserve the American Union inclined them to oppose the amount of autonomy Gladstone would give Ireland. When Chamberlain visited Canada he found that the governing Conservatives there shared his insistence on strong central government. He was still more impressed by the economic resources opened up by the Canadian Pacific Railway. At a banquet in Toronto, and then at Henry Adams's dinner table in Washington, Chamberlain began to preach an imperial mission for the English, unifying kindred races and 'working out... the great problem of federal government' (W. Maycock, 'With Mr Chamberlain in the United States and Canada, 1887-8', 1914, 100 ff.). 
Chamberlain secured two agreements in Washington: a 'modus vivendi' with the American and Canadian governments to deal with the fisheries dispute, and an engagement to marry Mary Endicott (died 1957), only daughter of William Crowninshield Endicott, secretary of the army in President Cleveland's cabinet. Less than half Chamberlain's age, Mary was a Massachusetts patrician who enjoyed the world of privilege and power. The wedding took place in November 1888, to the distress of Beatrice Potter, with whom he had had an association since 1883, though her passion for him was unrequited. When Mary joined Chamberlain in England she helped to settle him socially among the well-born Conservatives and whigs with whom he was now politically associated. The universality, none the less, with which he was known as Joe, not only on the streets of Birmingham but up to the royal family, reflected his sturdily popular associations. To the end of his life he refused any honour which would give him a title other than Mr. 
On his return from the New World to the Old, Chamberlain made two lasting adjustments in his political course. He made himself indispensable to the Unionist cause through endlessly resourceful opposition to home rule; and he added policy initiatives on imperial issues to his programme while adapting and developing its social side to make the most of the Conservative interest in reform. Along the way he refined a lean and pointed style of speech, responsive to but never distracted by interjections, and in doing so established a new model of platform oratory. He also emerged, in the judgement of close observers, as the ablest debater in the House of Commons. His envenomed indictment of home rule provoked retaliatory personal attacks from English radicals and Irish nationalists, who could not forgive him for deserting them. But he earned the gratitude of Unionists as much as the hatred of the Irish for being the man who killed home rule. Sharp practice and scandal accompanied these controversies. Chamberlain made the most of what proved to be false charges in 'The Times' in 1887 against Parnell for condoning crime, and he encouraged O'Shea to pursue the suit for divorce that finally ruined the Irish leader. 
Meanwhile Chamberlain equipped Unionists with a constructive programme to enhance their essentially negative 'raison d'etre' of resistance to home rule. On the imperial side, he aimed to strengthen the central government of the empire and cultivate its economic resources. He turned his attention first to South Africa, where fabulous resources of gold had just been discovered and more seemed in store. In this case he was less concerned with these resources economically than with the political power which their development threatened to transfer from London to South Africa, and within South Africa to the Boer republics, particularly the Transvaal where the goldfields were situated. Suspicious of Cecil Rhodes, who used his enormous wealth from the diamond mines of Kimberley, and now the gold of the Rand, to promote his political ambitions at the Cape, Chamberlain wanted to limit the terms of the charter which Rhodes sought from Lord Salisbury's government for development to the north of the Transvaal. But the government gave way to Rhodes because it saw no other avenue for development which would avoid heavy imperial expenditure. 
The economic developments Chamberlain wanted to promote lay elsewhere in the empire, and they usually involved the construction of railways. He was not in a position to make detailed proposals. But he drew the attention of working-class audiences, particularly after Gladstone's return to office in 1892, to the way in which markets and railway projects overseas could alleviate unemployment at home. Chamberlain himself invested heavily in a sisal plantation in the Bahamas. But his skill as an accountant had deteriorated with disuse. He made the initial investment against the advice of his brothers in business. When the returns proved disappointing, he deepened his investment; and he incurred further liabilities when he turned the business into a limited company, selling debentures. When the crop failed he lost so heavily that in the spring of 1895 he contemplated retiring from public life. Yet this personal experience did nothing to diminish his enthusiasm for public investment in the empire. 
On the domestic side, Chamberlain claimed and received credit for the Conservative government's extension of elective local government to the counties in 1888 and for the elimination of fees in state-aided elementary schools in 1891. Conservatives had reasons of their own for passing both measures, but Chamberlain undoubtedly increased their appetite for domestic reform. He took care wherever possible to encourage suggestions for reform made by Conservatives. It was through Sir John Gorst, the maverick Conservative MP for Chatham, that Chamberlain learned of the German scheme for insuring workmen hurt in industrial accidents. He placed workmen's compensation promptly on his Unionist platform and used the German model to undercut alternative Liberal proposals that pitted trade unions against employers. He always looked for ways to bring labour and capital together. In 1897, at last back in office now under Salisbury, Chamberlain saw to the enactment of a 'Workmen's Compensation Bill'. The crowning domestic achievement of the Unionists at the end of the century, this act served its social purpose at little cost to the Treasury. The compensation was paid for by insurance which employers were required to take out. 
Nothing comparable was to come of Chamberlain's more spectacular initiative in proposing old-age pensions. He first made the suggestion in 1891 in support of a Conservative candidate during a closely watched by-election at Aston on the borders of Birmingham. He pursued the suggestion after the narrow Liberal victory in the general election of 1892. But in spite of repeated attempts during the remainder of the decade, he could not find a scheme that offered much for what he liked to call the 'veterans of industry' without placing a heavier burden on the Treasury than Unionists were willing to impose. Once he launched his campaign for tariff reform a decade later, he suggested paying for old-age pensions from revenue raised through tariffs. But when the working class appeared to be more worried about raising the cost of living through a tariff on foodstuffs than they were attracted by benefits in old age, he dropped the suggestion, to the regret of some social reforming Conservatives. 
In 1894, anticipating the fall of the beleaguered Liberal government, Chamberlain sought support from Lord Salisbury for his social programme by suggesting that parts of it be introduced through bills in the House of Lords. Salisbury evaded this proposal, as he did all other Liberal Unionist attempts to settle the terms for a coalition ministry with the Conservatives before the Liberals were removed from office. As a result Chamberlain's programme for Unionism remained unofficial, widely influential in some Conservative and Liberal Unionist circles but firmly opposed in others. 
Not until the Liberals fell from office in June 1895 did Salisbury call the duke of Devonshire (as Hartington had become) and Chamberlain into council to decide on the terms for and composition of a coalition Unionist ministry. The way in which Salisbury expressed himself on social policy, though vague, was flattering to Chamberlain, who did not ask for clarification. He disconcerted Salisbury, however, by choosing the post of secretary of state for the colonies for himself. Aside from gratifying Chamberlain's sense of imperial mission, the choice reduced the risks of confrontation with Conservatives on social and fiscal issues; but it encroached upon the responsibilities Salisbury chose for himself by becoming foreign secretary as well as prime minister. 
That risk was averted for two years after the formation of the ministry and its triumphant confirmation at the polls by the basic agreement between Salisbury and Chamberlain on most imperial issues and by Chamberlain's distraction over the Jameson raid. Just after Christmas 1895 a lieutenant of Rhodes, Dr Starr Jameson, accompanied by a small force of men on horseback, invaded the Transvaal from a base under British control on its western border in an attempt to replace the Boer government of the republic with one sympathetic to Britain. The Boers crushed the raid without difficulty. Its defeat discredited the British inside the republic and out. It ruined Cecil Rhodes politically, though he preserved his economic might. It threatened to ruin Chamberlain, for he had given Rhodes's men possession of the strip of land from which Jameson launched his raid. Afterwards, for a year and a half, Chamberlain had to protect himself against the suspicion, which amounted among Rhodes's people to the knowledge, that he had known beforehand that the strip of land could be used for a raid -- though he could never have conceived of one as ill supported as Jameson's. Chamberlain was saved by Rhodes's knowledge that the continuation of the British charter for his interests north of the Transvaal depended on Chamberlain's retention of office, and also by the preoccupation among Liberal investigators in Britain with the extent of Rhodes's guilt. Chamberlain escaped without discredit except among the Boers and their sympathizers in South Africa. 
Amid the difficulties of these eighteen months Chamberlain canvassed the possibility of augmenting the trade between Britain and its self-governing colonies through creation of an imperial 'Zollverein'; but the suggestion elicited little sympathy either in the colonies, which relied on tariffs for revenue and for protection of their nascent industries, or in free-trading Britain. He had a little more success with the crown colonies governed by Britain. Before the Jameson raid he asked the governors of these colonies for information to help expand trade with the mother country. The former marketing manager asked for specifics on everything from prices and freight rates to patterns and packaging, and for samples of each colony's imports and exports. At the same time he attempted to use the dividends which Britain earned from its shares in the Suez Canal to fund the construction of railways and other infrastructural improvements in the crown colonies. Resistance from the Treasury, however, defeated this proposal and kept Chamberlain's subsequent achievement in 'cultivating the undeveloped estates' of the empire to modest proportions. 
Chamberlain made arguably his most substantial contribution to the crown colonies by promoting research and education in the field of tropical medicine. Concern for education permeated Chamberlain's career in public life from its beginnings with the National Education League to the establishment of the University of Birmingham at the turn of the century. As colonial secretary he looked to education to address a problem that crippled imperial administration especially in tropical west Africa, where most men sent out from England were stricken with malaria before they could complete their assignments. He appointed Dr Patrick Manson, the best-known of the few experts in tropical medicine, to be the Colonial Office medical adviser. Chamberlain raised private as well as public money to found the London School of Tropical Medicine. He fostered the appointment of committees of British researchers to go to the tropics not only for on-site investigation but to make and execute policy. From the sanitary reforms he made as mayor of Birmingham to the transformation he brought about in the sanitation of the camps into which Boer women and children were herded during the South African War, even his opponents recognized that he knew how to deal effectively with public health. Before he left office he had made service in the tropical colonies a more attractive profession. One way and another, Chamberlain's administrative efforts as colonial secretary marked him out as the most outstanding holder of that formerly secondary office, while the importance of imperial issues at the turn of the century and his personal importance in the party politics of the day lifted his position to an eminence second only to the prime minister. Even his rivals treated him as the first minister of the empire. 
Once the inquiry into the Jameson raid came to an end, Chamberlain invaded Salisbury's sanctuary at the Foreign Office by challenging his handling of the French in west Africa and his reluctance generally to seek an alliance with one of the other imperial powers. Salisbury had been dealing with the French over the Niger River in conciliatory fashion; he was anxious to save his diplomatic capital for a confrontation with them on the Nile. But Chamberlain insisted that Britain could not afford to diminish any of its colonial resources. To the embarrassment of the Foreign Office and its emissaries, he also demonstrated that the French would give way in face of stiffened British demands. His intransigent diplomacy, followed by the military activities of Frederick Lugard, extended the boundaries of what came to be known as Nigeria. 
At the same time Chamberlain sought official recognition, and thus international confirmation, of the informal sway held by the British in the commerce of China, the market potential of which he was inclined to exaggerate. To this end he looked for some sort of alliance with the other industrial powers he admired, the United States and Germany. This co-operation would, he hoped, strengthen Britain more broadly in the imperial competition which prevailed among the great powers at the turn of the century. President Cleveland had provoked Chamberlain on the eve of the Jameson raid by asserting the interest of the United States in a boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana. But Chamberlain welcomed the subsequent empire-building of the United States in the West Indies and the Pacific. Though his talk of an alliance disconcerted the Americans, Republicans responded appreciatively to his expressions of sympathy and willingness to co-operate in the imperial arena. But Germany rebuffed his repeated, often clumsy, overtures over China, and drove him ultimately towards the French. 
Chamberlain was distracted from these efforts by the onset of a war which he did not seek, but from which he did not recoil, to uphold British suzerainty over the Boer republics in South Africa. But at the end of 1898, with little idea that in less than a year he would lead Britain to war, he was preoccupied with founding and funding the University of Birmingham. In order to enhance the distinction of Birmingham and serve its industrial needs, he transformed Mason College into a university by adding an emphasis on the classics and humanities to its curriculum in the sciences, while applying higher education directly to business by adding a new faculty of commerce, Britain's first. He stimulated funding for the university by soliciting large grants from two expatriate Britons who had done well in North American business, Andrew Carnegie and Lord Strathcona. Manoeuvred by Chamberlain, the two men increased their offers and also made them contingent on matching funds, which he duly raised from the less wealthy business and professional elite of Birmingham. Chamberlain secured land for the new university from Lord Calthorpe, landlord of Edgbaston, the inner suburb of Birmingham beloved by its upper-middle class. 
The Jameson raid had left Chamberlain more circumspect yet still erratic in his handling of South Africa. He remained ready to do what he could by rough means as well as fair to strengthen the imperial power there and resist the quest of President Kruger of the Transvaal for autonomy. Chamberlain's uncertainty about the right tactics to employ diminished his ability to control the man he sent out as high commissioner to South Africa, Alfred Milner, especially since they shared the same objective, to make Britain supreme in the region. Milner soon despaired of a peaceful solution to the conflict with Kruger and resolved to work up to war. Former colonial secretaries had often found themselves unable to control their distant emissaries, but there was no comparable excuse for Chamberlain's failure to make adequate military provision for a war the severity of which he occasionally foresaw. 
Once the war broke out Chamberlain shrank from the role of war minister which was otherwise his for the taking -- and the war demonstrated a crying need for better military management. The war nevertheless raised him to new heights of eminence in the government. It was Chamberlain who pulled the government out of the slump into which it fell after three British armies were defeated in South Africa within one week in December 1899. It was he who determined the timing of the general election (October 1900), which was called early once the British seemed assured of military victory. Almost alone among the members of the cabinet, he then strode into the electoral fray. Crudely identifying the partisan appeal of the Unionist coalition with the fortunes of the imperial war -- 'Every seat lost to the Government was a seat gained by the Boers' -- he renewed the victory of 1895. 
The fortunes of the government and of its most prominent member did not advance in step with his achievement. Lord Salisbury reconstructed the ministry in ancestral fashion, promoting the members of its leading families, including Chamberlain's son Austen, but adding little fresh blood to its tired forces. Meanwhile the eruption of guerrilla warfare in South Africa eroded the moral force of the electoral mandate. Still, the war seemed to validate Chamberlain's imperialism, just as the election seemed to prove its popularity. Nothing was more remarkable than the willingness, even eagerness, with which the self-governing colonies of Canada, Australia, and above all little New Zealand contributed contingent upon contingent of troops to fight for the imperial cause far away at the foot of Africa. Arthur Balfour, Salisbury's nephew and presumed political heir, heralded Chamberlain at a special presentation to him in the Guildhall towards the end of the war as 'the man who, above all others, has made the British Empire a reality'. Next day 'The Times' (14 February 1902) greeted him as 'the most popular and trusted man in England'. 
But the war and its rewards for Chamberlain ended together. The heroic fight put up by the Boer guerrillas and the 'methods of barbarism' employed by the British army to force them to make peace discredited Chamberlain's brand of imperialism. The war was scarcely concluded, at the end of May 1902, when Milner ruptured his relationship with Chamberlain by calling publicly for suspension of Cape Colony's popular constitution in defiance of Chamberlain's injunctions. The obvious costs of the war in blood and treasure exceeded its apparent dividends, especially after the mine owners of the Rand indentured Chinese labour to meet their needs. The ending of the war allowed a backlog of domestic measures to the fore; and the most pressing of them, for improved funding and governance of elementary education, revived the denominational controversy that divided Chamberlain and nonconformist Unionists from their Anglican Conservative allies. The war also brought the government up against the limits of its fiscal resources. Finally, the termination of the war allowed Lord Salisbury to retire; and his retirement left the government under an uneasy dual leadership, with Balfour as prime minister and Chamberlain as first minister of the empire. The deterioration in Chamberlain's position as a result of these accumulating set-backs was not immediately apparent. But they were compounded as well as symbolized by the gash he sustained to his forehead a few weeks after the war from a falling pane of glass in a cab accident (7 July 1902). Though lean and vigorous, he had long been prone under stress to gout and neuralgia. He shunned exercise as a diversion from work, and he had been working under unremitting pressure for seven years. But he did not complain of fatigue until after this accident. It occurred just when Salisbury retired and when Balfour abandoned the one concession Chamberlain had secured in the terms of the 'Education Bill'. Chamberlain forced himself back to work against doctors' orders before he had fully recovered. 
The political situation from Chamberlain's standpoint continued to deteriorate. Still enthralled by his imperial assignment, he did not move to the exchequer which was his to take when Sir Michael Hicks Beach decided to accompany Salisbury into retirement; thus Chamberlain lost his best opportunity to determine the fiscal policy of the government, which was soon to be vital to him. Thereafter he had as little influence over Balfour's reconstruction of the ministry as over Salisbury's a year and a half earlier. The returns from by-elections turned sharply against the government, for which Chamberlain blamed the 'Education Bill'. All that he could salvage from an unproductive conference with the premiers of the self-governing colonies (June 1902) was an informal agreement with the Canadians to lower their tariff against British goods if Britain amended its wartime corn tax to favour the Canadians; and Chamberlain was not sure that he could secure cabinet approval for this small step towards imperial preference. Balfour encouraged his proposal to visit South Africa as the first in a projected series of personal missions overseas to draw the empire together. But Chamberlain's departure towards the end of the year weakened him at home, while few of the agreements which he patched up between the recently warring factions in South Africa survived his return to England. On his way home he learned that the chancellor of the exchequer, C. T. Ritchie, would resign and precipitate a major governmental crisis unless Chamberlain abandoned the slight modification in the corn tax to which he had tentatively agreed with the Canadians. Once Chamberlain reached England (March 1903) he acquiesced but with evident irritation, as he did also when the cabinet, on grounds of expense, rejected his plan to station a division of the British army permanently in South Africa. 
Frustration, not mature reflection, prompted the call that Chamberlain issued in Birmingham in May 1903 for 'a treaty of preference and reciprocity' with the colonies and for retaliatory tariffs against countries that threatened British imperial interests. His message nevertheless reflected deep-seated anxieties: about Britain's deteriorating industrial performance in comparison with the United States and Germany; about Britain's insecurity in the increasingly competitive world of the great political as well as economic powers; and, still, about the concern that first led him into public life, the social security of British industry unless it benefited labour as well as capital. He saw an opportunity to meet these concerns by cultivating the seed of imperial preference that Canada had sown. He elaborated his message rapidly under contradictory pressures: resistance in cabinet, but eager response from industrial and other Unionist interests. Industrially his message shifted towards protectionism, without abandoning insistence on the primary importance of imperial preference. The importance to the colonies of agricultural production, and particularly to Canada of its wheat exports, forced Chamberlain to demand that Britain place a tariff on its imports of foodstuffs, to be lowered preferentially in favour of those colonies that offered a comparable preference to British exports. He thus offended the most deeply rooted popular sentiments attached to free trade. But industrially his proposals were conservative. He focused his offer of protection on Britain's increasingly uncompetitive staple exports in metals and textiles rather than on technologically more advanced infant industries such as chemicals. In the social sphere he raised but then dropped the possibility of funding old-age pensions through tariffs and dwelt instead on the ability of tariffs to guarantee remunerative employment. 
At the same time Chamberlain created a formidable organization outside the regular channels of the government to promote his message. He worked from two bases. The avowedly non-partisan Tariff Reform League was set up in London, combining the talents of press magnates with the wealth of industrialists to flood the country with propaganda. The Tariff Reform Committee was set up in affiliation with the Liberal Unionist Association of Birmingham. Under close supervision by Chamberlain through his family and close friends it proceeded to capture control of the Unionist electoral machinery nationally. His most original organizational initiative came towards the end of the year when, in almost royal fashion, he appointed leading figures from industry and former governmental service to a tariff reform commission to make concrete proposals for a tariff after close industry-by-industry inquiry. 
In September 1903, tired of the constraints of cabinet government and encouraged by the seeming sympathy of Balfour, Chamberlain resigned from the ministry to launch a nationwide campaign from the platform. His campaign teetered on the verge of success by the turn of the year. But thereafter it compounded the electoral woes of the government. Tariff reform fragmented the Unionist alliance, much as home rule had split the Liberals. For another two years Chamberlain and Balfour paralysed each other. Each was unwilling to do what the other wished yet unable to do without him. Each was strong where the other was weak. While Chamberlain captured the organization of both parties to the Unionist alliance, Balfour outmanoeuvred him in parliament. Balfour performed brilliantly in foreign and military affairs, but Chamberlain kept the initiative in colonial policy. 
Chamberlain finally forced Balfour to resign in December 1905, thus precipitating a general election, which was held in January 1906 and brought in a Liberal government. The Unionists were overwhelmed by the allied forces of Liberals and Labour everywhere but in Birmingham, where Chamberlain and his men reversed the tide, increasing their already enormous majorities. The size of the majority the Liberals won in the new House of Commons destroyed Chamberlain's hopes of keeping their return to power brief. Still he fought back, struggling at least to commit the Unionist opposition to tariff reform. 
To that end a protracted celebration of Chamberlain's seventieth birthday, which coincided with the thirtieth anniversary of his election to parliament, was conducted in Birmingham at the beginning of July. Over the past year Chamberlain had blacked out briefly two or three times under the strain of public speaking, and he sensed that the address he gave on this occasion could be his last. It was a true valediction. In contrast to the Manchester school, with its devotion to minimal government and free trade, he praised what he proclaimed as 'the Birmingham school' for its readiness to use the powers of the state to promote the welfare of the country and to strengthen the empire. Tariff reform as he presented it served both these ends. It would 'secure for the masses of the industrial population in this country constant employment at fair wages', and it would advance the power and prosperity of industrial England. 'England without an empire', he said scornfully, 'would be a fifth-rate nation, existing on the sufferance of its more powerful neighbours' ('Birmingham Daily Post', 10 July 1906). 
Chamberlain hastened afterwards to London to pursue his campaign, and there he suffered a stroke. It paralysed his right side, including his writing hand, and it muffled his voice. His active political life was over, though his family tried to disguise the fact for nearly a year while Mary struggled to secure a recovery. He survived for a further seven years, intervening when he was able through dictated letters and awkward conversation to keep Unionists faithful to tariff reform and opposed to home rule. He remained influential because no one else on the Unionist side matched his strength of conviction and his remembered force of personality. But in 1913 Balfour's successor as party leader, Bonar Law, virtually abandoned the Unionist commitment to food taxes and, with them, to imperial preference. 
A year later Chamberlain, who had been re-elected in the two general elections of 1910, announced his intention to retire from the House of Commons at the next election. In mid-June he bid farewell to his faithful constituents, who saw him for the first time since his stroke being pushed along the footpaths of Highbury in a bath chair. He left Birmingham afterwards and returned to London, where he died at his home, 40 Princes Gardens, on 2 July 1914. Word of his death was overshadowed by the news of the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand at Sarajevo. 
Governed by Chamberlain's wishes, his family declined burial in Westminster Abbey. His funeral was conducted with stark simplicity in Birmingham. He was buried on 6 July in a civic cemetery, Key Hill, in the heart of his West Birmingham constituency, not far from the factory where he had made his fortune, in a ground vault with his first two wives, surrounded by the graves of the industrialists and civic leaders among whom he had been chief. He left an estate valued at just over $125,000, reduced by his abandonment of business for politics but not out of line with the estates left by his brothers who had remained in business. He also left a political progeny: his only son by his first marriage, (Joseph) Austen Chamberlain (1863-1937), foreign secretary; and his only son by his second marriage, (Arthur) Neville Chamberlain (1869-1940), prime minister. 
By 1914 Unionists had already given up one cause Joseph Chamberlain held dear. By the end of the summer they gave up another when they conceded home rule for Ireland. Only Birmingham remained true to his prescriptions in civic and national affairs for another thirty years. But his vision of empire continued to inspire Unionists at large, and his administrative policies at the Colonial Office were pursued by Labour as well into the mid-twentieth century. His willingness to use the powers of the state for domestic economic and social purposes has won more admirers among his political opponents than within his own party. 


@@@@@


doc= 32351


Chamberlain, Sir (Joseph) Austen (1863-1937), politician, was born on 16 October 1863 in Harborne Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the second child and only son of Joseph Chamberlain (1836-1914), politician, and his first wife, Harriet (1838-1863), daughter of Archibald Kenrick of Berrow Court, Edgbaston. Beatrice Chamberlain (1862-1918), later an active anti-suffragist, was his elder sister. His mother died soon after his birth and his father subsequently remarried twice. In his second marriage Joseph Chamberlain fathered a second son, (Arthur) Neville Chamberlain, the future prime minister. Austen was thus destined to be overshadowed at both the beginning and end of his life by a member of his own family. Joseph's second marriage also produced three daughters: (Florence) Ida Chamberlain ['see under 'Beatrice Chamberlain], (Caroline) Hilda Chamberlain ['see under 'Beatrice Chamberlain], and Ethel Chamberlain (1873-1905). 
Born into a political environment or, as Joseph once put it, into a red dispatch box, Austen Chamberlain's education was engineered with a political career in mind. His father was determined that he should follow him in public life, and that his progress up that greasy pole should be relieved of the impediments which the father had had to overcome. After preparatory school in Brighton, Chamberlain moved on to Rugby School shortly before his fifteenth birthday. At Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1882, he read history and graduated in 1885. Thereafter his father was anxious to continue the wider education of the future statesman. Experience of contemporary Europe would add to his understanding of the great issues of the day. Accordingly, Chamberlain spent nine months in Paris, where he attended the Ecole des Sciences Politiques. His father's name secured access to leading political circles and he met figures such as Clemenceau, Gambetta, and Ferry. Early in 1887 he went to Germany. Though he stayed there for a year, he never took the country or its people to his heart as he had done in Paris. Lectures which he attended by von Treitschke on Prussian history filled him with alarm because of their repeated emphasis on the superiority of the German race. It is probably no exaggeration to suggest that many of the attitudes which Chamberlain displayed as foreign secretary in the 1920s were in part shaped by these early experiences of Europe. 
Joseph Chamberlain now determined that his son should enter national politics, without the necessity of an apprenticeship on the municipal stage which had characterized his own career. Austen was formally adopted as Liberal Unionist candidate for the Hawick district in the Scottish borders early in 1888 and set about nursing the constituency while awaiting the next general election. In 1892, however, he seized the opportunity of accepting the more attractive nomination as candidate for the vacant East Worcestershire seat, close to his father's Birmingham stronghold. His election to parliament, unopposed, in a by-election in March characterized the ease with which Chamberlain's early advancement was achieved. After retaining the seat with a comfortable majority in the general election later that year Chamberlain, already a junior whip for the Liberal Unionists, delivered his maiden speech in April 1893 on the second reading of the Liberal government's 'Home Rule Bill'. It was an impressive performance which won the notice of his opponents, including Prime Minister Gladstone. 
In the Unionist government of 1895 Chamberlain accepted the post of civil lord of the Admiralty. More importantly, his father took office as colonial secretary and rapidly emerged as the most powerful man in the government beneath the prime minister, Lord Salisbury. For Austen this transformation in his father's fortunes meant that for a further decade or more he would have to live in the shadow of his illustrious namesake, and see his own political career largely shaped by the causes which his father espoused. The five years which Chamberlain spent at the Admiralty were essentially a period of administrative experience rather than political decision making. It was not particularly exciting work, but Chamberlain found it congenial and progressively enhanced his reputation as a capable administrator and reliable parliamentarian. He could speak effectively, but at no time in his career developed into an orator who really stirred emotions. He was again returned unopposed at the general election of 1900, held during the South African War, and escaped largely unscathed from allegations that he and his father were making money out of the war because of their holdings in armaments firms which had contracts with the government. 
In November 1900 Chamberlain was promoted to the position of financial secretary to the Treasury. Though outside the cabinet the post was an important one, and, as he was still only thirty-seven, his appointment was a clear indication that he was well regarded and destined for cabinet rank in the not too distant future. Promotion duly came on 8 August 1902 soon after Balfour succeeded Salisbury as prime minister. Chamberlain now entered the cabinet as postmaster-general to sit alongside his father. 
The South African War served to highlight the twin problems of national finance and the isolated and potentially vulnerable position of Britain on the international stage. It also emphasized divisions inside the Unionist government. It was in this increasingly strained atmosphere that Joseph Chamberlain delivered his celebrated speech on tariff reform on 15 May 1903 in Birmingham. By proposing a route towards imperial unity while at the same time creating a new source of revenue, Chamberlain offered his solution to the nation's outstanding problems. Austen could not have known how important an event this speech was to prove for his own career. By September, in the face of irreconcilable differences within the cabinet, the elder Chamberlain determined to resign from the government, the better to educate the nation on the merits of tariff reform from the comparative freedom of the back benches. Balfour strove to maintain a balance of interests within his reorganized cabinet. But the fact that Austen stayed on, and indeed was promoted on 6 October to the senior post of chancellor of the exchequer, may indicate that Balfour himself accepted the broad thrust of the elder Chamberlain's tariff policy and that Austen would act as a bridge between Joseph and the prime minister. Austen himself clearly envisaged that his new role was to act as custodian of his father's cause, but over the years which followed he found it much more difficult than he had expected to induce Balfour to adopt a positive and committed attitude towards tariffs. 
As chancellor Chamberlain was one of the few ministers to enhance his reputation while the government itself drifted indecisively towards the electoral catastrophe of 1906. Two competent, if orthodox, budgets were presented, but Chamberlain found his position inside the cabinet increasingly difficult as Balfour failed to commit the government to a full-blooded policy of tariff reform. He was probably relieved when the prime minister finally submitted the government's resignation in December 1905, making way for a minority Liberal administration under Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. The result of the general election of January 1906 was both decisive and yet ambiguous. On the one hand the Liberals secured a landslide victory in terms of seats in the House of Commons. Many of the Unionist leadership, including Balfour himself, went down to defeat. Yet on the other hand those Unionists who were returned to parliament were overwhelmingly in favour of the Chamberlainite policy of tariff reform. Austen and his father were both among the victors and seemed set to dominate the internal dynamics of the Unionist Party. But in July 1906 the elder Chamberlain suffered a severe stroke from which he never fully recovered. For the remaining eight years of his life he was no more than a backstage observer of the political scene, still desperately anxious to see the fulfilment of his political dreams. In such a situation Austen was the obvious instrument through which the stricken statesman could still exert an influence upon national politics. 
The younger Chamberlain thus found himself in the most difficult of positions. At a time when he was ready to carve out his own distinctive career in public affairs he was called upon to act as a sort of surrogate version of his father -- to be even more his father's son than he had been before. Representing his father forced Chamberlain into uncharacteristic behaviour. The man who for most of his career was renowned for political rectitude found himself the object of scorn and vilification as a result of his actions. His behaviour was often inconsistent with his membership of the shadow cabinet and, in more recent times, would certainly have led to dismissal from such a body. 
But for Austen Chamberlain tariff reform was never quite the crusade which it was for his father. His vision of the sort of socio-economic transformation which might result from the introduction of tariffs was always strictly limited. Furthermore, he failed to attract the unquestioning support of those who would have followed wherever his father had led. Deep down, Chamberlain probably wanted to play the role of mediator between the extremes of opinion within the Unionist ranks on the question of tariff reform rather than take the lead on one side of the debate, as his father's illness demanded. Not surprisingly, Balfour, successfully returned to the House of Commons at a by-election, found it possible to retreat once again into a cloud of ambiguities and imprecision as far as the issue of tariff reform was concerned. His character -- 'a locked Chinese box of paradoxes which seemed to defy penetration' (P. Brendon, 'Eminent Edwardians', 1980, 70) -- proved, as it had done in the years 1903-5, too subtle for Chamberlain's more pedestrian mind. 
None the less, as the country's economic situation deteriorated, Balfour became increasingly convinced of the merits of tariff reform on intellectual grounds until it was finally adopted as official party policy. So Chamberlain faced the general election of January 1910, precipitated by the House of Lords' rejection of the government's budget, with some optimism. His influence within the party in the whole period before the First World War was now at its height. For Chamberlain, perhaps even more than for the Unionist Party, the election represented a crucial test, for never before and not again until the 1920s was the cause of tariff reform so central to Unionist strategy. Against this background the outcome of the election must be seen as a considerable disappointment to him. Though the massive Liberal majority of 1906 was now wiped out, the government could still rely on a working majority in the new parliament because of the support of Labour and Irish MPs. Though Chamberlain was reluctant to admit it, the cause of tariff reform had suffered a severe set-back, and as the economic climate improved in the course of 1910 so its appeal diminished still further. 
Later in the year Chamberlain was one of a four-man Unionist delegation to the constitutional conference called to try to resolve the impasse between the parties over the powers of the House of Lords. Its failure made another general election inevitable in December. During the course of the campaign Balfour substantially reduced the party's commitment to tariff reform by declaring that, in the event of a Unionist victory, no food taxes would be introduced until after a referendum had been held on this single issue. For Chamberlain this was a considerable blow, not relieved by the Unionists' failure once again to return to office. 
At least Chamberlain could now seek refuge in a happy family life. On 21 July 1906, at the comparatively late age of forty-two, he had married Ivy Muriel Dundas ('c'.1879-1941), daughter of Colonel Henry Dundas of Datchet. This partnership lasted without blemish until broken by Chamberlain's death three decades later. The marriage produced two sons, Joseph and Lawrence, and one daughter, Diane. Chamberlain's private life was always a source of great joy, allowing him to put the cares of the political world into perspective and rescuing him from the many disappointments of his public career. 
By the end of 1910 Balfour had led his party to defeat in three successive general elections. This fact, coupled with his equivocal leadership during the 'Parliament Bill' crisis in the summer of 1911, gave rise to calls for his resignation. In November he decided to step down. Chamberlain, despite being a Liberal Unionist in a party dominated by Conservatives, and a Unitarian among Anglicans, was regarded as the front runner for the succession. But he was opposed by Walter Long, representative of the traditional tory landowning squirearchy. At this point Chamberlain suffered from a dual disadvantage of being his father's son. To Joseph Chamberlain's acolytes Austen lacked those qualities of fire and passion which made them unquestioning adherents to his father's cause. To those who held to a more traditional concept of Conservatism, Austen was tarred with his father's brush and stood as a symbol of the vulgar intrusion of 'Birmingham' and all it stood for into the party's ranks. In addition, Chamberlain's die-hard opposition to the 'Parliament Bill' and his membership of the Halsbury Club were not likely, despite his professions of devotion to the outgoing leader, to endear him to Balfour loyalists. Even so, had he possessed his father's determination and ambition, he could probably have secured the leadership on a majority vote. 
In the event, both Chamberlain and Long withdrew from the contest, allowing the little-known Andrew Bonar Law to emerge as a compromise candidate. Chamberlain's motivation was a combination of not wanting to split the party, an inner lack of conviction about his own leadership qualities, and a desire to live down his father's reputation as a man who had wrecked two political parties. This was a significant moment in his career. Thereafter, apart from the brief period of his own leadership in the 1920s, he found himself serving beneath men in the Conservative and Unionist Party whom he regarded as his juniors. He developed an exaggerated sense of his own importance and dignity which compounded an already stiff and unbending personal demeanour. With Bonar Law his relationship was never easy, especially when the new leader effectively abandoned tariff reform as a policy option for the foreseeable future. 
The years immediately before the outbreak of the First World War were dominated by the issue of Ireland. Chamberlain was never fully committed to the Unionist campaign of unyielding opposition to home rule and became increasingly concerned at the seemingly inexorable drift towards violence. His own preference was for a federal structure for the whole of the United Kingdom, or Home Rule All Round as it was usually called, but he failed to convert the Unionist Party to this cause. Joseph Chamberlain finally died at the beginning of July 1914, and Austen took over his West Birmingham seat in the House of Commons. More importantly, he now had the opportunity to carve out his own individual role in British politics, without the need to keep one eye on the wishes of his father. But he would do so against a background that was very different from anything he had so far experienced in public life. A month after Joseph Chamberlain's death, Britain and Germany were at war. 
At the beginning of hostilities Chamberlain played an important part in persuading the Unionist leadership to bring pressure upon Asquith's government to stand by France and Russia and to assure the prime minister of the support of the Unionist Party. Though no coalition government was formed for the time being, the chancellor of the exchequer, David Lloyd George, invited Chamberlain as a former chancellor to hold a semi-official post at the Treasury. On one occasion Chamberlain even took over the chairmanship of a conference at the Treasury when Lloyd George had to leave for a meeting of the cabinet. Significantly, this represented a first step in Chamberlain's association with Lloyd George, a working partnership which would gradually evolve from a mood of suspicion and mistrust towards the feeling of deep loyalty which would cost Chamberlain dear in 1922. When Asquith's coalition was formed on 25 May 1915, Chamberlain entered the government as secretary of state for India, remaining in this post when Lloyd George took over as prime minister in December 1916. 
As a passionate believer in the British empire Chamberlain took a keen interest in his new office. Though it did not seem central to the nation's war effort, he did inherit from his predecessor a small military campaign in Mesopotamia under the control of the government of India, designed in the first instance to protect oil fields at the head of the Persian Gulf. Over the following months the scope of the expedition was greatly extended, but by early 1916 it was becoming clear that provision for the sick and wounded had been hopelessly inadequate. The medical deficiencies of the campaign might not have attracted as much attention as they did had not the whole expedition turned sour after an initial run of military success. The decision to advance on Baghdad, which Chamberlain had supported in the cabinet, proved to be a grave mistake, and the Turks were far better prepared to meet the British advance than had been anticipated. After a series of set-backs Major-General Charles Townshend, commander of the 6th division which was besieged at Kut al-Amara, surrendered his 3000 British and 6000 Indian troops. 'In the whole history of the British Army there had never been a surrender like this' (A. J. Barker, 'The Neglected War', 1967, 266). 
The combination of military disaster and medical scandal ensured that heads would have to roll. Asquith was obliged to set up a commission of inquiry under the chairmanship of Lord George Hamilton, a former secretary of state for India. Chamberlain's culpability was believed to be marginal. When, however, the commission reported in the early summer of 1917, Chamberlain faced criticism on two counts. He bore a share of collective responsibility for the advance on Baghdad, and over the question of medical provision it was argued that he had not brought his concerns sufficiently into his official correspondence with the viceroy and had not acted quickly enough to bring about an inquiry. The new prime minister, David Lloyd George, offered Chamberlain the chance of a move to the Paris embassy, but the latter determined to stay where he was. When, however, the cabinet decided to set up a court of inquiry to decide against which individuals action should be taken, Chamberlain determined to resign from the government on 12 July 1917. He accepted without hesitation -- though many thought unnecessarily -- the doctrine of ministerial responsibility. 
By the end of 1917 Chamberlain was again exerting political influence. From the back benches he voiced concern about Lloyd George's increasingly close association with the magnates of the press. The prime minister seems to have concluded that Chamberlain was too dangerous a critic to be left outside the government, and on 18 April 1918 he was appointed minister without portfolio with a seat in the war cabinet. He retained this office when it was decided to extend the life of the coalition beyond the armistice of November, before becoming chancellor of the exchequer again on 10 January 1919. 
Chamberlain was apprehensive about returning to the Treasury, not least because of his expectation that the government was bound to confront severe financial problems and industrial unrest as a direct consequence of the war. The conflict had been largely financed through borrowing, so that the national debt stood at $7435 million by the end of the financial year 1918-19, compared to $650 million at the start of the war. His first budget announced a substantial reduction in planned public expenditure while reducing the rate of the excess profits duty. In 1920 there were violent fluctuations in the state of the British economy as an inflationary boom rapidly gave way to a severe recession marked by industrial stagnation and high unemployment. Though he has been much criticized for his management of the Treasury in this period, for first taking too long to respond to an overheating economy and then for making the slump more severe than it need have been by increasing the bank rate to 7 per cent, Chamberlain had little alternative but to pursue the chancellor's traditional role of exercising restraint over the spending plans of his ministerial colleagues. His budget of April 1920 increased both direct and indirect taxes, while at the same time he sought ever greater economies in the government's spending programmes. Overall it was to his credit that a deficit of $1690 million for the financial year 1918-19 was turned into a surplus of $238 million in 1920-21. 
In a broader context the Chamberlain who emerged from the war was a subtly different figure from the politician of 1914. He was more conscious than most of his contemporaries that the political environment of Edwardian England could never be recreated. Gone was the somewhat reluctant radical of the pre-war era, replaced by someone who was determined to preserve the existing fabric of ordered society against what he saw as the new threat of socialism, and ready to abandon some of his earlier beliefs to secure this greater end. In other words, he now developed into a natural Conservative, a transition eased by the formal fusion of the Conservative and Liberal Unionist parties which had taken place in 1912. His inherent conservatism was emphasized by his appearance and dress. With his monocle and frock coat he readily gave the impression of being a relic from an earlier age. He was one of the last MPs to maintain the old tradition of wearing a top hat inside the chamber. 
The evolution in Chamberlain's thinking shaped his attitude towards the coalition government and towards erstwhile political enemies in the Liberal Party. It was his long-term hope to combine in one party men of differing political traditions in order to avoid a peril more dangerous even than the war which had been so narrowly won. He did not believe that the Conservative Party standing alone would be able indefinitely to resist the challenge from the Labour Party. The maintenance of a coalition with Lloyd George's Liberals, even though the parliamentary strength of the Conservatives now gave them compelling claims to control a single-party government, was a necessary preliminary to such a political realignment. These calculations helped transform his attitude towards Lloyd George. His close association with the prime minister brought him a clear perception of the latter's qualities, and he developed a high regard for, and loyalty towards, Lloyd George which were ultimately to prove disastrous for him. It was an unlikely partnership between two men of vastly differing characters and public images, but it developed into the key axis of the coalition government. 
Late in 1920 Chamberlain was offered, but turned down, the Indian viceroyalty. A few months later a different and unexpected prize fell into his lap. On 17 March 1921 Andrew Bonar Law was forced to resign from the government on the grounds of ill health, and Chamberlain faced no serious challenge for the succession to the leadership of the Conservative Party in the House of Commons. His election was proposed at the Carlton Club by Captain E. G. Pretyman, who in the course of his speech coined the idea that Conservative leaders 'emerge'. In Chamberlain's case the word helped to convey the breadth of support which he now enjoyed. He took on his new role, which involved leaving the exchequer and becoming lord privy seal and leader of the Commons, 'as a clear duty but I wish that the call of duty had not come' (Chamberlain MSS, AC 4/1/1204). Such reluctance reflected doubts about his own leadership qualities which events were to justify. 
Chamberlain's elevation made him more than ever conscious of his dignity, while his lack of the common touch proved a serious handicap. He made few efforts to cultivate the support of Conservative back-benchers, many of whom had come into the Commons only since the war and knew very little of their new leader. More specifically, he proved a poor communicator. In this period he had developed into one of the more perceptive observers of the contemporary political scene. But he singularly failed to convey his understanding of the party-political struggle to those beneath him, most of whom were reluctant to submerge their identity inside a coalition headed by an increasingly unpopular prime minister. As a result, there developed a mutual failure of comprehension between leader and led. 
The ending of the First World War brought the issue of Ireland back to the forefront of the political agenda. Chamberlain's involvement in this question did little to strengthen his position as Conservative leader, though he himself came to look upon it with a sense of pride and satisfaction. As has been seen, Chamberlain's views on Ireland had never been those of an orthodox Unionist, and during the war he had become ever more prepared to consider a radical departure in Britain's Irish policy. He was among the first to urge negotiations with the Sinn Fein leadership and was one of the government's delegation when talks began. Though it was Lloyd George who shaped the course of the negotiations, Chamberlain was an enthusiastic supporter of the articles of agreement which the Irish representatives signed on 6 December 1921. He had played an important part in moving his party from the absolutist stance on the Union with which it had been associated in the pre-war period. The Free State became a dominion under the crown, while the prospect of Irish unity receded into the distant future. Like many later British politicians, he tackled the Irish problem in a spirit of well-meaning compromise, but this approach was bound to disappoint those who held more extreme positions on this most contentious of issues. In particular, Chamberlain, by his part in the negotiations, succeeded in alienating a substantial number of right-wing Conservatives for whom the Union afforded no possibility of compromise. Thereby he further eroded his basis of support within the party. 
By the beginning of 1922 attention was turning to the question of the next general election and, more specifically, the basis upon which the Conservative Party would contest it. Chamberlain remained one of the most committed advocates of maintaining the coalition. He was still convinced that, if it were to break up, the inevitable consequence would be to divide the moderate and constitutional forces into two hostile camps, leaving the Labour Party as the electoral beneficiary. Such thinking played its part when he declined Lloyd George's offer in February to step down from the premiership in his favour. Badly advised by those around him, Chamberlain seemed largely unaware of the strength of feeling against the continuation of coalition government which was now running through much of the Conservative Party. In private he may well have expected to succeed Lloyd George after the forthcoming election, but he found it difficult to articulate this in public, thereby giving the impression to many rank-and-file Conservatives that he was prepared to acquiesce indefinitely in a Lloyd George premiership. He could not understand, he told an audience at Oxford in March, 'the attitude of those who would desire needlessly to quarrel with our Liberal allies and to engage the constitutional forces in a fratricidal struggle' (Petrie, 2.179). At all events matters came to a head at a party meeting held at the Carlton Club on 19 October 1922. 
Chamberlain badly misjudged the mood of the meeting. He gave an unimpressive performance which highlighted his deficiencies as party leader. But the key factor was the re-emergence of Bonar Law, apparently restored to good health, as the champion of independent Conservatism. Making the issue one of confidence in himself, Chamberlain forced Conservative MPs into a position where they had to choose between loyalty to the leadership and, as they saw it, loyalty to the party, and they chose the latter. A motion for independent Conservative action at the next general election was carried by a large majority. The coalition was at an end and Lloyd George resigned immediately. The king now invited Bonar Law, elected Conservative leader in Chamberlain's place, to form a new administration. Chamberlain, bitterly resenting what had happened, stayed aloof from the new government, although the appointment of his half-brother, Neville, to the position of postmaster-general caused some strains within the Chamberlain family. Though Bonar Law succeeded in securing a large parliamentary majority for the Conservatives at the general election of November 1922, Chamberlain did not alter his analysis of the longer-term political situation. Noting the rise in the Labour vote, he continued to believe in the desirability of fusion between Conservatives and Lloyd George Liberals. 
Bonar Law's physical recovery proved short lived. By the spring of 1923 it was clear that he was a sick man, and in May he was obliged to resign, suffering from inoperable cancer. Had Chamberlain managed to reconcile himself to the verdict of the Carlton Club meeting, the party leadership, and therefore the premiership, would almost certainly have now reverted to him. In March Bonar Law, using Beaverbrook and Rothermere as intermediaries, had invited Chamberlain to return to the government as lord privy seal, with the expectation of succeeding him by the autumn. As it was, Chamberlain was still outside the government when Bonar Law resigned and had little chance of being considered for the succession, which passed to Stanley Baldwin. The latter did not feel able to offer Chamberlain a place in his government, and relations between the two men were badly damaged when the prime minister rather ineptly suggested that Chamberlain might like to consider becoming ambassador in Washington. Baldwin's decision to call a general election in December 1923 on the specific issue of tariffs brought about a partial reconciliation, and after the election, which resulted in Britain's first Labour government, Chamberlain resumed his place on the Conservative front bench. Neville played an important part in bringing Baldwin and his brother together, but Chamberlain still found it difficult to accept the new hierarchy of the Conservative Party. He remained a disgruntled and touchy colleague, looking down with some disdain from the eminence of his long parliamentary and ministerial career upon the inadequate efforts of the far less experienced Baldwin, whom chance and fate had installed as his leader. 
Lacking a majority in the House of Commons, Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government fell when Conservatives and Liberals combined to pass a vote of censure on its mishandling of a relatively minor legal case. The resulting general election of October 1924 produced an overwhelming Conservative victory. Baldwin was in a position to construct a government which would last its full term. Chamberlain, faced with a choice between the Foreign and India offices, inclined at first towards the latter, largely because it was a field of government where he already had experience. In the event he opted on 6 November for the more senior post. He did so with the diffidence and misgivings which accompanied most of the new initiatives of his career, but soon found his feet. Foreign affairs, in fact, now became the absorbing concern of the remainder of his life. 
The most important issue facing the new secretary of state was the future of the Geneva protocol, an ambitious and somewhat idealistic agreement negotiated by the previous Labour government, which was designed to supplement and strengthen the covenant of the League of Nations. By creating an exhaustive machinery for the definition of aggression and automatic procedures to deal with it, the protocol might well have had the practical effect of making Britain, as the leading league power, the world's policeman with unlimited obligations to fulfil. Chamberlain was no isolationist. He saw the vital need for Britain to make a firm commitment to the continent of Europe. 'If we withdraw from Europe', he told a cabinet colleague, 'I say without hesitation that the chance of permanent peace is gone' (Chamberlain MSS, AC 52/38). But for him the most important point was to define the extent and limits of Britain's commitment. The other key element in Chamberlain's thinking was his appreciation that there would never be real stability in Europe until France acquired that sense of security which she had failed to derive from the treaty of Versailles. Indeed, Baldwin appointed Chamberlain to the Foreign Office at least in part to put right the damage done to Anglo-French relations under the last Conservative foreign secretary, Lord Curzon. 
These factors made Chamberlain inherently hostile to the Geneva protocol, which was too wide-ranging in its ambitions, and led him towards a bilateral pact with France. Opposition within the cabinet towards Chamberlain's preferred option was, however, too strong, and, very much as a second best, the foreign secretary was obliged to take up proposals put forward by the German foreign ministry for a multilateral security pact in western Europe to guarantee the Franco-German and Germano-Belgian frontiers and the demilitarization of the Rhineland. Herein lay the seeds of the Locarno treaties, which were eventually concluded in October 1925 and for which Chamberlain's foreign secretaryship is best remembered. Though the agreements were not Chamberlain's in their origin, he adopted them with enthusiasm and played the key role through the spring and summer of 1925 in bringing his French and German opposite numbers, Aristide Briand and Gustav Stresemann, together. 
At the time the Locarno treaties were widely hailed as the most significant contribution towards a lasting peace in Europe of the whole inter-war era, marking a final end to the divisions of the war years and, because it was now agreed that Germany should become a member, setting the League of Nations on a new and more hopeful course. 'This morning the Locarno Pact was signed at the Foreign Office', wrote George V in the privacy of his diary. 'I pray this may mean peace for many years. Why not for ever?' (H. Nicolson, 'King George V', 1952, 409). Chamberlain himself was well rewarded for his efforts. A knighthood of the Garter and the Nobel prize for peace were the most tangible of the accolades showered upon him. But, especially in the light of what happened in the 1930s when Locarno was violated with impunity, the verdict of history has been less enthusiastic. It must always be remembered that Locarno began life as an initiative of German foreign policy, whose overriding purpose was the revision of the Versailles peace settlement. Moreover, by defining those frontiers of Europe where Britain felt committed, Chamberlain was advertising the fact that there were other frontiers where Britain was less vitally involved and which might be subject to revision without British intervention. After Locarno, therefore, certain parts of the Versailles treaty were endowed with a greater degree of sanctity than others. Granted existing French commitments in eastern Europe, this had the potential to create problems for Britain, as the 1930s demonstrated. 
Locarno's impact upon the League of Nations must also be considered. Chamberlain always maintained that the treaty should be seen as supplementing the league by adding specific obligations to the general ones inherent in the covenant. But this was true only in the context of the league as Chamberlain saw it -- a limited body which had a useful role to play in international affairs but which had in no sense transformed the intrinsic nature of diplomacy. 'I am sometimes more afraid of the League's enthusiastic friends than its contemptuous opponents', he once told a meeting of the League of Nations Union ('The Times', 17 March 1937). Objectively, Locarno may be viewed as a first step in Britain's abandonment of the sort of principles which underlay the covenant, with its belief in the indivisibility of peace, and a reversion to old-style foreign policy based on the priority of national self-interest. 
To his credit Chamberlain saw that Locarno alone was not enough. He once said that it should be seen as the beginning of the work of European appeasement and reconciliation and not its end. Locarno did provide for arbitration conventions between Germany and her neighbours in eastern Europe, and Chamberlain clearly hoped that what had been done in relation to Germany's western frontiers could be replicated by comparable regional arrangements in the east. But it would be for other powers than Britain to take the lead in this respect. As he once memorably wrote, in a deliberate misquotation of Bismarck's famous words, the Polish corridor was something 'for which no British Government ever will or ever can risk the bones of a British grenadier' (Chamberlain MSS, AC 52/189). In the event these so-called Eastern Locarnos failed to materialize. What he could not have foreseen was the rise of a new generation of German politicians for whom the traditional norms of diplomatic conduct had no meaning, men who were prepared to use the loopholes which Locarno offered in the east to begin their assault on European peace. But for the rise of Hitler, it would be easier to view Locarno as Chamberlain's honest attempt to resolve the dilemma of limited resources and over-extended obligations which confronted all the custodians of British foreign policy in the inter-war period. 
With what appeared to be the supreme accomplishment of Locarno behind him, Chamberlain became something of an elder statesman before his time. Locarno was his achievement and he revelled in it. But it is easy to forget that he remained foreign secretary for nearly four more years after its signature. Unhappily, the level of achievement was not maintained. He was the first British foreign secretary to attend meetings of the League of Nations on a regular basis. His primary purpose was to maintain personal contact with the other architects of the Locarno agreements. Thus began the so-called Locarno 'tea parties', a pattern of diplomacy whereby the representatives of the Locarno powers met in private in one another's hotel suites to discuss the outstanding international issues of the day. Though it has been argued that these meetings did not, in fact, divert business from its rightful forum in the league assembly, they did serve to emphasize the uniquely personal basis upon which the post-Locarno detente in European affairs was grounded. Personal chemistry, however, could not disguise the fact that serious differences remained between France and Germany. Even Germany's entry into the league was mishandled, with Chamberlain receiving much of the blame. Little of the spirit of Locarno survived Stresemann's death and Chamberlain's loss of office in 1929. 
In the years after Locarno the multiplicity of problems facing Britain in the international arena became far more apparent than it had been in the first twelve months of Chamberlain's foreign secretaryship, serving to remind him that Britain remained a worldwide and imperial power with interests across the globe. During the second part of his ministry he was confronted by serious problems relating to Britain's position in Egypt and in China and to the country's relations with the Soviet Union and the United States. The discovery that the All Russian Co-operative Society was a front organization for Soviet espionage led to the severing of diplomatic relations in May 1927. Relations with the Americans became particularly strained over the question of arms control and stand as one of the least distinguished aspects of his tenure of office. 
Faced with the diversity of calls upon his time and attention, Chamberlain's energy and health began to fail. Never endowed with a robust constitution or an infinite capacity for work, he complained repeatedly of the strain and tiredness brought on by the demands of the Foreign Office. In 1928 he suffered a complete collapse, after which many observers believed that he was never quite the same man again. By the time of the 1929 general election his star was no longer in the ascendant. The hopes engendered by Locarno had begun to fade and there was widespread criticism of his performance which was not restricted to the ranks of the Labour opposition. He was generally believed to have been too indulgent towards French wishes, especially when these were expressed by Briand. 
Chamberlain only narrowly held on to his West Birmingham seat in the election which brought the Labour Party back to power. In part this was testimony to his failings as a constituency MP. Certainly he never cultivated his Birmingham base as assiduously as did his father and half-brother. In opposition he became ever more critical of Baldwin's performance as party leader. He had never known 'so blunt a spearhead' or a man who 'left so large a gap between the recognition that he must act and action' (Self, 348). But by this stage of his career Chamberlain was careful to do nothing which might jeopardize Neville's claims to the succession. He had despaired when Neville had been persuaded to accept the party chairmanship in 1930 and had worked hard to extricate his brother from this commitment. He played no part in the crisis which led to the formation of the National Government in August 1931 but, with some reluctance, agreed to become first lord of the Admiralty without a seat in the cabinet. His official career would thus close with an odd symmetrical precision, as his first appointment thirty-six years earlier had been as civil lord of the Admiralty. In this position it fell to him to deal with the naval mutiny at Invergordon. He renounced any claim to further office after the general election in October, though he had some regrets about this decision when he saw the Foreign Office pass to the Liberal lawyer John Simon. 
A ministerial career spanning three and a half decades thus came to an end. Early assessments of Chamberlain's public life tended to be shaped by two considerations -- comparisons, generally unfavourable, with his father and half-brother, and attempts to attribute his failure to secure the premiership to some underlying character defect. He was the only Conservative leader of the twentieth century not to rise to this position. He might have found it easier to carve out his own political identity had it not been for a strong physical resemblance to his father, which he emphasized with his inevitable monocle and orchid. But there were physical differences between the two men which perhaps symbolized differences of character. Tall and slim like his father, his features were smooth and calm. His relaxed frame lacked the taut and wiry qualities of the older man. His appearance is well captured in portraits by I. M. Cohen, owned by the Cordwainers' Company but now hanging in committee room 6 of the House of Commons, and by Sir William Rothenstein at Reading University. Yet there is no need to consider him in terms of the post he did not attain or in comparison with members of his own family. He was a major figure in his own right. Only chance and his own decision stopped him becoming prime minister in 1922 or 1923. He played a significant role in the development of British political history from the turn of the century until shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War. He held the exchequer and Foreign Office at difficult periods and performed creditably in both posts. Leo Amery's assessment, written shortly after Chamberlain's death, remains balanced and fair: 'He just missed greatness and the highest position, but his was a fine life of honourable public service' (J. Barnes and D. Nicholson, 'The Empire at Bay', 1988, 437). 
Though out of office, Chamberlain now embarked upon a last, and by no means undistinguished, phase of his long political career, emerging as one of the leading critics of the National Government. Ironically, in his last years his influence inside the House of Commons was probably greater than when he had held high office. He was now the most respected of Conservative back-benchers and it was to him that young members, particularly those who found themselves at odds with the foreign policy of the National Government, looked for leadership and guidance. It was a reflection of the authority which he still enjoyed that the government persuaded him to join the executive of the League of Nations Union in February 1932. 
Whatever they later claimed, very few parliamentarians of the 1930s genuinely merited the description of 'anti-appeaser'. As far as Nazi Germany was concerned, Chamberlain belonged to this exclusive group. He wasted no time in drawing attention to the menace posed by Adolf Hitler after the latter became German chancellor on 30 January 1933. Fundamental to Chamberlain's assessment was his belief that Hitler's likely behaviour in the international arena could not be divorced from the nature of his domestic regime. He was adamant that the new German government was not one to which concessions could be granted. As early as 13 April 1933 Chamberlain declared: 'What is this new spirit of German nationalism? The worst of the old-Prussian Imperialism, with an added savagery, a racial pride, an exclusiveness which cannot allow to any fellow-subject not of 'pure Nordic birth' equality of rights and citizenship within the nation to which he belongs. Are you going to discuss revision [of the treaty of Versailles] with a Government like that? (Petrie, 2.392)' 

Freed from the constraints of high office, Chamberlain had the time to develop his interests outside politics. Having already served when foreign secretary as rector of Glasgow University, he was chancellor of the University of Reading (1935-7) and chairman of the governors of Rugby School. He also took seriously his chairmanship of the London School of Tropical Medicine and of the governing body of the British Postgraduate Medical School. He held honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, London, Birmingham, Glasgow, Toronto, and Lyons. Chamberlain was never a particularly rich man. The need to economize had already, in 1929, necessitated the sale of Twitt's Ghyll, the country home in Sussex which he had bought a decade earlier and whose garden had been a source of enormous pleasure and satisfaction to him. Sir Robert Vansittart described his last years, spent in 'straits and a small flat' from which he emerged 'immaculate in frayed white shirt and a shiny tail coat' (R. Vansittart, 'The Mist Procession', 1958, 549). But Chamberlain, always concerned for the financial security of his wife and children, may have exaggerated his own poverty. Out of office he found several lucrative sources of income. None the less, the expense involved was a compelling reason behind his decision to decline the sinecure post of lord warden of the Cinque Ports in October 1933. The desire to make some money provided an incentive to put together a volume of autobiographical essays, published in 1935 as 'Down the Years', though Chamberlain experienced some difficulty in spinning out the book to its required length. 'Politics from Inside', based on his letters to his stepmother during the period of his father's illness after 1906, appeared in 1936. 
A volume of cultural reflections, 'Seen in Passing', based on Chamberlain's travels on the continent, was published posthumously in 1937. This book reflected the interests of a man for whom politics was never an all-consuming passion. 'There are moments', he once suggested, 'when I ask myself whether the game is worth the candle and whether any public duty calls upon me to slave and endure at so thankless a task' (Chamberlain MSS, AC 18/1/10). It was on the advice of his father that he had found himself a hobby. Rock gardening became one of the passions of his adult life. Even at the height of his political career in the 1920s he would absent himself from a League of Nations meeting at Geneva for a couple of hours in order to pursue a particular alpine plant. But the concepts of public service and civic duty were deeply embedded in his personality and help explain why he remained in politics for so long. Though born into a tradition of nonconformity, religion did not play a large part in his life and he found it difficult to conceptualize any notion of an afterlife. 
Though he was by then seventy-two years of age, there was serious speculation about Chamberlain's return to government at the end of 1935. His reaction was recognized to be crucial in determining whether the government could survive the parliamentary outcry which followed the disclosure of the details of the Hoare-Laval pact, by which the British foreign secretary hoped to defuse the crisis created by Italian aggression in Abyssinia. It seems that a strong hint from Baldwin that he would be asked to return to the Foreign Office encouraged Chamberlain to tone down his criticism of the government's conduct. The cabinet survived, but it was Anthony Eden and not Chamberlain who succeeded Hoare as foreign secretary. 'Poor man', reflected Winston Churchill, 'he always plays the game and never wins it' (M. Gilbert, 'Winston S. Churchill', 5, pt 2, 1981, 1363). A later offer of a non-departmental post in the cabinet to advise on foreign affairs and defence was unceremoniously rejected, with Chamberlain convinced that Baldwin was not looking for his experience and advice, but merely for his name to patch up the government's tarnished reputation. The following year saw Chamberlain and Churchill co-operating closely as vigilant critics of the National Government's foreign policy. The German remilitarization of the Rhineland in March 1936 left the former convinced that the independence of Austria was now the key to the European situation, for 'if Austria perishes, Czechoslovakia becomes indefensible' (Elletson, 264). Thereafter Germany would be left dominant in central Europe, with enormous consequences for the whole of the British empire. Chamberlain remained active to the end, before suffering a mild heart attack on 12 March 1937. He died at his London home, 24 Egerton Terrace, four days later after suffering a more serious attack. After a funeral service at St Margaret's, Westminster, he was buried in St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley, on 19 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 32352


Chamberlain, Sir Neville Bowles (1820-1902), army officer, was born at Rio de Janeiro on 10 January 1820, the second son of Henry Chamberlain, consul-general and charge d'affaires in Brazil, and his second wife, Anne Eugenia (died 28 Aug 1867), daughter of William Morgan of London. His father was created a baronet in 1828, and died on 31 July 1829. By his second marriage (his first had been dissolved in 1813) Henry Chamberlain had five sons and three daughters. The eldest son, William Charles (1818-1878), became an admiral; the other four entered the East India Company's service and distinguished themselves as soldiers. The third son, Sir Crawford Trotter Chamberlain, was closely associated with Neville throughout his military career. The fourth son, Thomas Hardy (1822-1879), was major-general, Bombay staff corps. The fifth son, Charles Francis Falcon CB (1826-1870), was colonel in the Bombay staff corps. 
At thirteen, on the nomination of Lord Beresford, Neville entered the Royal Military Academy as a cadet; but, more combative than studious, he was withdrawn at the end of his probationary year. On 24 February 1837, on the nomination of Mr Buckle, a director of the East India Company, he was commissioned as ensign in the company's army. He reached Calcutta in June and was posted to the 55th Bengal native infantry, joining it at Lucknow early in 1838. On 28 August he was transferred to the 16th Bengal native infantry, which was at Delhi. His brother Crawford was serving in the same regiment. Sir Henry Fane, the commander-in-chief and a friend of his father, wished the two sons to take part in the imminent invasion of Afghanistan. 
The 16th formed part of the army of the Indus; at the end of June the army marched on Kabul and on 23 July Ghazni was stormed. Chamberlain distinguished himself in the fighting which preceded this assault. His regiment was left at Ghazni when the army moved on to Kabul, and the brothers became friendly with some of the sons of Dost Muhammad, who were on parole there. In June 1841 the 16th was relieved at Ghazni by the 27th, in which John Nicholson was a subaltern. He and Neville Chamberlain became close friends. 
On 25 August the 16th arrived at Kandahar, and on 8 November set out for India, but the outbreak at Kabul led to its immediate recall to Kandahar. During the next nine months General Nott's force had repeated encounters with the Afghans, in which Chamberlain was prominent. He was temporarily appointed to the 1st cavalry of Shah Shuja's force, and soon made a name for himself as a daring leader of irregular horse. In the action of the Arghandab (12 January 1842) he was wounded in the knee, but nevertheless took part in the pursuit. In March his men failed him, and he had to fight hard for his life. On 29 May he was again wounded, in the thigh. He was awarded a gratuity of twelve months' pay for his injuries. 
In August 1842 Nott's force marched from Kandahar on Kabul. Chamberlain went with it, and took part in the capture and burning of Istalif on 28 September, which made him 'disgusted with myself, the world, and, above all, with my cruel profession' (Forrest, 149). The combined forces of Nott and Pollock left Kabul on 12 October. Chamberlain, with the rear-guard, was twice wounded, in the spine and in the leg. In nearly four years in Afghanistan he had been wounded six times. General Nott so praised him that on 2 January 1843 he was appointed to the governor-general's bodyguard. This did not remove him from his regiment (the 16th), in which he had become lieutenant on 16 July 1842. 
Though still suffering from his last wound, Chamberlain took part in the Gwalior campaign and in the battle of Maharajpur on 29 December 1843. On 20 February 1845 he left Calcutta for England, very reluctantly, for the First Anglo-Sikh War was imminent, but this was regarded as his only chance of cure. He returned to India at the end of 1846, having partially recovered the use of his leg. He was military secretary to the governor of Bombay until May 1848, and was then employed for a few months at Indore; but on the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Sikh War he was appointed brigade major of a cavalry brigade. 
In the operations preceding the passage of the Chenab Lord Gough called for a volunteer to swim the river and reconnoitre the right bank. Chamberlain swam across with a few men of the 9th lancers, found that the Sikhs had gone, and was greeted by Gough on his return as 'the bravest of the brave'. At Chilianwala his brigade was left to protect the baggage, but at Gujrat it was actively engaged. Chamberlain distinguished himself in the pursuit, and Gough promised him the command of a regiment of irregular cavalry. When he became captain in his regiment on 1 November 1849 he was given a brevet majority. 
In May 1849 Chamberlain was appointed assistant adjutant-general of the Sirhind division, but he soon tired of office routine. In December he was made assistant commissioner in the Rawalpindi district, from where he was transferred to Hazara in June 1850 and organized the military police for the Punjab. 
After a bad bout of malaria in late 1852 Chamberlain went to South Africa on sick leave and spent a year and a half hunting lion. He returned to India at the end of 1854 to take up the command of the Punjab irregular force, which Lord Dalhousie had reserved for him. This force, modelled upon the corps of Guides, numbered 11,000 men and had to guard 700 miles of frontier against turbulent tribes. Chamberlain was only a captain in his regiment, but he was made brevet lieutenant-colonel (28 November 1854) and was given the local rank of brigadier. 'That glorious soldier' (Barthorp, 51), as Lumsden called him, was liked and respected by all who knew him. He was thanked by government for his services on the frontier. 
In May 1857, at the Indian mutiny, a column was formed to crush any outbreak in the Punjab, and Chamberlain was given command of it. But he soon handed this over to John Nicholson, being appointed adjutant-general of the Bengal army, and he joined the force before Delhi on 24 June. He took a leading part in repulsing the attacks of the mutineers on 9 and 14 July. In the latter action, seeing that the men hesitated before a wall lined by the enemy, he leapt his horse over it. They followed him, but he was shot in his shoulder, which partially disabled him for the rest of the siege. He helped, however, to stiffen the wavering purpose of the British commander during the storming of the city, and on 16 September he took temporary command of the force. He received the thanks of the governor-general, and was made CB on 11 November 1857. 
Chamberlain was prevented by his wound from taking part in the relief of Lucknow, and had to decline Sir Colin Campbell's offer of command of the cavalry in the Rohilla campaign of 1858. He resigned the post of adjutant-general and was reappointed to the command of the Punjab irregular force with the rank of brevet colonel on 27 November 1857, and the local rank of brigadier-general. In August 1858 he crushed a dangerous conspiracy among the Sikh troops at Dera Ismail Khan. In December 1859 he led an expedition against the Kabul Khel Wazirs, and another in April 1860 against the Mahsuds, forcing his way to Kaniguram, which they boasted that hostile eyes had never seen. His force was composed entirely of native troops, including some men led by their own chiefs. On 11 April 1863 he was made KCB. 
In the autumn of 1863 Chamberlain commanded a force of 5000 men against the Wahabi fanatics at Sitana. He decided to take one column from Peshawar over the Ambela Pass into the Chamla valley, while another column co-operated from Hazara. He reached the top of the pass on 20 October. During fierce fighting Chamberlain received a wound in the arm, which obliged him to hand over command. Lord Elgin the governor-general, died on the same day, and his council decided to withdraw the expedition. Chamberlain opposed this; eventually reinforcements were sent and under General Garvock the Yusufzai field force completed its task. 
Chamberlain went home as soon as he was fit to travel, and joined his mother and sisters at Versailles in July 1864. He was promoted major-general on 5 August 1864, and was made KCSI on 24 May 1866. In 1869 he accompanied the duke of Edinburgh on his visit to India. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 May 1872, GCSI on 24 May 1874, and GCB on 29 May 1876. On 26 June 1873 he married Charlotte Cuyler, sixth daughter of Major-General Sir William Reid; she died on 26 December 1896 without children. 
Chamberlain returned to India in February 1876 to take command of the Madras army. When it was decided, in August 1878, to send a British mission to Kabul, he agreed to go as envoy, but the mission was stopped at Ali Masjid on 21 September by the amir's orders. Chamberlain agreed with Lord Lytton that this insult should be punished, and he acted for some months as military member of council. But he did not wholly approve of the treaty of Gandamak, still less of Lytton's policy of retribution after the second occupation of Kabul and the continuance of the army's commitments in Afghanistan. He opposed the retention of Kandahar in 1880. 
Chamberlain's Madras command ended on 3 February 1881, and he left India. He spent the rest of his life at Lordswood, near Southampton. He had become general on 1 October 1877, was placed on the unemployed supernumerary list on 3 February 1886, and was made field marshal on 25 April 1900. He died at Lordswood on 18 February 1902, and was buried beside his wife at Rownhams near Southampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 32353


Chambers, Dorothea Katharine Lambert (1878-1960), lawn tennis player, was born on 3 September 1878 at Ealing, Middlesex, the second daughter of the Revd Henry Charles Douglass (died 1916), vicar of St Matthew's, Ealing Common, and his wife, Clara Collick. She learned to play tennis on the vicarage lawn, encouraged by her father, who was a constant support throughout her playing career. The game was not well catered for at her school, Princess Helena College in Ealing, but this did nothing to dampen her enthusiasm or her competitive spirit, and on one occasion she was given lines after getting into 'a very heated argument' with a mistress over a disputed line call (Lambert Chambers, 88). She joined the Ealing Common Lawn Tennis Club as a junior and won the club handicap singles as an eleven-year-old, the first of three successive victories. By taking every opportunity to play against the club's men, she developed into an all-rounder of 'immense skill, energy and intelligence' (Davidson and Jones, 10). 
'Tall, lean, and always superbly fit' ('DNB'), Chambers became extremely hard to beat. Her strength lay in her forehand and in her steady and accurate driving, with the emphasis on flexibility rather than sheer pace. An excellent tactician, she could read her opponents extremely well, and her angled drop shot was a famous winner. Competing at first as Miss Douglass until her marriage (on 3 April 1907) to Robert Lambert Chambers, a merchant, of Ealing, after which she was known as Mrs Lambert Chambers, she had a long string of victories in many tournaments. She took part in her first Wimbledon in 1900 and won her first title in 1903 at the age of twenty-four, then made a successful defence in the following year. For the next three years she faced tough competition from the young American May Sutton, to whom she lost in 1905 and 1907, but whom she beat in 1906. Between 1903 and 1914 she won the Wimbledon singles title seven times and lost only once to a British player, in 1908 to Charlotte Sterry, who herself won Wimbledon five times. Her record of seven singles victories stood until the great Helen Wills-Moody won her eighth title in 1938, though it should be noted that before 1922 the holder had to defend her title only in the final 'challenge' round. 
Chambers also won the Wimbledon ladies' doubles at the championships in 1903 and 1907, and the mixed doubles in 1906, 1908, and 1910. In 1908 she won the Olympic gold medal in the ladies' singles. At badminton, her other game, she was all-England women's doubles champion in 1903, and mixed doubles champion in 1904; she also played hockey for Middlesex. 
During her enforced break from the game in 1909, when she was expecting the first of her two sons, Chambers wrote 'Lawn Tennis for Ladies' (1910). The book reflected the increasing participation of women in sport, a much observed phenomenon which Chambers regarded as wholly beneficial to 'the health and mind of the modern girl' (Lambert Chambers, 1). She dismissed the arguments against female athleticism and advocated not merely exercise for women, but strenuous competition: 'If you are skilled and well drilled in discipline and sportsmanship, you are bound to benefit in the strife of the world' (ibid., 5). She preferred the overhead serve to the underarm, and it was an axiom with her that only by constant repetition could a stroke be perfected. She recommended to her readers the example of one English champion who always practised in this way: 'If no friend were available for the purpose, the butler had to devote an hour a day to throwing the ball in the given direction' (ibid., 13). 
Chambers's determination to win met indignation from some of her opponents and one, who was repeatedly beaten by a short drop shot, complained afterwards: 'I cannot admire your length' (Lambert Chambers, 28). She did not take the reproach at all seriously and if she discovered a weakness in her opponent's game would ruthlessly exploit it. She returned to Wimbledon in 1910 and won the ladies' singles with relative ease, a feat that she repeated the following year. By this time she was probably at her peak and was acknowledged to be the best woman player in the world. Her second pregnancy prevented her from defending the Wimbledon title in 1912, but she made a triumphant return to the championships in 1913 and won her seventh, and last, title in 1914. On the latter occasion she defeated Ethel Larcombe on the centre court at the old Wimbledon, in Worple Road. In sweltering heat, which left both players exhausted, Chambers won two very hard-fought sets, 7-5, 6-4. She would certainly have added to her total of singles titles had the war not intervened. 
When the championships were resumed in 1919 there was intense public interest, heightened by the appearance of the twenty-year-old Frenchwoman Suzanne Lenglen, who as a fifteen-year-old had won the world hard court championship in Paris before the war. From the moment that Lenglen appeared at Wimbledon crowds flocked to see her play and her wonderful progress through the opening rounds, together with her twenty years' advantage in age, made her a firm favourite to win. 'The only concession that Mrs Lambert Chambers had made to the passing of time since 1903 was that her long-sleeved blouse was open at the neck and her long skirt just a trifle shorter' ('DNB'). Lenglen won the first set 10-8 but Chambers counter-attacked strongly to take the second 6-4. In the final set Lenglen led 4-1 but Chambers fought back magnificently to take the lead. At 6-5 and 40-15 up she had two match points, but Lenglen kept her nerve and hit a lucky 'wooden' volley to save one match point, and then a sublime backhand to save the next. Lenglen went on to take the set 9-7 and win a brilliant and memorable victory. It was one of the finest women's matches ever seen at Wimbledon and the drama of the occasion was equalled by the high quality of the tennis. One contemporary commentator wrote: 'Viewed from any angle the struggle was memorable. The percentage of stroke error by both players was negligible; the net was rarely shaken by a mistimed drive' (Davidson and Jones, 13). 
Chambers returned in the following year to seek revenge and reached the final comfortably, but Lenglen was now almost invincible and overwhelmed her 6-3, 6-0. This was the last singles match that Chambers played at Wimbledon, although she carried on competing in the doubles. In December 1922 she became the first woman to be elected a councillor of the Lawn Tennis Association. And in 1925 she was invited to captain the British team for the Wightman Cup match against America at Forest Hills, New York. Her victories in the singles and doubles enabled Britain to win the tie by four matches to three, and bearing in mind that she was then forty-six this must rank among her finest achievements. In the following year she again captained the British team at Wimbledon, where she lost her doubles. She made her last playing appearance at Wimbledon in 1927, when she partnered the South African Billie Tapscott in the doubles and came through one round. She had played 161 matches at the championships and was nearly forty-nine years old: only Blanche Hillyard and Martina Navratilova have played in more finals than her. 
In 1928 Chambers became a professional coach and ceased to be a member of the All England Lawn Tennis Club, but after the war she was re-elected and thenceforward, until her death in London, on 7 January 1960, she was always to be seen in the members' enclosure at the championships. 


@@@@@


doc= 32354


Chambers, Sir Edmund Kerchever (1866-1954), theatre historian and civil servant, was born at West Ilsley, Berkshire, on 16 March 1866. He was the son of the Revd William Chambers ('b'. 1826/7), curate, and fellow of Worcester College, Oxford, and his wife, Anna Heathcote, daughter of Thomas Kerchever Arnold (bap. 1800, d. 1853), the educational writer and theologian. After receiving his early education at Marlborough College, Chambers proceeded to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a classical scholar, took firsts in honour moderations (1887) and 'literae humaniores' (1889), and in 1891 won the chancellor's English essay prize with an essay on literary forgeries. He was not awarded a fellowship, but before he left Oxford in 1892 for the education department, he had already acquired a bent for English studies and produced an edition of 'Richard II' (1891). He went on to become a notable example of a man who followed two careers, both with distinction. On 5 September 1893 he married Eleanor Christabel (Nora) Bowman, the daughter of John Davison Bowman of the Exchequer and Audit Office. They had no children. 
Chambers's duties in the education department were not at first onerous, but from 1903 he became a valued lieutenant of Robert Morant, permanent secretary to the newly constituted Board of Education. Chambers's contribution was most important in matters relating to day continuation schools and adult education. The day continuation schools were victims of the economies associated with the name of Sir Eric Geddes, but the Workers' Educational Association and other promoters of adult education were well aware of the debt of gratitude they owed to Chambers. He rose to be second secretary (1921), but perhaps because of his unaccommodating manner with deputations he was not offered the post of permanent secretary, and he resigned in 1926. 
During his years as a civil servant Chambers also practised journalism and edited many editions of the English classics, especially Shakespeare. He was the first president of the Malone Society (1906-39) and contributed to its 'Collections' valuable papers on dramatic records. Among the best of his publications were an anthology, 'Early English Lyrics' (1907), chosen by him and Frank Sidgwick, and 'The Oxford Book of Sixteenth-Century Verse' (1932). His interest in Arthurian studies, dating from his undergraduate days, resulted in 'Arthur of Britain' (1927). 
From the time Chambers left Oxford he was working at 'a little book about Shakespeare and the conditions, literary and dramatic, under which he wrote'. This 'little book' grew into his three chief publications, 'The Mediaeval Stage' (2 vols., 1903), 'The Elizabethan Stage' (4 vols., 1923), and 'Shakespeare' (2 vols., 1930). A master of dramatic history, Chambers made no attempt in these works to evaluate plays as literature. He was convinced that any history of drama which does not confine itself solely to the analysis of genius must start from a study of the social and economic facts on which the drama rested, and these facts he presented with a fullness and accuracy not approached before. In 'The Mediaeval Stage' the only well-trodden ground was the interlude; on minstrelsy and folk drama, and to some extent on the liturgical and miracle plays, his was pioneer work. 'The Elizabethan Stage' was more a work of consolidation than of discovery, but even so his originality appeared in the acuteness with which he balanced complicated evidence. His 'Shakespeare', completed in his days of leisure, was carefully composed, with due consideration given to all the material facts and problems. All three works showed the same grasp of all relevant evidence and the same lucidity in a prose that achieves a good expository level. 
After his 'Shakespeare' Chambers did not abandon Elizabethan studies ('Sir Thomas Wyatt and some Collected Studies', 1933, and 'Shakespearean Gleanings', 1944) but in his biographies of Coleridge (1938) and Matthew Arnold (1947) he turned also to the Romantic poetry of which his own verses are late examples ('Carmina argentea', privately printed, 1918). 
Chambers's services to education and his scholarship earned him many honours. He received the honorary DLitt from Durham (1922) and Oxford (1939), and his election to an honorary fellowship at Corpus Christi (1934) gave him great pleasure. He was appointed CB in 1912 and KBE in 1925, and in 1924 was elected FBA. He also became a foreign member of the Royal Society of Letters of Lund (1928), and a corresponding fellow of the Medieval Academy of America (1933). 
After his retirement Chambers lived at Eynsham, near Oxford, and there wrote 'Sir Henry Lee' (1936), a life of the ranger of Woodstock, and 'Eynsham under the Monks' (1936), his one work on medieval local history. In his 'English Literature at the Close of the Middle Ages' (1945), a contribution to the 'Oxford History of English Literature', he returned to the subjects of medieval drama and lyric, the ballad and folk poetry, and Malory. In 1938 he moved from Eynsham to Bovey Coombe, Beer, Devon, where he died on 21 January 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 32355


Chambers, Raymond Wilson (1874-1942), literary scholar, was born at Staxton, on the Yorkshire wolds, on 12 November 1874, the only son of Thomas Herbert Chambers, commercial traveller, and his wife, Annie, daughter of William Wilson. As a boy he knew privation. He was educated at the Grocers' Company's School and at University College, London, where he graduated in 1894 with a first class in English. After working in various libraries, among them the Guildhall Library, he returned in 1899 as Quain student to University College, where he remained thereafter. There he was in close contact over a period of years with such eminent men as A. E. Housman and W. P. Ker. His own contribution to the college, both as librarian and as teacher, was outstanding. He became a fellow in 1900, librarian in the next year, and assistant professor of English in 1904. In the First World War he served for a time as an orderly at a base hospital in France, and briefly with the YMCA in Belgium. 
Although all Chambers's academic work came under the general heading of English studies, its range was nevertheless considerable, extending in time from early Germanic legend and history to Shakespeare and Milton, and occasionally beyond, and in kind from textual study to literary criticism and biography. His earliest book was 'Widsith: a Study in Old English Heroic Legend' which was published in 1912, the same year in which he was awarded a DLitt degree from the University of London. This work, along with his edition of 'Beowulf' (1914), which represented a very thorough revision of A. J. Wyatt's edition, and his 'Beowulf: an Introduction to the Study of the Poem' (1921) placed Chambers among the foremost Old English scholars. 
In 1922 Chambers succeeded Ker as Quain professor of English language and literature, and he held the chair until 1941 when the college made him a special lecturer. He was elected FBA in 1927, and maintained close relations with the British Academy, lecturing before it on several occasions and becoming a member of its council in 1937. By this time his reputation as a scholar was widely recognized. He was made an honorary member of the Modern Language Association of America in 1930, and gave the Turnbull lectures at Johns Hopkins University in 1933 and the Clark lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1935. He was president of the Philological Society in 1933 and honorary director of the Early English Text Society from 1938 until his death. 
Chambers also had a part in the facsimile edition 'The Exeter Book of Old English Poetry' (1933), which was his last publication in this field; his contribution was recognized with honorary doctorates from the universities of Durham (1932) and Leeds (1936). Prior to any of this work, however, he had begun his study of 'Piers Plowman'. Although the definitive edition, which was his aim, was never completed, he wrote and inspired a number of articles which contributed to the solution of some knotty problems. Another subject that long engaged his attention was the literary and historical significance of Sir Thomas More. The book that resulted, 'Thomas More' (1935), made Chambers's name known outside academic circles and called forth the unusual tribute (to an Anglican) of a letter of thanks from Pope Pius XI. It was awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize. Included in it is Chambers's essay 'On the continuity of English prose from Alfred to Sir Thomas More', an important and influential corrective to current orthodoxies. 
Chambers had great energy and untiring intellectual curiosity; he had, in addition, gifts of imagination, wit, and humour which enabled him to put life into a recondite subject. He was a generous and voluminous letter writer. He often engaged in controversy, but only to vindicate the truth as he saw it, and always with consideration for his opponents. Although his opinions have not always stood up to further investigation, much that he wrote is likely to remain of value, particularly as a stimulus to other workers. As he grew older, Chambers's reverence for the great men of the past became ever more prominent in his writings. He admired the courage and strength of mind, grounded in religious faith and submission to discipline, that he found in More. These qualities, in some measure, he himself possessed, as his colleagues and friends discovered during the early years of the Second World War. Beneath his reserve he was a man of generous affections and strong loyalties. His relations with his invalid father and his only sister, Gertrude, were the deeper manifestations of this; the public signs were his many friendships and his capacity for successful collaboration with other scholars. 
Chambers was unmarried. He lived with his sister in north London for many years. His recreations included holidays in Switzerland, skiing in Norway, and visits to Florence. He served as secretary of St Christopher's Working Boys' Club. When in 1939, at the outbreak of the Second World War, University College migrated to Wales, Chambers went to Aberystwyth. He was taken ill in the course of a lecture tour to the scattered groups of the college, and died at 23 Sketty Road, Swansea, on 23 April 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 32356


Chamier, Stephen Henry Edward (1834-1910), army officer, was born in Madras on 17 August 1834, of Huguenot descent, the fifth son of Henry Chamier of Upton Park, Slough, chief secretary to the Madras government and afterwards member of council, 1843-8, and his wife, Marie Antoinette Evelina, daughter of Thomas Thursby of the East India Company. His grandfather, Jean Ezechiel Deschamps Chamier, was also a member of the Madras council. Captain Frederick Chamier was an uncle. 
Educated at Cheltenham College and Addiscombe, Chamier was appointed on 11 June 1853 second-lieutenant in the Madras artillery, and joined artillery headquarters at St Thomas Mount on 8 October 1853. Posted to the 1st battery in March 1854, he went to Burma in July 1854. After commanding an outpost of artillery at Sittang on 3 August 1854, he was appointed station staff officer there on 16 November 1854. On 11 April 1856 he went on field service to the Karen hills in command of a mountain train of howitzers and rockets, and was engaged with hill Karens on 22 April. 
After commanding B battery horse artillery for a few months at Bangalore, Chamier went in May 1857 to Madras 'en route' for Burma, but following the news of the mutiny at Meerut he went with Major Cotter's horse battery to Calcutta and from there to Benares and Allahabad. Detached to Gopiganj with two guns and some infantry, he disarmed a part of the Bengal native infantry. Proceeding to Mirzapur and on towards Rewah, he held the Katra Pass, where he was joined by a Madras regiment and C battery Madras artillery, and was given command of a battery. Ordered to Cawnpore to aid General Windham's operations against the Gwalior contingent, the force was continuously engaged for three days, with heavy loss; of thirty-six men with Chamier's guns seventeen were killed or wounded. Chamier was thanked in dispatches. He also took part on 8 December 1857 in the rout of the Gwalior contingent mutineers by Sir Colin Campbell in the vicinity of Cawnpore. 
At his own request Chamier, in February 1858, rejoined Major Cotter's horse battery and marched with General Franks from Benares through Oudh to Lucknow, engaging on the way in the actions of Chanda, Amirpur, Sultanpur, and various skirmishes. At Lucknow Chamier joined the 5th division of the army under Lord Clyde, and took part in the operations before and during the siege and capture of the city. After its fall Chamier's battery joined the force which went under Major-General Lugard to the relief of Azamgarh, being engaged against Kunwar Singh's rebel force and against other rebels near Jagdispur and Arrah. In June 1858 the campaign, during which, according to artillery orders, Chamier was engaged in nineteen actions, came to a close. 
In September 1858 Lord Canning, the governor-general, appointed Chamier commandant of the 1st artillery battery, Hyderabad contingent. He was promoted second captain on 29 February 1864 and brevet major on 11 October 1864 for his actions in the field. After commanding a battery of horse artillery at home from 1872 to 1876, he was, on promotion to regimental lieutenant-colonel, put in command of two batteries at Barrackpore. From 1877 to 1881 he was deputy inspector-general and from 1881 to 1886 inspector-general of ordnance, Madras. During his tenure expeditions were sent to Malta, Afghanistan, and Upper Burma, and he received the thanks of the Madras government and of the viceroy. He retired in October 1886 with the rank of lieutenant-general, being made CB (1886) for his services during the Indian mutiny and receiving the reward for distinguished service. On 4 September 1858 Chamier married, at Dinapore, Dora Louisa, daughter of George Tyrrell MD, of Banbridge, co. Down, Ireland, and they had six daughters and three sons. Chamier was a good musician and played the violoncello. He graduated MusB of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1874. He was a fellow of the Huguenot Society. He died after a long illness at his residence, Brooke House, Camberley, on 9 June 1910. His wife survived him with two daughters and one son, George Daniel, lieutenant-colonel of the Royal Artillery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32357


Champneys, Basil (1842-1935), architect and author, was born in Whitechapel, London, on 17 September 1842, the third of the five sons of (William) Weldon Champneys (1807-1875), rector of St Mary's Church, Whitechapel, afterwards dean of Lichfield, and his wife, Mary Anne, fourth daughter of Paul Storr, of Beckenham, Kent. He was an elder brother of Sir Francis Henry Champneys (1848-1930), obstetrician. 
Champneys was educated at Charterhouse School, which was then in London, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a second class in the classical tripos of 1864. He then studied architecture under John Prichard, diocesan surveyor of Llandaff. He began private practice in 1867. Although trained in the tenets of the Gothic revival, Champneys soon advocated a more eclectic approach to style. He was one of the first to design in the new Queen Anne mode and he also worked in the late Gothic, neo-Jacobean, and early English Renaissance styles. He married in 1876 May Theresa Ella, second daughter of Maurice Drummond, a descendant of William Drummond, fourth Viscount Strathallan; they had two sons and two daughters. 
The long list of Champneys's buildings at Oxford includes the Indian Institute (1883-96), Mansfield College (1887-90), the Robinson Tower at New College (1896), new buildings for Oriel College (1908-11) and Merton College (1904-10), the library of Somerville College (1903), and the church of St Peter-le-Bailey (1872-4). His works at Cambridge include the Archaeological Museum (1883), the divinity and literary schools (1879), and Newnham College (at intervals from 1875 to 1910). His structures in London include the chapel at Mill Hill School (1898) and new buildings for Bedford College in Regent's Park (1910). He also designed King's Lynn grammar school in Norfolk (1910-13), the Butler Museum at Harrow School (1886), the museum at Winchester College in Hampshire (1898), and Bedford high school (1878-92). His churches include his father's parish church of St Luke's, Kentish Town (1867-70), the sailors' church of St Mary Star of the Sea, Hastings, Sussex (1878), and St Chad, Slindon, Staffordshire (1894). He was a surveyor to St Mary, Manchester, to which he added a west porch (1898) and a south annexe (1902-3). His domestic work includes his home, Hall Oak, in Frognal, Hampstead (1881). 
Champneys's masterpiece was the John Rylands Memorial Library in Deansgate, Manchester, which took nine years (1890-99) to build and equip. This remarkable and costly monument was raised to the memory of John Rylands by the latter's widow, who admired the small library of Mansfield College, Oxford, and asked Champneys to develop it on a far more lavish scale. In spite of its cramped position on a mean street, the Rylands Library is a really noble design carried out in every detail with consummate skill in late Gothic style and with considerable regard for practical requirements. 
The Royal Institute of British Architects awarded Champneys its royal gold medal for architecture in 1912, but he never became a member of that institute because he regarded architecture as an art allied to painting and sculpture rather than a profession. He supported younger architects who sought a unity of the arts and was an early member of the Century Guild. He was a sociable man with a wide circle of friends. He belonged to the Athenaeum, where he was a familiar face in the billiard-room, and to the Savile Club. He especially valued his connections with literary men, among them Walter Pater, Robert Louis Stevenson, Sidney Colvin, and the poet Coventry Patmore, whose 'Memoirs and Correspondence' he published in 1900. He wrote an introduction to 'Henry Merritt: Art Criticism and Romance' (1879). His papers on architecture include 'Churches about Queen Victoria Street' ('Portfolio', 1871), 'Victorian art and originality' ('British Architect', 1887), and 'The architecture of Queen Victoria's reign' ('Art Journal', 1887). His papers on the then unfrequented district around Rye and Romney Marsh appeared first in 'Portfolio' and later under the title 'A Quiet Corner of England' (1875). In later life he published 'A Retrospect and Memoir' (1915) of his mother-in-law, Adelaide Drummond. He died at his home, Hall Oak, 42 Frognal Lane, Hampstead, on 5 April 1935, at the age of ninety-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 32358


Champneys, Sir Francis Henry, first baronet (1848-1930), obstetrician, was born on 25 March 1848 in Whitechapel, London, the fourth son of the Revd (William) Weldon Champneys (1807-1875), rector of St Mary's Church, Whitechapel, afterwards dean of Lichfield, and his wife, Mary Anne, fourth daughter of Paul Storr, of Beckenham, Kent. The third son was the architect Basil Champneys (1842-1935). Francis Champneys was educated at Winchester College, where he was a scholar (1860-66), and at Brasenose College, Oxford (1866-70), where he obtained a first class in natural science in 1870 and was captain of boats. He then proceeded as a medical student to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, qualifying for the degrees of BM in 1875 and of MD in 1888. Elected to the Radcliffe travelling fellowship of Oxford University in 1872, Champneys spent half of each of the following three years in study at Vienna, Leipzig, and Dresden. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1876 and a fellow in 1882. In 1880 he was elected assistant obstetric physician to St George's Hospital and obstetric physician to the General Lying-in Hospital, York Road. In 1885 he became obstetric physician to St George's. In 1891 he succeeded James Matthews Duncan as physician accoucheur to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he remained until his retirement in 1913. 
Champneys had considerable success as a consultant and as a teacher. He also tried to influence medical practice through his writings, but his bias towards the medical aspects of obstetrics and gynaecology was out of step with a growing interest in the introduction of surgical procedures. His most important contribution to his profession was through his many public services. He was a fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society of London and played an active part in the uniting of the various medical societies of London into the Royal Society of Medicine. He was elected president of the society in 1912. Although he had very decided convictions and a tendency towards conservatism, Champneys had an openness of mind and a breadth of outlook which meant that other medical professionals sought his help and advice. He is perhaps best known for the prominent part he took in the movement to raise the status of midwives which led to the 'Midwives Act' of 1902 and for his chairmanship of the Central Midwives' Board (CMB), the regulatory body set up under the act. 
First as a member (1882) of the board for the examination of midwives of the Obstetrical Society of London, later as its chairman (1891-5), and finally as president of the society (1895), Champneys advocated the legal recognition and registration of midwives. This drew the attention of the General Medical Council to the form of certificate issued under his signature, and led to its revision after mutual discussion. When the functions carried on by the Obstetrical Society were taken over by the CMB in 1903, Champneys became its first chairman and was re-elected annually until his death, twenty-seven years later. Champneys was a controversial chairman. He helped to advocate the vision of midwifery reform held by the well-educated, middle-class leaders of the Midwives' Institute, who believed that the practice of midwives should be limited in scope and that they should defer to doctors. This was not always shared by rank-and-file midwives who were disciplined by the CMB and who found the chairman harsh in his judgements and scathing towards those who were not submissive enough to the board. 
Champneys was also crown nominee from 1911 to 1926 of the General Medical Council, where he strove to improve the training of medical students in practical midwifery. In 1929 he was involved in founding the British College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, despite at first being opposed to the bringing together of the disciplines of obstetrics and gynaecology. He became a foundation fellow of the college and was elected vice-patron. 
Music was Champneys's chief relaxation and he was regarded in his day as the finest musician in his profession in London. He had a wide knowledge of sacred music, which he studied under Samuel Sebastian Wesley while at Winchester, and composed hymn tunes, anthems, and other metrical works. As a young man, under the name of Frank Champneys he contributed five tunes to 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' ('BMJ', 16 Aug 1930). He installed an organ in his house in London and took it with him to Sussex, where it became a very important part of his later life. For many years he was a member of the council of the Royal College of Music and of its executive committee. 
Champneys married on 12 September 1876 Virginia Julian (died 1922), the only daughter of Sir John Warrender Dalrymple, seventh baronet, of Luchie, North Berwick, with whom he had three sons and one daughter. Champneys was created a baronet in 1910. He died at his home, Littlemead, Nutley, Sussex, on 30 July 1930. He was buried on 2 August at Hampstead cemetery. The funeral was preceded by a requiem, and a memorial service was held on the same day at the church of St Bartholomew-the-Less. Champneys was succeeded, as second baronet, by his youngest and only surviving son, Weldon Dalrymple-Champneys ('b'. 1892). 


@@@@@


doc= 32359


Chance, Sir James Timmins, first baronet (1814-1902), glass manufacturer and lighthouse engineer, was born in Birmingham on 22 March 1814, the eldest of the six sons of William Chance (1788-1856), merchant and glass manufacturer, of Spring Grove, Birmingham, and his wife, Phoebe (died 1865), fourth daughter of James Timmins of Birmingham. From a private school at Totteridge, James passed to University College School, London, where he gained high honours in languages, mathematics, and science. At seventeen he entered his father's mercantile business, but found the work distasteful and began to study for holy orders. In 1833 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he made mathematics his chief study, won a foundation scholarship, and graduated BA as seventh wrangler in 1838, after losing a year through insomnia brought on by overwork; he proceeded MA there in 1841, and MA 'ad eundem' at Oxford in 1848. He had also begun the study of law, in 1836 entering as a student at Lincoln's Inn, but circumstances obliged him, on leaving Cambridge, to join his uncle, Robert Lucas Chance, and his father in their glassworks at Spon Lane, Smethwick, near Birmingham. Here he devoted himself to the manufacturing side of the business and to its scientific developments. He married, on 26 June 1845, Elizabeth, fourth daughter of George Ferguson of Houghton Hall, Carlisle; she died on 27 August 1887. They had three sons and five daughters. 
While still at Cambridge, Chance had invented a process for polishing sheet glass so as to produce 'patent plate', but it was the production and perfection of lighthouse lenses which came to absorb his attention. This difficult manufacture, originally a French invention, was first carried on in England by Cookson & Co. of South Shields from 1831 to 1845, when it became again the monopoly of two firms in Paris. About 1850 the Chances started to make lighthouse lenses. They engaged a M. Tabouret, a French expert, to superintend the work but he left their service in 1853. Two years later manufacture began in earnest under James Chance's direction. Royal commissioners had been appointed in 1858 to inquire into the state of the lights, buoys, and beacons of the United Kingdom, and had soon detected grave defects in existing apparatus. On 23 December 1859 the commissioners visited the Spon Lane works, where they assessed Chance's technical competence and examined the production facilities. At the request of the commissioners, Sir George Airy, the astronomer royal, consulted with Chance and on 2 and 3 April 1860 examined at Spon Lane a large apparatus under construction for the government of Victoria. New principles formulated by Airy were first tried upon an apparatus which the company was constructing for the Russian government. 
In the autumn of 1860 Chance joined Michael Faraday, acting for Trinity House, in experimenting with the firm's apparatus at the Whitby southern lighthouse. Faraday acknowledged his debt to Chance for the earnest and intelligent manner in which he co-operated in these trials, working and thinking out every point, and declared his confidence in the firm's capabilities. One thing that Chance discovered at Whitby was that it was not necessary to adjust lighthouse equipment 'in situ' against the horizon itself, but that a graduated staff at a short distance from the light could be used. This important discovery enabled the apparatus to be adjusted accurately before it left the factory. 
Chance effected permanent alterations in the Whitby light on the newly formulated scientific principles. A detailed paper dealing with all the questions at issue, which he sent to the commissioners in January 1861, formed part of their report. In May 1861, by request of Trinity House, Chance took part in an examination of all the dioptric apparatus in their charge. Most of the lights were of French manufacture, and in several cases Chance could remedy the defects only by reconstructing them, making the final adjustments mostly with his own hands. The old system of requiring the firm to make lights to prescribed specifications was abandoned, and Chance, with rare exceptions, was left to design them himself. He personally superintended every detail of the work, and from a sense of patriotism declined to patent improvements but made them public property. At the Paris Exhibition of 1867 his designs were demonstrably more efficient than similar apparatus of French manufacture. On 7 May in the same year he read before the Institution of Civil Engineers a paper entitled 'Optical apparatus used in lighthouses', which became a classic, and for which he was awarded a Telford medal and premium, and elected an associate of the institution. On 22 April 1879 he read before the institution a second important paper, 'Dioptric apparatus in lighthouses for the electric light'. Meanwhile, in 1872, he handed over responsibility for the lighthouse works to a new director, Dr John Hopkinson, and gradually retired from the management of the firm. 
Chance was actively engaged in local and county affairs, and was prominent in directing the chief religious, educational, and philanthropic institutions in Birmingham. At a cost, including the endowment, of $30,000, in 1895 he gave the town West Smethwick Park. He was high sheriff of Staffordshire in 1868, and was mainly instrumental in forming the Handsworth volunteer rifle corps, the first corps in the midlands. He was a director of the London and North Western Railway from 1863 to 1874. In 1900 he endowed, at a cost of $50,000, the Chance School of Engineering in the University of Birmingham. He was created a baronet in the same year. 
Chance lived at Brown's Green, Handsworth, Birmingham (1845-69), Four Oaks Park, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire (1870-79), and afterwards at 51 Prince's Gate, London, and 1 Grand Avenue, Hove, Sussex, where he died on 6 January 1902. He was buried, after cremation at Woking, in the Church of England cemetery, Warstone Lane, Birmingham. William, his eldest son, a barrister of the Inner Temple, succeeded as second baronet. 


Chance Brothers had established an alkali works at Oldbury in 1835, to supply the glassworks. Alexander Chance became managing director of the works in June 1868 and was made a partner of Chance Brothers in 1879. In 1870 he married Florence Hasted Mercer (died 1903), daughter of Major Arthur Hill Hasted Mercer, of the 60th rifles. They had eight children. When the alkali works were converted into the Oldbury Alkali Company Ltd in 1890, Chance was made deputy chairman as well as managing director. He decided not to take part in the creation of the United Alkali Company in 1890, but in 1898 amalgamated his firm with another Leblanc soda manufacturer, Hunt & Sons of Wednesbury, to form Chance and Hunt Ltd. He was chairman of Chance and Hunt from 1901 until his retirement in June 1912; Brunner, Mond & Co. (later part of ICI) acquired a majority shareholding in Chance and Hunt in 1917. In 1907, four years after his first wife's death, Chance married Agnes Elizabeth, daughter of William Fleming of Inverness. There were no children of this marriage. 
Alexander Chance is chiefly remembered for the Chance process for the recovery of sulphur in the Leblanc method. This enabled the latter to weather, for another thirty years, the challenge from the ammonia-soda process used by the Solvay Company in Belgium and its British partner, Brunner Mond. The Leblanc process prepared soda (sodium carbonate) by heating salt with sulphuric acid, which formed salt-cake (sodium sulphate) and hydrochloric acid gas. The salt-cake was then converted into the desired soda by heating it with coal and limestone in large revolving furnaces. Unfortunately, impure calcium sulphide was a major by-product of this second step, and the Leblanc works were surrounded by mounds of evil-smelling waste called 'galligu'. In the 1880s Chance developed a method of pumping carbon dioxide gas through tanks of a slurry of galligu and water. The hydrogen sulphide gas thereby freed from calcium sulphide was burned to produce elemental sulphur, which was used to make sulphuric acid. 
Chance built a convalescent home for his workers and set up a fund which quickly paid out compensation for industrial accidents on a no-fault basis. His concern about the evil effects of drunkenness led to the formation of the Langley Temperance Club, and he was also active in the social work of the Church of England. He presented the open space of Warley Woods to the city of Birmingham. Chance died at his home, Walcot, St Mark's Road, Torquay, Devon, on 22 November 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 32360


Chancellor, Sir John Robert (1870-1952), army officer and colonial governor, was born in Edinburgh on 20 October 1870, the second son of Edward Chancellor (1828-1907), writer to the signet, and his wife, Anne Helen (died 1932), daughter of John Robert Todd, also a writer to the signet. He was educated at Blair Lodge, Polmont, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1890. After a period of duty at home he served in India with the Dongola (1896) and the Tirah (1897-8) expeditions, and in the latter his courage and initiative earned him a mention in dispatches and appointment to the DSO in 1898. In 1903 he married Elsie, daughter of George Rodie Thompson, a barrister, of Lynwood, Ascot. They had one daughter and two sons, the elder of whom was Sir Christopher John Howard Chancellor (1904-1989), general manager of Reuters. 
Back in Britain, Chancellor attended the Staff College and in 1904 was appointed assistant military secretary to the committee of imperial defence. He showed such administrative ability and sound judgement that in 1906 he was made secretary of the colonial defence committee. He was promoted major in 1910. It was a tribute to Chancellor's qualities that, at the age of forty, a soldier with no experience of colonial administration, he was appointed to the important governorship of Mauritius where his term of office, 1911-16, was still recalled with admiration, more than thirty years later, by some who by then were leading personalities in the island. His success was rewarded by appointment to the governorship of Trinidad and Tobago, which he held from 1916 to 1921, and thereafter to the first governorship of Southern Rhodesia. This had to wait until 1923, when the territory was taken over from the British South Africa Company, and during the interval he served as a principal assistant secretary to the committee of imperial defence. He had been promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1918. 
Chancellor's term in Southern Rhodesia, 1923-8, more than justified his reputation as a capable and progressive administrator. The constitution which he helped to establish proved more durable than many such instruments and he opposed firmly any suggestion for the introduction of extreme forms of segregation. The ability which he showed in handling local politicians and in guiding the management of affairs led to his selection for the difficult appointment of high commissioner for Palestine and Transjordan, from 1928 to 1931; he succeeded Lord Plumer, whose term of office had been noteworthy for its freedom from those serious disturbances so unhappily frequent during the British administration of Palestine. This tranquillity and reasons of economy led to the withdrawal of the British military garrison from Palestine and to the reduction and reorganization of the police force. In consequence the civil power was without military aid when in August 1929, following incidents at, and in connection with, the Wailing Wall at Jerusalem, Arab attacks were made on Jews in several large towns in Palestine. 
Chancellor was then on leave and, although the parliamentary commission of inquiry under Sir Walter Shaw, reporting in March 1930, found no serious fault with the governmental handling of the riots, there were some in Palestine who felt that events might have taken a very different course had Chancellor been in the country. The principal recommendation of the Shaw commission was that the British government should issue a statement of policy defining clearly and positively the meaning which they attached to certain passages in the mandate and should make it plain that they intended to give full effect to the policy thus defined. That recommendation was, almost certainly, influenced by Chancellor's views and he must have been well satisfied when, after further investigations, including one of land and immigration problems by Sir John Hope Simpson, the government issued a statement on policy in October 1930 which went to what Chancellor undoubtedly regarded as the root of the Palestine problem. When in February 1931 the white paper was in effect reinterpreted by Ramsay MacDonald in a statement to Chaim Weizmann, Chancellor's faith in government policy in Palestine was badly shaken and his disappointment was made evident in his speech at a farewell banquet in Jerusalem when he said: 'I came hoping to increase the country's prosperity and happiness. I am leaving with my ambition unfulfilled. Conditions were against me' (private information). 
Regarded as 'aloof and suspicious' (Sherman, 77), Chancellor was 'convinced that the entire Balfour Declaration policy had been 'a colossal blunder', unjust to the Arabs and impossible of fulfillment in its own terms' (ibid., 85). 
Though over sixty, Chancellor now embarked on a third career, serving as chairman or member of a number of governmental committees; on bodies such as the Royal Geographical, Royal Empire, and Royal African societies; and as a director of various companies. 
Although not tall, Chancellor was impressive alike in appearance, in his carriage, and in the good taste with which he always dressed. He did not make friends quickly or easily but to his subordinates he showed a courtesy which commanded their devotion and, once his confidence had been won, his charm and sympathy made him excellent company. He held strong views on many issues of policy but after his retirement from Palestine he scrupulously avoided public controversy. 
Chancellor was appointed CMG in 1909, KCMG in 1913, GCMG in 1922, GCVO in 1925, and GBE in 1947. He died on 31 July 1952 at Shieldhill, Lanarkshire, an estate which his family had owned for nearly eight hundred years. 
T. I. K. Lloyd', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32361


Channell, Sir Arthur Moseley (1838-1928), judge, was born in London on 13 November 1838, the only son to survive infancy of Sir William Fry Channell (1804-1873), baron of the exchequer, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Richard Moseley, of Champion Hill, Camberwell, Surrey. He was educated at Harrow School before going on as a scholar to Trinity College, Cambridge. He won the Colquhoun sculls in 1860 and the university pair oars in 1861 when he was in the first Trinity crew which competed successfully at Henley for the Grand Challenge Cup and ladies' plate. In the same year, he was twenty-sixth wrangler and obtained a second class in the classical tripos. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1863 and joined the south-eastern circuit. Before and after he was called, his father would make him listen to the cases in his court and draft judgments, which the baron would criticize and revise. 
In 1865 Channell married Beatrice Ernestine (died 1871), daughter of Captain Alexander Wadham Wyndham of Blandford, Dorset; they had a son and two daughters. After her death, in 1877 he married Constance Helena, daughter of Walter Blackett Trevelyan, barrister of Hendon; they had four sons and a daughter. 
Channell specialized in local government work, where his intellect, industry, and common sense fitted him to thread his way through the tangle of statute and case law. His progress, however, was not rapid. He was unassuming and shy, and had no flair for sensational advocacy. But he gradually acquired a substantial practice, and in 1885 became queen's counsel. In 1888 he was appointed recorder of Rochester, an office which he held until 1897. 
In 1897 Channell, then fifty-eight, was appointed a judge of the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice and was knighted. He proved an admirable judge -- able, dignified, and patient, with a pleasantly astringent wit when needed. His summing-up to juries gave necessary guidance without forcing his own views on them. He tried Richard Archer Prince for the murder of the actor William Terriss in 1898, the jury finding Prince guilty but insane. In 1906 he tried the Great Yarmouth election petition case. Channell differed from his colleague, Sir William Grantham, whose judgment was debated in the House of Commons. Channell also tried the well-known libel action of 'Jones v. Hulton'. Channell's direction to the jury was upheld by the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords. Among other noteworthy decisions were 'Dulaney v. Merry & Son' (1901), on 'conflict of laws'; 'Torkington v. Magee' (1902), involving the assignment of choses in action; 'Compania Naviera Vasconzada v. Churchill and Sim' (1905), involving the legal effect of statements in a bill of lading relating to the condition of the merchandise when shipped; 'Oppenheimer v. Attenborough & Son' (1906), involving the authority of mercantile agents to pledge goods; 'Andersen v. Marten' (1907), a case arising out of the Russo-Japanese War, in which Channell held that a ship which is captured and afterwards condemned by a prize court, but wrecked between capture and condemnation, is lost by capture and not by 'perils of the sea'; and 'Carleton Illustrators v. Coleman & Co. Ltd' (1910), concerning the right of an artist to prevent the owner of the copyright from altering his work. 
In 1914 Channell retired from the bench and became a member of the privy council. During and after the First World War he was a member of the judicial committee in prize-court appeals (1916-21), where his own experience as an amateur yachtsman and yacht-owner since 1876 doubtless assisted him in his masterly discussion of the nautical questions involved in the case of the 'Ophelia' (1917), an appeal from the prize court in which the issue was whether the vessel was a genuine hospital ship or was really engaged in signalling to German submarines. In 1921, when retired judges were asked to help reduce case arrears in the King's Bench Division, Channell, then eighty-three, sat for a few weeks. As late as 1927 he sat in the privy council to hear the last prize appeal arising out of the war. He retired to Hillside, Falmouth, Cornwall, and died at Rathgowry, Falmouth, on 4 October 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 32362


Channer, George Nicholas (1842-1905), army officer, was born at Allahabad, India, on 7 January 1842, the eldest surviving son of eight children of George Girdwood Channer (1811-1895), colonel, Bengal artillery. His mother was Susan (died 1895), eldest daughter of Nicholas Kendall JP, vicar of Talland and Lanlivery, Cornwall. Educated at Truro grammar school and Cheltenham College (1856-9), he passed direct on 4 September 1859 into the Indian army, but served with the 89th and 95th regiments until 7 August 1866, when he entered the Bengal staff corps. He was first on active service in the north-west frontier campaign in 1863-4. He served in the Ambela campaign, and was at the actions of 16 and 17 December 1863 against the Sitana fanatics. He afterwards was with General Wilde's column in Jadoor country in 1864. He also took part in the Lushai operations in 1871-2. 
Channer next served, when a captain, with the 1st Gurkhas in the Malay peninsula in 1875-6, and when with the Malacca column in operations in Sungei Ujong, Terrachi, and Srimenanti won the Victoria Cross on 20 December 1875. He was sent forward in command of a party of his Gurkhas to reconnoitre the road across the Burkit Putus Pass, which was known to be occupied by the enemy, though owing to the terrain and dense jungle it was impossible to ascertain without close approach either the number of the enemy or the strength of their defences. Selecting two men only to support him, he pushed on into the jungle. Discovering a Malay to act as his unwitting guide, he reached the stockade, within which the enemy were in force. He and his two men leaped the stockade, which was formidably constructed, and rushed on the enemy, who were at a meal. Shots were exchanged, but under the impression that a large force was at hand the enemy bolted, and the remainder of the Gurkhas occupied the captured position. In his dispatch Colonel Clay, commanding the column, claimed Channer's foresight and intrepidity prevented great loss of life. The gallant deed practically brought the campaign to a close. Channer was mentioned in dispatches, and promoted brevet major on 12 April 1876. 
Channer served with the expedition against the Jowaki Afridis in 1877. He was with the 29th Punjab infantry in the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80) and with the Kurram field force, and was present in command of the regiment at the attack and capture of the Peiwar Kotal; he was mentioned in dispatches, and received the clasp and the brevet of lieutenant-colonel on 22 November 1879. He attained the rank of colonel in the army on 22 November 1883, at the early age of forty-one. In 1888 he commanded the 1st brigade of the Hazara field force, under General John McQueen, in the expedition to the Black Mountain to punish the population for an attack on British troops in British territory. He was mentioned in dispatches and was nominated CB on 10 April 1889. 
Channer returned to his command, at Jullundur, and received the reward for distinguished service on 9 September 1892. He was colonel on the Bengal staff from 19 November 1888 to 17 August 1890, and brigadier-general from 22 April 1892 to 11 December 1896, in command of the Assam district. He attained the rank of major-general on 27 April 1893, and was promoted lieutenant-general on 9 November 1896 and general on 12 January 1899. In November 1901 he was placed on the unemployed supernumerary list. 
Channer married in June 1872 Annie Isabella, daughter of John William Watson of Shooter's Hill. They had four surviving sons (two served in the army) and four daughters. Channer died on 13 December 1905 at his residence, Buckleigh, Westward Ho!, Devon, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32363


Chaplin, Henry, first Viscount Chaplin (1840-1923), politician and sportsman, was born on 22 December 1840 at Ryhall, near Stamford, the third child but the eldest surviving son of the Revd Henry Chaplin (1789-1849), vicar of Ryhall, and his wife, Caroline (died 1858), daughter of William Ellice (1781-1822), MP for Great Grimsby in 1807-12, and niece of Edward Ellice. The Ellices were a mercantile family, and Edward a leading whig, but the Chaplins were tory country gentlemen, resident in Lincolnshire since the seventeenth century. Tathwell, near Louth, had been inherited from the Hamby family, and the larger Kesteven property, centred on Blankney, near Sleaford, had been purchased in 1719. There were also marriage connections with the nobility. The grandmother of Henry Chaplin, senior, had been a Cecil of Burghley; Ryhall was a Burghley living; and his elder brother Charles, the squire of Blankney, had sat for Lord Exeter's borough of Stamford before becoming MP for Lincolnshire. When the elder Henry died in 1849 his wife and children went to live at Blankney. The Charles Chaplins were childless, and when the squire died in 1856 his young nephew, Henry, still a minor, succeeded to the Lincolnshire estates of some 23,000 acres. He was educated at Harrow School (1854-6) and privately, before spending a few terms as a gentleman commoner at Christ Church, Oxford (1859-60). This was followed by an expedition to the Rocky Mountains, during which Lake Chaplin in Saskatchewan was named after him. 
A dedicated rider to hounds from youth, in 1864 Chaplin purchased the Burton pack from Lord Henry Bentinck, his mentor in hunting matters, and from 1865 to 1871 he hunted that extensive country as master. In the latter year it was divided, and Chaplin hunted the Blankney, formerly the southern portion of the Burton, from 1877 to 1881. All this was in the squirearchical tradition, but he was also quick to develop a taste for high society and extravagant living. From Oxford days he was a member of the prince of Wales's circle, and by the mid-1860s he was spending huge sums on racehorses, money that was only temporarily recouped by his success with Hermit at the 1867 Derby. He was said to have won $140,000 on that race, while the fourth marquess of Hastings, with whom Lady Flora Paget, Chaplin's fiancee, had bolted in 1864, lost $80,000. 
Chaplin was thus already well-known when he entered parliament as member for the newly created county constituency of Mid Lincolnshire in 1868. He made an impression with his maiden speech on Irish disestablishment, and attracted the favourable attention of Disraeli, to whom he had been introduced by Lord Henry Bentinck. In 1875 he was considered for the Irish secretaryship, but was passed over as too inexperienced for that tricky post. An attack on Gladstone's foreign policy during the 1877 session resulted in a well-merited mauling from its intended victim, but on questions relating to land and agriculture Chaplin was on firmer ground. He was a member of the royal commission on agricultural depression (1879-81), and prominent in the counsels of the central chamber of agriculture. As a loyal supporter of the party leadership in the opposition years of 1880-85 he came into conflict with Lord Randolph Churchill, and was narrowly defeated by him in an election for the chairmanship of the National Union of Conservative and Constitutional Associations in 1884. In the following year he achieved office in Lord Salisbury's first ministry as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, with special responsibility for agriculture, but when Salisbury returned to power in 1886 Chaplin declined the Local Government Board because it did not carry a seat in the cabinet. 
In 1889, however, it was decided to create a Board of Agriculture, mainly from the agricultural department of the privy council. Chaplin was the obvious choice as its first president, and since the offer came with a seat in the cabinet it was duly accepted. The new department, however, had a small budget and little real scope for assisting the long-suffering agriculturist, though by the time the ministry fell in 1892 Chaplin had secured the passage of a measure to combat cattle disease and a smallholdings bill. In 1895 Salisbury gave him the Local Government Board, but in this post he was a less than conspicuous success, mishandling an agricultural rating bill in 1896 and being thrown over by Arthur Balfour on the 'Vaccination Bill' of 1898. He was removed from office in 1900. 
During the 1890s Chaplin's financial affairs became desperate. Arable estates such as his had been especially badly hit by the depression, and despite his reputation as a model squire he had been an inattentive and only partially resident landlord. In 1897 Blankney passed into the hands of the earl of Londesborough, and the Tathwell estate was sold about 1900. Despite this his local popularity was sufficient to return him for the Sleaford division, which he had held since 1885, at the general election of 1900, but he was ousted in 1906 and forced to retreat to the suburban seat of Wimbledon, which he won in a by-election in 1907, defeating the Hon. Bertrand Russell. A tariff-reformer early in the new century -- he represented agriculture on Chamberlain's tariff reform commission -- he supported Ulster in 1914 and opposed the wartime coalition in 1915, becoming leader of the token opposition in the Commons. In 1916, having suffered a slight stroke, he was persuaded to retire with the viscountcy that he had previously declined in 1900. 
In appearance Chaplin was every inch the squire. Although more striking for his girth than his height in later years, he had an excellent constitution, and retained his agility in the saddle. Horses, indeed, remained a lifelong obsession, and for many years he was an active member of the Jockey Club, of which he was a steward from 1873. He was also very fond of good food and society, and acquired a reputation as a diner-out and raconteur. He remained cheerful despite sadness in his personal life. In 1876 he had married Lady Florence Sutherland-Leveson-Gower, elder daughter of George Granville William Sutherland-Leveson-Gower, third duke of Sutherland ['see under 'Gower, George Granville Leveson-]. She brought him both happiness and stability, but after only five years of marriage she died after the birth of their third child, in 1881. After the loss of Chaplin's own establishment it was his brother-in-law Lord Stafford, later fourth duke of Sutherland, who provided a 'pied-a-terre' for him and who largely brought up his children. In 1899 his elder daughter, Edith ['see 'Stewart, Edith Helen Vane-Tempest-], married Lord Castlereagh, later seventh marquess of Londonderry, and near the end of his life Chaplin went to live at Londonderry House, Park Lane, London. He died there on 29 May 1923, and was buried at Blankney. 
Politically Chaplin was one of the last of the country-gentleman party. He suffered, perhaps, from being regarded as the personification of that breed, despite the fact that he was abler, harder-working, and considerably grander in his tastes and connections than the average squire. He aspired to be a statesman, although in fact he was by nature more of a follower than a leader. He also lacked the agility of the party manager, and his sub-Disraelian style of oratory, never as effective as he imagined, became increasingly old-fashioned and indeed risible in the post-Disraelian period. Yet in a deeper way he remained true to his origins in the shires. Despite his party loyalty he was at heart a protectionist, and was strongly attracted in turn to fair trade, bimetallism (in the late 1880s), and later tariff reform. It was in the country rather than in parliament that he was most appreciated: Walter Long, another squire turned politician, described him as 'one of the most deservedly popular men that ever lived'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32364


Chapman, David Leonard (1869-1958), physical chemist, was born on 6 December 1869 in Wells, Norfolk, the eldest son of David Chapman, merchant, who later became a builder in Manchester, and his wife, Maria Wells. The economist and civil servant Sir Sydney John Chapman was his younger brother. He attended Manchester grammar school, from where he won an open scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, taking first-class honours in chemistry in 1893 and second-class honours in physics in 1894. After a short period as science master at Giggleswick School he was appointed in 1897 to the chemistry staff at Manchester University. In 1907 Jesus College, Oxford, which had just equipped itself with a large teaching and research laboratory, elected him fellow and tutor to take charge of the scientific work. This laboratory, the last to be run by an Oxford college, remained open until three years after Chapman's retirement in 1944. He acted as senior proctor, served on university boards and committees, and was vice-principal of his college in 1926-44. He was elected FRS in 1913. In 1918 he married Muriel Catherine Canning Holmes ['see below']. 
As a tutor Chapman was devoted to his pupils, as they were to him. Research, however, was his first interest, and this he pursued over many years, assisted by his wife and his students. His approach to research problems was cautious, critical, thorough, and penetrating, relying for inspiration and technique very little on the work of others. Because his standards of proof were very high, he was not disposed to accept readily fresh outlooks put forward by newcomers to his subject, although he never rejected them outright. 
The problem which occupied Chapman for the longest period was the mechanism of the photochemical combination of hydrogen and chlorine, which turned out to be extraordinarily difficult to resolve. Chapman established that minute traces of impurities were the cause of the capricious behaviour of the reaction. In 1913 he first suggested the 'steady-state hypothesis', and applied it to intermediates in a chemical reaction. He found that if the light is interrupted by a rotating sector, the rate of the hydrogen-chlorine reaction varies with the sector frequency, and he was the first, in 1926, to work out and use the theory of this effect to measure the 'mean life' of a reaction intermediate. The method has since been much used by others. 
Chapman carried out research on a variety of other problems in physical chemistry and physics. In 1899 he published an important paper on the theory of detonation in gases, and was able to make reliable calculations of detonation speeds. His name is still associated with the theory, known as the Chapman-Jouget treatment. In 1913 he published an important paper on the distribution of ions at a charged surface, and the surface layer he envisaged is still called the Gouy-Chapman layer. 
Chapman was reserved and somewhat eccentric in manner, particularly in his later years. In his scientific work he was somewhat of a recluse, but he could demonstrate an informal but effective administrative ability when he so wished. His outdoor hobbies were golf and cycling; when he gave these up he continued to be an active walker until the age of eighty-two. Chapman died (of cancer) at his home, 253 Cowley Road, Oxford, on 17 January 1958. 


Muriel Holmes married her supervisor, D. L. Chapman, in 1918, and they had their only child, Ruth, in the following year. Muriel Chapman carried out research on the reaction between hydrogen and chlorine in the laboratories of Jesus College, and was awarded the Oxford BSc degree in 1923. Two research papers based on this work were published in 1923 and 1924. Ten years later she carried out further laboratory work, and a joint paper with her husband appeared in 1937. After about 1927 she became active with the League for the Prohibition of Cruel Sports. She died at her home, 6 Bainton Road, Oxford, on 23 March 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 32365


Chapman, Edward John (1821-1904), mineralogist, was born on 22 February 1821 at an inn on the Kent-Surrey border as his parents were returning to London from France. His father died two years later. Educated principally in France, Chapman attended the Lycee Henri IV and the Sorbonne in Paris, where his studies focused on mineralogy and chemistry. During the late 1830s he accompanied friends to Algeria and enlisted in the French army. After being wounded he returned to convalesce in England, where he married the daughter of a Colonel Cogan, with whom he had a son who predeceased him; following her death he later married Frances Sutherland, daughter of Captain Sutherland of Sydney, Nova Scotia, who outlived him. 
Following his convalescence Chapman studied civil engineering, and worked for a time under William Froude (1810-1837) on the staff of I. K. Brunel (1806-1859). Nevertheless, he retained his interest in mineralogy, publishing two treatises in the mid-1840s: 'Practical Mineralogy' (1843) and 'A Brief Description of the Characters of Minerals' (1844). In the session 1848-9 he gave lectures in mineralogy at University College, London, and, in 1851, he was appointed to a newly established chair in the subject. He also continued to publish in the 'Philosophical Magazine' and the 'Chemical News'. In 1853 he was appointed to the new chair of geology and mineralogy at University College, Toronto. He remained there until 1889, when he moved to the University of Toronto's new school of practical science. 
Chapman performed important public services in promoting and popularizing the work of the geological survey of Canada. Broadening his research to embrace Canadian geology and mineralogy, he also travelled widely to assess the commercial value of local deposits. He refined blowpipe analysis as a tool in testing for mineral traces through chemical reactions to flame. The bulk of his publications appeared in the Canadian Institute's 'Canadian Journal of Industry, Science, and Art', which he helped to edit for many years. 
Chapman wrote one of the first Canadian scientific responses to 'The Origin of Species', and reviewed both the Revd James Bovell's 'Outlines of Natural Theology' (1859) and J. W. Dawson's anti-transformist 'Archaia' (1860). Sceptical of the theory of natural selection, he nevertheless preferred Darwin's impressive amassing of scientific evidence to Bovell's error-ridden compilation, especially in light of recent geological theory. Chapman admitted to occasional doubts regarding the fixity of species, and resisted the full implications of the cosmogony and natural history that Dawson attributed to scripture. Chapman was at his most effective, however, when conveying practical knowledge to general readers; his 'Popular Exposition of the Minerals and Geology of Canada' appeared in serial form (1860-64), along with several other texts. 
Chapman received a PhD from the University of Gottingen (1862) and an honorary LLD from Queen's College, Kingston (1867). A charter member of the Royal Society of Canada (1883), he retired in 1895 and returned to London. He died on 28 January 1904 at his home, The Pines, Hampton Wick, possibly as the result of after-effects of a serious accident in December 1901. His last work, on mineralogical classification, appeared posthumously. An amateur actor, master raconteur, published poet, and one-time fencing opponent of Louis Napoleon, Chapman is noteworthy for his scientific contributions to an important Victorian ideal, the wide dissemination of useful knowledge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32366


Chapman, Robert William (1881-1960), literary scholar and publisher, was born at Eskbank, near Dalkeith, Midlothian, on 5 October 1881, the youngest of the six children of the Revd Edward Whitaker Chapman and his wife, Hannah Margaret Cannon of a Yorkshire family. His father was the Episcopalian vicar of Birnam, Dunkeld, Perthshire, from 1871 to 1877 and secretary and treasurer of the Representative Church Council of the Scottish Episcopal Church, Edinburgh. Upon her husband's death in 1884, Hannah Chapman settled near Dundee. Chapman attended the high school at Dundee, then went with a bursary to St Andrews, where he obtained first class honours in classics. With the Guthrie and Adam de Brome scholarships he proceeded to Oriel College, Oxford, where he won the Gaisford prize for Greek prose (1903) and was awarded a first class in classical moderations (1904) and in 'literae humaniores' (1906). 
In 1906 Chapman was appointed assistant secretary to the secretary to the delegates of the Clarendon Press, Charles Cannan. On 22 April 1913 he married Katharine Marion (1887/8-1978), daughter of Arthur Wharton Metcalfe, a Somerset engineer. After obtaining a first class in the honour school of English language and literature (1910) she had moved from Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, to Somerville College as assistant English tutor. They had three sons and one daughter. On the outbreak of the First World War he was given a commission in the Royal Garrison Artillery and served in Salonika. After he returned to Oxford he succeeded to the secretaryship in January 1920, after Cannan's death. He followed Cannan's 'Catalogue of the Oxford University Press' (1916) with the complementary 'Account of the Oxford University Press, 1468-1921' (1922; 2nd edn, 1926) in which he described the more important books published by the press, some in progress, in which he had a share, especially the 'Oxford English Texts' and the first edition of the 'Oxford English Dictionary' (1928) and its supplement (1933), to which he freely contributed. His early interest in lexicography, which was also shown in his contributions to the revised edition of Liddell and Scott's 'Greek-English Lexicon' (1940; rev. edn, 1996), remained throughout his life. 
When on active service Chapman wrote a series of essays, collected as 'Portrait of a Scholar' (1920), among them 'The textual criticism of English classics', which contains the injunction 'To restore, and maintain in its integrity the text of our great writers is a pious duty'; this duty he observed throughout his scholarly life and he demanded its observance by others in editions promoted or controlled by him. The English authors he loved and studied most were Jane Austen and Samuel Johnson and his reputation rests on his editions of their works. As early as 1912 he had planned with Katharine Marion Metcalfe an edition of Jane Austen's novels and this was completed by himself, with her assistance, in five volumes in 1923. This edition was judiciously annotated and accompanied by numerous appendixes of great importance. It was followed by six volumes of juvenilia and minor works and two editions of letters, 'The Five Letters of Jane Austen to her Niece' (1924) and 'Jane Austen's Letters to her Sister Cassandra and Others' (2 vols., 1932). Chapman completed his work on Jane Austen with his edition of J. E. Austen-Leigh's 'Memoir' (1926), 'Jane Austen: Facts and Problems', the Clark lectures given in 1948 at Trinity College, Cambridge, and 'Jane Austen: a Critical Bibliography' (1953; corrected edn, 1955). 
Very early in his career Chapman laid the foundations of his belief that Samuel Johnson was one of the first writers of modern times and one of the greatest of Englishmen. He read and studied in Macedonia Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' and began there an edition of Boswell's 'Tour to the Hebrides' and Johnson's 'Journey to the Western Islands' which were published together in 1924 in an edition in which the texts were, for the first time, established by scholarly collation and emendation. Chapman had already come to the conclusion that Boswell's 'Life' and Johnson's 'Letters' were in need of radical revision; the great edition of Boswell's 'Life' and 'Tour to the Hebrides' (1887) was found on examination to be textually inaccurate and factually inadequate. Lawrence Fitzroy Powell was commissioned to undertake the revision: Chapman, in addition to reading the proofs, assisted materially by editing Boswell's 'Note Book, 1776-77' (1925), 'Johnson and Boswell Revised by themselves and Others' (1928), and 'Papers Written by Dr. Johnson and Dr. Dodd, 1777' (1926). Chapman himself undertook the new edition of the letters, making diligent and successful efforts to obtain new letters. His prime aim was to furnish an accurate text and therefore he made a close study of Johnson's difficult handwriting. The resultant edition, 'The Letters of Samuel Johnson with Mrs. Thrale's Genuine Letters to Him', was fully indexed and published in three volumes in 1952 and is Chapman's greatest contribution to Johnsonian scholarship. In 'Johnson, Boswell and Mrs. Piozzi: a Suppressed Passage Restored' (1929) Chapman exposed Piozzi's editorial malpractices. He also produced in 1927 an edition of 'Rasselas'. 
Chapman was well aware of the need for a systematic study of the canon of Johnson's writings. The pioneer 'Bibliography' by W. P. Courtney, seen through the press by D. Nichol Smith in 1915, was reissued with the support of Chapman in 1925; it added and described numerous facsimiles, but made no addition to the canon. This was done when twenty-two pieces were delineated in 'Johnsonian bibliography: a supplement to Courtney' by Chapman with the collaboration of Allen T. Hazen and published by the Oxford Bibliographical Society (vol. 5, 1940). Chapman was an ardent bibliographer. He wrote one important book, 'Cancels' (1930), and many articles on bibliography and kindred subjects such as typography, binding, and the book trade, and contributed to its terminology. He freely shared his knowledge with R. B. McKerrow, whose 'Introduction to Bibliography', a standard manual, was published by the Clarendon Press in 1927. 
Chapman was taken seriously ill in 1942 and compelled to resign the secretaryship of the press. He retired to Barton near Oxford and devoted himself mainly to the completion of his edition of Johnson's letters. An essayist and reviewer of rare distinction, he had an innate feeling for language and always wrote with gracious learning and wit. As a reviewer he was generally kindly but could be severe when occasion required. His style can be observed in 'Johnsonian and other Essays and Reviews' (1953), written over the years 1921-49. The reprint of the 'Oxford Standard Authors' edition of Boswell's 'Life of Johnson' (1953) was not edited by him, but he added very greatly to its value and importance by supplying translations of the numerous Latin and Greek quotations. The last work to be edited by him was an anthology, 'Selections from Samuel Johnson' (1955). 
In person Chapman was tall and lean, with a distinct stoop when walking, and he was a tireless walker. He never rode a horse, drove a car, or rode a motorcycle, but was seldom parted from his bicycle clips; his bicycle was famous and he indicated to other road users with unmistakable elaboration the way he intended to go. He never used a typewriter or wrote with a fountain pen. He wrote rapidly: what he wrote was not always legible, even to his secretaries, his close friends, or the printer; on one occasion at least it caused serious error. But if his writing was sometimes a torment, his voice was always a joy. He deplored slovenly speech; his own was clear, with every syllable distinctly and naturally uttered; it bore no trace of his northern origin. In addition to a small but notable collection of books, he collected silver spoons, and, as a minor hobby, abbreviations. He had in 1910 collaborated with his friend George Gordon in collecting examples of modern jargon which were pilloried in the 'Oxford Magazine'. His tracts for the Society of Pure English, 'Names, Designations and Appellations' (1936) and 'Adjectives from Proper Names' (1939), could only have been compiled from hundreds of examples collected over a period of years. He was aided by a very good memory. 
The honorary degree of DLitt was conferred on Chapman by Oxford in 1928 for his part in the production of the 'Oxford English Dictionary' and St Andrews made him an honorary LLD in 1933; he was elected a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1931, and FBA in 1949, and was appointed CBE in 1955. Chapman died at Cowley Road Hospital, Oxford, on 20 April 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 32367


Chapman, Sydney (1888-1970), mathematician and geophysicist, was born on 29 January 1888 in Eccles, Lancashire, the second son of Joseph Chapman, chief cashier at Rylands, a Manchester textiles firm, and his wife, Sarah Gray. He left elementary school at the age of fourteen and attended the Royal Technical Institute, Salford, for two years, intending to enter industry; there he was encouraged in a successful attempt for a county scholarship to Manchester University, which he entered, at the age of sixteen, to read engineering. After this course he spent a further year taking a mathematics degree, during which he won a sizarship to Trinity College, Cambridge (1908), being promoted to a full scholarship one year later. 
Chapman gained a first class in part two of the mathematical tripos in 1910 and was starting research when the astronomer royal, Frank Dyson, offered him a post as senior assistant at the Greenwich observatory alongside A. S. Eddington, which he accepted. He was sent to work supervising the installation of instruments for a new magnetic observatory. He found that magneticians were unduly devoted to collecting data, spending too little time trying to interpret them. Encouraged by Dyson and Arthur Schuster he tried to rectify this, and thus began the study of the influences of the sun and moon on terrestrial phenomena which was to be a prime ingredient of his later work. In 1913 he won the first Smith's prize. 
Chapman wished to complete work on gas theory begun earlier at the suggestion of Sir Joseph Larmor, so left Greenwich in 1914 and returned to Trinity as a college lecturer. His return coincided with the outbreak of the First World War, during which his religious principles made him a pacifist. He was granted exemption from military service but was asked in 1916 to return to Greenwich in an honorary capacity and remained there until December 1918. However, he felt the strain of maintaining unpopular views, and after the war he went through a period of agonized reappraisal. 
Chapman's scientific achievements during the years 1912-19 were remarkable. In gas theory he, and independently David Enskog in Sweden, gave an exact solution to the problems of gas viscosity, heat conduction, and diffusion, posed much earlier by James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann. Chapman and Enskog identified a hitherto overlooked phenomenon, thermal diffusion, which Clusius used in 1939 to develop a powerful method of separating gases in mixtures. 
Furthermore, in four massive papers (1913-19) Chapman examined the regular variations in the geomagnetic field arising from tidal flows in the ionosphere, excited by the sun and moon. He estimated (following Schuster) the electrical conductivity of the ionosphere, and showed how it depends on the sun's radiation. In 1918 he identified a lunar atmospheric tide from sixty years of Greenwich barometer records, a remarkable achievement both because the effect detected was smaller than the limit of accuracy of an individual measurement, and because of the amount of computation which had to be done without mechanical aids. During the next thirty years he determined the lunar tide at numerous stations over the surface of the globe. Finally, in 1919 he made a first attempt at a theory of magnetic storms -- sudden irregular changes in the geomagnetic field. Although this theory was soon abandoned as unsound, the accompanying analysis of storm morphology was to prove invaluable. 
In 1919 Chapman's scientific achievements were recognized in his election as a fellow of the Royal Society and his appointment to succeed Horace Lamb as professor of natural philosophy at Manchester, where he met Katharine Nora (died 1967), daughter of Alfred E. Steinthal, barrister and honorary treasurer of Manchester University. They were married in 1922 and had three sons and one daughter. His wife shared many of Chapman's later peregrinations. 
Chapman remained in Manchester until 1924, when he became chief professor of mathematics at Imperial College, London. During the period up to 1928 he was much involved in reorganizing and modernizing student courses, though finding time to win the Adams prize from Cambridge for 1928 with an essay on geomagnetism, and to develop earlier ideas further, often in collaboration with younger men -- for example, E. A. Milne. The years 1928-32 were another period of intense intellectual activity. He extended his gas-theory methods to cover Brownian motions and the electrical conductivity of plasmas (ionized gases). With a research student, V. C. A. Ferraro, he produced the first satisfactory explanation of the initial phase of magnetic storms as due to compression of the geomagnetic field by plasma streams emanating from the sun. The most significant feature of the Chapman-Ferraro theory was its recognition that plasma behaviour is essentially different from that of single charged particles, so that solar plasma streams can pen the geomagnetic field within a bounded 'magnetosphere'. 
In the 1931 Royal Society Bakerian lecture Chapman gave a trail-breaking discussion of the effects of the sun's ultraviolet radiation on the earth's upper atmosphere. He provided a standard theory of layer formation in the lower ionosphere against which later experiments could be compared; he also gave an enlightening account of photochemical reactions in the upper atmosphere. Working in a period when experimental facts were at best only partially available, his achievement was to enable later observers to direct their efforts in the most profitable directions. 
1932 to 1940 were years of expanding horizons. Always an internationalist, in 1934 Chapman spent three months in Cairo as visiting professor. He regularly attended international conferences, often cycling across Europe to do so. He made no secret of his distaste for Hitler. He did all he could, personally and through committees, to have refugee scientists settled in suitable posts. However, he maintained friendly relations with German scientists; from 1929 onwards he worked sporadically with Julius Bartels on a treatise, 'Geomagnetism', finally published in 1940 after the outbreak of war. He had a copy of this book transmitted via America to Adolf Schmidt in Germany, which led him into temporary trouble with officials concerned with stopping trade with the enemy. 
A second book which Chapman had begun much earlier, 'The Mathematical Theory of non-Uniform Gases', was published in 1939 with T. G. Cowling as co-author. The war put an end to such pursuits. Chapman, no longer a pacifist, undertook civilian war work, finally, in 1943-5, working for the army council on problems of military operational research. His methodical nature and capacity for marshalling facts made him a valued leader in his group, whose members could rely on his firm support even against the wrath of generals. 
In 1946, after the war, Chapman accepted an invitation to become Sedleian professor of natural philosophy at Oxford, and became a fellow of Queen's College. He appreciated the gracious living there, but not the relatively secondary status he found allotted to science. He tried to improve that status by giving general science lectures to non-scientists. He also supervised research students who were later to make their mark such as F. D. Kahn and K. C. Westfold. However, this time at Oxford was marked by no exciting new advance; his scientific role was becoming that of an elder statesman and counsellor. 
In 1953, determined not to let himself be retired when he reached the official age, Chapman resigned his Oxford chair to take up a research post at the new Geophysical Institute at College, Alaska, helping to establish the research school there. In 1955 he added a similar post at the High Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colorado, officially dividing his time between the two. In practice, however, the two were used as bases for sorties throughout the world. He was visiting professor at many places, among them Istanbul (1954) and Ibadan (1964). He made numerous visits to secure the co-operation of groups in many countries in the work of the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957-8, of whose organizing committee he was president. 
Soon after the IGY, Chapman was joined by Syun-Ichi Akasofu, a young geophysicist who had already begun good work in his native Japan. They worked together on the completion of the theory of magnetic storms and the explanation of aurorae in the light of recent discoveries about the van Allen belts, the magnetosphere, and the surrounding plasma from the sun. Another collaborator during this period was P. C. Kendall, with whom Chapman produced a theory of noctilucent clouds. 
During the last years of his life Chapman tried, through review papers, to make generally available the wide knowledge he had accumulated over the years. Two of his longer papers were republished as books, 'Solar Plasma, Geomagnetism and Aurora' (1964), and (with R. S. Lindzen) 'Atmospheric Tides' (1970). In addition, at the time of his death he had largely completed the manuscript of a new and comprehensive book with Akasofu, entitled 'Solar-Terrestrial Physics'; this was published posthumously in 1972. He was working hard on a variety of other projects up to the time of his death, which occurred at Boulder on 16 June 1970, after only a few days' illness. 
Chapman's most distinctive personal characteristics were his kindliness, persistence, integrity, and simplicity. Those who saw through his surface reserves always found him ready to help. He was never afraid to tackle massive problems, though sometimes he surveyed them for years before the final assault; he tried to give complete solutions, often returning time and again to particular topics. His strength of principle was manifested both by his pacifism during the First World War and his war work in 1939-45; each was motivated by his opposition to violations of humanity. He had a strong sense of duty (including scientific duty) and encouraged high standards in others. If satisfied that a course of action was reasonable he would take it, even if it meant defying convention. When convinced of an error he was ready to acknowledge it. A simple directness pervaded both his writings and his way of life. 
Chapman's distinctions and honours were many. He was in turn president of five British scientific societies, and of four international bodies, including the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (1951-4). He received royal and Copley medals from the Royal Society, and eight other medals and awards from societies in Britain and abroad, and was elected honorary member of six national academies. He was given honorary doctorates by ten universities, six British and four foreign. 
T. G. Cowling', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32368


Chapman, Sir Sydney John (1871-1951), economist and civil servant, was born on 20 April 1871 in Staithe Street, Wells, Norfolk, the second son of David Chapman, a merchant who later became a mortgage and estate agent, and his wife, Maria Wells. David Leonard Chapman, the chemist, was his elder brother. The family moved to Manchester where Chapman attended Manchester grammar school ('c'.1882- 'c'.1888), after which he stayed in the city to study for a London BA degree at Owens College. He graduated in 1891 and worked as a schoolmaster before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1895. Here he read for the moral sciences tripos, extending an early interest in philosophy and psychology to the study of political economy following encouragement from Alfred Marshall, after having given up his original intention to become a clergyman. Attending all Marshall's lectures for three years, Chapman saw him on a weekly basis for personal tuition and was given the run of Marshall's library (Kadish, 186-8). 
After graduating with a double first in moral sciences in 1898, Chapman went back to Owens College to become Jevons research student, and, at Marshall's prompting, embarked on a study of the Lancashire cotton industry. His dissertation was awarded the Cambridge Adam Smith prize in 1900, and he subsequently published an influential monograph on the subject (1904). During his year in Manchester he also lectured in psychology at University College, Liverpool, before moving in 1899 to a lectureship at University College, Cardiff, where he established teaching in economics. He returned to Manchester in 1901 to succeed A. W. Flux as the Stanley Jevons professor of political economy at Owens College. On 17 September 1903 he married Mabel Gwendoline (1879/80-1958), daughter of Thomas Henry Mordey, shipowner, of Newport, Monmouthshire; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Plans to develop commercial education in Manchester already existed, and Chapman became responsible for their implementation; in 1902 he read a paper to the Manchester Statistical Society, 'On education for business and public life'. During the winter of 1903-4 a new faculty of commerce and administration was formed, with Chapman as its dean. This coincided with the disintegration of the existing federal Victoria University (including university colleges in Liverpool and Leeds); Owens College became the Victoria University of Manchester in 1904. Chapman promoted the study of commerce and economics in Manchester's new university, and he did so with marked success. At the first faculty of commerce in Britain, founded by W. J. Ashley at the University of Birmingham, emphasis was placed on the teaching of accounting, finance, and law, for which full-time professorial appointments were made. In Manchester, on the other hand, Chapman relied on part-time local professionals for this component of the commercial curriculum, reserving his full-time appointments for promising young economists who were able to develop the honours school of economics and political science alongside teaching on the BCom course. 
Chapman's recruitment strategy was unique at the time, but was extremely effective in developing teaching in both commerce and economics. It also provided employment for a new generation of economists, for Chapman was, by his early forties, already becoming part of an older generation. Most of these younger proteges in turn established the teaching of economics in provincial universities, where they formed part of an important intermediate generation of founding professors who were to retire during the 1940s. These included H. O. Meredith, Douglas Knoop, C. F. Bickerdike, and G. W. Daniels. 
Chapman's links with local business facilitated the study of local economic conditions by students and staff of the faculty. This followed the pattern that he had established with his own pioneering research into the organization of the Lancashire cotton industry, a feature of which was his unusual ability to obtain detailed commercial information from business people. This early initiative later bore fruit in the 1930s with the formation, under the leadership of John Jewkes, of the economic research section, the first such university-based research institution in Britain. Although commerce teaching remained a mainstay for Manchester staff up until the 1930s, Chapman's early emphasis on teaching and research in economics laid the foundations for Manchester's later international reputation in the subject, as well as reflecting the strong research ethos that the university developed in all departments during the first decade of its independent existence. 
In addition to three volumes of 'Work and Wages', a continuation of the inquiry by Lord Brassey, published between 1904 and 1914, Chapman wrote two economics textbooks (1911, 1912), and a study of unemployment with H. M. Hallsworth (1909). In 1909, when the British Association met in Canada, Chapman was president of section F (economics and statistics), and in 1913 he was appointed chairman of a commission to investigate economic and labour problems in South Africa. The First World War formed a turning point in his career. In the spring of 1915 he was asked by the Board of Trade to direct inquiries into wartime industrial organization, seeking to identify ways in which production could be more efficiently carried out. At first Chapman did this on a part-time basis, but he quickly found that it became a full-time occupation. The ease of contact with business people that had been important to the success of his own early research was an important asset to him in this work. In 1918 he was induced to leave his post at Manchester and join the civil service full-time, and in August 1919 was made joint permanent secretary of the Board of Trade. His appointment to CBE in 1917 and CB in 1919, and promotion to KCB in 1920, reflected his expert contribution to economic administration during the war. On 1 March 1920 he became permanent secretary of the Board of Trade, and served during the following seven years Sir Robert Horne, Stanley Baldwin, Sir Philip Lloyd-Greame, and Sidney Webb. 
Chapman's subsequent career, up until his retirement in 1939, was bound up with the national and international economic problems of the day, especially after he was appointed chief economic adviser to the government in 1927, in succession to Hubert Llewellyn Smith. His civil service work naturally lacked the public impact that it had enjoyed in Manchester. His appointment as chief economic adviser brought with it the task of representing Britain at conferences and committees of the League of Nations, as well as attending other international conferences. When the Economic Advisory Council was formed Chapman attended the first meeting of its committee on economic information in February 1932, but his replacement as economic adviser by Sir Frederick Leith-Ross in March excluded him from later meetings. The adoption of tariff protection by the British government saw Chapman appointed instead to the import duties advisory committee, where he served with Sir George May and Sir Allan Powell, devising appropriate responses to the practical and theoretical intricacies of a tariff regime. 
War broke out shortly after Chapman's retirement and he returned to routine administrative work, as chairman of the arc lamp carbon pool and controller of matches, as well as becoming vice-chairman of the Central Price Regulation Committee. In the early 1940s he suffered a stroke, which forced him into permanent retirement. He died suddenly at his home, the Manor House, Ware, Hertfordshire, on 29 August 1951, of a massive heart attack. 


@@@@@


doc= 32369


Charles, James Henry (1851-1906), landscape and genre painter, was born at Warrington, Lancashire, on 5 January 1851. His ancestors, who were French, settled originally at Caernarfon and owned fishing and cargo boats which traded with Anglesey. His father, Richard Charles (1823-1893), was a draughtsman and cabinet-maker who designed the mayor of Caernarfon's chair of office and his mother, Elizabeth, 'nee' Davis, was the daughter of a butcher. Charles accompanied his father to London in 1865, and worked for a time in his father's office and in a lithographer's before registering at Heatherley's School of Art, Chelsea. From there he moved to the Royal Academy Schools in 1872, first exhibiting at the academy with 'An Italian Youth in Armour' in 1875. Earlier, on 25 January of that same year, he had married Ellen Agnes (1854/5-1909), a milliner, the daughter of William Williams, a dyer. They settled at 15 Halsey Street, Chelsea, and had five sons and seven daughters. 
Initially Charles attempted a career as a portrait painter, exhibiting portraits of his father and Victor Cavendish, later ninth duke of Devonshire, in 1876 and 1877 respectively. An important connection was made in 1879 when Charles met John Maddocks, the Bradford mill owner who amassed a large collection of his work and encouraged him to develop a type of rural genre of which 'The Knifegrinder' (1877; Manchester City Galleries) and 'Grandad, She Doesn't Want to Go to School' (1883; Warrington Museum and Art Gallery) are typical. During the 1880s Charles established close friendships with the members of the New English Art Club, especially with George Clausen and Henry Herbert La Thangue. He exhibited 'Dignity in Distress' at its inaugural exhibition in 1886. Although influenced in general terms by the rustic naturalist painter Jules Bastien-Lepage, Charles did not adopt the mannerisms generally associated with his followers. He was nevertheless committed to producing large subject pictures such as 'Christening Sunday' (1887; Manchester City Galleries). 
During the 1880s Charles worked at Thorpacre near Loughborough and South Harting, Petersfield, Sussex, before moving in 1889 to Colnor House, Bosham, Chichester. In this year he won a silver medal at the Universal Exhibition for 'The Baptism'. In 1892 he worked in Venice and painted pictures such as 'The Heat of the Day, Venice' (Warrington Museum and Art Gallery). Throughout the early 1890s Charles continued to produce large and impressive academy pieces, one of the last of which, 'Signing the Marriage Register' (1895; Cartwright Hall, Bradford Museums and Art Galleries), portrays the interior of the church at Bosham, with his wife, Ellen, and two daughters, Nina and Marion, used as models. By this time Charles was producing smaller, more saleable impressionistic landscape studies, often painted directly from the motif, which owe more to Adolphe Monticelli than to Monet or Pissarro. A number of these were purchased by Sir Hugh Lane and later presented to public collections in Dublin and Belfast. During the summers of 1902 and 1904 Charles worked at Montreuil-sur-Mer in northern France producing seascapes and coastal genre pictures. Sadly on a visit to the eisteddfod at Caernarfon in August 1906, where he was to act as a judge, Charles fell ill with appendicitis, underwent an operation, and died on 27 August as a result; he was buried in Fulham cemetery. Tributes immediately flooded in and a memorial exhibition was held at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1907. For the catalogue of this show George Clausen wrote an admiring introduction in which he referred to Charles's fine sense of colour and his eye for 'the harmony and envelopment of a scene'. At the same time T. Martin Wood published an article on Charles in 'The Studio' praising his 'naturalness' and the 'sunlit charm' of his art (Wood, 98). 


@@@@@


doc= 32370


Charles, Robert Henry (1855-1931), Church of England clergyman and biblical scholar, was born on 6 August 1855 at Cookstown, co. Tyrone, the fifth of seven sons of David Hughes Charles MD JP, of Cookstown, an eminent doctor, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth, second daughter of John Allen. He was educated at a private school near his home, and then at his own request was sent to the Belfast Academy, where he prospered. In 1874 he went to Queen's College, Belfast, to read classics; he won five scholarships, and graduated BA (1877) and MA (1880), both with first-class honours. Following a spiritual crisis during his time at Queen's, Charles went to Trinity College, Dublin, where he read classics and theology and trained for the ministry. After he had completed his studies there, he went to Germany and Switzerland for a holiday with some friends, and met his future wife, Mary, at Heidelberg. 
Charles was ordained deacon in 1883 and priested in 1884, and between 1883 and 1889 served three London curacies. He made a conscious decision to make straight for a difficult parish, namely Whitechapel, where he met with some success, but the strain on his health was great and after a brief rest he moved to much less demanding work at Kensington. In 1886 he married Mary Lilias, daughter of William Bence-Jones of Lisselan, co. Cork, whom he had been courting for three years. They had no children of their own, but brought up some nieces and thereby enjoyed a family life. After some time in Kennington, Charles was obliged to abandon his ministry in London for a period of prolonged rest, and he and Mary spent the year 1889-90 in Germany. 
Charles returned to work in 1891 and moved to Exeter College, Oxford, where he was extremely happy. It was there that his most significant academic work was done, centring on apocryphal and pseudepigraphic literature of the 'Old Testament'. There is a gap of several centuries between the bulk of the 'Old Testament' material and that of the 'New Testament'. The material on which Charles was expert filled this gap, and therefore provided the immediate background to the 'New Testament'. His work on the pseudepigrapha was controlled by his view of it as an (inadequate) stage 'en route' for the 'New Testament', and he usually commented on the worth of the texts about which he wrote by looking to see how much influence they had on the 'New Testament'. These ideas of progressive revelation in Israel's history are still current in some biblical scholarship but there are very few scholars who would be so self-conscious in their privileging of the 'New Testament' over other texts. Charles's work throughout his life was achieved despite a constant struggle against illness; towards the end of his life he was able to say that he had not enjoyed three consecutive nights of proper sleep for forty years. 
Charles produced a new English translation of 'Enoch' in 1893, and shortly after (1895) a version of the book of 'Jubilees', translated from Ethiopic, which was Charles's area of individual brilliance. Indeed, in H. F. D. Spark's 1984 volume of the 'Old Testament' 'Apocrypha', the translation of 'Jubilees' is merely a revision of Charles's 1895 translation. In 1898 Charles was made professor of biblical Greek at Trinity College, Dublin (a post he retained until 1906), and Jowett lecturer, and he published his lectures, 'The doctrine of a future life in Israel, in Judaism and Christianity'. For the years 1905-11 Charles was Grinfield lecturer on the 'Septuagint' (the ancient Greek translation of the 'Old Testament'), during which time he produced a text of the Ethiopic 'Enoch' (1906), a huge work of scholarship, and became a fellow of the British Academy (1906). In 1908 his edition of 'The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs' (Greek text) was published. In 1910 he became both a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, and speaker's lecturer in biblical studies at Oxford, which post he held for four years. He became DD of Dublin in 1898, and DLitt of Oxford in 1907. 
In 1913 Charles returned to London, where he was appointed canon of Westminster Abbey, where he emptied the pews by delivering scholarly lectures rather than sermons. He learned from this, however, and, though never a demagogue, managed to adapt to his new surroundings. He continued his academic studies and in 1913 he produced the Oxford edition of 'The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament'. In 1914 his 'Religious Development between Old and New Testaments' came out, and this represents the best summary of his thought on the role of his studies within his faith, to which his own work always remained subservient. In 1919 Charles became archdeacon of Westminster, Warburton lecturer at Lincoln's Inn chapel, and Schweich lecturer at the British Academy. The academy honoured him further when in 1925 he became the first winner of its medal for biblical studies. In 1920 he published on the 'Revelation' of St John, and in 1929 he produced a commentary on the book of 'Daniel'. He contributed to the tenth and eleventh editions of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and also published on gambling and on divorce. He listed his recreations as golf and light literature. 
In 1929 Charles was involved in a serious road accident, which left him disabled. He died at his home, 4 Little Cloisters, Westminster Abbey, on 30 January 1931, survived by his wife. He left his library to Ripon Hall, Oxford, of which he had been a benefactor. Charles's career was one of outstanding academic brilliance and his achievement was monumental. Despite the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls in 1947, his contribution is still considered valuable. 


@@@@@


doc= 32371


Charlesworth, Martin Percival (1895-1950), classical scholar, was born at Eastham, Cheshire, on 18 January 1895, son of the Revd Ambrose Charlesworth (1863-1921), then curate of Eastham, and his wife, Alice Whish. He was educated at Birkenhead School and at Jesus College, Cambridge, of which he was a Rustat scholar, and was awarded university scholarships, the Bell (1915), Stewart of Rannoch (1916), and, after service in the First World War, mainly in the Middle East as a commissioned officer in the labour corps, the Craven (1920). He was first chancellor's medallist in 1921. After being placed in the first division of the first class in the classical tripos, part one (1920), and in the first class in part two in 1921 with distinction in ancient history, he became visiting fellow at Princeton (1921-2). He was a fellow of Jesus College (1921), and became fellow and lecturer at St John's (1923), and tutor in 1925, an office which he held until, in 1931, he was appointed to the Laurence readership in classics (ancient history) in the university. He had been a university lecturer on the subject since 1926. 
Charlesworth first made his name by a Hare prize essay, 'The Trade Routes and Commerce of the Roman Empire' (1922, published 1924; 2nd edn, 1926), which enjoyed a high reputation and was translated into French and Italian. In 1927 he was appointed an editor of the 'Cambridge Ancient History', to which he rendered great services until its completion twelve years later. His contributions to volumes 8, 10, and 11 displayed skill in handling evidence, a sympathetic while penetrating assessment of individuals, and an easy, vigorous style. This was especially apparent in his treatment of Tiberius, Claudius, and the Flavians. In 1935 he delivered the Martin lectures at Oberlin College, Ohio, on notable figures in the empire, published under the title of 'Five Men' (1936). He was interested in the interpretation of the ideas revealed in coin-types, linked with literary evidence, and in the complex of practices known as the imperial cult. He was aware of continental scholarship, translating V. Parvan's 'Dacia' in 1928 and exchanging offprints with Stefan Weinstock before the latter's arrival in Britain. But his writings are marked neither by original insights and new directions for research nor by major works of scholarship comparable to those produced in Germany in the nineteenth century. He was also interested in Romano-British studies; the last book he lived to publish was the Gregynog lectures of 1948, 'The Lost Province, or, The Worth of Britain' (1949). While he was well-versed in ancient history, his especial field was the Roman empire, of which his skilful survey in the 'Home University Library', 'Rome' (1947), was passed for press during his last illness. His 'Documents Illustrating the Reigns of Claudius and Nero' (1939) was the first of such sourcebooks. 
Besides his activity as a historian, both as writer and lecturer, Charlesworth devoted himself to St John's, which repaid his services with affection and admiration. This was attested by his election by the fellows as president in 1937, an office in which he revealed high social gifts. He had very many friends throughout the university and among scholars, so that his untimely death at the General Infirmary, Leeds, on 26 October 1950, following a heart attack, was widely lamented. In 1940 he had taken holy orders, and, although he desired no ecclesiastical preferment, he was a devoted churchman. He was an active president of the Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies (1945-8), fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and fellow (1940) and member of the council (1948) of the British Academy. In 1947 he received the honorary degrees of DLitt from the University of Wales and D-es-L from Bordeaux. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 32372


Charley, Sir William Thomas (1833-1904), politician and lawyer, born at Woodbourne, co. Antrim, on 5 March 1833, was the youngest son of Matthew Charley (1788-1846) of Finaghy House, Belfast, and his wife, Mary Anne, daughter of Walter Roberts of Collin House. He was educated at Elstree House School, Lee, Kent, and at St John's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 28 June 1856, graduating BA in 1864 with a first class, and proceeding BCL and DCL by accumulation in 1868. Entering as a student at the Inner Temple on 3 June 1857, he was called to the bar on 9 June 1865. Although a fair lawyer and the editor of a textbook (1867) on the law of cabs and omnibuses, Charley never obtained more than a moderate practice, for the most part carried on in Liverpool and Salford. 
Charley was an active Conservative politician all his life and took a prominent part in the reorganization of the Conservative Party in London and Lancashire which accompanied the extension of the franchise in 1867. At the general election of December 1868 he was elected for Salford; he retained his seat at the general election of February 1874, but at that of April 1880 he was defeated, and he was an unsuccessful candidate at Ipswich in 1883 and 1885. While in parliament Charley was a constant speaker, and an out-and-out supporter of Disraeli, taking an especial interest in social and ecclesiastical questions, on which latter he held strong protestant views. He was the author of several measures, one of which, the 'Offences Against the Persons Act' of 1875, was the forerunner of the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' of 1885 for the better protection of young women and girls. He edited a book on the 'Real Property Acts' (1875, several later editions) and wrote 'The New System of Practice and Pleading' (1877). 
Charley's election as common serjeant in April 1878 against a strong field of competitors occasioned, in view of his modest legal qualifications, general surprise in the profession. The result was the abolition in the 'Local Government Act' of 1888 of 'the right claimed by the court of common council to appoint to the office of common serjeant', which was thereby vested in the crown (51 & 52 Vict. c. 41, s. 42). Although he was knighted on 18 March 1880 -- the appointment being criticized for its overt politicism -- and was made a QC in the same year, his performance of his official duties was the cause of dissatisfaction, and he retired on a very generous pension of $1500 in 1892. 
Charley married in April 1890 Clara, daughter of F. G. Harbord of Kirby Park, Cheshire; they had no children. He was a vigorous defender of the Church of England and trustee of numerous church societies. He defended the House of Lords in 'The Crusade Against the Constitution' (1895) and 'Mending and Ending' (1900). His later years were largely devoted to lecturing on 'the higher criticism', a subject for which his studies had imperfectly qualified him (see his 'The Holy City', 1902). An enthusiastic volunteer from the early days of the movement, he commanded the 3rd volunteer battalion of the Royal Fusiliers, the City of London regiment, retiring in 1889 with the rank of honorary colonel. He rode at the head of his old regiment at the annual inspection in Hyde Park a few weeks before his death, which took place on 8 July 1904 at his house, Woodbourne, East Grinstead, Sussex, after he was suddenly taken ill at the East Grinstead Literary Institute. He was buried at East Grinstead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32373


Charlot, (Eugene) Andre Maurice (1882-1956), theatrical impresario, was born in Paris on 26 July 1882, the eldest of three children of Jules Charles Maurice Charlot (1858-1917), whose father, Auguste, had won the first prix Rome for composition in 1850, and his wife, Jeanne Sargine Battu (1858-1934), the well-off daughter of a Geneva goldsmith. From his earliest days Charlot had an English governess. Having gladly failed his exams at the Lycee Condorcet, he enrolled at the Paris Conservatoire but in 1899, offered a job by his father, then a theatre manager, Charlot took up a new career. By 1902 he was writing theatrical news and gossip for Parisian magazines and travelling to London to sign talent for the Theatre du Chatelet. His first-hand acquaintance with revue began in 1905, as assistant manager of the Palais Royal. In 1908 Charlot joined the Folies-Bergere as business manager. 
In 1909, Charlot married the English dancer Florence Gladman (1891-1956); they had two children. That same year he joined the theatrical agents Sherek and Braff, shortly afterwards opening the firm's New York office. In 1910 he opened his own agency in Paris, and was soon supplying revue and music-hall talent -- notably the 'femme fatale' Gaby Deslys -- to the huge Alhambra Theatre in Leicester Square, London. Under the wing of actor-entrepreneur George Grossmith the younger, he became manager (briefly co-manager, with Montague Leveaux) at the Alhambra, where between 1912 and 1914 his spectacular shows, adapting the gossipy conventions of French revue for English sensibilities, duelled ably with the immense, American-style revues of Albert de Courville. Charlot quickly influenced the British stage, importing the scenic artists Marc Henri and Laverdet and the work of couturiers Paul Poiret, Jean Patou, and Lucien Lelong, as well as identifying bright new performing talents such as Beatrice Lillie, destined for four decades of fame as 'the funniest woman on earth'. 
The surprising 1914 success of one of Charles Cochran's bare-bones revues helped convince Charlot that the genre's immediate future lay in taking audiences' minds off the war with humour, panache, economy, and a non-intrusive intimacy. At smaller houses -- notably the Vaudeville -- he gradually made intimate revue his own: aside from undefinable 'style', the Charlot form featured a small orchestra, a chorus of no more than eight who could sing, dance, and play sketches, no more than six principals, a reliance upon evocative lighting rather than opulent settings, and plenty of bright, topical 'blackout' playlets of 5-7 minutes. Charlot soon developed the future stars of the British musical stage -- Lillie, Gertrude Lawrence, Jack Buchanan, Phyllis Monkman, Jack Hulbert, Jessie Matthews -- as well as sketch-writers Ronald Jeans and Dion Titheradge and composers Ivor Novello and Philip Braham. The lengthy run of 'Buzz Buzz' (1918-20) confirmed Charlot as a genius of revue. 

'A to Z' (1921) and 'London Calling' (1923, the first revue whose songs and sketches were largely written by Noel Coward) were more skilled and sophisticated. It was characteristic of Charlot's patriarchal approach that, having first failed Coward at an audition, he incorporated a Coward song into a 1918 revue and, after the young man had begun to make a playwriting name, assigned Jeans, by now a safe pair of hands, to work with him on 'London Calling'. In 1922, the year of his naturalization as a British subject, Charlot co-produced London's first publicly staged cabaret. A tall, beguiling man who preferred to spend money on gracious living -- particularly Lanson champagne -- rather than salaries, Charlot momentarily solved the problem of losing his stars to higher bidders by fusing the best bits of earlier shows and taking Lillie, Lawrence, and Buchanan to New York, where 'Charlot's London Revue' opened in January 1924. 
The impact of 'Charlot's Revue' was immediate and historic. In America the gigantic revues perfected by Florenz Ziegfeld did not survive the decade. American success made 'Charlot's Revue' the toast of London. But Charlot was unable to build upon his success; there followed a series of impoverishing American set-backs. A new version of 'Charlot's London Revue' in early 1926 foundered on a tour, and later that year a disastrous lapse of judgement paired Charlot's lighthearted approach with that of the raunchiest of American producers, Earl Carroll. In 1928, back in England, his fortunes briefly rallied with radio's first revue, 'Charlot's Hour'; its postbag (24,000 letters at its closing) was the largest so far in the BBC's short history. Although later ventures, including the experimental musical play 'Wonder Bar' (1930), were critically praised, Charlot's moment had passed; he briefly worked for Alexander Korda's film company and took bankruptcy in 1931. 
In 1933 Charlot's comeback revues recaptured the old genial spirit. Another radio series was well received in England and France. But the general theatrical depression of the mid-1930s forced him into a degrading sequence of semi-nude 'non-stop revues'. In debt and in poor health, Charlot, an imperious man (his disciple Robert Nesbitt called him 'magisterial') whose confidence often faltered, left Britain for good in 1937, and travelled to southern California, where he was convinced he could start a new career. His timing was unusually poor; an even more intimate form of revue, created by Herbert Farjeon and Norman Marshall -- its chorus removed, its orchestra replaced by a piano, and its satire sharpened -- was under way at the Little Theatre and the Gate. Thus renewed, British revue prospered for the next two decades. 
After an unsatisfying stint as technical adviser for Paramount Pictures, Charlot enlisted the Hollywood 'British colony' and a host of American film stars for 'Charlot's War Relief Revue' (1940). This success led nowhere and Charlot turned to teaching. Acting as compere for his 'revuettes' in a tiny theatre on Sunset Boulevard, he was 'spotted' by one of his own stage discoveries, now a successful director, who persuaded him to take up motion picture acting. Between 1941 and 1954 Charlot, who became an American citizen in 1944, appeared in more than three dozen films, often uncredited and usually as an all-purpose European. Perhaps his most memorable role was the fearsomely condemning cardinal in 'The Song of Bernadette' (1941). He continued to repackage his material in the hope of making a theatrical comeback or television debut. He had completed a book of reminiscences and was working with Rowland Leigh on a musical comedy script when he died in Hollywood on 20 May 1956; he was buried there on 25 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 32374


Charoux, Siegfried Joseph (1896-1967), sculptor, was born at Koppstrasse 2, Vienna, Austria, on 15 November 1896, the only son of Josef Kinich (1860-1916?), a civil engineer and former cadet (corporal) in the Austrian army, and Anna Buchta (1855-1929), 'nee' Charous, widow of Johann Buchta and a dressmaker of Czech origin. Until 1914 Siegfried used Buchta as his surname; from 1914 he used the name Charous, which he changed to Charoux in 1926. He attended elementary and secondary schools in Vienna and was called up to serve in the Austro-Hungarian army at the beginning of 1915; after being wounded twice, he was invalided out in April 1917. A successful operation restored his paralysed right arm and saved his future as a sculptor. Two years later, after having completed some private lessons with Josef Heu, he attempted unsuccessfully to gain admission to the Hochschule fur Angewandte Kunst in Vienna, where the Austrian sculptor Anton Hanak was teaching. In 1922 Charoux was admitted to the master class of the Akademie der Bildenden Kunste in Vienna under Hans Bitterlich, and remained there until 1924. At the same time he was engaged as a political cartoonist. On 18 December 1926 he married Margarethe Treibl (1895-1985), a sales representative in the textile business; they had no children. 
Charoux began work in the optical firm Goerz, where he had to affix lenses to telescopes with wax, and this led to his making figures in wax. He was a man of extreme political sensitivity, for which he found an outlet in the cartoons he made for the 'Arbeiter-Zeitung' from 1924 to 1928. During his time as a cartoonist he used the pseudonym Chat Roux. His first exhibition was in 1927; he executed the memorial to Robert Blum (1927, Vienna), the Matteotti memorial (1929, Vienna), and the memorial to Professor Josef Herzig (unveiled 1935, University of Vienna). In the early 1930s he exhibited works in Germany, Belgium, and Italy, as well as Austria, and from 1930 to 1935 he undertook various commissions for municipal buildings in Vienna. In 1930 he won an international competition, which had eighty-three entrants, for a monument to the dramatist Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. The bronze statue, completed in 1931 and unveiled in 1935, was destroyed by the Nazis, who melted it down for armaments because of their hatred of any unusual or unconventional art. (After the Second World War he returned to Austria from England to make another.) 
Charoux settled in England in September 1935. His early preference for the art of Auguste Rodin, expressed in his bronze group 'Man with Lamb' (Art Institute of Chicago), gave way to his enthusiasm for the more tranquil qualities of Greek and Gothic sculpture at about the time of his arrival in England, where he seems to have undergone a spiritual rebirth which is clearly apparent in his work. England freed him as an artist and as a human being and he was able to explore and develop his art without fear of political persecution. An increased monumentality and an appearance of tranquillity is visible in the terracotta figure of 'Youth: Standing Boy', which was acquired under the terms of the Chantrey bequest for the Tate Gallery, London, in 1948. This work was carried out in a technique, once used by the Etruscans, of building up a hollow shell in terracotta without the reinforcement of an armature. As in his technique, Charoux was apostolically and artistically catholic about his ideas: 'My tolerance knows no limit', he once wrote to a friend, 'the fruits painted may be square, and so can be the arses, but they must be alive and carry a message' (translation from Charoux's letter to the editor, 'Tagebuch'). 
The significant commission of a terracotta figure for the novelist Hannah Cohen's garden at Durford Heath, Petersfield, Hampshire, established Charoux's career in England. He was naturalized a British subject on 16 November 1946 following his showing of a bronze bust of Sir Stafford Cripps at the Royal Academy summer exhibition in that year. In 1938 he executed stone carvings for the new school of anatomy and the engineering laboratory at Cambridge. He contributed a monumental group, 'The Islanders', to the Festival of Britain exhibition at the South Bank, London, in 1951, after which he completed nine figures, each 8 feet tall, for Salters' Hall in London, representing Manual and Spiritual Labour. His best-known work is the cycle of sculptures in London entitled 'Civilization': 'The Judge' for the law courts, 'Motor Cyclist' for the Shell building, and 'The Cellist' for the area outside the Royal Festival Hall. He contributed to open-air exhibitions of sculptures in Battersea Park, London, in 1948, 1951, 1954, and 1960, and in Holland Park, London, in 1957. 
Charoux was elected an ARA in 1949 and an academician in 1956. In 1948 he received the highest award for sculpture of the city of Vienna and in 1958 was made an honorary professor of the Republic of Austria. He was described as a typical Austrian in appearance: fair-haired and blue-eyed, heroic in build, and with a magnificent head like a much more amiable version of Beethoven. Almost always he wore a faded old sculptor's smock, the rolled-up sleeves revealing a massive pair of forearms and hands. He seemed happy so long as he was making something -- sculpture, pictures, pots, a new kiln, bread. (Jugged hare was one of his special culinary accomplishments.) He loved a good argument among friends and could be devastatingly funny, manipulating his enormous fingers to emphasize a point and wielding a shaky knowledge of English with wit and wisdom. 
Charoux died at Manor House Hospital, Hendon, London, on 26 April 1967 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 1 May. His ashes were interred at Sulz im Wienerwald, near Vienna, then in 1977 transferred to the Zentralfriedhof in Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 32375


Charrington, Frederick Nicholas (1850-1936), philanthropist and temperance reformer, was born in London on 4 February 1850, the eldest son of Frederick Charrington, a brewer, and his wife, Louisa, the daughter of Huxley Griffith of Stepney. After two terms at Marlborough College, in 1864, he left and a year later was sent to Brighton College (1865-7). On leaving school he travelled on the continent, and afterwards went into a brewery at Windsor to learn the details of the trade. A place was then found for him in his father's firm of Charrington & Co., but in 1870 he relinquished it in order to take up the cause of Christianity and temperance in the district surrounding the brewery in the East End. 
Charrington's action created a considerable impression: at a meeting of the Band of Hope over which he presided there was a crowded audience. The early meetings of the Tower Hamlets mission which he founded were held in a tent, but his efforts met with success: a conference hall was built, and later (in 1886) the great assembly hall in Mile End Road to hold 5000 people. Here every Sunday Charrington provided a free tea for 700 hungry men and women of the district, and in 1909 George V, then prince of Wales, gave the first of an annual series of free teas. 
Charrington's ardent advocacy of the causes which he championed provoked considerable opposition. During his campaigns against the London music-halls in the 1870s and 1880s he was frequently assaulted and twice arrested for harassing music-hall patrons. In 1885 he was found guilty of slander and libel of a music-hall owner, and an injunction was issued to prevent him from distributing tracts outside Lusby's Music Hall. At times he allowed his fervent enthusiasm to carry him to fantastic lengths. On 18 May 1915, when the House of Commons was discussing the report of a select committee on pensions, Charrington, wearing evening dress, an overcoat, and a silk hat, dashed into the house from the members' lobby, seized the mace from the speaker's table, and began to protest against the drinking bar inside the lobby being used by members. He was arrested, but released after two hours' detention. 
Charrington was one of the original members (1889-95) of the London county council, a member of the old Mile End guardians and vestry, and later of the Stepney borough council. As a member of the LCC he opposed all applications for liquor licences. In the early twentieth century he purchased Osea Island (off the coast of Essex), which he made a temperance seaside and health resort. Charrington died, unmarried, at 3 Devonshire Terrace, Marylebone, on 2 January 1936. He left his body to the medical school of the London Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 32376


Charteris, Archibald Hamilton (1835-1908), Church of Scotland minister and biblical scholar, born at the schoolhouse in Wamphray, Dumfriesshire, on 13 December 1835, was the eldest son of John Charteris, the parish schoolmaster, and his wife, Jean Hamilton. From his parish school he passed to Edinburgh University, where he graduated BA in 1852 and MA in 1853. Having entered the Church of Scotland ministry he was presented to the parish of St Quivox, Ayrshire, and ordained in 1858, but in the following year became minister of New Abbey parish in Kirkcudbrightshire (where he initiated a movement for the preservation of the ruins of Sweetheart Abbey), of which James Hamilton, his maternal uncle, had been minister from 1813 to 1858. While there he wrote the biography of James Robertson (1802-1869), founder of the endowment scheme of the Church of Scotland, whose eager and energetic churchmanship Charteris inherited. The biography was published in Edinburgh in 1863 and abridged as 'A Faithful Churchman' in the 'Church of Scotland Guild Library' series in 1897. In 1863 Charteris succeeded John Caird as minister of Park Church, Glasgow, where his preaching and his work among the young attracted attention. On 24 November 1863 he married Catherine Morice ['see 'Charteris, Catherine Morice (1837-1918)], daughter of Sir Alexander Anderson, lord provost of Aberdeen; they had no children. 
After some time spent abroad on account of ill health, Charteris became, in 1868, professor of biblical criticism in Edinburgh University, retaining the post until 1898. He was strongly conservative, being mainly concerned with the unity, catholicity, and authority of the 'New Testament' and little concerned with more recent biblical criticism. His most notable work, 'Canonicity: a Collection of Early Testimonies to the Canonical Books of the New Testament' (1880), based on Joannes Kirchhofer's 'Quellensammlung' (1844), was commended by Adolf Hilgenfeld, Frederic Godet, and William Sanday. He also published 'The New Testament Scriptures: their Claims, History, and Authority' (Croall lecture, 1882) and his Baird lecturer for 1887, 'The Church of Christ: its Life and Work' (1905). 
Charteris always retained the outlook of a parish minister. He was mainly responsible for a renewal of vitality within the national church, and achieved a marked revival of practical Christian effort and a sense of Christian mission, both local and national. His reputation as 'the gentlest man in the assembly' (Burleigh, 391) served to persuade the general assembly to adopt and support his many schemes. He was the founder, and from 1871 to 1894 convener, of the general assembly's Christian life and work committee, which inaugurated many new forms of Christian enterprise: under his guidance it originated the Young Men's Guild and the Young Women's Guild. He also revived the order of deaconesses, taking a lead in founding at Edinburgh the Deaconess Institution and Training Home, and the Deaconess Hospital. He recognized the importance of contemporary means and styles of communication in bringing information regarding the work of the church into the homes of its people, and in January 1879 started, and was the first editor of, 'Life and Work', the monthly magazine of the Church of Scotland. The first issue sold 76,000 copies, with the circulation rising to 270,000 in the 1930s; in the 1990s it had an average circulation of 60,000 copies. He originated and promoted Advance, a scheme to rebuild the Church of Scotland's foreign missions, which had been left with only one agent after the Disruption of 1843; it met with much success, new mission fields opening in Africa (Blantyre, 1874) and China (Ichang (Yichang), 1878). Charteris also rendered conspicuous service as vice-convener of the general assembly's committee for the abolition of patronage and of the endowment committee, and promoted the cause of church reunion within Scotland. His leadership, which contributed greatly to the recovery of the national church in the difficult decades after the Disruption, was recognized when he was elected moderator of the general assembly in 1892. 
Charteris was one of the royal chaplains in Scotland from 1870, and received the honorary degrees of DD (1868) and LLD (1898) from Edinburgh University. After some years of ill health he died on 24 April 1908 at 58 Melville Street, Edinburgh, and was buried on 28 April at Wamphray. The Charteris Memorial Church (now Kirk o' Field) was erected in the Pleasance, Edinburgh, in 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 32377


Chase, Drummond Percy (1820-1902), college head, born on 14 September 1820 at Chateau de Saubruit, near St Omer, was the second son of John Woodford Chase, an army paymaster, of Cosgrave, Northamptonshire. Matriculating at Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1838, he became an open scholar of Oriel College in 1839, and obtained first-class honours in classics in 1841. He graduated BA in 1841, proceeding MA 1844 and DD in 1880, and was ordained deacon in 1844 and priest in 1849. He was president of the Oxford Union in 1842. Elected fellow of Oriel College on 1 April 1842, just when the question of John Henry Newman's relation to the Anglican church was at its acutest phase, he retained his fellowship until his death, sixty years afterwards. 
Chase was tutor of Oriel from 1847 to 1849 and again from 1860 to 1866. He was senior proctor of the university in 1853, and printed his Latin speech on leaving office on 26 April 1854. He was a select preacher before the university in 1860, and was vicar of St Mary's, Oxford, from 1855 to 1863 and again from 1876 to 1878. When he began his duties as college tutor, he took the unusual step of printing the substance of his principal course of lectures for the use of his pupils and other Oxford passmen. This was an edition, with translation and notes, of Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics' (1847; 4th edn, 1877). 
In 1848 Chase became vice-principal of St Mary Hall, Oxford, and on his appointment as principal in 1857 set himself vigorously to reform the place. He would admit no idle or extravagant candidate who was seeking to migrate from a college. But he welcomed diligent and frugal men, whose poverty excluded them from expensive colleges. On 28 June 1859 he married Caroline Matilda Northcote (died 1904), but was allowed to retain his Oriel fellowship, to which a celibacy restriction was attached, by virtue of his headship of St Mary Hall. As a result of the 1881 statutes of the university commissioners, on Chase's death the hall merged with Oriel College, with which it was connected locally and through various individuals, after an independent existence of nearly 600 years. 
Between 1854 and 1881, Chase published frequent pamphlets on academic questions, and many occasional sermons preached before the university. He resisted in 1854, in the interests of poor professional men in country places, the abolition by the university commission of all local and other special qualifications for scholarships and fellowships. In 1870 he gave evidence to a select committee of the House of Lords in defence of religious tests. A don of the old school, courteous, gentle, and kindly, brimming over with quiet fun and quaint Oxford anecdotes, he died at St Mary Hall on 27 June 1902. He was buried in Holywell cemetery, Oxford. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32378


Chase, Frederic Henry (1853-1925), bishop of Ely, the only son of the Revd Charles Frederic Chase, rector of St Andrew by the Wardrobe and St Anne Blackfriars, and his wife, Susan, daughter of John Alliston, was born at St Andrew's rectory, Blackfriars, on 21 February 1853. He was educated at King's College School, London, and proceeded as a scholar to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated as eighth classic in the tripos of 1876. He was ordained deacon in 1876 and priest in 1877. In that year he married Charlotte Elizabeth (died 1928), daughter of the Revd George Armitage, vicar of St Luke's, Gloucester; they had three sons and one daughter. 
Chase gained pastoral experience as curate of Sherborne, Dorset (1876-9), and of St Michael's, Cambridge (1879-84). From 1881 to 1890 he was lecturer in theology at Pembroke College, Cambridge, and at Christ's College from 1893 to 1901. He was also principal of the Cambridge Clergy Training School from 1887 to 1901. In the latter year he was elected president of Queens' College, and appointed Norrisian professor of divinity at Cambridge, a post which he held until 1905. He was vice-chancellor of the university from 1902 to 1904. 
When J. Armitage Robinson founded in 1891 the theological series entitled 'Texts and Studies', Chase contributed to the first volume a study, 'The Lord's prayer in the early church'. In 1900 he wrote for Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Bible' three important articles -- on St Peter (Simon), and on the two Petrine epistles. Chase's Hulsean lectures, 'The Credibility of the Book of the Acts', delivered in 1900 and 1901, were published in 1902 with important additions. These lectures are, perhaps, the most attractive of his works. His heart was in the 'Acts of the Apostles', and had leisure been granted him he would have edited the book for the 'International Critical Commentary'. Even as bishop of Ely he continued to contribute articles on 'New Testament' subjects to the 'Journal of Theological Studies'. 
Chase was appointed bishop of Ely in 1905, continuing to be president of Queens' College until 1906. He threw himself into his new work with great energy. His diocese was at first very large, including Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, and the western half of Suffolk (565 benefices). But in 1914 Bedfordshire was transferred to the diocese of St Albans, and west Suffolk to the new diocese of St Edmundsbury and Ipswich. 
The bishop of Ely, however, still retained the oversight of 300 benefices and 360 clergy. Moreover, the revision of the 'Book of Common Prayer' was in progress, and an important share in the work fell to Chase, who was trusted both for his learning and for his cautious judgement. In his primary visitation in 1910 he gave as his opinion that it was 'advisable that the Church should go forward slowly, cautiously, and deliberately in this confessedly difficult and anxious task' (F. H. Chase, 'A Charge Delivered... on the Occasion of his Primary Visitation', 1910). Besides taking his share in the work as it came before the convocations, Chase served on the three committees which revised respectively the lectionary (of this he was chairman), the translation of the prayer book psalter, and the office for holy baptism; he also served on a fourth committee, which drew up a 'Form and manner of making deaconesses'. He took a special interest in the ministrations of women. His labour was not lost through the rejection by the House of Commons of the prayer book measure of 1927-8. The revised psalter was taken into the revised prayer book of the Church of Ireland, while the new baptismal office and the service for the institution of deaconesses were both used in England. 
In the much debated question of an alternative office for holy communion, Chase again showed his Christian statesmanship. His speech in the upper house of the convocation of Canterbury on 11 February 1920 is a noteworthy utterance. He concluded that the new service was 'true to liturgical principles, and to the thought and doctrine of the present prayer book' ('Chronicle of the Convocation of Canterbury', sessions of February and April 1920, 73-5). 
Chase did not live to see the rejection of the book on which he had bestowed so much labour. In 1924 he resigned his see and retired to Woking, where he sought a renewal of his health. He died at the Normanhurst Hotel, Bexhill, Sussex, on 23 September 1925, leaving behind him the reputation of a learned theologian, a conscientious administrator, and a faithful friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 32379


Chase, Marian Emma (1844-1905), watercolour painter, was born on 18 April 1844 at 62 Upper Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square, London, the second of the three daughters of John C. Chase (1810-1879), watercolour painter, and his second wife, Georgiana Ann Harris ('b'. 'c'.1818). Her sister Jessie ('fl'. 1885-6) was also an artist. Marian Chase was educated at a private school in Ham, near Richmond. Her father, who was a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, taught her perspective and watercolour painting; Margaret Gillies gave her instruction in figure drawing; and she enjoyed the friendship and advice of Henry Warren, president of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, E. H. Wehnert, G. W. Mote, Henry Tidey, and other artists. 
In early life Chase devoted much time to illuminating, but it is as a painter in watercolour of flowers, fruit, and still life that she became best known; she was praised for careful detail, delicacy of touch, and effective use of colour. She also painted a few landscapes, and towards the end of her life exhibited picturesque flower gardens and detailed interiors with figures. She worked occasionally in oil. Marian Chase exhibited at the Liverpool Academy (1865), Royal Academy (1866-77), Dudley Gallery (1866-71), Society of Female Artists (1866-92), Society of British Artists (1868-71), Royal Hibernian Academy (1870-98), and Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1884). She was also represented at the Universal Exhibition of 1871, the Paris Exhibition of 1889, and at exhibitions in Melbourne, Australia, and Philadelphia, USA. The vast majority of her paintings however -- a total of 275 -- appeared at the Institute of Painters in Water Colours (1875-1905); she was elected an associate of the institute on 22 March 1875, and became a full member in 1879. In 1888 the Royal Botanical Society awarded her a silver medal. Among her most celebrated paintings were 'Neglecting her Work' (exh. International Exhibition, 1871), 'Nature and Art' (exh. RA, 1873), 'Springtime' (exh. RA, 1874), and 'Summertime' (exh. Institute of Painters in Water Colours, 1875). 'Music, Literature and Art' (exh. RHA, 1886), priced at $100, was an ambitious work. Apart from a tour abroad with her father about 1876, Marian Chase worked entirely in England. Having occupied various addresses in Charlotte Street, London, in 1880 the family moved to Haddon Lodge, Quex Road, and in 1886 to 18 Christchurch Road, Brondesbury, where Marian Chase worked in a large studio. After a 'quiet and uneventful life' ('St John's Wood, Kilburn and Hampstead Advertiser', 29 Aug 1901, 5) she died, unmarried, at 285 Elgin Avenue, Maida Vale, from heart failure, following an operation, on 15 March 1905; she was buried on 20 March in St Pancras cemetery, Finchley. The Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and Aberdeen Art Gallery and Museum hold examples of Chase's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 32380


Chase, William St Lucien (1856-1908), army officer, eldest son of Captain Richard Henry Chase of the control department of the War Office, was born in St Lucia, West Indies, on 21 August 1856. He was educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and commissioned lieutenant in the 15th foot on 10 September 1875, joining the Bombay staff corps on 31 May 1878. He served in the Second Anglo-Afghan War, taking part in the defence of Kandahar. During the sortie from Kandahar on 16 August 1880 against the village of Deh Khoja, he and Private T. E. Ashford (Royal Fusiliers) rescued a wounded soldier, carrying him over 200 yards under fire. For this they both were awarded the Victoria Cross (4 October 1881) and were mentioned in dispatches. 
Chase served with the Zhob valley expedition in 1884 as deputy assistant quartermaster-general, and was again mentioned in dispatches. From 1 November 1882 to 10 December 1887 he was deputy assistant adjutant-general, Bombay. Promoted captain on 10 September 1886, he was appointed on 28 August 1889 wing commander of the 28th Bombay native infantry (Pioneers). He took part in the Chin-Lushai expedition in 1889-90, and was mentioned in dispatches. Promoted major on 10 September 1895, he served on the north-west frontier in 1897-8 against the Mohmands, and in the Tirah campaign of 1897-8, taking part in the capture of the Sampagha Pass, in the operations at and around Datoi, in the action of 24 November 1897, and in the operations in the Bara valley, 7-11 December 1897. 
On 10 June 1899 Chase became commander of the 28th Bombay native infantry, with the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1901 he married Dorothy, daughter of Charles Edward Steele, district magistrate of Hyderabad. He was nominated CB in 1903. Later he became assistant adjutant-general, Quetta division, and was on leave when promoted to command the Fyzabad brigade. He returned to Quetta, where he died of brain disease on 30 June 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 32381


Chatfield, (Alfred) Ernle Montacute, first Baron Chatfield (1873-1967), naval officer, was born on 27 September 1873 in Southsea, the fourth child and only son of Admiral Alfred John Chatfield (1831-1910) and his wife, Louisa, eldest daughter of Thomas Faulconer, of Hampstead. Much of his early childhood was spent in naval circles, first in Malta when his father commanded 'Thunderer' in the Mediterranean Fleet and later at Devonport and Pembroke Dock during the years that his father held shore appointments in those establishments. He was educated at St Andrew's School, Tenby, and in 1886 passed the examination for entry into the 'Britannia', joining her at Dartmouth a few days before his thirteenth birthday. On passing out in 1888 he joined the 'Iron Duke', a barque-rigged battleship in the Channel Fleet, and a few months later was appointed to the 'Cleopatra', a new corvette bound for the South American station. She also was square-rigged with auxiliary steam engines and during the young Chatfield's early years in the navy he had much experience of sail and sail drill. Fortunately it did not last long enough to indoctrinate him into the die-hard resistance to change which so dominated the Royal Navy of the late nineteenth century. 
As a lieutenant Chatfield specialized in gunnery during a period when the need for developing a modern navy suitable to the times was widely recognized as paramount, and when the specialist, particularly in gunnery and torpedoes, was usually starred for advancement. In 1899, when he took up his first sea-going appointment as a gunnery specialist in the 'Caesar', the navy was undergoing a long overdue surge of feeling towards modern appliances and modern techniques. Stimulated by the advanced naval doctrines of Sir John Fisher and, particularly in the art and practice of gunnery by Captain (later Admiral Sir) Percy Scott, Chatfield was swept up in this surge and became an enthusiastic and, in his specialization, a brilliant supporter of any and every technical advance which could add to the efficiency of the navy. These were the years of the naval building competition with Germany, and the knowledge of a new navy building and training hard on the other side of the North Sea acted as a spur to most of the younger naval officers to dedicate themselves to their profession. Chatfield was undoubtedly one of these. 
In 1909 Chatfield married Lillian Emma St John (died 1977), daughter of Major George L. Matthews; they had two daughters, one of whom died in 1943, and one son. In 1909 he was promoted captain and appointed to command the 'Albemarle' in the Atlantic Fleet, in which one of his fellow captains was David Beatty. He first became Beatty's flag captain in the 'Aboukir' for six weeks during the manoeuvres of 1912, and when Beatty was appointed in 1913 to command the battle-cruiser squadron, flying his flag in the 'Lion', he again took Chatfield with him as his flag captain with the additional responsibility of organizing and training the squadron in gunnery. Thus he took part in the three principal actions fought in the North Sea, those of Heligoland Bight (28 August 1914), Dogger Bank (24 January 1915), and Jutland (31 May 1916). The 'Lion' was heavily hit at both the Dogger Bank and the Jutland battles, sustaining considerable damage, due in part to the faulty distribution of fire of the battle cruisers which in each action left a German opponent unengaged, a surprising lapse in a gunnery officer of Chatfield's calibre. Chatfield remained in the 'Lion' until November 1916, when Beatty relieved Sir John Jellicoe as commander-in-chief, Grand Fleet, and again Chatfield went with him as flag captain and chief of staff first in the 'Iron Duke' and later in the 'Queen Elizabeth'. 
After the war, in June 1919, Chatfield (who was knighted KCMG the same year) went to the Admiralty as fourth sea lord, becoming assistant chief of staff in February 1920, shortly after Beatty had taken up his appointment as first sea lord in November 1919. As such he had an important part to play in the negotiations for the treaty for the limitation of naval armaments, the end result of the Washington conference of 1921-2. He had been promoted rear-admiral in August 1920 and, when Beatty left the conference in November 1921 to look after naval affairs at home, Chatfield became the senior naval delegate in Washington, a position which involved him in long technical discussions on the levels of armament and displacement of the future naval ships of all the maritime nations. This introduction to international and political negotiations on naval affairs, allied to his extensive experience of senior command at sea and of the administrative machine in the Admiralty, gave him an unrivalled background against which to build his future career. Already he had very clear views of the future shape and organization of the navy, and was clearly marked for promotion to high office. He was appointed KCB in 1922 (and promoted GCB in 1934). 
After two years in command of the 3rd cruiser squadron in the Mediterranean, Chatfield returned to the Admiralty in 1925 as third sea lord and controller of the navy, a position which he did not relish. As controller he was responsible for the material development and supply of the navy, whereas his chief interest lay more in organization and in tactical and strategical thought. At the same time it was a particularly difficult period, hedged in as it was by the limitations on size and armament agreed at the Washington conference, by the 'ten year rule' laid down by the Treasury, on which all service estimates were to be based, and also hindered by various Treasury committees set up to enforce the deflationary fiscal policies of those years, and by severe disagreement with the United States over the number of cruisers required by Britain for the defence of the empire. Chatfield was the main driving force in resisting American demands for a reduction in British cruiser strength, and it was his insistence, against strong Treasury and, indeed, cabinet, opposition to his views, which finally won the day. He was, at the same time, brought into the unhappy dispute with the Air Ministry over control of the Fleet Air Arm, and also had to concern himself with the decision to build up Singapore as a defended naval base in the Far East. He remained controller for three and a half years, being promoted vice-admiral in 1926. 
On leaving the Admiralty, Chatfield hoisted his flag in 1929 in the 'Nelson' as commander-in-chief, Atlantic Fleet, and a year later was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet, having in the meantime been promoted admiral (1930). He flew his flag in the 'Queen Elizabeth', the same ship in which he had ended the First World War as Beatty's flag captain. During his two years in the Mediterranean as commander-in-chief he exercised the fleet many times in night fighting, filling a large gap in naval training the need for which had been demonstrated in 1916, when the German high seas fleet had been allowed to escape from possible destruction in the battle of Jutland. Night fighting exercises had been first instituted in 1921, but in a desultory fashion, and it was largely as a result of Chatfield's enthusiasm in the Mediterranean that it took its proper and overdue place in fleet training. He also experimented with carriers and naval aircraft in an attempt to introduce a viable tactical doctrine for their use in battle; this had little success partly because of the low priority which was given to the development of the aircraft-carrier and to naval aircraft under Air Ministry control. 
In 1933, on the expiration of his term of command, Chatfield realized his great ambition by returning to the Admiralty as first sea lord. Since the limitations on naval shipbuilding imposed by the Washington and London (1930) treaties were due to expire in 1936, he set about preparing a new building programme which would restore the navy to something like the power it had formerly enjoyed before the cuts imposed on it had reduced its operational strength. At the same time, determined to rectify the weakness which his Mediterranean experiences in carrier and aircraft exercises had revealed, he renewed the battle with the Air Ministry for naval control of the Fleet Air Arm. In this he was successful when, in 1937, the cabinet upheld the Admiralty's case. 
As a gunnery specialist, Chatfield had always been a firm supporter of the battleship as the dominant weapon at sea, and there were those who feared, on his appointment as first sea lord, that too great a proportion of the money voted for naval rearmament would be spent on the construction of these expensive ships to the detriment of cruisers and, particularly, of destroyers and escort vessels. The experience gained in the U-boat campaign of the First World War, and the technical advances made in submarine construction and torpedoes since then, meant that there were many naval officers who considered that in the next war (a war which, during Chatfield's term of office, seemed increasingly likely to be fought against Hitler's Germany), the decisive battle would be fought against submarines in the Atlantic. Because of this, they felt that during naval rearmament priority should be given to the building of an adequate convoy escort force for anti-submarine warfare. In the event, a large programme of new battleship construction was authorized, and it was only after four years of war, and grievous losses of merchant tonnage, that the escort forces were at last able to assert a mastery over the U-boats. Nevertheless, the fact that the navy, throughout the first three years of the war, was able to meet and discharge the heavy commitments which it was called upon to undertake, though with very little to spare, was due largely to Chatfield's drive. His term of office as first sea lord was twice extended, and he left the Admiralty in August 1938, having been promoted admiral of the fleet in 1935 and raised to the peerage as first Baron Chatfield in the coronation honours list of 1937. 
After leaving the Admiralty, Chatfield served as chairman of the expert committee on Indian defence (1938-9), and while still in India received an invitation from the prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, to join the cabinet as minister for co-ordination of defence, in succession to T. W. H. Inskip. He started this work in Whitehall in February 1939 at a time when it was certain that war with a rearmed Germany could not be long delayed. He was sworn of the privy council on taking up the appointment, having been admitted to the Order of Merit in the previous month. But the essential pragmatism of politics was entirely foreign to one who had been brought up since youth to the decision-taking character of naval life, and he was constantly irked by his lack of power to press ahead in his own way with the rapid build-up, which war demanded, of the navy, army, and air force. As he himself wrote in his memoirs, when he found himself after the declaration of war a member of the war cabinet, he was little more than 'a fifth wheel to the coach' (Chatfield, 'The Navy and Defence'), but his malaise in political life went deeper than that. He was apt to be intolerant of politicians, perhaps not understanding that they, like him, also had their particular spheres of responsibility for which they were answerable to parliament. His disillusionment with the political side of service life was also exacerbated by the fact that, although he was an admiral of the fleet, he now had no say in the chiefs of staff committee which, as first sea lord, he had grown used to dominate. He was asked to resign in March 1940 and his office was abolished. He then turned his undoubted abilities to less irksome occupations, of which the most important was the chairmanship of the committee on evacuation of casualties in London region hospitals. 
Chatfield was one of the most able and dedicated naval officers of his generation, a man of great intellect, force of character, and complete integrity. In stature he was small, with little of the traditional look of an admiral about him, and he was austere with little sense of humour. He reached the top of his profession, deservedly, through hard work, an intense devotion to duty, and an unbending resolution to carry into effect the policies he considered necessary to transform the hidebound Grand Fleet of 1914-18 into the flexible instrument so ably used by the fleet commanders of 1939-45, a transformation as successful as it was necessary. He received many decorations and honours in his life, both British and foreign, which included honorary degrees from both Oxford and Cambridge universities and appointment to the Order of Merit in 1939. 
Chatfield died at his home, the Small House, Farnham Common, on 15 November 1967 and was succeeded in the barony by his son, Ernle David Lewis ('b'. 1917). 
Peter Kemp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32382


Chatterjee, Sir Atul Chandra (1874-1955), administrator in India, was born at Malda in Lower Bengal on 24 November 1874, the fourth son and sixth child of Rai Sahib Hem Chandra Chatterjee of Santipur, an engineer in the Bengal public works department, and his wife, Srimati Nistarini Debi. He was educated at Hare School, Calcutta, and Presidency College, Calcutta, where he graduated BA in 1892. In 1893 he was awarded a government of India scholarship and entered King's College, Cambridge, where he took a second class in history in 1895. The following year he headed the list of successful candidates in the open competition for the Indian Civil Service, and during his probationary year at Cambridge won the Bhaunagar medal. 
In 1897 Chatterjee returned to India, and was posted to the United Provinces, where he remained for nine years in district administration. Also in 1897 he married Vina Mookerjee (died 1905), with whom he had two daughters. A period of special duty, during which he conducted a comprehensive survey and produced a report on the industries of his province, was followed in 1912 by his appointment as registrar of co-operative credit societies for the United Provinces. In 1917 Sir James Meston selected him for the post of revenue secretary in the province, and this was followed in 1919 by his appointment as chief secretary under the lieutenant-governor, Sir Harcourt Butler. He was sent in the same year to Washington as the representative of India at the first international labour conference, and attendance at the Geneva conference of 1921 was followed by his appointment as secretary to the government of India in the newly constituted department of industries under Sir Thomas Holland. In 1923 Chatterjee himself became the member of the executive council responsible for the department, and he was largely responsible for the labour legislation initiated and passed from 1922 onwards. On 30 April 1924 he married Gladys Mary (1883-1969), daughter of Captain William Barnard Broughton of the Dorsetshire regiment. She had been a member of the Indian educational service and an adviser to the government of India on issues of women's and child welfare. She was called to the bar in 1933. 
Towards the end of 1924 the viceroy, Lord Reading, offered Chatterjee the post of high commissioner for India in London. His wide administrative experience and intellectual gifts, combined with a ready adaptability to new demands and surroundings, made him an admirable choice for the post at a difficult point in its history. India House in Aldwych was built at Chatterjee's initiative to provide suitably spacious and dignified accommodation for the representative of the Indian government in London; it was formally opened by King George V in the summer of 1930. Chatterjee, who had been appointed KCIE in 1925, was appointed KCSI in 1930. The move to London provided him with an enlarged role in the international field: he represented India at six consecutive annual sessions of the international labour conference from 1924, and again in 1933. He was a member of the governing body of the International Labour Organization for five years (1926-31), its vice-president in 1932, and president in 1933. In 1927 he was unanimously elected president of the tenth international labour conference. He also served as a member of the Imperial Economic Committee (1925-31), represented India at the League of Nations assembly in 1925, and led the International Labour Organization delegation to the abortive world economic conference of 1933. He served the League of Nations as vice-president of the consultative economic committee, and as a member of the permanent central opium board and of the allocations committee. He was Indian delegate to the London naval conference of 1930. Confidence in his diplomatic gifts within imperial circles was marked by his appointment to lead the Indian delegation to the Ottawa conference of 1932. In 1933 he was promoted GCIE. Chatterjee's term of office as high commissioner ended in 1931. He was then appointed to the Council of India for the statutory period of five years. His last appointment, in 1942, was as adviser to the secretary of state for India, which he held until India became independent in 1947. 
Chatterjee served on the council of the Royal Society of Arts for twenty years, and was its chairman in 1939-40, the first Indian to hold this position. He was for many years vice-chairman of the council of the East India Association, and was also a member of the council of the Royal Asiatic Society. His intellectual interests were principally historical: he published 'A Short History of India' (1936) with W. H. Moreland, an Indian Civil Service colleague; 'The New India' (1948); and, with Sir Richard Burn, 'British Contributions to Indian Studies' (1943). He was a fellow of the University of Allahabad (1908) and an honorary LLD of Edinburgh (1921). 
Chatterjee sought to avoid political controversy, but lost no opportunity to advance his country's interests in the international field. In public he impressed by his sincerity and mastery of his subject; in private he was a man of simple tastes and abstemious habits. He died on 8 September 1955 at his home, 24 Motcombe Court, Bexhill, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 32383


Chauvel, Sir Henry George (1865-1945), army officer, was born on 16 April 1865, at Tabulum, New South Wales, the second son of Charles Henry Edward Chauvel (1833-1896), a grazier and cattle breeder, and his wife, Fanny Ada Mary (died 1916), daughter of Henry Kerrison James of Sydney. He was educated at Sydney and Toowoomba grammar schools. 
Chauvel hoped to follow a family tradition by joining the British army as soon as he had finished his schooling, but this intention was thwarted when the family farm suffered financial setback as a result of drought. Instead Chauvel undertook the management of one of his father's stations, as well as becoming an accomplished horseman. In 1888 the family moved to Darling Downs in Queensland. A change of career soon followed: in 1890 Chauvel was commissioned in the Queensland mounted infantry, and in 1896 appointed a captain in the Queensland permanent military forces. He travelled to Britain with a contingent for the celebration of Queen Victoria's jubilee in 1897, and spent a year training with the British army. 
Chauvel then served with distinction as an officer with Australian cavalry in the South African War, participating in the relief of Kimberley and the advance on Pretoria and even, in action at Vet River, taking possession of a hostile machine gun. He returned to Australia in 1901, was appointed to the command of a battalion of horse formed by the newly established commonwealth of Australia, and returned to South Africa just as the war was ending. He was appointed CMG and mentioned in dispatches. 
Having again returned to Australia Chauvel spent the next decade training mounted troops (the light horse). On 16 June 1906 he married Sybil Campbell Keith, daughter of George Keith Jopp. They had four children -- two sons who followed him in a military career, and two daughters, one of whom, Elyne Mitchell, became a well-known writer. From 1911 Chauvel was involved in setting up the system of compulsory military service for home defence, as well as participating in the establishment of the Royal Military College at Duntroon. In 1914 he was on his way to Britain to become Australian representative on the Imperial General Staff when the First World War broke out. He served at the War Office in London until December, while waiting to take up command of the 1st light horse brigade then on its way to Britain as part of the Australian Imperial Force. His inspections of the camps on Salisbury Plain led him to conclude that they would not be in a fit condition by the time the Australians arrived, and his representations influenced the decision -- which was to have noteworthy consequences -- to disembark them in Egypt. Chauvel joined them there. 
In April 1915 the Australian infantry participated in the invasion of the Gallipoli peninsula, only to be brought to a standstill by the terrain and the Turkish defenders. When the horsemen were called in as reinforcements, Chauvel and other officers prevailed on the authorities to send them as dismounted cavalry so as to preserve the integrity of their units. He arrived on the peninsula on 12 May and soon distinguished himself in command of some key sectors, maintaining contact with his troops and attending closely to the conditions of the trenches. Chauvel was appointed commander of a division in November, and oversaw its successful evacuation from the peninsula the following month. 
After returning to Egypt Chauvel was promoted major-general and offered command of a division then in the process of transferring to France. Instead he opted to stay as head of the newly formed Australian and New Zealand mounted division. In mid-1916 this force played a part in warding off Turkish attacks directed at the Suez Canal, including the operation at Romani on 4-5 August in which Chauvel contributed significantly to the plan whereby the Turks were allowed to come on and then struck decisively in the flank by his mounted troops. Continuing the pursuit towards Palestine, he defeated the Turks at Rafa and Magdhaba in December 1916 and at Rafa in January 1917. He then participated in what was nearly a further success against the fortress of Gaza, commanding the coast road into Palestine, in March 1917, before an over-anxious British command obliged the cavalry to withdraw with victory almost in hand. In April he became a corps commander and in August lieutenant-general. 
Sir Edmund Allenby, appointed commander in Palestine in June 1917, launched a new campaign in which he entrusted Chauvel with the mounted operations. In a daring charge of 31 October against reduced Turkish forces, Chauvel's light horse overran Beersheba and captured its water wells intact. This action turned the Gaza line. Chauvel was appointed KCB. Less successful were attacks on Derra against stiffened Turkish resistance late in April 1918. Then in September occurred another striking triumph, at Megiddo. First Allenby's infantry broke through on the coast. Then Chauvel's mounted forces swept into the breach, encircling and capturing the greater part of two Turkish armies. He then pressed on to Damascus, which he reached on 1 October just after the arrival of an Arab force led by T. E. Lawrence (who, with scant cause, wrote dismissively of Chauvel in 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom'). Chauvel then proceeded to Aleppo. There was little fighting during this last phase, a fortunate development given that his troops were becoming gravely affected by typhus and malaria. 
The Turks capitulated at the end of October. In the preceding six weeks Chauvel's mounted forces had, for losses of only 650 men, taken 78,000 prisoners and advanced between 300 and 500 miles. Even against a demoralized enemy, this was an impressive performance in inhospitable campaigning territory. It bore witness to Chauvel's thorough planning and responsible logistical arrangements. 
Chauvel returned to Australia in 1919. He was appointed GCMG, and given the post of inspector-general. In 1923 he became chief of the general staff. This was a time of severe economic stringency, and it was in some measure thanks to Chauvel's guidance that the diminished and under-equipped Australian army remained in good spirits. 
Chauvel retired with much honour in April 1930. That same year he became a lay canon of St Paul's Cathedral in Melbourne, a token of his lifelong Christian religious observance. He held business directorships until his death, and devoted much time to causes relating to former servicemen. After his death in Melbourne on 4 March 1945 he was accorded a state funeral. 
Chauvel was a shy man, but one who in battle remained calm in stressful situations. His caution in some engagements in Palestine attracted criticism. But he was unwilling to squander the lives of his men. And he was powerfully aware that the dangers inherent in desert operations, where failure in such matters as ensuring access to water supplies could spell disaster, required of him caution and meticulous organization. One of his most noteworthy military operations, the charge of the Australian light horse against Turkish positions at Beersheba, twice featured in major Australian films, one of which, 'Forty Thousand Horsemen' (1940), was directed by his nephew, the eminent Australian film-maker Charles Chauvel. 


@@@@@


doc= 32384


Chavasse, Christopher Maude (1884-1962), bishop of Rochester, was born at 36 New Inn Hall Street, Oxford, on 9 November 1884, the eldest (and identical twin) son of Francis James Chavasse (1846-1928), then rector of St Peter-le-Bailey, Oxford, and later bishop of Liverpool, and his wife, Edith (1851-1927), daughter of Joseph Maude, vicar of Chirk, Denbighshire, and his wife, Mary. Christopher had an elder sister, twin younger sisters, and two younger brothers. Educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford, and Liverpool College, he went up to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1905, where he distinguished himself as an athlete, gaining blues for lacrosse and athletics. Both he and his twin brother represented England at the Olympic Games of 1908. In the same year he failed his history schools, whereupon he sat pass moderations and a group. 
Chavasse was ordained to a curacy at St Helens, Lancashire, where his gifts of leadership and his initiative in tackling social problems were immediately apparent. He enlisted as a chaplain in the forces in 1914 and served throughout the First World War, being awarded the MC and the Croix de Guerre. In August 1917 his twin brother, Noel Godfrey Chavasse, who had won the VC, was killed in France. One of his younger brothers was also killed. He was promoted deputy assistant chaplain-general in the 11th corps in 1918. On demobilization in 1919 he was appointed vicar of St George's, Barrow in Furness. In the same year he married Beatrice Cropper (died 1977), daughter of William Edward Willink JP of Dingle Bank, Liverpool. They had three sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Noel, gained the MC in the Second World War and the second son, Michael, became a QC and a circuit judge. 
In 1922 Chavasse returned to Oxford as rector of St Aldates, where he built up a vigorous congregation of undergraduates and established a reputation as a gifted preacher and a leader among younger evangelicals. He became known outside Oxford as a tenacious and well-informed opponent of the proposals for the revision of the 'Book of Common Prayer', at the risk, he was told by the archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, of any chance of preferment. 
In 1928 it fell to Chavasse to initiate the fulfilment of the vision of his father, who had died that year, namely the founding in Oxford of a new and evangelical college which would attract men of modest means and provide bursaries for ordination candidates. He left St Aldates for St Peter-le-Bailey, a living which he had held in plurality for six months, and round St Peter-le-Bailey and the buildings associated with it he began the first stage of a hostel for non-collegiate students. A petition was presented to the convocation of the university for the licensing of St Peter's as a permanent private hall, with Chavasse as its first master. Permission was granted in 1929 but not without some opposition, partly from Anglo-Catholic opinion and partly provoked by the impetuousness and enthusiasm of the young master in his dealings with the university's delegacy of lodgings. Chavasse recruited a body of able tutors and the early years were marked by a steady growth in numbers and reputation. Behind the scenes there was a constant struggle to establish the hall on a sound financial footing; but from the impact that Chavasse made on the first generation of men in the hall, no one could have guessed the stress of financial worry. It was typical of him that he was able to enlist the support of W. R. Morris (later Viscount Nuffield) on the basis of a friendship formed through his pastoral ministry at the death of Morris's mother. With Morris's support and the personal sacrifice of Chavasse and some of his friends, the finances of the hall were secured. During this period his interests were not confined to Oxford. He served as proctor for the university in the convocation of Canterbury in 1936-9, and continued as chaplain to the Territorial Army. 
In July 1939 Chavasse was nominated to the see of Rochester, but his consecration had to be delayed until St Mark's day, 25 April 1940, owing to injuries sustained in a boating accident, as a result of which he lost the use of a leg, which was amputated in 1942. His episcopate of over twenty years fell into two periods. The first decade was devoted to the problems of wartime and post-war reconstruction. He had a deep understanding of the pastoral needs of men and women in the forces, and a concern for their homes and churches, so badly damaged by enemy action. The figure of the bishop with an artificial leg, worn with great fortitude, was an inspiration to many in what he used to call his 'bomb-alley' diocese. In preparing for peace he launched, in 1944, a great appeal for $1 million for rebuilding and augmentation. He was concerned for 'diocesan consciousness' in an area where all roads lead towards London, and to achieve this he appointed a 'mobile force of diocesan officers' and held regular clergy conferences. Early in his episcopate he was faced with a problem of discipline which attracted widespread attention. It concerned the reservation of the sacrament in the parish of St Mary's, Swanley. He insisted on loyalty to the policy laid down by both houses of convocation, which permitted reservation in the manner allowed in the 1928 prayer book. His action was misrepresented by some Anglo-Catholics, but he was later able to claim that his stand, which was upheld in the consistory court, had smoothed the path for his episcopal brethren. His most distinguished service to the church at this time was his chairmanship of the commission which produced the report 'Towards the Conversion of England' (1945), which created much discussion in the post-war period and inspired evangelistic campaigning, but the bishop was disappointed in the subsequent attitude of the church assembly. He also produced many other books and pamphlets. 
The second decade of Chavasse's episcopate was devoted to further advance. A church extension campaign was launched to provide churches in the new housing estates arising from the overspill of London's population. Chavasse had a great sense of occasion and in 1954 used the 1350th anniversary of the founding of the diocese as a focus of effort. His last years saw the creation of a third archdeaconry at Bromley (1954), the suffragan bishopric of Tonbridge, and a diocesan centre at Chislehurst. He also founded at Rochester a theological college for older men. 
Chavasse was more than a diocesan figure. He had a rare combination of great moral and physical courage which led him to be outspoken on a number of issues such as on the element of gambling in premium bonds and on the Wolfenden report. As an evangelical churchman he had an independent position for, although he was their undoubted leader, he was distrustful of liberals on grounds of vague theology and he opposed extreme conservative fundamentalism. 
In 1936 Chavasse was appointed OBE, in 1940 TD, in 1959 DL, and he was also DD (Lambeth). In 1960 he retired to Oxford, where he had become an honorary fellow of Trinity College (1955) and of St Peter's (1949). He lived to see the fulfilment of his earlier ambitions when St Peter's became fully incorporated as a college of the university in 1961. Chavasse died at Oxford on 10 March 1962. 
D. R. Vicary', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32385


Chavasse, Francis James (1846-1928), bishop of Liverpool, was born on 27 September 1846 at Sutton Coldfield, the eldest son of Thomas Chavasse FRCS, and his second wife, Miriam Sarah Wyld. As a child he was sent to Chesterfield grammar school, but a long illness supervened, and after private tuition he matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He took his degree with a first class in the final school of law and modern history in 1869 and proceeded MA in 1872. He was ordained at Manchester in 1870 and, after holding a curacy (1870-73) at St Paul's, Preston, became vicar of St Paul's, Upper Holloway (1873-7) and rector of St Peter-le-Bailey, Oxford (1877-89). There the success of his 'Greek Testament' readings for undergraduates and his widespread influence led to his being appointed principal of Wycliffe Hall in 1889. On the retirement of Bishop John Charles Ryle in 1900, Chavasse was nominated by Lord Salisbury to the see of Liverpool, and spent twenty-three years in that diocese. 
Chavasse is best remembered as the effective founder of Liverpool Cathedral for, although the project of a new cathedral had been mooted in his predecessor's time, the pressure of other work, the heated atmosphere of Liverpool churchmanship, and the controversy over the proposed site led Bishop Ryle to stay his hand. He left the way open, however, for Chavasse, a fellow evangelical, but a man of wider sympathies and therefore more fitted to such a difficult undertaking. After ten years the lady chapel of the new cathedral was opened for regular service (1910). Thirteen years later, when the first section of the main fabric, the choir and transepts, was nearing completion, Chavasse thought that the time had come for a younger man to replace him. He resigned and retired to Oxford, where he was elected an honorary fellow of Corpus Christi College. He interested himself once more in undergraduate life and meditated on the possibility of a new collegiate foundation in the university, which would make use of New Inn Hall with the adjacent buildings attached to his former parish church of St Peter-le-Bailey, as an institution for undergraduates of moderate means and evangelical views. His scheme matured, and in February 1929 St Peter's Hall, which had opened, in memory of him, in 1928 as a hostel for undergraduates, was granted the status of a permanent private hall within the university, with his eldest son, Christopher Maude Chavasse (1884-1962), as its first master. Later it became St Peter's College. 
Chavasse was one of the finest among the hard-working evangelical clergy of his time. His earlier teaching, both at St Peter-le-Bailey and at Wycliffe Hall, was fruitful in the training of men who in their parochial work combined, after his example, evangelical conviction with commitment to the Church of England. In his prime he was an effective preacher; though not much interested in academic theology, his sermons compensated for their lack of intellectual distinction by their wide appeal. He combined cogency of thought, vigorous delivery, and obvious sincerity, but Chavasse's Christian life and example were his real message. His years in Liverpool included those of the First World War and he was indefatigable in pastoral work during that difficult period. Chavasse had married in 1881 Edith (died 1927), younger daughter of Canon Joseph Maude, vicar of Chirk, Denbighshire; they had four sons and three daughters. The second and fourth sons lost their lives in the First World War, the former, Noel Godfrey Chavasse, after gaining the VC with bar. Chavasse died at St Peter's House, New Inn Hall Street, Oxford, on 11 March 1928. He was buried in the founder's plot at Liverpool Cathedral on 17 March. A memorial church, Christ Church, was subsequently built in a suburb of Liverpool, Norris Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 32386


Cheadle, Walter Butler (1835-1910), physician, born at Colne, Lancashire, on 15 October 1835, was the son of James Cheadle, thirteenth wrangler at Cambridge in 1831, who was vicar of Christ Church, Colne, and later of Bingley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of John Butler of Ruddington, Nottinghamshire. Educated at Bingley grammar school, he proceeded in 1855 to Cambridge as a scholar of Gonville and Caius College. In 1859, when a family bereavement prevented him from rowing in the university eight, he graduated BA. In 1861 he took the MB degree, having studied medicine both at Cambridge and at St George's Hospital, London. 
In June 1862, with William Wentworth-Fitzwilliam, Viscount Milton (1839-1877), Cheadle set off to explore the then little known western parts of Canada. On their return in 1864 they jointly published a successful account of their travels as 'The North-West Passage by Land' (1865), which ran to nine editions by 1901. The book was written by Cheadle, and recounts a notable series of hardships faced in mountainous and untracked country. According to V. G. Hopwood, 'With its analysis of the prospects of the prairies and British Columbia, the book helped prepare opinion in both Britain and Canada for the end of Hudson's Bay Company rule, and the inclusion of the west in the union. Its intelligent estimate of the value of the Yellowhead pass was vindicated by the route's being chosen for the Grand Trunk Pacific' (Hopwood, 700). Cheadle's diary of their trip was published in 1931 as 'Cheadle's Journal of a Trip across Canada, 1862-1863' (ed. A. Doughty and G. Lanctot). Cheadle then returned to Cambridge, proceeding MA and MD in 1865. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in that year and was elected a fellow in 1870; he was subsequently councillor (1889-91), censor (1892-3), and senior censor (1898); he acted as examiner in medicine in the college (1885-8). In 1900 he delivered the Lumleian lectures before the college 'On some cirrhoses of the liver'. Meanwhile he was elected physician to the Western General Dispensary in 1865, and assistant physician to St Mary's Hospital in 1867, both in London. He remained associated with St Mary's and its medical school for nearly forty years. He was dean of the medical school (1869-73), and guided it through a critical period of its existence, and under his guidance the school more than doubled the number of its students. He became physician to in-patients in 1885, and remained on the staff until 1904, when he was appointed honorary consulting physician. During his career at St Mary's he acted variously as dermatologist and as lecturer in materia medica and therapeutics, in pathology, in medicine jointly with Sir William Broadbent and David Bridge Lees, and in clinical medicine. Cheadle also did much good work for St Mary's medical school, helping to found scholarships and encouraging the athletic clubs. In 1898 he gave over $1000 to endow a Cheadle prize (value $20) and a gold medal for an essay on clinical medicine. As a teacher he was best at the bedside with senior students and qualified men. In treatment Cheadle relied on experience and intuition, and while always careful to ease his patients' suffering he put faith in nature and time as healing agents. 
Cheadle is, however, best remembered as a pioneering paediatrician. In 1869 he was also appointed assistant physician to the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, where he worked until 1892, when he became honorary consulting physician. Although he disliked being called a specialist, his private practice mainly lay among children and his chief writings dealt with children's health and ailments. Tall and of heavy build, Cheadle was dignified and reserved in manner, but won the confidence of his many child patients by his great kindliness and charm of manner. 
Cheadle's professional distinction lies in his original research into the connection between poor nutrition and illness in infancy and childhood. He was the first, in 1877, to define the nature of a then mysterious childhood disease characterized by pain and tenderness of the limbs, haemorrhages, and swelling of the gums. He attributed the disease to artificial foods that possessed no antiscorbutic properties, giving it the name 'infantile scurvy'. The pathology of the disease was afterwards worked out by Sir Thomas Barlow, who reported in 'The Lancet' in 1878. In 1889, Cheadle published a series of lectures on the proper way to feed infants, under the title 'On the principles and exact conditions to be observed in the artificial feeding of infants; the properties of artificial foods; and the diseases which arise from faults of diet in early life'. Among his other interests were the rheumatic diseases of childhood, the subject of his Harveian lectures in 1888. Cheadle maintained that the true type of acute rheumatism is that which occurs with manifold and serious symptoms and complications in childhood, and not the less severe affection of adult life. 
Cheadle was married twice: first on 31 January 1866, to Anne, youngest daughter of William Murgatroyd of Bankfield, near Bingley, Yorkshire; and second on 4 August 1892, to Emily, daughter of Robert Mansel, of Rothbury, Northumberland, inspector of Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses. Both wives predeceased him. 
A radical in politics, Cheadle was one of the early supporters in face of much professional opposition of the claims of women to enter the medical profession, and was one of the first to lecture at the London School of Medicine for Women. He visited Canada with the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1884, and contracted dysentery, which permanently damaged his health. Cheadle died on 25 March 1910 at his home, 19 Portman Street, Portman Square, London, and was buried on 30 March in Ocklynge cemetery, Eastbourne. He was survived by four sons from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32387


Cheatle, Arthur Henry (1866-1929), otologist, was born at Belvedere, Kent, on 4 December 1866, the second son of George Cheatle, solicitor, of Belvedere, and of Burford, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Mary Anne, daughter of James Allen, of Dartford, Kent. He was educated in London at Merchant Taylors' School and at King's College Hospital, and in Vienna. After qualification he was one of Joseph Lister's house surgeons at King's College Hospital. From 1893 he held an appointment at the Royal Ear Hospital. In 1899 he became assistant aural surgeon at King's medical school, and in 1910 aural surgeon and lecturer in aural surgery at King's College Hospital. 
Cheatle began practice in London when otology both in Great Britain and on the continent was at a low ebb. By his original investigations he developed this branch of surgery and made otology of more general appeal both to British and foreign surgeons. Under his influence otological surgery became the province of specialists. Cheatle's original work correlated the anatomy of the temporal bone and its intimate pathological connection with the spread of infective processes to mastoid cells, petrosquamosal and lateral sinuses, and the meninges of the skull and brain. At the sixth International Congress of Otology, held in London in 1899, Cheatle's specimens impressed the visitors, and demonstrated the importance of otology as a special study. 
In 1912 Cheatle was awarded the Adam Politzer prize for his histological work, which brought his name into international prominence. He was elected an honorary member of the New York Otological Society and of the Italian Otological Society. He was also elected Hunterian professor of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1906, and lectured on points in the surgical anatomy of the temporal bone. With Urban Pritchard he founded in 1899 the Otological Society of Great Britain, which became a special section of the Royal Society of Medicine. He was elected second president of this section in 1910. 
In Cheatle's hospital and private practice, extensive operations on the temporal bone and its neighbouring structures became ordinary routine procedure. Cheatle dissected and mounted hundreds of normal and abnormal temporal bones, classified mastoid bones into cellular and acellular, and showed the latter to be a normal development and not, as previously believed, the product of suppuration. In 1911 he presented his own collection of some 700 temporal bones to the Hunterian Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons. After the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Cheatle was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Air Force, then in its infancy. He initiated tests to determine the fitness of aviators. For this and his other work during the war he was made CBE in 1919. 
In addition to articles in the transactions of various otological congresses and societies Cheatle published, with R. B. Carter, 'Sight and Hearing in Childhood' (1903) and his Hunterian lectures, 'Some Points in the Surgical Anatomy of the Temporal Bone' (1907). Cheatle, who was unmarried, died at his practice, 29 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, London, on 11 May 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 32388


Cheesman, Robert Ernest (1878-1962), explorer and naturalist, was born at Westwell, Kent, on 18 October 1878, the eldest son and second of five children of Robert Cheesman, farmer, and his wife, Florence Maud Tassell. His younger sister, (Lucy) Evelyn Cheesman (1881-1969), became a well-known entomologist, traveller, writer, and broadcaster. Cheesman was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and Wye Agricultural College. He then worked for Sharpe and Winch, brewers, of Cranbrook, Kent. He was a keen ornithologist. As a boy he tried to rear wood pigeon squabs by swallowing and regurgitating clover leaves, like the mother bird. He was elected to the British Ornithologists' Union in 1908, and in 1912-14 contributed notes to 'British Birds'. 
In 1914 Cheesman enlisted in the Buffs, misrepresenting his age. He served in India and in the attempted relief of Kut. In 1916 he met Sir Percy Cox, then political officer to the Mesopotamian expeditionary force, who shared his enthusiasm for birds. Together they undertook to collect the avifauna of Iraq. Cox wanted to organize the growing of vegetables for the troops and persuaded Cheesman to take a commission (1916) in the Indian army reserve of officers. Cheesman then became assistant to the deputy director of agriculture. His pamphlet 'Notes on Vegetable Growing in Mesopotamia in 1917' was published officially in 1918. While Cox was high commissioner in Iraq, Cheesman was his private secretary (1920-23). He was elected to the British Ornithologists' Club in 1919, a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1920, and a corresponding member of the Zoological Society of London in 1921. 
In 1921 Cheesman mapped the Arabian coast from 'Uqair to the head of the Gulf of Salwa. He was appointed OBE in 1923. In 1923-4 he spent eleven weeks at Hufuf and then travelled to Jabrin; he fixed its position, mapped 150 miles of the desert, identified the site of ancient Gerra, and corrected serious mistakes about the wadi system. He received the Royal Geographical Society's Gill memorial award in 1925 for this journey, which he described in 'In Unknown Arabia' (1926). In 1925 he became consul for north-west Ethiopia, resident at Dangila, as a member of the Sudan political service. Officially he was much concerned with preventing elephant poachers from entering Sudan, but he used every opportunity for exploration. He visited the source of the Blue Nile several times, first in March 1926. He mapped the river from Tisisat to Wanbera in January-April 1927, returning to Dangila through little-known country. He completed the map from Wanbera to the frontier in February-April 1929. He explored the river from its source to Lake Tana, correcting many cartographical errors, in 1932. He circumnavigated the lake, landing on all the bigger islands and making a compass traverse of the coast, in November 1932-April 1933. He retired in 1934, was made a commander of the Star of Ethiopia, and was appointed CBE (1935). He received the Royal Geographical Society's patron's medal in 1936 for his explorations, which he described in 'Lake Tana and the Blue Nile' (1936). 
In 1927 Cheesman married Catherine, daughter of William Francis Winch, estate agent and brewer, of Cranbrook; they had no children. In 1928 he resigned from the reserve as major, and after he retired in 1934 he and his wife lived at her fifteenth-century house, Tilsden, outside Cranbrook, where they farmed together. In 1940, at the request of the governor-general of Sudan, Cheesman became head of the Ethiopian section of intelligence, Sudan defence force, first as bimbashi, then as colonel. Notes and bearings he had taken previously now proved valuable. It was largely on his recommendation that O. C. Wingate selected his first objective in the invasion of Ethiopia. In 1942 Cheesman became oriental counsellor at the legation, Addis Ababa. In 1944 he retired finally to Cranbrook, having been mentioned in dispatches in both wars. The farm was sold after his wife's death in 1958, but he continued to live quietly at Tilsden. He died on 13 February 1962 at the Lonsdale Nursing Home in Tunbridge Wells. 
On all his travels Cheesman assiduously collected specimens of fauna, flora, and minerals, nearly all of which he presented to the British Museum. They included several new species of mammals and insects. He described them in articles on which he collaborated with professional taxonomists in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History' (1919-28), 'Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society' (1920-26), and 'Ibis' (1923-36). He contributed occasionally to the 'Geographical Journal' (1923-60). His books are both readable and authoritative, characterized by modesty, a sense of humour, and accurate observation, especially of topography and wildlife. In temperament and tastes he was a countryman: deliberate, patient, thorough, kind, and personally frugal. Never pretending to expertise he did not possess, he did whatever was possible to ensure that his travels should benefit every branch of knowledge. 
C. F. Beckingham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32389


Cheetham, Samuel (1827-1908), Church of England clergyman and ecclesiastical historian, the son of Samuel Cheetham, farmer, of Hambleton, Rutland, and his wife, Emma Mary, 'nee' Woolston, was born in Hambleton on 3 March 1827. Educated at the neighbouring grammar school of Oakham, he matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1846. He graduated BA in 1850, being a senior optime and eighth in the first class of the classical tripos, and was elected to a fellowship at his college. He proceeded MA in 1853 and DD in 1880. Meanwhile in 1851 he became vice-principal of the Collegiate Institute, Liverpool, and, being ordained deacon in 1851 and priest in 1852, was licensed to the curacy of St Mary, Edgehill. In 1853 he returned to Cambridge and served as tutor of Christ's College until 1858. He was curate of Hitchin, Hertfordshire (1858-61), and was vice-principal of the theological college at Chichester (1861-3), at the same time acting as curate of St Bartholomew's. In 1863 he was appointed professor of pastoral theology at King's College, London, where for nineteen years he did excellent work. 
Cheetham was co-editor with Sir William Smith of the 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities' (2 vols., 1875-80), doing practically all the editorial work from letter D onwards and writing many of the articles, showing an exceptional combination of laborious erudition and sound judgement. The dictionary remains a much consulted work. 
In 1866 Cheetham married Hannah (died 1876), daughter of Frederick Hawkins MD, and his fellowship consequently lapsed. He added to his professorship the post of chaplain to Dulwich College, which he held until 1884. His work at Dulwich brought him in touch with the south London diocese of Rochester, and led to his appointment by Bishop A. W. Thorold as examining chaplain and honorary canon of Rochester in 1878. In the next year he was made archdeacon of Southwark, and the rest of his life was largely taken up by diocesan activities in south London. He was transferred in 1882 as archdeacon from Southwark to Rochester, and was made a canon residentiary of Rochester in 1883. He remained examining chaplain to the bishop of Rochester until 1897. He was Hulsean lecturer at Cambridge 1896-7, and published his lectures as 'The Mysteries, Pagan and Christian' (1897). Cheetham, who was elected FSA in 1890, devoted all his leisure to work on church history. He wrote for the 'Quarterly Review' and for the 'Contemporary Review'. He completed the sketch of church history which Charles Hardwick, archdeacon of Ely, in 1859 left unfinished at his death. In 1894 Cheetham published 'A History of the Christian Church during the First Six Centuries', and in the year before his death 'A History of the Christian Church since the Reformation'. In 1896 Cheetham married Ada Mary, eldest daughter of S. Barker Booth of Bickley. Cheetham died without issue at The Precinct, Rochester, on 19 July 1908, and was buried in the cathedral. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32390


Chermside, Sir Herbert Charles (1850-1929), army officer, was the second son of the Revd Richard Seymour Conway Chermside, rector of Wilton, Wiltshire, and his wife, Emily Dawson, and was the grandson of Sir Robert Alexander Chermside. Herbert Chermside was born at Wilton on 31 July 1850, was a scholar at Eton College, and passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, at the head of the competitors: Chermside, aged seventeen, was a thousand marks ahead of any of them. At the end of the course he passed out easily at the top of the list, and was commissioned in the Royal Engineers in 1870. He was a brilliant scholar, with a remarkable memory, and an accomplished athlete who won prizes as a swimmer and oarsman, and swam the Hellespont. 
In 1871 Chermside, with other officers, visited Paris during the commune. He was accused of assisting the communards, and narrowly escaped execution. Later Chermside's adventurous spirit found another outlet for, after a period of duty in Ireland, he joined in 1873 Benjamin Leigh Smith's Arctic expedition. After this, at Chatham, Portsmouth, and Devonport, he learned the method of coastal defence by submarine mines. 
In 1876 Chermside was specially employed in Turkey during the operations against Serbia and Montenegro, and was acting as military attache with the Turkish forces when Russia declared war on Turkey in 1877. He remained attache until June 1879, having spent the previous six months with the Turkish boundary commission. In July 1879 he was appointed military vice-consul in Anatolia, and in 1882 was promoted captain. In the same year he was appointed to the intelligence staff of the British army sent to Egypt, although he was described as deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general. There Sir Evelyn Wood, the first British sirdar, gave him command of the 1st battalion of the new Egyptian army. Now brevet major, Chermside stayed in Egypt over four years, taking part in the Suakin expedition of 1884. He remained in Suakin with his command when the British force was withdrawn, until in October he was appointed governor-general of the Red sea littoral, with the rank of brevet lieutenant-colonel, although still only a captain of Royal Engineers. In addition to continuous operations against the Mohdists, Chermside successfully undertook negotiations with King John of Abyssinia. Transferred to the command at Wadi Halfa in October 1886, he repelled Mohdist incursions at Sarras in 1886 and 1887. 
In 1887 Chermside was promoted brevet colonel, and in 1888 he returned to consular duties, this time in Kurdistan, where he remained for just over a year. He was then sent as military attache to Constantinople, where he spent nearly seven years. Later he was British delegate on the commission for the reorganization of the gendarmerie in Crete, and in March 1897 was appointed British military commissioner and commander of the British troops there. He did good work, and was promoted major-general in 1898. In 1899 he married Geraldine Katharine, daughter of William Frederick Webb of Newstead Abbey, Nottinghamshire. She died in 1910; they had no children. 
In 1899 Chermside briefly commanded the Curragh, then the 14th brigade, 7th division, at Aldershot. On the outbreak of war in 1899 he went with his brigade to South Africa, where, in April 1900, he succeeded Sir William Forbes Gatacre as temporary lieutenant-general in command of the 3rd division. He was present at the actions of Paardeberg (27 February 1900), Poplar Grove (7 March), and Karee siding (29 March), and in the operations in the Transvaal, east and west of Pretoria, and in Cape Colony. 
In January 1901 Chermside resumed command at the Curragh, and later the same year was appointed governor of Queensland, assuming office in March 1902. There he was a competent administrator, and was friendly, approachable, and popular. The Australian parliament was compelled, for economic reasons, to reduce the emoluments of state governors; to enable earlier retrenchment Chermside resigned in September 1904, having previously surrendered voluntarily part of his salary. 
In 1907 Chermside retired from the army with the rank of honorary lieutenant-general. Among his honours were the CMG (1880), CB (1886), KCMG (1897), and GCMG (1899); in 1916 he was made colonel-commandant, Royal Engineers. In 1920 he married Clementina Maria, second daughter of Paul Julius de Reuter, first Baron de Reuter, and widow of Count Otto Stenbock. They had no children. Chermside died at Woodheath, Cornwall Road, Harrogate, on 24 September 1929, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32391


Garrard, Apsley George Benet Cherry- (1886-1959), polar explorer, was born in Bedford on 2 January 1886, the only son (there were five daughters) of Major-General Apsley Cherry-Garrard CB (1832-1907), and his wife, Evelyn Edith, daughter of Henry Wilson Sharpin. Major-General Cherry-Garrard, a distinguished soldier, inherited from his elder brother the Cherry estate of Denford Park, Berkshire, and in 1892 that of his mother's family also, Lamer Park, Hertfordshire, with the added name and arms of Garrard. He leased Denford and made Lamer his residence; it became to his son the dearest place on earth. Short-sightedness handicapped the young Cherry-Garrard in games at his preparatory school and at Winchester College, where he was lonely. But at Oxford he found congenial friends and interests as well as rowing -- a sport to which bad eyesight was no bar: he helped the Christ Church eight to win the Grand Challenge cup at Henley in 1908. In the same year he obtained a third class in modern history. 
On his father's death in 1907 Cherry-Garrard found himself the heir to a double fortune, and two years later went for a cruise round the world on cargo boats. Hearing when at Brisbane that Captain Robert Falcon Scott proposed a second expedition to the Antarctic in 1910, he wrote to Edward Wilson, whom he had met previously at a shooting party in Scotland, volunteering his services. Every member of the expedition was a specialist of some sort and he was accepted by Scott on Wilson's recommendation alone: he duly enlisted as 'assistant zoologist'. Yet from the outset, despite his youth and inexperience, he won the affectionate regard of his more seasoned comrades, and before the close of the expedition had more major sledge journeys to his credit than any other surviving member. 
On the Depot Journey to lay stores at stages along the southern route, as far as to One Ton Depot 140 miles from base, Cherry-Garrard was warmly commended by Scott for his efficiency and unselfishness as a sledger and tent-mate. In the comparative comfort of life at the base he edited the 'South Polar Times', a unique periodical afterwards reproduced in facsimile. Wilson chose 'Birdie' Bowers and Cherry-Garrard -- 'the pick of the sledging element' (Scott, quoted in 'South Pole Odyssey', 81) -- as his companions for a Winter Journey in 1911 to obtain specimen eggs from the emperor penguin rookery at Cape Crozier. This entailed a hazardous round trip of 120 miles in darkness, at temperatures in excess of -70 degree F, an exploit which is still without parallel in the annals of polar exploration. An unbreakable bond was forged between the three men and on their return five weeks later Scott described their journey as 'the hardest that has ever been made' -- a phrase which later suggested to Cherry-Garrard the title of his narrative of the fortunes of the whole expedition: 'The Worst Journey in the World' (1922). 
The Winter Journey was the climax of the whole expedition for Cherry-Garrard, so much so that even the outward marches of the great southern journey, despite their gruelling nature, were a picnic by comparison. He accompanied the polar party as far as the summit of the Beardmore Glacier whence he was sent back, because of his youth, with the first of the two supporting parties. Early in March 1912 he set out with dog teams and Dmitry, the Russian dog driver, to speed the return of the polar party. Having reached One Ton Depot on the night of the third, the date approximately timed for their arrival, he was beset by a four days' blizzard which prevented movement, but stayed on until there remained only just enough dog food for the return. Although his decision to return was the only possible one, he never ceased to reproach himself afterwards for not having attempted the impossible. He was a member of the search party eight months later which found the bodies of Scott, Wilson, and Bowers, who had died within only 11 miles of One Ton Depot (which they reached on 21 March), and learned of the heroic self-sacrifice of Lawrence Oates a few marches behind, and of Petty Officer Edgar Evans's earlier collapse below the Beardmore Glacier. It was at Cherry-Garrard's suggestion that the last line of Tennyson's 'Ulysses' ('To strive, to seek, to find and not to yield') was inscribed on the cross surmounting the cairn of snow which covered them, as well as the epitaph commemorating Oates. 
The rest of Cherry-Garrard's life was anticlimax. During the First World War he commanded a squadron of armoured cars in Flanders from 1914 until invalided out two years later, and during long convalescence wrote 'The Worst Journey', a classic of Antarctic literature. First published in December 1922 it went through several editions before being republished in 1951, with a postscript written in 1948. Years later he also wrote introductions to biographies of Wilson and Bowers. He cultivated friendships with men of letters, including George Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, and Arnold Bennett; and with men of action, especially Mallory of Everest and Lawrence of Arabia. To the latter he paid tribute in the symposium 'T. E. Lawrence by his Friends' (1937). 
In the early 1920s Cherry-Garrard recovered some strength but the Scott tragedy continued to haunt him, altering and even reversing many of his interests: 'He gave up shooting, became almost hostile to fox-hunting, and disappointed the churchmen who had been accustomed to his support in the parish' ('The Times'). Later he cruised the Mediterranean and collected books, first editions where possible, but 'he still lived with the Polar expedition and would talk of little else' (ibid.). He married, on 6 September 1939, Angela Katherine, daughter of Kenneth Turner, of Fairfields, Ipswich. In 1947 income tax demands and ill health obliged him to sell Lamer, which was demolished, and he moved into a London flat. After many years of intermittent illness he died at the Berkeley Hotel, Piccadilly, London, on 18 May 1959. He was survived by his wife; there were no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32392


Chesterton, Gilbert Keith (1874-1936), writer, was born on 29 May 1874 at 32 Sheffield Terrace, Campden Hill, London, the elder son of Edward Chesterton (died 1922), estate agent, and his wife, Marie Louise, 'nee' Grosjean (died 1933). His maternal grandfather's family were of Swiss French origin, though they had been in England for several generations; his maternal grandmother came from an Aberdeen family called Keith -- hence Chesterton's second name. Gilbert Chesterton had, as he emphasized in his 'Autobiography' (1936), a sheltered and happy childhood in a comfortable middle-class home, where his interests in art and literature were encouraged by his parents. The only shadow was the death of a sister whom he was barely old enough to remember. When he was five the birth of his brother, Cecil Edward Chesterton (1879-1918), brought him a companion and, when they were older, a sparring partner in argument. 
Chesterton was a dreamy, absent-minded, untidy child, and he preserved these attributes throughout his life. He was a slow developer, not speaking until he was nearly three, and not reading until he was eight. But thereafter he was a passionate reader, particularly of fairy-tales. He was also devoted to toy theatres, and remained so throughout his life. At school -- Colet Court, Hammersmith, and then St Paul's School -- it was clear that he was formidably intelligent, but he was a wayward student who could not focus on topics he did not find interesting or important. He was happy at school, as he had been at home; he made lasting friendships and was a dedicated member of the St Paul's School debating society, for a love of argument was one of his abiding characteristics. When he was eighteen he enrolled for classes in English, French, and Latin at University College, London, and in art at the Slade School of Fine Art, which was then part of the college. His college career was much less happy than his school-days. He was not at ease with organized academic learning, and at the Slade he experienced some kind of psychological disturbance which he subsequently hinted at but never explained. Chesterton first thought of making a career in art, but soon found that his real gifts and inclination were for writing. Nevertheless, he continued to produce drawings for his own amusement and that of his friends, such as his entertaining illustrations to Hilaire Belloc's novels. 
After leaving college in 1895 Chesterton worked as a publisher's reader while launching himself as a man of letters. In the 1890s the periodical press offered many opportunities to a clever and energetic young man who wanted to live by his pen and he took advantage of them. Before long he was making his name as a reviewer and essayist and was contributing regular columns to two Liberal papers: the weekly 'The Speaker' and the 'Daily News'. (He had inherited something of the spirit of Gladstonian Liberalism from his father.) In 1900 he published his first books, two collections of poems; one of his early poems, 'The Donkey', became a favourite anthology piece. In the same year he met Hilaire Belloc, the Anglo-French writer and polemicist, who became a friend and literary ally. Chesterton tended to hero-worship Belloc and was strongly but not always fortunately influenced by him. 
Collections of periodical essays followed in the early 1900s, and in 1903 Chesterton published his most substantial work to date, a study of Robert Browning, in the prestigious 'English Men of Letters' series. That he was invited to write it while still only in his twenties was a sign of his growing celebrity. The book was well received by ordinary readers but not by Browning experts, who objected to its biographical inaccuracies and frequent misquotations. Chesterton was habitually careless about questions of fact, but 'Robert Browning' contains acute discussions of Browning's poetry; among many other things, Chesterton was an excellent literary critic. Nevertheless, the book's real interest is the extent to which he identifies with his subject, and the clues it offers to his later development. When he wrote it he was more than a young man embarking on a successful literary career. He was also engaged in a personal struggle to make sense of the world, a struggle which marked all his writing. He emphatically rejected the pessimism, positivism, and determinism which he saw as marking the late nineteenth century, and turned to those writers who were optimists and in love with life and the world, such as Whitman and Stevenson, and Browning, of whom he wrote, 'In discussing anything, he must always fall back upon great speculative and eternal ideas' ('Robert Browning', 1903, 118). This may or may not have been true of Browning, but it was entirely true of Chesterton. He saw Browning's love of nature and delight in human diversity as implying and resting on a belief in God. 
Although Chesterton's family was nominally Anglican, and he had been baptized in the Church of England, he had grown up in an ethos of reverent humanism and knew very little of traditional Christian beliefs. As a very young man he had become agnostic for a time, but the sense he had found in Browning that life is splendid but somehow incomplete led him to work out a religion for himself which, he was astonished to discover, already existed in the form of orthodox Christianity. In 1896 he met and fell in love with Frances Alice Blogg (1870/71-1938), to whom he was introduced by a schoolfriend who later married her sister. Frances was the daughter of a diamond merchant who was deceased, and her family was of French descent, having originally been called de Blogue. She was a devout Anglo-Catholic and her beliefs reinforced and directed Chesterton's Christian convictions. He became a believing though not very fervently practising Anglican, but it was some time before his religious allegiance was apparent to the public. He and Frances were married on 28 June 1901. 
In 1904 Chesterton published his first novel, 'The Napoleon of Notting Hill', a strange and original fantasy which reviewers appreciated even if some of them were baffled by it. It describes how at some point in the future, in the reign of the whimsical joker King Auberon, the various London boroughs have become separate city states on the model of Renaissance Italy. One of them, Notting Hill, resists the demands of its neighbours to build a new road through its territory, goes to war with them, and wins. Although the fantasy is engaging, 'The Napoleon of Notting Hill' is a serious novel of ideas on the theme summed up much later in the century as 'small is beautiful', and was partly inspired by Chesterton's pro-Boer stance during the South African War. King Auberon and Adam Wayne, the fiery young provost of Notting Hill, argue throughout the story; Maisie Ward has said that they 'are the most living individuals in any of his novels -- just because they are the two lobes of his brain individualized' (Ward, 1958 edn, 127). That is to say, they embody his opposed sides of profound gravity and exuberant fooling, which often united in a pun or an arresting paradox. 
Chesterton's next novel, 'The Man who was Thursday' (1908), is another ingenious fantasy on serious themes; it is his most obscure novel but it is also his most popular. It shows each member of a group of anarchists who are plotting to overthrow established society in London being successively revealed as a police detective employed to spy on the rest. The novel expresses his concern with the perennial war between order and chaos, and its riddling quality gives it some affinities with Kafka. But a lively pace is maintained as the plot unfolds, with energetic adventures and fights and chases. This is also true of his subsequent novels, 'The Ball and the Cross' (1910), 'Manalive' (1912), and 'The Flying Inn' (1914), though they have worn less well. 'Manalive', in which the hero travels all round the world to break into his own house and fall in love with his own wife, exemplifies Chesterton's conviction that the greatest possible adventure is the rediscovery of the familiar. 
Chesterton's best-known fiction, however, is to be found in the 'Father Brown' stories, of which the first collection, 'The Innocence of Father Brown', appeared in 1911. Here he introduces one of the most famous of literary detectives, the insignificant-seeming little Roman Catholic priest, Father Brown, who is possessed of formidable powers of observation and ratiocination, and whose work as a confessor has given him a deep insight into human nature and the criminal mentality in particular. The restricted compass of the short story meant that Chesterton had to condense his writing, avoiding the stretches of improvised action which sometimes pad out the novels. This first collection had several successors; in later years if Chesterton was in urgent need of money he would sit down and write another Father Brown story. Often adapted for film and television, the character was memorably played by Alec Guinness in Robert Hamer's film 'Father Brown' (1954). 
In whatever genre he wrote Chesterton was at heart an essayist, pursuing profound or whimsical reflections about life and the world. He produced innumerable short essays for newspapers and magazines and regularly collected them into books. His 'Charles Dickens' (1906) is a tribute to a writer for whom, like Browning, he felt a considerable affinity; it remains a valuable contribution to the study of Dickens and was followed by 'Appreciations and Criticisms of the Works of Charles Dickens' (1911), which discusses individual novels. Chesterton's 'The Victorian Age in Literature' (1913) shows him at his best as a literary critic -- impressionistic, aphoristic, presenting familiar works in a new light. He continued to write poetry in a broadly Pre-Raphaelite vein, working for several years on an epic poem in ballad form, 'The Ballad of the White Horse', published in 1911, which describes a desperate but ultimately victorious battle fought by the Christian King Alfred against the pagan Danish invaders. Its fervent English patriotism made it popular during both world wars. 
In the years leading up to 1914 Chesterton's fame was at its height. He was celebrated not only as a writer but also as a public figure, 'G. K. C.', of unmistakable presence and appearance; as a youth he had been slender, in his twenties he was corpulent, and by his thirties he was obese. His wife encouraged him to wear a cloak and a wide-brimmed hat, and although he was the admired author of many books, he liked to regard himself as a journalist and to frequent the taverns and newspaper offices of Fleet Street, his pockets full of books and papers and proofs. He was seen as a latter-day Dr Johnson, and something of a living myth; in D. J. Conlon's words, he was 'the fat man in the cloak and the brigand's hat forever stopping for a pork pie and a beer while he scribbled yet another poem or article on his cuff or on the back of a sugar packet' (Conlon, xxiii). Eventually Frances Chesterton decided that her husband would be better off out of London and the temptations of Fleet Street, and in 1909 the Chestertons moved to Beaconsfield in Buckinghamshire, which was within easy access of London but far enough away to keep Chesterton from its distractions. He was notoriously unable to cope with the practicalities of day-to-day living and needed his wife to organize his life for him. It was by all accounts a happy marriage, though the Chestertons were saddened by not having children. His sister-in-law Ada Chesterton, who did not like Frances, implied that it had never been consummated, but this seems unlikely, if only because Frances was on one occasion receiving medical treatment for infertility. As if to compensate for having none of his own, Chesterton loved children and delighted in organizing games and entertainments with them. 
Chesterton was famous for his exploitation of paradox. It had been a favourite mode in the 1890s, when he came to maturity, in the work of Wilde and Shaw and Max Beerbohm; his achievement was to adapt this literary inheritance to produce paradoxes which were not merely witty or startling but challenging in a philosophical or religious way. At its simplest, Chestertonian paradox involved seeing familiar things from an unfamiliar angle, so that a glass of water which is half empty is also, remarkably, half full; the one description might be called pessimistic, the other optimistic. In a more directly philosophical fashion, the difference between things implies a measure of similarity, in order for the comparison to be possible. And central to Christian belief is the traditional paradox, to which Chesterton often returned, of an incarnate God who is born as a helpless infant and dies an ignominious death. 
In 1905 Chesterton published 'Heretics', a spirited collection of studies of contemporary writers. A critic complained that although Chesterton had discussed their fundamental attitudes to life, he had been reticent about exposing his own. 'Orthodoxy' (1908) is a direct response to this challenge. With a wealth of paradoxes and parables he describes his progress towards Christian belief, and his ultimate conviction that the world is good and meaningful and something to be grateful for; 'And last, and strangest, there had come into my mind a vague and vast impression that in some way all good was a remnant to be stored and held sacred out of some primordial ruin' ('Orthodoxy', 1934, 116). 'Orthodoxy' remains one of his finest books, and one of his most personal. 
In the first decades of the twentieth century Chesterton was closely associated in public opinion with Hilaire Belloc, and Bernard Shaw coined the term 'the Chesterbelloc', referring to them as a compound beast. In fact they were temperamentally very different, whatever their shared religious and social ideals. Chesterton, a man of exceptional good nature, was always generous and charitable to those he disagreed with, whereas Belloc was a harsh and unforgiving controversialist; Chesterton was also influenced by his younger brother Cecil, a polemical journalist who joined with Belloc in fierce attacks on the English establishment, particularly after the Marconi scandal of 1913, when members of the Liberal government were accused of financial corruption. To Chesterton's lasting distress his brother found himself in the dock at the Old Bailey charged with criminal libel, and he narrowly escaped imprisonment. Chesterton had little sense of politics and public affairs, and he took over uncritically Belloc's mythicized versions of European and English history, and his idealization of the Latin and Catholic nations, particularly France, his hatred of anything Germanic, and his conviction that English capitalism was the direct result of the rift with Rome and the despoliation of the monasteries. 
Chesterton also absorbed from Belloc and from his brother the antisemitism which disfigures his work, though he lived long enough to be horrified by the antisemitic programme which Hitler started putting into effect in Germany after 1933. Belloc was a pugnacious Roman Catholic who thought that the church was the only source of order and sanity in the world, and Cecil Chesterton was a convert. Many readers thought that Chesterton would go the same way, given the spirit of his writings, but it was many years before he did so (Belloc thought that he never would); a reluctance to distress his Anglo-Catholic wife may have been an element in the delay. 
By 1914, which marked the end of the Edwardian era, Chesterton had done the best of his purely imaginative writing, though important religious works were to follow. In the autumn of 1914 he fell gravely ill and barely survived; he was confined to bed for several months and unconscious for much of the time. Eventually he recovered and resumed his literary career, though his wartime writing is not distinguished. There are propagandist tirades against Germany and in favour of France, and 'A Short History of England' (1917) is Bellocian in its approach and without any dates in it. Between 1918 and 1920 he visited Ireland, Palestine, and the United States, and in 1922 he was finally received into the Roman Catholic church, after years as a fellow traveller. He was triumphantly welcomed by his new co-religionists; four years later Frances Chesterton took the same step. 
In the year of his conversion Chesterton published 'St Francis of Assisi'. As in his literary biographies, he vividly evokes his subject and demonstrates a strong identification with him; his Francis is an essentially paradoxical figure, both deeply ascetic and deeply in love with the created world. This book was followed by 'The Everlasting Man' (1925), which moves on from the metaphysical theism of 'Orthodoxy' to a profound reflection on the nature of Christ. Maisie Ward has described these two books as 'the highest expression of Gilbert's mysticism' (Ward, 1958 edn, 311). 
At the end of 1918 Chesterton's life had been darkened by the death of his brother from an illness acquired on active service. He vowed to continue Cecil Chesterton's weekly, the 'New Witness', and did so until his death, though it later became 'GK's Weekly'. His wife and friends deplored this commitment, since he was not a natural editor, and it made heavy demands on him for both money, to keep it afloat, and time, since he wrote much of its content himself. During the 1920s he was also active with Belloc in the distributist movement, which aimed for a middle way between capitalism and socialism by ensuring the widest possible distribution of property. It is not surprising that his later writings show signs of fatigue; the use of paradox, originally so surprising and provocative, becomes repetitive and predictable, and he is given to setting up and then demolishing straw men. Even at its best his late prose can resemble a baroque sermon, spinning endless significance out of a simple truth. At the start of his career Chesterton had enjoyed the pleasures of intellectual opposition, using his rhetorical and stylistic skills to undermine materialism and liberal protestantism. As an eminent Roman Catholic layman, praised and honoured in the church, his writing was directed to defending and expounding Catholicism in all its aspects. As his critical Catholic admirer Christopher Hollis put it: 'this robbed his writing of that power of surprise which was itself one of its main attractions. Of the early Chesterton one never knew what he was going to say. Of the later Chesterton one always knew what he was going to say. (Hollis, 221-2)' Two of his late books are important. 'Chaucer' (1932) turns the poet into a familiar Chestertonian figure but is written out of intense devotion and makes an effective introduction. 'St Thomas Aquinas' (1933) provides a parallel to his earlier study of St Francis, focusing on the saintly philosopher rather than the saintly poet. Although Chesterton had no philosophical training, his book shows his intuitive grasp of Aquinas; the Thomist insistence that 'ens', or being, is the starting point of all philosophy was what he had sensed in his early conviction that existence is inherently valuable. A distinguished Thomist, Etienne Gilson, praised the book for having achieved a deeper insight into Aquinas than the professional philosophers. 
Chesterton's last years were made easier by his secretary Dorothy Collins, who brought order into his tangled literary and business affairs; she was also his chauffeur (in effect, an adopted daughter to the childless couple) who drove Chesterton and his wife on holidays and lecture tours in Britain and Europe. But his health was not robust; he was overweight and dropsical, and in 1936 he succumbed to heart and kidney failure. Chesterton died on 14 June 1936 at his home, Top Meadow, Beaconsfield, and was buried on 17 June at Beaconsfield. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32393


Chetwode, Philip Walhouse, first Baron Chetwode (1869-1950), army officer, was born in London on 21 September 1869, the elder son of Sir George Chetwode (1823-1905), who became sixth baronet, and his wife, Alice Jane (died 1919), daughter of Michael Thomas Bass and sister of M. A. Bass, first Baron Burton. 
Educated at Eton College, Chetwode gained athletic distinction by winning the 100 yards, the quarter mile, and the hurdles in 1887; he also played in the oppidan wall and field elevens. He entered the army through the militia, receiving his first commission in the 3rd battalion the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry, and in 1889 a regular commission in the 19th hussars. This impregnation with two distinct traditions of mobility, of light infantry and of cavalry, was both an influence and an augury. He married on 1 June 1899 Hester Alice Camilla (died 1946), daughter of Colonel the Hon. Richard Southwell George Stapleton-Cotton and great-granddaughter of Stapleton Cotton, first Viscount Combermere. They had one son and one daughter. 
He was fortunate to have an early chance of active service, in the Chin Hills expedition, Burma, of 1892-3. He was promoted captain in February 1897 after only seven years' service, when with his regiment in South Africa, and he was there when war broke out two years later. He took part in the defence of Ladysmith, and before the end of the war had been twice mentioned in dispatches and appointed to the DSO. Sir John French, who had been his first commanding officer in the 19th hussars, was strongly impressed by Chetwode's potentialities and sought his appointment to the staff on receiving the Aldershot command. Chetwode had not, however, passed through the Staff College, Camberley, and the War Office would not relax the rule. But in 1906 he became French's assistant military secretary. In the previous year he had succeeded his father in the baronetcy. In 1908 he was given command of his regiment in the cavalry brigade commanded by Edmund Allenby who, like French, was struck by Chetwode's quick grasp of a problem and keen eye for ground. 
Soon after completing his four years' term of regimental command Chetwode was given the London yeomanry brigade in the Territorial Force. During the Curragh incident of March 1914 he was chosen to replace Hubert Gough in command of the 3rd cavalry brigade when Gough and other senior officers tendered their resignations. The issue was settled and the resignations withdrawn, but Chetwode's provisional acceptance caused ill feeling which long persisted in some quarters. He was, however, given command of the 5th cavalry brigade shortly afterwards and took it to France on the outbreak of war in August 1914. His brigade helped to cover the retreat from the frontier, and at Cerizy inflicted a valuable check on the pursuing Germans. In the subsequent advance from the Marne it joined with the 3rd under Gough's command, the two then being designated the 2nd cavalry division. During this phase there was some criticism of Chetwode's caution in pursuit, although not of his general capacity as a commander. After the check on the Aisne, he moved up to Flanders with the rest of the cavalry and took part in the defensive battle of Ypres. In July 1915 he was promoted to command the 2nd cavalry division on French's recommendation, but by that time the trench deadlock had turned the opportunity into a cul-de-sac. 
More fortunate than most cavalrymen, Chetwode was provided with a wider scope by transfer to the Near East in December 1916 as commander of the desert column in the Egyptian expeditionary force under Sir Archibald Murray. Here Chetwode showed striking ability in devising and planning bold manoeuvres, although in execution these several times fell short of their prospect from a sense of caution fostered by his concern for the water supply of the horses. 
In January 1917 Chetwode advanced against the Turkish fortified post at Rafah on the Palestine border. The post was surrounded soon after dawn, following a night approach through the desert, but the attack made such slow progress that in the afternoon Chetwode was instructing Sir Henry Chauvel to prepare to withdraw when the key position was stormed. In March an advance was made on Gaza by a larger force under Sir Charles Dobell, with Chetwode commanding the desert column. Gaza was enveloped and the garrison on the verge of surrender when the attack was broken off at nightfall after consultation between Dobell and Chetwode who expected a Turkish counter-move and were anxious about water for the horses. A second attack in April failed at heavy cost, the enemy having been reinforced. Dobell was then replaced by Chetwode and, in June, Allenby took Murray's place. On Allenby's arrival in Egypt he received a plan of manoeuvre finely conceived by Chetwode and his staff officer, Brigadier-General Guy Payan Dawnay. When applied in the autumn this resulted in levering the Turks out of their defences. Chetwode was now in command of the newly formed 20th corps which was brought up in the subsequent advance on Jerusalem when the 21st corps was checked. To him was due both the conception and the direction of the stroke which turned the Turks' resistance in the hills and opened the way to the capture of the holy city. 
In 1919 Chetwode became military secretary to the secretary of state; he was deputy chief of the Imperial General Staff (1920-22), and for a short time adjutant-general: a notable series of appointments for an officer who was not a Staff College graduate. In 1923 he was given the highest command at home, Aldershot. It was a time of retrenchment but he exerted a helpful influence on the remodelling of the army by his constant insistence on the need to break loose from entrenchment and revive manoeuvre in warfare. While he still cherished the horse and was rather sceptical of the tank, his demand for 'a general quickening up all round' of movement and leadership was encouraging to those younger men who were proclaiming the new vision of lightning strokes by armoured forces. 
At the end of his four years' tenure Chetwode was only fifty-seven but the two posts senior to him had been filled within the previous two years. In 1928 he accepted a temporary step down and became chief of the general staff in India. The prospect of Chetwode eventually becoming chief of the Imperial General Staff disappeared when the holder, Sir George Milne, obtained an extension, but in 1930 Chetwode became commander-in-chief in India, a five-year appointment. It was a very difficult period: the military need for modernizing the army in India conflicted with the economic and political demands for reducing military costs, while there was growing pressure to indianize the army. Chetwode came through this ordeal with remarkable success, showing the qualities of statesmanship in the way he steered a course amid the rocks and swirling currents of British conservatism and Indian nationalism. His frankness of speech and downright manner both helped and hid his diplomacy. The proportion of entirely Indian-officered units was much increased, an Indian Sandhurst created, and also an Indian air force, while the Indian marine became the Indian navy. The slight progress made in modernizing the army and its equipment was not surprising. Chetwode had to work in a very conservative military environment, and within a limited military budget -- in which he achieved considerable economies and an overall reduction. 
Chetwode had greater natural gifts than most of the eminent soldiers of his time. Not intellectual, he was highly intelligent. His shrewd and incisive comments in conference, delivered in a racy 'Newmarket twang', made a lasting impression. He gripped an audience as few generals could -- all the more because he looked and spoke like a leader. He was a 'big' man both physically and in personality. His 'military testament' delivered to the Quetta Staff College before he left India was one of the most penetrating indictments of orthodoxy and mental atrophy and stimulating calls for imagination ever delivered from the throne of military authority. To an unusual extent he practised what he preached. He shone even more in peace than in war since his exceptional capacity for imagination, which may have caused an occasional hesitation in carrying through battle-plans which he had masterfully conceived, became an increasing asset, as did his flexibility, as he rose higher and entered the sphere of statecraft. 
Chetwode was promoted field marshal in 1933 and on returning from India was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1936 and received the honorary degree of DCL, Oxford. Earlier honours were CB (1915), KCB (1918), GCB (1929), KCMG (1917), and GCSI (1934). He was constable of the Tower of London (1943-8) and rendered valuable service during the Second World War as chairman of the executive committee of the Red Cross and St John joint war organization. He was colonel of the Royal Scots Greys, the 15th/19th hussars, and the 8th light cavalry (Indian army). He was created a baron in 1945 and died on 6 July 1950 at 23A Grove End Road, London. As his son had died in 1940, the titles passed to Chetwode's grandson, Philip ('b'. 1937). 
B. H. L. Hart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32394


Chevalier, Albert Onesime Britannicus Gwathveoyd Louis (1861-1923), comedian and actor, was born on 21 March 1861 at 21 St Ann's Villas, Royal Crescent, Notting Hill, London, the eldest son of Jean Onesime Chevalier, language teacher, and his wife, Ellen Louisa Mathews; his name at birth was registered simply as Albert Chevalier. He was educated at Clanricarde College, Bayswater, and St Mary's College, Richmond. After leaving school he worked briefly as a clerk in a newspaper office and as a pupil teacher before gaining an introduction to a theatrical agent through the playwright Dion Boucicault. Chevalier's first professional appearance was at the Prince of Wales's Theatre, London, on 29 September 1877, and his subsequent theatrical career featured character and comic roles in popular drama, both in London and provincial theatres. He appeared in Arthur Pinero's 'The Magistrate' (1885) and 'The Schoolmistress' (1886) before becoming principal comedian in burlesques at the Avenue Theatre in 1889. During the 1880s Chevalier was also writing shows and songs, and his song 'Our 'armonic Club', written for the burlesque 'Aladdin, or, The Wonderful Scamp' ('c'.1888), began the series of coster pieces which were to establish him as a star of London music-halls. 
On 5 February 1891 Chevalier made his first appearance as a music-hall performer at the New London Pavilion, Piccadilly Circus. He appeared in character as a costermonger, and sang 'The coster's serenade', 'The nasty way 'e sez it', and 'Funny without being vulgar'. The performance drew upon an older music-hall tradition of the stage cockney established by Alfred Vance and others, and upon the London characters of Charles Dickens, particularly that of Sam Weller whom Chevalier had played in an unsuccessful touring show. However, Chevalier modernized the speech of Weller and the mid-century cockney performers, and recast the criminal coster of Vance as a sentimental version of a working-class Londoner. His decision to perform in music-halls was unusual for an actor at this time: it resulted in part from his limited success in the theatre, but also reflected the development of the 'syndicate' music halls, like the Pavilion, which sought to reorganize the industry and present a respectable entertainment to a wider audience than that of the older halls. Chevalier himself defended his decision in an article in the 'English Illustrated Magazine' in 1893 where he argued that music-hall audiences had become 'ready to digest some sentiment, some traits of deeper human life' (Chevalier, 'On Costers', 487), and he was championed by literary figures such as George Bernard Shaw and the poet Arthur Symons. On 8 October 1894 he married Florence Isabel ('b'. 1868/9), daughter of the music-hall performer George Leybourne; they had no children. 
Chevalier worked in the major London music-halls for seven years, often performing a 'turn' in three or four halls each night. He established a repertory of coster songs written by himself and his brother Auguste (who composed under the name of Charles Ingle). These included 'Wot cher!, or, Knocked 'em in the Old Kent Road', 'The future Mrs. 'Awkins', ''Appy 'Ampstead', and his most successful number, the workhouse-door melodrama 'My old dutch'. At the height of his career Chevalier was one of the best-paid music-hall stars, earning up to $450 per week. However, his brief venture in music-hall management, at the Trocadero in 1893, was disastrous, and resulted in debts of $10,000. 
During the 1890s Chevalier interspersed his London music-hall appearances with shows elsewhere in Britain. These took place in concert venues as Chevalier refused to appear in provincial music-halls. After returning to Britain from a successful tour of the United States and Canada in 1896-7 he largely abandoned music-hall performances of any kind to concentrate on these 'recitals', as he termed them. He had come to dislike what he considered the unpredictability and inattentiveness of music-hall audiences, and he also faced rivalry from other coster entertainers, particularly Gus Elen, who had developed a more complex and bleakly comic version of the genre. In his recitals Chevalier presented other kinds of character sketches alongside his coster songs, including those of a rural vicar in 'Our bazaar', a failed actor in 'A fallen star', and a west-country peasant in ''E can't take a roise out of oi'. While none of these achieved the popularity of the coster songs, Chevalier maintained a successful solo career. His annual season of twice-daily recitals at the Queen's Hall, London, which began in 1899, ran to over 1000 performances. 
Later in his career Chevalier also returned to the theatre. He played the title role in J. M. Barrie's 'Pantaloon' (1906) and in the same year appeared with the French chanteuse Yvette Guilbert. He continued to write songs and drama, and his final play 'My Old Dutch', co-written with Arthur Shirley and based on his own song, had some success at the Lyceum Theatre in 1920 despite its by then dated sentimentality. Chevalier made his last London appearance in a revival of this play in November 1922. 
Albert Chevalier was in some ways an innovative popular performer who established the coster style of performance, wrote his own material, and exploited the commercial opportunities of the developing music-halls in the 1890s. He made commercial recordings of his songs, and appeared in several early films, including one of 'My Old Dutch'. He died at his home, Lake House, 38 Woodberry Down, Stoke Newington, London, on 10 July 1923, and was buried in Abney Park cemetery on 13 July. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32395


Cheyne, Thomas Kelly (1841-1915), biblical scholar, was born on 18 September 1841 in London, the youngest son of the Revd Charles Cheyne (died 1867), second master at Christ's Hospital, and his wife, Sarah Anne, whose father was Thomas Hartwell Horne, editor of the popular 'Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures'. Cheyne was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School, London, and then at Oxford University, where he was at Magdalen College, briefly, before taking up a scholarship at Worcester College. On the grounds not only of poor health but also because of his unusual talents in fields outside the regular honours schools, he took only a pass degree in 1862. Subsequently he was awarded numerous distinctions, including the chancellor's English essay prize, the Ellerton theological essay prize, and the Kennicott Hebrew scholarship. He then spent time in Germany at the University of Gottingen, where he studied under Heinrich Ewald, the critical 'Old Testament' scholar, whose influence is evident in Cheyne's early work, 'The Book of Isaiah Chronologically Arranged' (1870). After his return to Oxford, Cheyne became vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, and in 1865 he took priest's orders. In 1868 a Semitic fellowship was established for him, by Balliol College, based on his knowledge of Semitic philology and biblical criticism. This made Cheyne the first in Oxford to teach the methodology of biblical and textual criticism. He remained in the post until 1882. He was rector of Tendring in Essex from 1880 until 1885. In 1884 he joined the Old Testament Revision Company. From 1885 until 1908 he was the Oriel professor of the interpretation of holy scripture, and canon of Rochester. 
Cheyne's special knowledge of continental critical scholarship and literature was recognized early in his career when, at the age of twenty-eight, he took charge of the theological department of 'The Academy', then newly founded, to which he himself would contribute many reviews of both British and continental works. Further, in conjunction with the 'Theological Translation Fund Library', he encouraged the translation of noted German critical works. It is evident from his writings in 'The Academy' that by 1871 Cheyne had accepted the hypothesis of K. H. Graf that the 'Grundschrift' (later known as the priestly code) was post-exilic in origin. In this Cheyne was probably the first British scholar to accept the hypothesis. In 1877, while Hebrew lecturer (from 1870 until 1882), Cheyne proposed that there be a second chair of Hebrew, one untrammelled by the strictures of the Anglican church, whose occupant would thus be able to teach a purely historico-critical interpretation of the 'Old Testament'. This was consistent with his academic principle, evidenced in his 'Book of Isaiah' (1870), that 'a priori canons of a theological or a philosophical nature' should be kept apart from questions of philology (Introduction, xvii). 
However, after 1880 Cheyne's stance became more evangelical, and for a while it was possible for scholars to describe him as an 'orthodox' exponent of the historical school, in marked contrast to later perceptions of his work. His books, especially on the prophets, were initially recognized not only in Britain but also in Germany for their contribution to textual and exegetical scholarship, notably 'The Prophecies of Isaiah: a New Translation' (2 vols., 1880-81; 'Isaiah' was always of literary interest to Cheyne); 'The Book of Psalms' (1888); 'The Origin and Religious Content of the Psalter' (1891), in which he placed all the psalms except one in the post-exilic period; and his work on the Wisdom literature, 'Job and Solomon' (1887), to cite but a few from his impressive output. In 1884 Cheyne was awarded an honorary DD by Edinburgh University. He spent from November 1897 until January 1898 in the United States lecturing on Jewish religious life in the post-exilic period. 
Although Cheyne's earlier work had evinced some sensitivity towards the concerns of traditional biblical scholars, this disappeared with his growing conviction, advanced in 'Aids to the Devout Study of Criticism' (1892), that historical criticism enhanced rather than impeded faith. He clearly enjoyed controversy, referring, for example, to the 'exciting battles of 'Pentateuch'-criticism' (Preface, 'Job and Solomon', viii). Contemporary church scholars believed that his reckless attitude could hinder the acceptance of biblical critical scholarship in Britain. His position was challenged by Gladstone in 1891, and the people of Rochester publicly demonstrated their hostility towards their canon's 'blasphemy'. 
Cheyne's belief in the superiority of the critical approach is most evident in his work 'Founders of Old Testament Criticism' (1893), written in response to the controversy caused by the British translation of Julius Wellhausen's 'Prolegomena to the History of Ancient Israel' (1885), in which the traditional view of Israel's history was challenged definitively. In 'Founders' Cheyne chronicled the history of the rise of the critical method. Drawing on his own meticulous research he described the work of both German and British scholars. While the book was clearly meant as an apologia for the critical approach, 'Founders' has endured as a valuable reference work. 
As Cheyne's literary career continued, his own historico-critical views became more extreme. He edited, with J. S. Black, the 'Encyclopaedia biblica' (4 vols., 1899-1903) which he described as 'a brave forward movement in the critical study of the 'Bible'' ('Critica biblica', 1903, 2). Contributing many articles, he first delineated the tenuous north Arabian theory of H. Winckler that 'Mizraim' often refers not to Egypt but to a north Arabian kingdom, Musri. Cheyne became convinced that this theory was correct, and he began to ascribe to north Arabia a radical part in Israel's history. The substantiation at textual level of this hypothesis increasingly dominated his work and publications, for example in 'Traditions and Beliefs of Ancient Israel' (1907) and 'The Mines of Isaiah Explored' (1912). Cheyne held also that Israel's major opponents were the Jerahmeelites and, in the course of justifying this, literally 'Jerahmeelized' the 'Old Testament' text (Day, 'Dictionary of Biblical Interpretation'). These obsessions, coupled with his scorn of the 'average opinions' of biblical scholars ('Critica biblica', 3), and his lack of concern that they regarded him as extreme, caused him to lose the respect of many of his contemporaries. A. B. Davidson was led to write that 'This critic, chameleon-like, has reflected in succession critical opinions of every colour and complexion. In him there is no continuance' (Strahan, 309). Cheyne's later exegetical work was to be of value only to the specialist in Semitics. This part of his career has been described as 'one of the most tragic episodes in the history of scholarship' ('DNB'). 
Cheyne was married twice, first in 1882 to Frances, third daughter of the Revd D. R. Godfrey, fellow of Queen's College, Oxford, and rector of Stow, Norfolk. She died in 1907, after which he married the poet Elizabeth Gibson (1869-1931), daughter of the chemist, antiquarian, and photographer John Pattison Gibson, in 1911. Elizabeth's brother, Wilfred Wilson Gibson, achieved note as a poet. Both of Cheyne's marriages were childless. In 1883 he lost the sight of one eye. 
In his last years Cheyne apparently embraced the Baha'i faith, though he chose to remain an Anglican priest, Baha'ism not opposing but subsuming Christian belief in the divinity of Jesus Christ. His last work, 'The Reconciliation of Races and Religions' (1914), reflected his new beliefs. He had appealed in previous writings for a 'more progressive church theology' ('Job and Solomon', 9), as a foundation for 'Old Testament' scholarship, and clearly he related this also to the 'New Testament', believing little of the synoptic narrative to be accurate. He died in Oxford at his home, 11 Oakthorpe Road, on 16 February 1915, having suffered from debilitating health most of his life. 
Despite the nature of his own work in later years, Cheyne, with his contemporary S. R. Driver, set the ground in Britain for the modern critical study of the 'Old Testament' through his application, tenacity, and breadth of knowledge. He was described in 1893, with A. B. Davidson and W. R. Smith, as 'being the real Bahnbrecher of our modern British 'Old Testament' research' (Whitehouse, 280). 


@@@@@


doc= 32396


Cheyne, Sir (William) Watson, first baronet (1852-1932), bacteriologist and surgeon, was born at sea, off Hobart Town, Tasmania, on 14 December 1852, the only child of Andrew Cheyne (died 1867), of Ollaberry, Shetland, captain in the merchant navy, and his wife, Eliza (died 1856), daughter of William Watson, minister of the united parishes of Fetlar and North Yell. After the death of his mother Cheyne was brought up by an aunt and uncle on Fetlar, one of the Shetland Islands. 
His early education took place there and he subsequently attended Aberdeen grammar school, and King's College, Aberdeen. In 1871 he entered Edinburgh University to study medicine, despite his family's desire for him to enter the clergy. Cheyne was anxious to go to sea like his father, and through studying medicine he hoped to gain a position as ship's surgeon. At Edinburgh he excelled in his studies, especially chemistry, and won twelve medals. In 1872-3 he attended the lectures given by Joseph Lister, and he won the first prize for the course. He then became Lister's dresser. 
Cheyne graduated MB, CM, in 1875. Following this he studied under A. C. Theodore Billroth in Vienna and Freidrich Daniel von Recklinghausen in Strasbourg. On his return to Edinburgh he became house surgeon to Lister. He embarked on bacteriological research and in 1877 was awarded the Syme bacteriological scholarship, worth $100 a year for two years. He became demonstrator of anatomy at Edinburgh in the same year. 
In 1877 Cheyne accompanied Lister to King's College Hospital, London, where Lister had been appointed to the chair of clinical surgery. There they encountered a mixture of hostility and apathy towards their work from staff and students alike. Lack of opportunities in hospital and private practice led Cheyne to consider a career in the Indian Medical Service (IMS), but Lister paid him a retaining fee of $200 a year to act as his private assistant and to administer anaesthetics during operations. Cheyne found ample time for research in his early years at King's. In 1879 he passed the examinations for the membership and fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1881 the college awarded him the Jacksonian prize, for a dissertation on antiseptic surgery. 
As a surgeon Cheyne rose to a distinguished position. In 1880 he was appointed assistant surgeon at King's; he became surgeon in 1887, professor of the principles and practice of surgery in 1891, and professor of clinical surgery in 1902. Active in the Royal College of Surgeons he was Hunterian professor of surgery and pathology in 1892. He delivered the Bradshaw lecture in 1908 and the Hunterian oration on the subject of wound treatment in 1915. He also served on the college's court of examiners and was a member of the council. From 1914 to 1916 he served as president. 
Cheyne was twice married: first, on 29 January 1887, to Mary Emma (died 1894), daughter of the Revd William Servante, of Plumstead, Kent; they had two sons, and their one daughter died in infancy. Second, in 1894, he married Margaret (died 1922), daughter of George Smith, of Lerwick, Shetland; they had one son and two daughters, all of whom predeceased him. 
Cheyne was a loyal and active defender of Lister's work on antisepsis. His 'Antiseptic Surgery: its Principles, Practice, History and Results' (1882) was described by 'The Lancet' as 'a starting-point for the more general adoption of Mr Lister's treatment' (29 July 1882, 143). His 'Manual of the Antiseptic Treatment of Wounds for Students and Practitioners' (1885) brought the method to a wider audience. 
Cheyne was also instrumental in establishing the science of bacteriology in Britain, through experimental research and the translation of a number of works by continental authors. In 1883 he published 'A Report on the Relation of Micro-Organisms to Tuberculosis', in which he furnished evidence in support of Robert Koch's discovery of the causal link between the tubercle bacillus and tuberculosis. He translated two important German works: Koch's 'Etiology of the Traumatic Infective Diseases', in 1880, and Carl Flugge's work on micro-organisms, in 1890. In 1886 he travelled to Berlin to work in Koch's laboratory, and he edited two collections of recent researches for the New Sydenham Society, entitled 'Bacteria in Relation to Disease', and 'Suppuration and Septic Disease'. His own research on the micro-organisms involved in suppuration and sepsis led to his election to the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1894. 
On the outbreak of the South African War in 1899, Cheyne was appointed civil consulting surgeon to the forces. He was appointed CB in 1900 for his services, and in 1908 he was created a baronet and received a commission as surgeon rear-admiral in the Royal Naval Reserve. In 1910 he was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the king. When war broke out in 1914 he was made consulting surgeon to the navy and he served in the Dardanelles with the fleet. In 1916 he was appointed KCMG, and at the end of the war he retired from active practice. 
From 1917 to 1922 Cheyne served as MP for the universities of Edinburgh and St Andrews; later he was a member for the combined Scottish universities. In the house he endeavoured to restrict his contributions to matters concerning medical issues. His maiden speech addressed the subject of unqualified practitioners treating disabled soldiers during the war. In 1919 he was gazetted lord lieutenant of Orkney and Shetland, an office he held until 1930. 
In 1924 Cheyne was awarded the first Lister medal in recognition of his contributions to surgical science. In the same year he delivered the Lister memorial lecture at the Royal College of Surgeons. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford, Edinburgh, and Birmingham, and in 1927 he was made honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. 
In appearance Cheyne was tall and well-built, and he had the look of a Scandinavian. Throughout his life he spoke with a strong Shetland accent. Like his father he was a skilled sailor, and his seamanship was formed in the waters near his home. Cheyne died in Holloway Sanatorium, Virginia Water, Surrey, after a prolonged illness, on 19 April 1932, and was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest son, Joseph Lister Cheyne MC ('b'. 1888), colonel in the 16th lancers. A memorial service was held at the chapel of King's College Hospital, London, on 25 April 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 32397


Chifley, Joseph Benedict (1885-1951), prime minister of Australia, was born at Bathurst, New South Wales, on 22 September 1885, the eldest of three sons of Irish-Australian and Irish immigrant parents, Patrick Chifley (1862-1921), a blacksmith, and his wife, Mary Anne Corrigan (1856?-1929). He attended a bush school and then spent two years at the Patrician Brothers' High School, Bathurst. Before and after joining the New South Wales railways as a shop-boy in 1903, he educated himself assiduously for years at night school, and through the Workers' Educational Association and the Railways Institute. On 6 June 1914 Chifley, a Roman Catholic, married, in the Presbyterian church, Elizabeth Gibson (1886-1962), daughter of George McKenzie, a fellow railwayman. The McKenzies gave the Chifleys a house where they lived for the rest of their lives. They had no children. Chifley remained a non-communicant Roman Catholic until his death. 
Chifley rose to full driver's rank in 1913 and subsequently also gave instruction in his craft. A local and state trade union officer (while still working as a driver), he appeared repeatedly as expert witness or advocate in industrial arbitration proceedings. In 1917, as a prominent leader of his union, he was dismissed from the railway service following the failure of a bitter and far-reaching strike in New South Wales industry. On appeal he was reinstated to a junior rating, with loss of superannuation and seniority rights. His union had been decimated, and was deregistered by the state industrial court. He was one of a handful of men who worked unrelentingly for years to rebuild the union and restore the strikers' former positions. In 1920 he was a founder of the nationwide Australian Federated Union of Locomotive Enginemen, with access to the commonwealth arbitration court. But not until the return of a Labor government in New South Wales in 1925 were the pre-1917 seniority and other rights of the strikers regained. 
In 1922 Chifley followed his father as a director of the Bathurst District Hospital and of a local daily newspaper, the Bathurst 'National Advocate'. Among many other local public activities, he was from 1933 to 1947 a member (and for several years president) of the Abercrombie shire council. 
In 1922 and again in 1924 Chifley failed to win selection as Labor candidate for the local seat in the New South Wales legislative assembly. In 1925, as Labor candidate for the federal seat of Macquarie (which included Bathurst), Chifley ran the sitting government member close. In 1928 he won Macquarie and in 1929 held it when a Labor government under J. H. Scullin was swept into office. Without control of the senate and confronted by the mounting misery and turmoil of the depression, the Labor Party was soon split by frustration and dissension inside and outside parliament. Early in 1931 the cabinet suffered defections to right and left. On 2 March Chifley was elected to one of the vacancies and served as minister for defence and minister assisting the treasurer, E. G. Theodore. At the end of March the New South Wales state branch under J. T. Lang, who had been at loggerheads with Scullin, was expelled from the Australian Labor Party but retained considerable popular support. In November the government was defeated by the defection of Lang sympathizers in the house of representatives. Theodore, Chifley, and most other New South Wales members who had remained loyal to the federal Labor Party lost their seats at the December elections, which resulted in a landslide against Labor. 
From 1931 until 1940, Chifley's bids to re-enter parliamentary life failed. He gave years of leadership to the struggle in New South Wales to reunite the Labor factions and to oust Lang (which was achieved in 1939-40). From 1936 to 1937 Chifley served on the royal commission on banking, recommending bank nationalization in a minority report. Following the outbreak of war in 1939 the non-Labor government of R. G. Menzies appointed Chifley a member of the capital issues advisory board, director of labour supply in the department of munitions, and a member of other wartime bodies. In September 1940, however, Chifley regained the Macquarie seat and was elected to the opposition front bench. 
In October 1941, when Labor under John Curtin assumed government, Chifley took office as third-ranking minister, with the treasury portfolio (which he held continuously until December 1949), membership of the war cabinet and the production executive of cabinet, and also (December 1942-February 1945) the additional portfolio of minister for post-war reconstruction. Curtin increasingly relied on Chifley as his 'home front' and house of representatives aide and as his closest confidant. 
As treasurer, Chifley pushed taxation to new levels, while filling loans of unprecedented proportions several times a year. He imposed stringent controls on credit, prices, and consumption, achieving by 1943 comprehensive stabilization and rationing schemes that afforded 'fair shares' while releasing a maximum of food and supplies to Britain and her allies and holding cost-of-living figures stationary until the war was won. With the uniform taxation legislation of 1942 he permanently reinforced commonwealth financial ascendancy by establishing a federal monopoly of direct taxation. By wartime regulation, followed by legislation in 1945, he expanded the central banking and other functions of the Commonwealth Bank, reformed its direction, and brought other banks under stricter central bank and governmental control. 
Despite the government's failure in the years 1942-4 to win approval for wider constitutional powers for the federal parliament, Chifley prepared a wide range of measures for demobilizing and re-establishing former servicemen and -women and war workers, land settlement, housing, social security and health service extensions upon an entirely new financial basis, grants to universities and scholarships for their students, disposing of wool and other surplus stocks, national development works, and the use or disposal of government munition factories and surplus construction equipment. These were applied with a high degree of timeliness and success. In his dual wartime ministerial capacities he was also the key man behind Australian participation in international planning of mutual aid, relief, food and agriculture, monetary stabilization, full employment, and increased world trade. 
On 30 April 1945 Chifley became acting prime minister and on 12 July, following Curtin's death, prime minister. He represented Australia at two historic prime ministers' conferences in London -- that of 1946, which made a crucial review of the British Commonwealth's changed strategic and economic requirements, and that of 1949, which thrashed out a basis for retaining republican India as a full partner. He was an unvarnished, practical British Commonwealth man. Between 1945 and 1949, during the absence of colleagues overseas, he acted as minister for external affairs for a total of some seventeen months and minister for defence for a shorter period. Chifley displayed a high order of statesmanship in leading the nation and, not least, his own party towards accepting new and uncomfortable facts of international life facing Australia in the fields of collective security, world economic arrangements, and the emergent Asia. He judged Dutch efforts to curb Indonesian nationalists as about as useless as 'poking a stick into water' (Ward, 268). In all this his hand was strengthened by the convincing vote of confidence lent to his government by the general elections of 1946. 
At home, as treasurer as well as prime minister, Chifley carried on his battle for economic stability with high success until he failed in May 1948 to carry a constitutional amendment allowing the federal parliament to maintain essential economic controls beyond the life of the wartime defence powers; but even then he did not give up the struggle. He was also a firm believer in a large public sector of the economy. He was the leading spirit behind the measures for nationalizing internal and external airlines, banking, stevedoring, and telecommunications, for the close public control of coalmining and broadcasting, for the public development of hydroelectric power, atomic energy, coastal shipping, aluminium production, whaling, and television, for the advance planning of massive national development works by the Australian National Works Council (which he created in 1943), and for reorganizing and expanding the commonwealth's scientific and industrial research organizations. His was the decisive role in founding the Australian National University and inaugurating the huge Snowy Mountains hydroelectricity scheme. Although the courts ruled nationalization of internal airlines and banking unconstitutional, the Chifley government created a public airline (Trans-Australia Airlines) to compete with private lines and expanded the Commonwealth Bank. He aimed in all of these measures at controlling and civilizing capitalism, not at abolishing it. 
Opposed by the British Medical Association in Australia, Chifley failed to complete his design for non-contributory national health services. In the field of industrial arbitration and conciliation, however, he succeeded in reforming the existing institutions on a basis better adapted to cope with the industrial unrest during the post-war transition, unrest greatly aggravated by communist leadership of some of the largest industrial unions. Chifley insisted on sustaining civil liberties in the industrial field (though some thought otherwise) but he provided procedures enabling trade unionists to overcome communist rigging of union ballots. His government enlarged the membership of both houses of the national parliament in 1948 to represent more adequately the growing electorate. 
After an attempt to nationalize the banks in 1947, the politics of which Chifley mishandled badly, his opponents redoubled their efforts to overthrow his government. All sectional grievances were vigorously exploited; the opposition attacked particularly Chifley's economic controls, retained in the post-war years to sustain stability at home and the hard-pressed British food standards and sterling area balances abroad. A severe coalminers' strike in the summer of 1949 made for temporary public hardships and Chifley's use of the military to work the open-cut mines at its height alienated many in the labour movement. In the December general elections, opposition promises to end the recently reintroduced petrol rationing and extend child endowment (with which Chifley refused to compete) probably proved decisive. Among other things, he had failed to pay sufficient attention to what he himself termed the 'hip-pocket nerve' of the Australian electorate (Manne, 179). A Liberal-Country Party composite government took office under Menzies. Labor, however, held a majority in the senate. 
As leader of the opposition (1949-51), Chifley determinedly fought some of the methods provided for in a bill to suppress communism in the trade unions and elsewhere. After he had gained some important concessions from Menzies, the federal executive of the Labor Party, against his advice, called a halt to further opposition that might have brought about an early double dissolution of parliament on the communist issue. But Chifley's deputy, H. V. Evatt, on behalf of some of the unions, fought the 'Communist Party Dissolution Act' in the high court and got it declared unconstitutional. A deadlock at that time (March 1951) between house and senate over a bill to undo parts of Chifley's 1945 banking reforms provided the government with the opportunity to dissolve both houses and fight an election mainly on the communist issue. At the end of November 1950 Chifley had suffered a heart seizure that had required three months' rest. But he now campaigned doggedly throughout Australia to the limit of his strength. In April 1951 the Menzies government was returned with a majority in the senate and a reduced majority in the house. Chifley was re-elected unopposed as leader of the Labor opposition. But on 13 June, while resting in his room in the Hotel Kurrajong, Canberra, he suffered a second heart attack and died without regaining consciousness. 
Chifley was a man of fine presence, naturally shy, yet warm, outgoing, and quietly humorous. He was a most capable and successful negotiator and a tremendous desk-worker, for whom his civil service officers had unstinted admiration. A much-loved party colleague, with the confidence also of his opponents, he was a very successful parliamentary manager. He was not an orator and a chronic throat condition over the last twenty years of his life (he described his voice as resembling 'a lot of rusty old chains knocking together'; Waterson, 414) weakened his otherwise persuasive debating powers. His colourful, homespun expressions rarely missed their mark. Chifley had (except over Menzies' anti-communist measures) an extraordinarily complete command of his party inside and outside parliament -- no Labor prime minister has rivalled his sustained command of his followers. He was a typical Australian Labor amalgam of radical, socialist, and conservative. Politics was for Chifley the art of the possible and he pursued the social and economic betterment of his fellows, his 'light on the hill' (McMullin, 254) as effectively as any other Australian Labor prime minister. Yet his fatal misreadings of the bank nationalization issue and the 1949 coal strike finally brought him down. 
Chifley was sworn of the privy council in 1946. He was accorded a state funeral and was buried in the Bathurst City Cemetery, where a memorial has been raised over his grave by the Labor Party. 


@@@@@


doc= 32398


Child, Harold Hannyngton (1869-1945), writer and theatre critic, was born at Gloucester on 20 June 1869, the second son of the Revd Thomas Hannyngton Irving Child, afterwards rector of Stratton, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Florence, daughter of Thomas Crossman, solicitor, of Thornbury, Gloucestershire. Child was a scholar both of Winchester College and of Brasenose College, Oxford. After being awarded a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1892 he was articled to a firm of solicitors in Thornbury but after a short period in the firm's London office he abandoned the law. At Oxford he had been friends with George Bancroft, son of Squire and Marie Bancroft, and in 1894 he played a small part in 'Slaves of the Ring' by Sydney Grundy, the first play criticized by G. B. Shaw in the 'Saturday Review'. For the next two years Child was a member of various companies, playing the 'light juvenile gentleman'. His experiences as an actor were humorously recounted in 'A Poor Player' (1939). 
Even before he left the stage Child began to write. Introduced to 'The Star' by Richard Le Gallienne, he contributed a series of short stories to that paper and his first book, 'Phil of the Heath' (1899), was a romantic novel of the 'Reform Bill' period. In 1896 Child married Drusilla Mary (died 1918), sister of the actress Kate Cutler (1870-1955), and daughter of Henry Cutler, an artist. 
Between 1905 and 1910 Child was successively assistant editor of 'The Academy' and the 'Burlington Magazine', and he was drama critic of 'The Observer' from 1912 to 1920. Meanwhile he joined his old friend Bruce Lyttelton Richmond in producing the 'Times Literary Supplement', which was founded in 1902. He contributed substantial critical articles over a period of forty years to this journal, and on the basis of their quality he was invited to write a number of wide-ranging chapters for the 'Cambridge History of English Literature'. The theatre retained a special place in his interest: for many years he shared the dramatic criticism of 'The Times' with A. B. Walkley, and in this he was greatly assisted by his own personal experience of the stage. He gradually established himself as an authoritative historian of Shakespearian production in particular, and up to the time of his death each volume of 'The New Shakespeare', edited by Arthur Quiller-Couch and John Dover Wilson, contained a stage history written by him. He wrote a number of notices for the 'Dictionary of National Biography', including those of the Bancrofts, Walkley, Irving, Wyndham, Esmond, and Ellen Terry. 
Apart from the theatre, Child had a keen interest in poetry, music, and the arts. He was secretary from 1902 to 1905 of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, and translated Louis Dimier's 'La peinture francaise au XVIe siecle' as 'French Painting in the Sixteenth Century' (1904). He was also the author of a book on Thomas Hardy (1916), of the libretto of Ralph Vaughan Williams's 'Hugh the Drover' (1872; new edn, 1959; repr. 1993), and of a small book of love poems, 'The Yellow Rock' (1919). But it was to 'The Times' that the greater part of his energy was devoted, and a selection of his articles is preserved in 'Essays and Reflections' (1948). Describing his writing as 'clean and scholarly', a contemporary stated that he 'was best in his anonymity'; 'his real works will be found unsigned... in the files of 'The Times' and the 'Literary Supplement'' (Roberts). 
In a series of articles, later published together as 'Love and Unlove' (1921), Child revealed something of his own approach to life: 'Happiness is not a negative measure of shutting out, but a positive measure of taking in more and more'. In 1934 he married Helen Mary, daughter of H. Spenser Wilkinson. A victim of recurrent asthma, Child nevertheless remained a good clubman and a most sensitive companion. Neither his failing health nor the bombing of his London flat during the war destroyed the buoyancy of his faith in spiritual values. Child died at his home, 31 St Flora's Road, Littlehampton, Sussex, on 8 November 1945, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32399


Child, Thomas (1839-1906), Swedenborgian minister, son of John Child of Darlington, heckle-comb maker, and his wife, Grace McKay, was born at Arbroath, Forfarshire, on 10 December 1839, and brought up there in the Free Church of Scotland. He was sent to a relative at Darlington to learn tanning but ran away. After serving an apprenticeship to a chemist he was employed by manufacturing chemists at Horncastle, Lincolnshire; there, as there was no Presbyterian congregation, he joined the Congregational body and subsequently, with a view to its ministry, studied at Airedale Independent college, Bradford (1862-7). He was Congregational minister successively at Castleford in the West Riding of Yorkshire (1867-8), and Sittingbourne, Kent (1870). In October 1870 he married Louisa Martha Hadkinson, whom he had met in 1868 in Matlock, Derbyshire, where he was recuperating after an illness. His perusal of the 'Appeal' by Samuel Noble led him to accept the doctrines of Emanuel Swedenborg, and in 1872 he left Sittingbourne to join the New Church. As a preacher of the New Church, he officiated at Newcastle upon Tyne (1872), moving to Lowestoft (1874) and to Bath (1876), where he was ordained on 15 October 1878. In March 1886 he became assistant at the chapel in Palace Gardens Terrace, Kensington, to Jonathan Bayley, who died on 12 May 1886, when Child became his successor. He died on 23 March 1906 at his home, Melrose, Milton Road, Hanwell, Middlesex, and was buried on the 29th in Highgate cemetery; his wife survived him. 
Child's writings and lectures in support of New Church principles, for the publication of which Sir Isaac Pitman was responsible, enjoyed considerable vogue. His chief work was 'Root Principles in Rational and Spiritual Things' (1905), a reasoned reply to Haeckel's 'Riddle of the Universe'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32400


Childe, (Vere) Gordon (1892-1957), prehistorian and labour theorist, was born at the rectory of St Thomas's Church in Sydney, New South Wales, on 14 April 1892, the only surviving offspring of the Revd Stephen Henry Childe (1844-1928), rector of St Thomas's Church, and his second wife, Harriet Eliza (1853-1910), daughter of Alexander Gordon, a barrister, and his wife, Anne. Delicate when young, he was educated from the age of fifteen at the Sydney Church of England grammar school, where he excelled particularly in Latin. In 1911 he entered the University of Sydney, specializing in classics and philosophy. He graduated in April 1914 with first-class honours, the university medal for classics, and the Cooper graduate scholarship in classics, which took him the following October to Queen's College, Oxford. In a university and city increasingly depleted of its male members by the demands of war, Childe took a BLitt in 1916, his thesis entitled 'The influence of Indo-Europeans in prehistoric Greece', his supervisors being the distinguished scholars Sir Arthur Evans and John Myres. In 1917 he obtained a first in 'literae humaniores' (Greats). 
Childe grew to maturity in a country then considered the world's social laboratory. At Oxford he soon became involved in the socialist movement, doing his turn as secretary of the Oxford University Socialist Society and president of the Oxford Union of Democratic Control, and also working for the National Council for Civil Liberties and the Fabian Society research department. His friends included G. D. H. Cole and his future wife, Margaret Postgate, her brother Raymond, and particularly Rajani Palme Dutt, later a founder member and foremost theoretician of the British Communist Party, with whom he shared many academic and political interests. Occasionally they would walk out to Boars Hill for tea with Evans. 
Rich in academic success, Childe returned to an Australia riven by the issue of conscription. He became senior resident tutor at St Andrew's College, Sydney (a university-affiliated establishment), but, indicative of the way his life would persist as an interplay between academic brilliance and political conviction, his tenure was short. It was claimed that his peace movement activities were discrediting both institutions, and he was compelled to resign. Excluded on political grounds from appointments at Sydney and Queensland universities for which he was well qualified, he also experienced a public witch-hunt forcing his resignation from a teaching post at Maryborough Boys' Grammar School, Queensland. By now well known in New South Wales Labor Party circles, Childe was eventually appointed private secretary to John Storey, the party's leader, who retained him in that post on becoming state premier in April 1920. In late 1921 Childe was sent to London to report on European social democratic movements, but Storey's death precipitated a change of government, and Childe's post was soon abolished. He was then thirty, without job prospects in either Australia or Britain. 
In 1923 Childe published his first book, 'How Labour Governs: a Study of Workers' Representation in Australia', subsequently a classic in Australian historiography. It is often interpreted primarily as an analysis of how the Australian Labor Party, 'starting with a band of inspired Socialists, degenerated into a vast machine for capturing political power' (Childe, 'How Labour Governs', 209); but T. H. Irving has shown that, in line with guild socialist principles enunciated by his mentor, Cole, the book is better read as an argument that a working-class party should be both a party of representation and an agent for political change and democracy. 
Although not excluding the possibility of a political career, Childe began his return to archaeology in 1922 by visits to sites and museums in Greece, the Balkans, and central Europe, while he also worked on 'The Dawn of European Civilization', which, when published in 1925, brought immediate academic recognition. In that year, urged by Myres, he became librarian at the Royal Anthropological Institute. In 1927 he became the first holder of the Abercromby chair of prehistoric archaeology at the University of Edinburgh, moving in 1946 to become the first professor of prehistoric European archaeology and director of the Institute of Archaeology in the University of London. Elected fellow of the British Academy in 1940, and a recipient of honorary degrees from American and European universities, as well as those of Sydney and Edinburgh (the latter posthumously), he retired in 1956. Returning to Australia in April 1957, he visited relatives and colleagues, gave some lectures (on one occasion comparing contemporary Australia unfavourably with tenth-century Iceland) and explored the New South Wales Blue Mountains. There, at Govett's Leap, Blackheath, he committed suicide on 19 October 1957. The funeral on 23 October was at his father's old church, St Thomas's, north Sydney. The body was cremated. 
Childe was widely regarded as the most distinguished European prehistorian of his time, with a bibliography of over 600 items, predominantly concerned with the European neolithic and Bronze ages. 'The Dawn' was rapidly followed by four books relating to his abiding academic concern, first set out in the former's preface. 'My theme is the foundation of European Civilization as a peculiar and individual manifestation of the human spirit' (Childe, 'Dawn', xiii). 'The Aryans' appeared in 1926, followed by 'The Most Ancient East' (1928), 'The Danube in Prehistory' (1929), and 'The Bronze Age' (1930). In 1931 he published 'Skara Brae', an account of excavations he had directed at the famous Orkney neolithic village. 
To many of his contemporaries Childe was the great synthesizer, competent in almost every European language, these books his lasting achievement. His own final self-assessment was very different, stressing instead 'interpretative concepts and methods of explanation' (Childe, 'Retrospect', 69). By such means he brought order to the mass of facts pertaining to European prehistory, relating it to the historic ancient Near East particularly by definitions of specific cultures, spatially and chronologically arranged. To this scholarly corpus was added 'New Light on the Most Ancient East' (1934), 'The Prehistory of Scotland' (1935), a new edition of 'The Dawn' (1939, hastened by the threat of war -- three more editions were to follow), 'Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles' (1940), 'Scotland before the Scots' (1946), a Marxist interpretation equivocally received, 'Prehistoric Migrations in Europe' (1950), and a revised 'New Light' (1952). 
Childe also wrote very successfully for what he called the 'bookstall' public, notably 'Man Makes himself' (1936) and 'What Happened in History' (1942), both often reprinted and widely translated. The underlying theme of each, one written during the depressed 1930s, the other completed in 1941 when German military successes were paramount, was that progress was real if discontinuous. As Sherratt has written of Childe's stance: 'Over the long term, the increase in human numbers and their independence from environmental controls are some measure of man's evolutionary success; and just as the Industrial Revolution marked a crucial turning-point, so prehistory too was punctuated by periods of sharply accelerated growth. (Sherratt, 179)' These changes, from hunting to farming, and from the latter to urban society, Childe termed the neolithic and urban revolutions, which, in evolutionary terms derived from the Enlightenment, distinguished savagery from barbarism and barbarism from civilization. After 1945 appeared 'History' (1947), a Marxist study of historiography (where, incidentally, the future of society was not guaranteed), 'Social Evolution' (1951), and in 1956 'Piecing together the Past', a 'Short Introduction to Archaeology', and 'Society and Knowledge', a study of epistemology. His last book was a final testament. In 'The Prehistory of European Society' (1958) he argued forcefully that the origins of European capitalism lay in the freer relations of production existing in Bronze Age Europe compared to those of oriental despotisms. 
Childe never married, and his commitment to scholarship and at times shy and austere personality could suggest aloofness. Deemed by some a poor lecturer, he was more accurately a brilliant and inspiring teacher, ready to assist colleagues and students alike in the establishment of prehistory as a coherent and knowable subject, relevant to society as a whole. Within the labour movement and to other supporters of the left he was known for his commitment to socialist causes, his membership of the Association of Scientific Workers, and his association with several left-wing journals. 
Childe's work has been much debated. Initially after his death his emphasis on the study of artefactually defined cultures was regarded as too limiting. The radio-carbon revolution destroyed his chronologies. Megaliths owed nothing to the Orient for their being. Prehistoric Europe was not its quirky birthchild, but a parallel, lusty creation. Under the banner of the 'new archaeology' Childe's work was pushed to the sidelines. His Marxism, often misunderstood in his lifetime, became irrelevant, its importance merely historical. 
More recently, partly because of widespread reactions against the new archaeology's determinism, has come the realization that much of Childe's work remains worth debating, not only among archaeologists. He was almost alone among his peers to raise such issues as the relativism of knowledge ('Hence, any society may be allowed its own logic'; Childe, 'Social Worlds', 18), and the enormous relevance of archaeology to the definition of progress in a world threatened by totalitarian regimes. Essentially a Marxist in the Western tradition, at various times, particularly after the entry of the Soviet Union as an ally in the Second World War, Childe regarded Russian archaeology, and to a much lesser degree Marxism-Leninism, sympathetically. Disillusionment, notably in 1956 when Stalinism was denounced in the Soviet Union shortly before a visit to Russian colleagues convinced him of serious unacknowledged deficiencies in Soviet archaeology (Klejn, 83-7), probably contributed to his suicide as much as his conviction that his own contributions to scholarship and society were complete. 
More than any other scholar in his field, however, and despite the divisive political and military turmoils of the first half of the twentieth century, Childe stood for the internationalism of learning. As a prehistorian he regarded the interconnections of cultures within the Old World, if not yet known, as knowable. Knowledge, though defined by its context, is not limited to that context. Modern culture, he maintained, 'already incorporates the real thought of past societies... The historian's business is to locate in their proper social and chronological context these thoughts that are still living and active in our culture... To this extent historical knowledge, knowledge of past societies, is both possible and profitable. (Childe, 'Social Worlds', 26)' And that knowledge is for universal benefit. 


@@@@@


doc= 32401


Childers, (Robert) Erskine (1870-1922), author and politician, was born in London on 25 June 1870, the second son of Robert Caesar Childers (1838-1876), a distinguished orientalist, and his wife, Anna Mary Henrietta (died 1883), daughter of Thomas Johnston Barton of Glendalough House, co. Wicklow. Childers was a reserved and sensitive child, and his youth was marked by two profoundly formative incidents. With the death of his father from tuberculosis in 1876, his mother was exiled to a home for incurables, and Childers and his siblings were sent to live with an aunt and uncle in Ireland. This loss appears to have lent him an enduring quality of independence of thought and action, while his upbringing at Glendalough inculcated a surpassing love of his mother's country of Ireland. Six years later, on the occasion of his mother's death, he began to suffer religious doubts. Given the fierce protestantism of his adoptive household, this was a cause of intense suffering, leading to his lifelong quest for more secular forms of faith. 
The first of these was the imperialism in which Childers was schooled at Haileybury College. In due course he declared that 'one can set no limits to the possibilities of an alliance of the English-speaking races' (letter to Basil Williams, 14 Oct 1903, Childers MSS, Cambridge), and at Trinity College, Cambridge, he would argue vehemently against the provision of home rule for Ireland. He graduated BA in 1893, and his ideological leanings led him to a clerkship in the House of Commons. Here the meticulous and methodical in the man masked a nature increasingly adventurous and romantic, the latter finding expression in ever more ambitious voyages in the smallest of sailing-boats, one as far as the north German coast. It was to events in South Africa, however, rather than Germany, that Childers was next drawn, volunteering to serve as a driver in the South African War. Although he retained the patriotic fervour that had fuelled this decision, the war on the veldt nevertheless opened Childers's eyes to the sincerity and conviction with which some were prepared to fight for self-determination. Hints of this appear in his letters home, collected and published as 'In the Ranks of the CIV' (1900), and this wider view is also evident in his volume of 'The Times History of the War in South Africa' (vol. 5, 1907). 
Childers's reputation as a writer, however, was largely forged by his novel, 'The Riddle of the Sands', published in 1903, and it is for this work that he is now remembered. A fictional account of German preparations to invade England, it drew upon his experiences of sailing in the German Frisian Islands, and brought to the central theme an unyielding verisimilitude. A fine thriller which has withstood the test of time, it is also marked by a richness of characterization, a matchless sense of pace, and a superb evocation of land- and seascape. Published soon after Britain's final attempt to make an alliance with Germany, and before the Anglo-French 'entente cordiale' of 1904, the book was a seminal contribution to the considerable body of 'invasion' literature in Edwardian Britain. 
When Childers visited the United States in the autumn of 1903, his writings provided an effortless introduction to the girl whom he would marry in 1904. Mary Alden (Molly) Osgood (1878-1964) was the younger of the two daughters of one of Boston's leading physicians, and as a couple they proved entirely devoted. A fervent republican, Childers's wife was to prove a crucial influence on her husband's subsequent political development. 
There followed seven quiet years. The couple's son Erskine Hamilton Childers was born in 1905, and Robert Alden followed in 1911. Childers gradually rose in seniority at the Commons, and his career as a writer developed through the 1907 volume on the South African War and two works on military strategy ('War and the Arme Blanche', 1910, and 'German Influence on British Cavalry', 1911). He was gradually moving towards Liberalism, to which a tour of rural Ireland in 1908 had proved a catalyst. The country was languishing under British rule, and Childers's observations convinced him of the justice of the calls for a limited form of Irish autonomy. There followed 'The Framework of Home Rule' (1911), one of the best contemporary surveys of the Irish question, written with Childers's characteristic precision and verve. Simultaneously, though, he was beginning to question the legitimacy of merely literary efforts. Like Arthur H. Davies, hero of 'The Riddle of the Sands', Childers longed for the primacy of action, writing to his old friend William Le Fanu: 'the older I grow the keener I get about things and the more acutely I feel the discomfort of caring, without the necessity that is simultaneously a sedative and a stimulant -- action' (letter to William Le Fanu, December 1909, Childers MSS, Cambridge). In 1910 he resigned his clerkship to pursue the political career that he and his wife agreed should now be their goal. 
Eventually standing as Liberal candidate for Devonport, Childers was shocked by the pragmatism of the political world, as he was still very much an idealist. Soon he was at odds with the party leadership, a situation exacerbated by events in Ulster reaching a crisis over the Unionists' threat of active resistance against the imposition of home rule. When the government in March 1914 offered Ulster temporary respite from the proposal, Childers felt that what was fast becoming his ideal of a united and semi-autonomous Ireland had been fatally compromised. He at once withdrew his candidacy. Scarcely had he done so than government ambivalence over the Larne gun-running to the Ulster Volunteers confirmed the wisdom of his decision, simultaneously fomenting the notion of arming the Irish Volunteers in the south. Childers and his wife became part of a committee to raise funds for such a purpose. In June 1914 he succeeded in running some 900 rifles and 25,000 rounds of ammunition into the Dublin port of Howth. An act of symbolic as much as practical value, Childers's voyage in his own yacht 'Asgard' is now seen as a turning point in the creation of an Irish republic. 
The First World War proved to be something of a hiatus. Childers volunteered in the belief that a war declared by Britain on behalf of the small nations of the world was one which perforce would benefit Ireland. As a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, he served in the North Sea, Gallipoli, and the Middle East, spending eighteen months as a seaplane observer and navigational instructor. For this work he won the DSC. Back in England, he was involved in the development of the early motor torpedo boats, returning to his aerial role at the end of the war to plan with Major-General Hugh Trenchard the first bombing raid on Berlin. 
Childers, though, was by then thoroughly disillusioned, not simply by the conduct of the war, but by the country itself. His return to England in 1916 had coincided with the Easter rising in Dublin, an incident to Childers profoundly disturbing in itself, and made doubly so by the severity of the government's repression of the putative establishment of an Irish republic. Attempts to impose conscription in Ireland appeared to Childers more and more to gainsay the government's -- the country's -- position as a protector of freedom. In 1917 he was temporarily seconded to work as assistant secretary to the Irish Convention, established to re-examine the Irish question. To his mother-in-law he wrote: 'I feel profoundly that England in the long run must stand or fall by her treatment of Ireland -- her supreme test -- and in her whole attitude towards the causes of the war and her intentions in it, [standing as we do] for the liberties and rights of small nations. (letter to Mrs Hamilton Osgood, October 1916, Childers MSS, TCD)' When the convention broke up in the spring of 1918 it dawned on Childers that in his eyes England would indeed 'fall', a view confirmed by the terms of the treaty of Versailles the following year. 
By then Childers had settled in Dublin to dedicate himself to the Irish cause. Because of his involvement in the gun-running to Howth, Childers was familiar with Sinn Fein's leaders, Eamon de Valera, Arthur Griffith, and Michael Collins. They saw in Childers a writer of talent and a former imperialist who had seen the error of his ways. Childers attended the Paris peace conference on the party's behalf to publicize Ireland's case, then produced a series of remarkable newspaper articles brilliantly exposing the increasingly violent repression of Sinn Fein -- a violence fully reciprocated against British forces. Before long, he was editing the republican 'Irish Bulletin', subsequently becoming minister of propaganda in the 'doppelganger' administration created by Sinn Fein. With the manipulation of public opinion as important as military activities in the outcome of the struggle, when a truce between the two sides was finally called in June 1921, it was as much to the credit of Childers as it was to the military commander Collins. 
For the subsequent peace conference in London, Childers acted as secretary to the Irish delegation. The war had been fought for a republic, but the delegates rapidly split over whether this was an achievable objective. Collins became the focus for compromise, Childers for hard-line sentiment, the republic for him now an article of faith as much as had been the empire years previously. The final treaty, granting modified dominion status to Ireland's southern counties, for Childers represented defeat, although without his presence such indulgence towards the new 'free state' that the treaty provided would have been less marked. It nevertheless in many respects ended the 700-year-old association between the two countries, foreshadowing the ultimate establishment of the republic. 
The division between the Irish delegates was replicated in Ireland itself. When the treaty was put to the vote in the Dail, the pro-treaty faction won a narrow majority. The country as a whole split into those who wished to continue to fight for a full republic, and those 'free staters' who would adhere to the treaty. By June 1922 civil war had erupted, de Valera and Childers among the leaders of the republicans, Collins and Griffith supporting the free state. Portrayed by Griffith as a 'damned Englishman', and a saboteur waging warfare on his adopted country, Childers in reality restricted his activities to propaganda. As the republican rump was driven towards the citadel of Cork, he edited the republican newspaper and himself wrote generous obituaries of the fallen Collins and Griffith. The end, though, was near. Never of robust appearance or constitution, during the treaty negotiations he had seemed a shadow. Now he was suffering from a persistent cough, reminiscent of his parents' tuberculosis. Recalled to Dublin by de Valera, Childers sought refuge in his childhood home of Glendalough. Here he was captured by free state troops. To his wife he wrote: 'Beloved, they have taken me' (letter to Mary Alden Childers, 11 Nov 1922, Childers MSS, TCD). 
Childers was armed with a small revolver, given to him in happier days by Collins. The carrying of weapons bearing the penalty of death, Childers was duly tried and sentenced. Despite international appeals for mercy, he was executed at Dublin's Beggars Bush barracks on 24 November 1922, after first shaking hands with the firing squad. He was buried in the barracks, but in 1923 was reinterred in the republican plot in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 
Vilified as a traitor by many in both England and Ireland, Childers met a curious and tragic end for the author of a work so fervently patriotic as 'The Riddle of the Sands'. Time, however, has largely rehabilitated his reputation. In England his novel has long been recognized as a masterpiece, and in Eire he is revered as one of the founding fathers of the republic. Among the more thoughtful in both countries he can be seen as a pioneer in the movement for self-determination who laid down his life for such a cause. Winston Churchill described him as a 'great patriot and statesman' in his role as one of the creators of modern Ireland. As a fitting continuation of his legacy, in 1973 Childers's son became the fourth president of Ireland. As the seventh earl of Longford wrote of Erskine Childers: 'With all his wanderings, his was a continuing journey, governed by no passing influences, guided to no ephemeral end. He lived and laboured, and he fought and died, under the shadow of the eternal' (Pakenham). 


@@@@@


doc= 32402


Childs, William Macbride (1869-1939), educationist, was born at Carrington vicarage, Carrington, near Boston, Lincolnshire, on 3 January 1869, the only child of the Revd William Linington Childs (1821-1893), vicar of Carrington, and his second wife, Henrietta Fowles Bell (1833-1889), daughter of a local estate manager; there were a son and two daughters of the first marriage. He was educated from 1879 to 1887 at Portsmouth grammar school (his father then being a vicar in Portsea) and from 1887 at Keble College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar; his second class in modern history (1891) was an enduring disappointment to him. 
In 1892 Childs became assistant private secretary to the cabinet minister Arthur Herbert Dyke Acland. He gained little from his brief dogsbodying occupation apart from the ability to mimic the rhetorical style of William Ewart Gladstone, then prime minister. A year later he accepted with some relief a lectureship in history at the university extension college in Reading, lately set up on the initiative of Christ Church, Oxford. On 8 July 1897 he married Emma Catherine (1869-1960), daughter of Alfred Whiting Pollard, a corn factor. She was at that time a lecturer in biology at the college, having gained an Oxford first in natural science; she gave up an academic career of great promise to care for him and their four sons. 
Appointed vice-principal in 1900, three years later Childs succeeded the college's first principal, Halford John Mackinder, on the latter's resignation. Early in his time there he formed the ambition eventually to turn Reading University College -- as it became in 1902 -- into a university, despite its chronic shortage of finance and relative proximity to London and Oxford. To attract students from a distance it needed to be residential, and he actively promoted the setting up of hostels and, later, halls of residence. Notwithstanding his Oxford background, he did not object to vocational courses, mainly in agriculture and horticulture, provided that these were not at the expense of the arts and sciences. He was fortunate in having gifted colleagues such as William George de Burgh, tolerant of his singlemindedness which, at times, spilt over into the dictatorial. 
As leader of this small team, Childs had an abiding sense of adventure and brought a craftsman's outlook to the task of turning this modest institution into something. From his early days in Reading he made equipment for camping expeditions -- his favourite method of getting away from it all -- and a boat for sailing. Likewise, the assembling of what later became the university out of none too pliable materials was a work of skilled craftsmanship. 
Childs's paramount task was to extract funds, or tangible resources, out of the wealthy businessmen or landowners in the neighbourhood. Between 1904 and 1906 he obtained three essential benefactions. He induced George William Palmer, senior director of Huntley and Palmers, to give a capital sum of $50,000; George William's younger brother Alfred Palmer donated the site for the college's permanent buildings; and Harriet Loyd-Lindsay, Lady Wantage, paid for a hall of residence, named Wantage Hall. 
Once these assets had been secured, Childs and his associates in 1906 drew up a programme for working towards university status. He thus needed a substantial endowment fund, and in 1911 the two Palmer brothers and Lady Wantage jointly gave no less than $200,000 to this fund, after months of delicate negotiation on his part. He later recalled the twists and turns in 'Making a University: an Account of the University Movement at Reading' (1933): the engaging style and sheer brio of the narrative tend to mask the contributions of others to the success of this ambitious project. 
After delays caused by the First World War, in 1920 Childs submitted a request for university status to the privy council, which commended achievements to date but judged that the college's funds were still inadequate. His next request, in 1925, owed its success largely to the by then well-established system of halls of residence. In 1926, when Reading University received its charter, Childs became the first vice-chancellor. 
The next three years were not particularly fulfilling ones for Childs. Pioneering and bold improvisation had given way to consolidation. A poor committee man, he preferred to float his own ideas -- the fruit of long solitary thought -- to having to weigh up the ideas of others. He found hobnobbing with his staff difficult; he would take no notice of colleagues he passed on foot. To private remonstrances on this habit, he replied that he could not see that it made any difference whether or not he greeted them. At the age of sixty, in 1929, he unexpectedly retired. 
Thereafter Childs read, wrote, lectured, fished, and caravanned; but above all he completed the house Grimsbury Bank, Hermitage, Berkshire, which he and his sons had built almost entirely by themselves, even down to the carved door latches. He died there on 21 June 1939 and was cremated at Reading on 26 June. In an earlier near-fatal illness, he had looked forward to another great adventure, doubtless anticipating achievements comparable with those realized during his adventures in this world. 


@@@@@


doc= 32403


Chirol, Sir (Mary) Valentine Ignatius (1852-1929), journalist and author, was born on 23 May 1852, the younger son of the Revd Alexander Chirol (1816-1875?), and Harriet Ashburnham (1824-1908), daughter of the Revd Denny Ashburnham of Catsfield, Sussex. The Chirols were Huguenots, who emigrated to England from Switzerland during the upheaval of the French Revolution. Alexander, ordained in the Church of England in 1841, was soon caught up in the Tractarian movement, and in 1847 he, along with his new wife and his mother, was received into the Roman Catholic church. Valentine Chirol was born in Europe and shortly afterwards his father, repenting his doctrinal switch, returned to England and to the Anglican church. Young Chirol and his mother, a devout Catholic until her death, stayed in Europe, where he was raised in her faith and as an only child; although of French descent and brought up in France and Germany, Chirol was a staunch English patriot, proud of his Anglo-Saxon Ashburnham blood. 
Chirol took his 'baccalaureat' at the Sorbonne in 1869, which entitled him to style himself a 'bachelier es lettres'. He continued his studies in Germany until the Franco-Prussian War made it prudent for mother and son to resettle in England. Although he kept terms at Lincoln's Inn from 1890 to 1892, Chirol did not choose a career at the bar. Trilingual as a boy, he spoke nine languages by the time he was in his mid-thirties. According to Chirol, his mind and character -- including an ability to dream in French and German as well as English -- were formed by his foreign upbringing and education. The direction his life took he credited to two dramatic events witnessed at first hand: the first was the entrance of Prussian troops into Paris in 1871; the second the destructive excesses of the Paris commune. Stirred deeply, Chirol pledged himself to 'the study and writing of history as we see it in our own times constantly in the making, whether shaped by new aspirations or by ancient forces' (Chirol, 20). 
Chirol's linguistic skills helped him to find a place at the Foreign Office, which he left after a stay of only four years. His abrupt departure was probably occasioned by a combination of youthful impatience with the slow pace and tedious routine of his post, and a taste for travel and exotic adventure, although financial embarrassment might also have contributed (L. S. Amery, 'My Political Life', 1953, 1.93). During his employment at the Foreign Office, Chirol learned how diplomacy worked and gained an insight into foreign affairs in general. He made some close friends and acquired the habit, never really lost, of thinking of himself as a diplomat. Freed from Foreign Office routine, he immersed himself in the history and culture of the Near East, which had intrigued him on a brief earlier visit. He went first to Cairo, then hardly touched by Western influences and sinking rapidly into the chaos that would result in British occupation. In 1879 Chirol was in Syria and Lebanon, and by 1880 Constantinople, where he learned the trade of journalism, working for the 'Levant Herald'. His first book, ''Twixt Greek and Turk' (1881), recounted his adventures and observations on a trip along the politically restless and violent Graeco-Turkish border. In 1882 the London 'Standard' sent him back to Egypt to cover Wolseley's campaign against Arabi Pasha. He continued to travel and to produce occasional journalism, making his first visit to India in 1883, traversing a primitive Persia in 1884, and serving as 'The Standard''s war correspondent in the Sudan in 1885. The following year he was in Sofia for the dramatic end to Prince Alexander's rule in Bulgaria. 
These were valuable 'Wanderjahre' for Chirol; he gained on-the-spot experience of international politics and a number of well-connected and well-informed friends, among them Moberly Bell, who in 1890 was appointed managing editor of 'The Times'. At Bell's urging the paper had set up a separate foreign news department with the widely respected correspondent, and Chirol's friend from Bulgarian days, Donald Mackenzie Wallace, as foreign editor. When Bell offered Chirol a job in 1891, Wallace warmly seconded the offer. The opportunity of working with Bell and Wallace, and for a paper with the reputation and influence of 'The Times', along with financial losses that reduced his scope for working part-time, led Chirol to accept. His post was to be Berlin, rapidly becoming one of the most important capitals on the recently remodelled map of Europe. 
Chirol, a slight, dapper man of medium height with reddish hair and blue eyes, moved to Germany in May 1892. Encouraged to acquit himself like the diplomat he already felt himself to be, he began 'the most important years of [his] life' (Chirol, 264). Extraordinarily adept at winning the confidence of German officials, including the foreign minister, Marshall von Bieberstein, and the behind-the-scenes architect of German foreign policy, Friedrich von Holstein, Chirol began at once to analyse German affairs, internal and external. Initially disposed to promote good Anglo-German relations, Chirol aimed for a balanced and open-minded tone in his dispatches. A growing awareness of the brutality of German politics, the unstable character of her autocratic emperor, and the aggressive nature of her military and imperial ambitions, began to suggest to him that Germany was, at best, an uncertain friend to England. In 1896 Chirol's special relationship with German officialdom abruptly ended when, in the aftermath of the Kruger telegram incident, he published the details of its authorship and the extent of German ambitions in South Africa in 'The Times' of 4 January. Hurt and frustrated at being ostracized by his former friends, and ridiculed by them in the manipulated German press, he returned to London. Not yet a thoroughgoing Germanophobe, Chirol's suspicions of Germany were now well planted. 
Chirol took himself, and his position as a representative of 'The Times', very seriously. Sensitive to slights touching on his dignity or his patriotism, he found that doubts not laid to rest were hard to forget. Although never physically robust and often in poor health, he was intrepid, even pugnacious, ever ready to defend himself and his opinions. Intellectually honest and deeply moral, he could not accept the duplicity that he felt permeated German diplomacy. On his return to London in 1896, Chirol served as Wallace's deputy until he became foreign editor in 1899; for the next twelve eventful years he decided the position that 'The Times' would take on foreign affairs. England soon abandoned diplomatic 'isolation' and allied herself to Japan in 1902, followed in short order by ties with her former enemies France and Russia. Increasingly convinced of the seriousness of the German threat, Chirol actively promoted these connections and then worked to strengthen them. He also worked to improve Anglo-American relations and, believing fervently in the beneficent capabilities of the British empire, he devoted himself to its preservation. 
Chirol was an exacting but encouraging editor. Under his direction a distinguished team of foreign correspondents made the paper's foreign news coverage pre-eminent throughout the world. He attempted to steer a middle course, aiming at a more balanced attitude to Germany than he himself had adopted as Berlin correspondent. Cultivating his quite exceptional relationship with the diplomatic and Foreign Office establishment, he listened closely to what his contacts had to say to him, while maintaining his personal independence and a sense of responsibility to his readership. When Lord Northcliffe bought 'The Times' in 1908 Chirol stayed on but was worried and upset by what he saw as the inevitable vulgarization of the august old 'Thunderer'. As changes at the paper multiplied, and the tempo of international crises increased, Chirol's health could no longer stand the strain of newspaper work. Granted a knighthood on his retirement in 1912, he continued to chronicle history in the making and serve the British empire. A productive author, his numerous titles reflect his lifelong interest in the East, most particularly in India. While still in Berlin he published 'The Far Eastern Question' (1896), and, during his years as foreign editor, 'The Middle Eastern Question' (1903) and 'Indian Unrest' (1910). 
On his retirement Chirol was named to the royal commission on the Indian Civil Service (1912-16), an appropriate appointment given his continuing fascination with Indian history and culture, and deepening concern with the political future of both the raj and the indigenous population. Between his work on the commission and the necessity of collecting evidence for his defence in a libel suit brought against him in 1915 by the Indian extremist Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Chirol spent the equivalent of several years effectively living in India. He was finally acquitted in the libel action in 1919, but by then had been exposed to the problems that would face India in a post-war world, an exposure that led him to write two further volumes, 'India Old and New' (1922) and 'India', a volume in the 'Modern World Series' (1926). Egypt also continued to fascinate Chirol; in 1921 he republished, as 'The Egyptian Problem', articles written for 'The Times' on the rise of militant Egyptian nationalism. 
Given his profound knowledge not only of Europe but of the Near East, Chirol was useful to the Foreign Office during the war. In 1915 he was sent on a secret tour of the Balkan states to try to bring them into the war on the allied side, an attempt that, through no fault of his, failed. At the end of the war Chirol went to the peace conference at Versailles to liaise between the French press and the British delegation on questions concerning the future of south-eastern Europe and Turkey. 
Chirol always had time for his friends. Accused in later accounts of excessive sensitivity and touchiness, he was in fact a loyal, generous, and understanding friend, who had warm and enduring friendships with some of the most interesting and vital men and women of his time. A testament to one such friendship is his 'Cecil Spring-Rice: in Memoriam' (1919). Never married, he loved the amenities of family life and was as fond of children as they of him. He was a member of the Athenaeum, a founder and governor of Lady Margaret's School in Parsons Green, London, and a director of the weekly publication 'The Near East and India'. A keen and able watercolourist, Chirol also loved music and was a discriminating collector of art and artefacts from around the globe. He wrote two well-received volumes of memoirs, 'Fifty Years in a Changing World' (1927) and 'With Pen and Brush in Eastern Lands' (1929). 
Although Englishmen later realized the debt that was owed to Chirol's presentient grasp of the threat posed by an armed and hostile Germany, his favourite tribute came from the then German foreign minister, Count von Bulow, in 1899. In a secret memorandum, published after the war, Bulow said that given the naivety and blind confidence of the British ruling classes, 'the most dangerous Englishmen for us are those who, like Chirol and Saunders, knew from personal observation how sharp and deep is the German dislike of England' (Dugdale, 114). 
Chirol died of a heart attack at 34 Carlyle Square, Chelsea, London, on 22 October 1929 and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. A Catholic as long as his mother lived, he had never forgiven the French clergy for their role in the Dreyfus affair. According to his wishes, an Anglican memorial service took place on 28 October at St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 32404


Chisholm, Hugh (1866-1924), journalist and editor of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, was born at 21 Harewood Square, London, on 22 February 1866. His father, Henry Williams Chisholm (1809-1901), became a senior civil servant, chief clerk of the exchequer, and author of 'The Great Account of Annual Public Income and Expenditure from 1688 to 1869', published as a 'Parliamentary Return' in three volumes -- a ten-year labour for which he was granted $1200. Hugh Chisholm's mother was Anna Louisa Bell ('c'.1824-1900), the daughter of a London wine merchant. 
Brought up in modest circumstances, Chisholm was educated at Felsted School (1878-85), where he was head boy for three years. He won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he took a double first in classics (1886 and 1888). He was called to the bar (Middle Temple) in 1892, but for financial reasons had already drifted into politico-literary journalism, becoming assistant editor and later (1897) editor of the deeply Conservative 'St James's Gazette'. He was a vociferous Disraeli-style imperialist and tariff reformer, and an enemy of Gladstone's policies. ''The St James's Gazette' had always seen in Gladstone a national danger. The danger had been none the less real because it was now removed,' he wrote about his journal's controversial stance during the period of national mourning on Gladstone's death in 1898. 'Why gloss over the past?' (Courtney, 'Oxford Portrait Gallery', 111). 
On 29 July 1893, the fine-featured, debonair, and strong-minded Chisholm, who stood over 6 feet tall, married a musically gifted Irish woman, Eliza Beatrix (1861-1947), daughter of Henry Harrison, a co. Down landowner. In 1900, after seven years of marriage, Eliza gave birth to the first of three sons. The year also saw a dramatic change in Chisholm's professional life, for 'The Times' had become co-publisher of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and Chisholm was made co-editor, with Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace and President Hadley of Yale University, of the tenth edition, updating the ninth edition by a further ten volumes, to make thirty-five volumes in all. Published in 1902-3, the tenth edition did extremely well commercially, thanks to its crusading patron, the American bookseller, advertiser, and businessman H. E. Hooper, who had purchased all rights to the 'EB', as it was generally known, from A. & C. Black in 1897. As a result, in 1903 Hooper asked Chisholm to edit a completely new edition, to be known as 'The Times Encyclopaedia Britannica'. Chisholm, Conservative imperialist, journalist, and club stalwart (he joined the Athenaeum and eventually became vice-chairman), rose to the occasion and over the next seven years prepared one of the three greatest monuments to Victorian and Edwardian cultural entrepreneurship (James Murray's 'New English Dictionary on Historical Principles' (later called the 'Oxford English Dictionary') and Leslie Stephen's 'Dictionary of National Biography' being the other two). His achievement can only be understood in terms of the transatlantic chemistry and partnership between Chisholm and Hooper. Horace E. Hooper was an idealist, with a determination to make the scholarship of a great modern encyclopaedia affordable and accessible to a general readership -- 'democratising the means of self-education' as Chisholm put it (Courtney, 'Recollected in Tranquillity', 232). Chisholm was seized by the intellectual challenge which this entailed at the start of a new century and brought to bear his formidable contacts in literary, historical, museum, university, and scientific circles. 
Chisholm divided the new encyclopaedia into comprehensive treatises within which were shorter articles: 40,000 entries compared to 17,000 in the tenth edition. The 29 new volumes totalled 44 million words, written by 1507 contributors, among whom were 168 fellows of the Royal Society, 53 presidents or secretaries of learned societies, 47 members of the British Museum staff, and 47 staff members of laboratories and observatories. Contributors ranged from Edmund Gosse to Bertrand Russell and Ernest Rutherford. 
Though innovative in his approach to imparting knowledge, Chisholm could neither type nor dictate, but wrote all his own letters, by hand. His real work lay in the orchestration of his scheme for a modern encyclopaedia that would be more than the sum of its parts: 'on uniform lines', he declared in his editorial preface, 'as a single organism' ('Encyclopaedia Britannica', 11th edn, 1.ix). In particular, he kept the project going throughout the disastrous period in 1909 when Lord Northcliffe, new owner of 'The Times', took affront at 'yellow journalism' accusations made in the law courts, and withdrew from his publishing agreement with Hooper. Cambridge University Press, impressed by the proofs of Chisholm's work, gladly took 'The Times''s place in 1910. 
The eleventh edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' was finally published under CUP's imprimatur in 1911. The edition had no entry under psychoanalysis, did not mention Freud, was poor on Fabian socialism and communism, and used only thirty-five women contributors. Theoretically a feminist (his sister Grace, a brilliant mathematician, was awarded a PhD 'multa cum laude'), Chisholm was in reality uncomfortable with women, a prude, and profoundly naive in matters of sex. 'We might have something newer than what Adam did for Eve when he was left alone with her in the Garden of Eden' complained one of his medical sub-editors in a famous quip (Courtney, 'Recollected in Tranquillity', 227). Nevertheless the 'EB''s eleventh edition is commonly regarded as the greatest encyclopaedic achievement in the English language of the twentieth century, and the credit was Chisholm's. To this day it remains a primary reference work of the state of knowledge in the English-speaking world on the eve of the First World War. 
So great was Chisholm's standing in 1911 that Northcliffe offered him the editorship of 'The Times'. Northcliffe did not then honour the offer, however, and for two years Chisholm edited the 'Britannica Yearbook' in Holborn, until returning to Printing House Square and 'The Times' as leader writer and day editor in 1913. During the First World War he was city (financial) editor and helped raise prodigious sums for government war bonds, but fell out with Northcliffe over labour issues -- penning the conservative leader which in 1919 finally brought Geoffrey Dawson's dismissal as editor. 
Chisholm had been happiest working with Hooper, for an increasingly American audience, and in 1920 Chisholm severed his 'Times' connection to edit three further, supplementary volumes of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', in order to update the eleventh edition. This edition, known as the twelfth edition, covered the First World War in detail. It was published in 1922. 
Chisholm was a keen freemason, a devotee of billiards and bridge, a man of independent mind and first-class intellect. He was Hooper's ideal as an editor, an English journalist-scholar with a sincere interest in America, backed by a staff of young university graduates, and with an unrivalled network of famous and distinguished contributors. When Hooper died in 1922, however, the inspiration behind the 'EB' died also. Chisholm died at 3 Courtfield Gardens, Kensington, London, two years later on 29 September 1924 as the result of a gangrenous appendectomy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32405


Cholmondeley, Hugh, third Baron Delamere (1870-1931), settler in Kenya and politician, was born in London on 28 April 1870, the only son of Hugh Cholmondeley, second Baron Delamere (1811-1887), and his second wife, Augusta Emily (died 1911), eldest daughter of Sir George Hamilton Seymour. He was educated partly at Eton College, where he proved difficult to discipline, and partly at a tutorial establishment. His father died when he was seventeen, he thereby inheriting the family estate at Vale Royal, Cheshire. After a brief spell of military service with the Cheshire regiment and the Cheshire yeomanry, Delamere began the organization of big-game shooting expeditions into eastern Africa. At the end of the fifth of these, in 1897, he crossed from northern Somaliland through Ethiopia into the north of the East Africa Protectorate (later Kenya). He was the first Briton to enter the territory from the north, and the beauty and the apparent agricultural possibilities of central Kenya deeply impressed him. 
Delamere returned to Vale Royal but revisited the protectorate again in 1899, and in 1902, finding English country life dull, decided to settle and farm in the future Kenya. His decision coincided with the policy of the British commissioner, Sir Charles Eliot, that the economy of the territory would be best developed by white settlement. Agricultural wisdom of the time held that such development must be in large land units and to the new and inexperienced colonial administration it appeared that vast areas of attractive land were unoccupied, with the African peoples incapable of putting them to use. 
Delamere was not the founder of white settlement, but that settlement very much bore the mark of his personality. The style of white settlement was his -- baronial, pioneering, but exuberant, living life to the full, and frequently to excess, in social behaviour. For such a society Delamere was the natural leader. He had, or was able to raise, funds for agricultural experimentation and he possessed a sharp intellect, quick in debate, and an autocratic and often volcanic temperament which, combined with influential connections in England, powerfully challenged the colonial establishment. Above all he believed that Kenya was destined to be developed as a 'white man's country'. 
Delamere first purchased, on the 99-year-lease system in place at the time, an estate of 100,000 acres in the Njoro area, with the intention of sheep ranching; this proved a failure, as did his next project, cattle ranching. Wheat proved more successful, but in all three projects Delamere invested heavily in experimentation and only after a decade was he able to extend his activities with further land purchases. Of these the most notable was at Soysambu where he was able to breed merino sheep on a large scale. The numerous uncertainties of African agriculture, and, at the end of his life, the worldwide economic depression, prevented his ever becoming very wealthy. Delamere married first, in July 1899, Lady Florence Cole (1878-1914), fourth daughter of the fourth earl of Eniskillen; they had one son. His first wife died in 1914 and on 28 May 1928 he married Gwladys Helen (died 1943), daughter of Rupert Evelyn Beckett and the former wife of Sir Charles Markham. 
Delamere's political career began in 1903 when he was elected chairman of the first settler farmers association; in 1907 he was nominated to the territory's first legislative council. During the early months of the First World War he acted as an intelligence officer in the border area between the protectorate and German East Africa. The work was both testing and dangerous, Delamere's health suffered, and he had to return to England for recuperation. In 1917, after return to the territory, he was elected to the governor's war council, a body created to co-ordinate the colony's war effort. After the war, elections, on a European men and women franchise, were held for the European settler members of the legislature, Delamere being elected for the Rift Valley constituency in 1920. He retained this seat until his death, though ill health forced a temporary resignation in 1929. 
Delamere's political objectives remained constant: the building of a 'white man's country', by reservation of the highlands together with selected urban areas for Europeans, and pressure on the government to ensure, by harsh measures, that the white community could draw on a supply of cheap African labour until such time as a white working class had been established. In the years before 1914 he led the settler opposition to a proposal to settle Jewish refugees and exiles in the territory. In the years immediately after the First World War he championed the settler resistance to the claims of Kenya's Indian community for full equality of citizenship, common roll elected members of the legislature or parity with the number of European members, the ending of segregation, and free immigration. In a charged atmosphere, with militant settlers talking of a coup, Delamere headed a European settler delegation to London. The final settlement, declaring Kenya primarily an African territory, ended Delamere's hopes for a Rhodesian-style white dominion, but nevertheless secured the European settlers in the highlands, giving them such powerful representation in the legislature that the general pattern of colonial rule became that of 'government by agreement' (officials and settlers) for the remainder of the 1920s, Delamere becoming a member of the executive council. In these years Delamere's principal political activities became centred on creating a union of the three east African territories, a union to be dominated by the white settlers of Kenya and Tanganyika. Predictably the governments of Uganda and Tanganyika could not accept any such project, though the debate on some form of union was to continue long after Delamere's death in 1931. 
As strong a personality as Delamere's inevitably aroused criticism, even among the white settlers, where he was attacked as representing only the large landowners, and also over some of his own land dealings. The secretary of state ordered two inquiries which nevertheless afforded him some defence. 
Delamere's career is remarkable as an unusual case of a single individual outside the official colonial hierarchy having so great an impact on the life and style of a colony. His political views and ambitions were of course those of a settler at a time of almost total colonial self-confidence. They should not obscure Delamere's massive and lasting contribution to Kenya's economic development, with experimentation in particular with rust-resisting wheat, support for new flour milling, creamery, and other processing industries, and personal generosity to new settlers opening up land for commercial use. That these assets may have passed later into the hands of others does not belittle his work. 
As a man, Delamere suffered from poor health; he arrived at his Njoro estate on a stretcher. Pain from riding accidents and malaria, and damage to his heart from his war service told heavily on him. The last months of his life were clouded by the appointment from London of a new and strong governor, Sir Joseph Byrne, who was not prepared to follow the 'government by agreement' policy. Delamere died of angina at Loresho, near Nairobi, on 13 November 1931. He was buried at Soysambu. He had been made KCMG in 1929. Until Kenya's independence, the main thoroughfare of Nairobi was named Delamere Avenue, and a statue of him stood at one end of the avenue. After independence the avenue was renamed and the statue removed. 


@@@@@


doc= 32406


Christiansen, Arthur Robin (1904-1963), newspaper editor, was born in Wallasey, Cheshire, on 27 July 1904, the only son and second of the three children of Louis Niels Christiansen, a master shipwright of Danish descent, and his wife, Ellen Miller. From the age of fourteen, at Wallasey grammar school, he was producing a magazine -- reporting school events, writing the short stories, drawing the illustrations, and stitching the pages together on his mother's sewing machine. He had fallen in love with the printed word, and he never fell out of it. Soon after his sixteenth birthday he joined the 'Wallasey and Wirral Chronicle' as a reporter. From there, three and a half years later, he moved to the 'Liverpool Evening Express' and 'Daily Courier', and in 1925 he was appointed the 'Evening Express''s London editor. Within a year he was news editor of the 'Sunday Express', and in 1928 assistant editor. He took charge of the office on the Sunday morning in 1930 when the airship R101 crashed in flames at Beauvais on its maiden voyage to India, and brought out a special late-morning edition which won the admiration of Fleet Street and, more importantly, brought him to the attention of the proprietor, Lord Beaverbrook. 
In 1932 Beaverbrook sent Christiansen to Manchester to edit the northern edition of the 'Daily Express'; he then brought him back to London in 1933, first as assistant editor and then, in the same year, as editor of the 'Daily Express'. He was only twenty-nine. It was the beginning of a remarkable association which was to last nearly twenty-five years and to lift the 'Daily Express' from a sale of 1.7 million to 4 million. Christiansen described their association thus: 'I was a journalist not a political animal. My proprietor was a journalist and a political animal. The policies were Lord Beaverbrook's the presentation mine' (Griffiths, 154). This was a frank and truthful piece of self-analysis but it conveys no flavour of the battles, the tensions, the coolnesses, the moments of warm affection that made up the association of the two men. 
Christiansen's presentation was not simply a matter of making headlines bigger and bolder; by the brilliant and highly personal use of type and illustration he combined legibility with dramatic appearance in a harmony new to popular journalism. His best work represented a revolution in newspaper design -- not always acceptable to the typographical purists but much copied by other newspapers and overwhelming in its appeal to the public. At the very outset of his editorship Christiansen -- who had the support and understanding of Beaverbrook's able manager E. J. Robertson -- surrounded himself with forceful, energetic men of his own generation, many of whom stayed with him throughout his career. A constant flow of talent was recruited into the paper's columns. 
In a particularly turbulent period of a turbulent calling Christiansen inspired loyalty not only by the exercise of considerable personal charm but by his daily staff conferences and his daily bulletins. His conferences were conducted with a high-spirited, shirt-sleeved exuberance which not only expressed his own jovial, generous nature, but also set the tone for the next day's paper. Dullness was banished; optimism shone through. What was good for the executives turned out to be a formula which had an intense appeal for those millions of readers whose struggles, ambitions, and aspirations Christiansen instinctively understood. Immediately the morning conference ended he wrote his daily bulletin, in which he analysed the paper, gave praise or blame, stated general principles, produced such much-quoted phrases as 'the man in the back streets of Derby' (a character who grew into the prototype 'Express' reader), and developed his ideas on presentation of news. 
Yet policy and presentation could not be wholly divorced; in the printed word the medium can also be the message. An example of this occurred when in 1938 the 'Express' published the headline 'There will be no war', with the later addition of 'this year, or next year either'. Authorship remains doubtful; what is certain is that Christiansen projected the slogan so prominently and so vigorously that the headline subsequently became a convenient weapon for critics to employ in attacking everything they found hateful about 'Express' political policies. Criticism of political policies, however, did nothing to halt the rising sales of the 'Express' and for many years, until the post-war rise of the 'Daily Mirror', it had the highest sale of any newspaper in Britain. 
In July 1956, after twenty-three years of editorship, Christiansen had a heart attack while staying with Beaverbrook in the south of France. He was no longer able to edit in the pattern of vigorous leadership that he had established, and after an unhappy period when he tried, and failed, to adjust himself to new jobs and to a new relationship with Beaverbrook, he resigned in May 1958 and finally severed his connection with the Beaverbrook press in 1959. 
Christiansen switched his energies to work in television and films but he never found there the satisfaction that newspapers had brought him. On 27 September 1963 he collapsed and died of a heart attack in a television studio at Anglia House, Norwich; a funeral service was held on 3 October at the church of St Bartholomew, Holland-on-Sea, Essex. 
In 1926 Christiansen had married Brenda Winifred Shepherd, with whom he had two sons and two daughters, and who survived him. His elder son, Michael Robin, edited the 'Sunday Mirror' from 1964 to 1972. 
Edward Pickering', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32407


Christie, John (1882-1962), founder of Glyndebourne Opera, was born on 14 December 1882, at Eggesford, Devon, the only child of Augustus Langham Christie (1857-1930), a country squire, and his wife, Lady Rosamond Alicia Wallop (died 1935), third daughter of the fifth earl of Portsmouth. His family had acquired large estates over the past hundred years since their ancestor came from Switzerland to settle in England, and now owned the manor house at Glyndebourne in Sussex and some 10,000 acres, as well as an extensive property, Tapeley Park, in north Devon. Unfortunately Augustus Christie suffered from a nervous instability verging upon insanity, and the early life of the son was spent away from his father. His childhood was unhappy, which had the effect of making him fiercely independent and often rebellious, so that at the age of six, being strong and well able to look after himself, he was sent away to school, where he quickly earned a reputation for indiscipline. In 1896 he went to Eton College, like his father and grandfather, where, despite his small stature, he made his mark by unconventional behaviour and by the capricious use of his intelligence according to whether he liked or disliked his masters. From there he was sent in 1900 to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, but he injured his foot in a riding accident, and, much to his satisfaction, he abandoned a military career and in 1902 passed into Trinity College, Cambridge. Here he spent three years reading natural sciences, which he liked, and he developed a keen interest in music and the motor car. After getting a second-class degree (1905) he became a master at Eton in 1906 and spent sixteen years there (apart from two years on war service), which proved, as he often said, to be the happiest of his life. At that time Eton masters were allowed very considerable freedom, and he was conspicuous among a somewhat eccentric community for a novel approach to his duties and methods. But he enjoyed teaching and had the gift of inspiring loyalty among his pupils, and he made many friends among his colleagues. In the First World War, the years 1914-16 saw him in France, where, as a captain in the King's Royal Rifle Corps, he showed absolute fearlessness in action, which won him the Military Cross (1915) and the admiration of his men. But trench warfare proved too severe a strain on his injured foot and he returned to Eton, staying there another six years, until he decided to give up teaching in order to pay more attention to the development of his inherited assets. 
In 1913 Christie's father had let him have virtual control of Glyndebourne, which he made his own home and used for entertaining his friends. In 1920, when he gained legal ownership of the estate, he at once set about improving the amenities of the house. He had already built on a large room which was to become the centre of his musical activities. Here he had installed a cathedral organ, buying up an organ company for the purpose, and he developed the estate workyard, which later grew into a most successful commercial enterprise. He also acquired a controlling interest in various other businesses, for he felt strongly that a landlord should do something constructive with his money and property, and he had no use for the idle and parasitic rich. As yet he confined his musical interests to performances in the organ room. In 1930 he became engaged to (Grace) Audrey Laura St John-Mildmay (1900-1953), a gifted soprano with the Carl Rosa Opera Company, daughter of the Reverend Aubrey Neville St John-Mildmay (later tenth baronet), and they were married on 4 June the next year. Almost at once he made plans to give complete operas at Glyndebourne, but his wife saw that this would not be practicable unless it were done 'properly' (as she put it). Therefore her husband, who trusted her professional judgement implicitly, decided to build a theatre on to the back of his country house. So Glyndebourne Opera was founded. 
When this announcement was made, the music world was incredulous, the press derisive, and even his closest friends thought that such a wild scheme could not possibly succeed. But he went ahead, and by summer 1934 the opera house had been built with a large and excellently equipped stage but a relatively small auditorium holding about three hundred people. A first-rate team was assembled under the leadership of the conductor Fritz Busch and the producer Carl Ebert, with John Christie himself and his wife at hand to keep things under control. Recent visits to Salzburg and elsewhere had made them both ardent Mozartians, and the first season opened with 'Le nozze di Figaro'. It was immediately pronounced a triumphant success both by the musical intelligentsia and by the lay public, and an equally good reception was given to 'Cosi fan tutte' which followed. During the next four years the repertory was extended to the other three best-known Mozart operas ('Don Giovanni', 'Die Zauberflote', and 'Die Entfuhrung') and to Verdi's 'Macbeth' and Donizetti's 'Don Pasquale'. In five productions of three of these operas Audrey Mildmay sang with great charm and distinction, while in the same period managing to have a daughter and a son and to act as an exemplary hostess to her many guests. She was indeed a person of rare quality. The first three seasons had cost John Christie about $100,000, of which $21,000 had been lost on the running costs of the opera, but in 1937 he was able to make a small profit and thus to prove that such a thing could be done. Then war started, and Glyndebourne became a home for London children. Audrey Christie, much against her will, took her own children to Canada, where she eked out a precarious existence by giving concerts, but she was able to return home in 1944. At once Christie set about considering means of reviving the opera, but financial problems were acute, since he did not feel it reasonable to spend more of his private fortune for the benefit of the public. A few concerts with Sir Thomas Beecham and opera performances (the world premieres of Benjamin Britten's 'The Rape of Lucretia' and 'Albert Herring', and Gluck's 'Orfeo ed Euridice', with Kathleen Ferrier) were given in 1946-7, while the Glyndebourne company was engaged in creating productions for the Edinburgh festival, where it performed opera exclusively from 1947 to 1949. But it was not until 1950 that support from the John Lewis Partnership enabled Glyndebourne to put on its own festival again. Then in 1952 the Hungarian textile manufacturer Nicholas Sekers (later knighted for his services to music) organized the supporters of Glyndebourne into a group known as the Glyndebourne Festival Society (the first scheme of its kind in Britain), and this substantially assisted the opera to remain solvent. Shortly afterwards the decision was taken to place it under a charitable trust (established in 1954), the first to be registered for the benefit of the performing arts, and which later became the normal procedure in this field. But before this could come into effect Glyndebourne suffered a tragic blow with the death in 1953 of Audrey Mildmay at the age of fifty-two. Fortunately she had lived to see the opera on its way to permanent existence, and her principles and ideals were continued long after her death. The year after John Christie became a Companion of Honour as a reward for his work. Thenceforth he played a less active part, and his son George took over most of the executive control. Christie lived another seven years, mentally as alert as ever but physically much handicapped by failing eyesight. In the last months of his life he became almost completely blind in his one remaining eye (he had lost the use of the other some fifty years before and had eventually had it removed), but even now, confined to a wheelchair, he was still the same genial host and stimulating company that he had always been. At last in 1962 he was no longer well enough to attend the opening night of the season, and on 4 July Christie died at Glyndebourne, aged seventy-nine. 
In any estimate of the character and achievement of this remarkable man, perhaps the most obvious conclusion would be that he had to an extraordinary degree the ability to reconcile the ideal with the practical. Most people who knew him well would agree that among his many qualities the most vital were a highly original and creative mind, dynamic and inexhaustible energy, and unfailing and unbounded optimism. He was fifty when he established a new and challenging objective in his life, and from that moment he pursued this purpose with a ruthless and unflagging singleness of aim. Many thought of him as impossibly eccentric, but a closer acquaintance with the man himself showed that most of his decisions were amply justified in the event, even if he sometimes gave curious reasons for making them. Cast in a mould somewhat larger than life, it was not surprising that he should advise others to 'think big' (to use his own phrase) and to ignore and despise littleness of mind and action. Above all he believed that life was not worth living without what he called 'amusement'. By this he did not mean that a person should show a shallow or frivolous attitude to his or her problems, but rather that he or she must be capable of sifting out whatever grains of humour might be found in the chaff of experience. All through his life John Christie applied this philosophy in handling difficult situations and people, and he had the rare gift of settling disputes by making them appear ridiculous. He did not suffer fools gladly, and he had no time for those who bored him or did not try to see his point of view; nor was he particularly ready to see their own. Nevertheless he did what no man had ever done before in producing opera at his own country house and persuading people to come from all over the world to hear it. As he often said, the object of Glyndebourne was not just to put on good performances of opera but to aim at perfection, and, in the opinion of many, he came nearer to realizing this ideal than anyone else in the history of opera. 
Nigel Wykes', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32408


Christie, Richard Copley (1830-1901), educationist and scholar, was born on 22 July 1830 at Lenton, Nottinghamshire, the second son of Lorenzo Christie (1802-1892), a Manchester mill owner resident at Edale, Derbyshire, and his wife, Ann (died 1861), daughter of Isaac Bayley of Lenton Sands. Owing to weak health Christie was educated privately before entering Lincoln College, Oxford, in April 1849. There he shared with Mark Pattison common literary interests and ideas as to the higher purposes of university life. He obtained first-class honours in law and history, graduating BA in 1853 and MA in 1855. 
In November 1853 Christie was appointed professor of ancient and modern history by the trustees of the newly founded Owens College, Manchester, and in the following year he was chosen for the Faulkner chair of political economy and commercial science. To these he added a third chair, jurisprudence and law, in 1855. A keen teacher of evening classes, which were then one of the most important departments of Owens College, he was on the committee of Manchester Working Men's College (1858). On 13 June 1861 he married Mary Helen (died 1911), daughter of Samuel Fletcher, of Broomfield near Manchester, a merchant and one of the original trustees of Owens College. 
Christie had originally intended to pursue a legal career. Admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn (21 November 1854), he was called to the bar in June 1857 and immediately commenced practice at Manchester as an equity draftsman and conveyancer, and in the chancery court of the county palatine of Lancaster. His practice continuously grew until, at the time of his retirement through ill health in 1877, he was the leader of the Manchester equity bar. From January 1872 until January 1894 Christie was chancellor of the diocese of Manchester, having been appointed by James Fraser, bishop of Manchester. This position involved him in the proceedings against S. F. Green, rector of Miles Platting, who was imprisoned in 1881 for ritualist practices. 
Although the growth of his legal practice caused him to resign his chairs of history and political economy in 1866, and jurisprudence in 1869, Christie played an increasingly important part in the history of Owens College. With Thomas Ashton, J. G. Greenwood, and H. E. Roscoe, he was a supporter of the movement to reconstitute the college, and he was named as one of the governors under the resulting 'Owens College Extension Act' of 1870. He was a member of the executive body, the college council, from 1870 until 1886. In these capacities he took a leading part in the growth of college, including the incorporation with the college of the Royal Manchester School of Medicine, and the efforts which in 1880 resulted in the grant of a charter to the Victoria University. Christie was a member of the university court until 1897, and received an honorary LLD from the university in 1895. 
Christie was placed in a position of altogether exceptional responsibility towards the city of Manchester following the death in 1887 of his friend Sir Joseph Whitworth. He became chairman of the Whitworth company, a position he held until its purchase by Armstrong, Mitchell & Co. in 1897. By Whitworth's will, Christie was appointed one of the three legatees to whom was bequeathed a residuary estate of more than $0.5 million in equal shares for their own use, 'they being each of them aware of the objects' to which these funds would have been applied by the testator, had he been able to carry out the plans that had occupied him so long. Of existing institutions, Owens College was judged by the legatees to have a primary claim upon their munificence; and sums amounting (apart from that expended on the purchase of an estate to be held by the college for hospital purposes) to more than one fifth of the total at their disposal were devoted by them to the various departments of the college. These donations were made by the legatees in common; in 1897, however, Christie personally assigned a sum exceeding $50,000 out of the final share of the residue falling to him for the erection of a Whitworth Hall, to complete the front quadrangle of Owens College. He was president of the Whitworth Institute from 1890 to 1895 and was much interested in the medical and other charities of Manchester, especially the Cancer Pavilion and Home, of whose committee he was chairman from 1890 to 1893. In October 1893 the freedom of the city of Manchester was conferred upon him and his surviving fellow legatee, R. D. Darbishire. 
Over many years Christie pursued literary and bibliographical researches in France and elsewhere during his vacations. The resulting publication in 1880 of 'Etienne Dolet, the Martyr of the Renaissance', established his literary reputation. It was translated into French by Professor C. Stryienski (1886), and went through a second English edition in 1899. Further essays on personalities of special interest to him in the history of the Renaissance appeared in the 'Quarterly Review' (1893), 'Macmillan's Magazine' (1885), and the 'English Historical Review' (1895). From 1883 to his death Christie was chairman of the Chetham Society, to whose publications he contributed 'The Old Church and School Libraries of Lancashire' (1885) and portions of the 'Diary and Correspondence of Dr John Worthington' (1886). For the Record Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, of which he was president from 1883 to 1895, he produced an edition of 'Annales Cestrienses' (1887). 
Christie took a very active interest in the Library Association of the United Kingdom; he was a vice-president of the Bibliographical Society for many years, a member of the London Library Committee, and chairman of the library committee of Royal Holloway College, where he was a governor (1892-7). His gift to Owens College of a library building, the Christie Library, designed by Alfred Waterhouse and erected at a cost of over $21,000, was opened in 1898. He bequeathed to it his own library of 75,000 volumes, which he had accumulated principally to assist his Renaissance studies. Most notable of its contents was the collection, unequalled as to completeness, of the issues of Dolet's press; it also contained a large number of Aldines, a series of editions of Horace, and about 600 volumes published by Sebastian Gryphius of Lyons. 
Christie died at Ribsden, Windlesham, Surrey on 9 January 1901 having been virtually confined to his couch during the last two years of his life. His remains, after cremation at Woking, were buried in the churchyard at Valley End, near Sunningdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 32409


Christie, Sir William Henry Mahoney (1845-1922), astronomer, was born on 1 October 1845 at Woolwich, the eldest child of Samuel Hunter Christie (1784-1865), professor of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and his second wife, Margaret Ellen Malcolm ('b'. 'c'.1822), the daughter of James Mahoney of Killarney. (There were children from the first marriage, one of whom, James Robert Christie, also joined the staff of the Royal Military Academy.) 
Christie was educated at King's College School, London, and went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1864. He became a scholar in 1866, and two years later was placed fourth wrangler in the mathematical tripos. He was elected a fellow of his college in 1869. He had tried for the Sheepshanks exhibition in 1866 and, though he was unsuccessful, one of the examiners, George B. Airy, the astronomer royal, who had known his father well, was impressed by his knowledge of practical astronomy. When the post of chief assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory became vacant in 1870, Airy offered it to Christie, who accepted. 
Under Airy, the main efforts of the Greenwich observatory were concentrated on the accurate positional measurement of celestial objects. Christie observed with the transit circle and the altazimuth instrument, suggesting some useful modifications to the former, and he also worked on calculations relating to positional measurements of stars. However, it soon became apparent that Christie's real interest lay in the newly developing science of astrophysics. Airy had not considered such studies to be appropriate to the work of the observatory. Christie, with the encouragement of such leaders in the new science as Warren De La Rue and William Huggins, now persuaded him to initiate a small programme of astrophysical observations at Greenwich. The most important of these were observations of the sun's surface. In the 1860s photographs of the sun's disc had been taken at the observatory at Kew using a photoheliograph devised by De La Rue. This and other similar instruments were bought by the Greenwich observatory; E. W. Maunder began making daily photographs of the sun and using them to obtain information about sunspots. 
When Airy retired in 1881, after forty-six years in the post, his position was first offered to the eminent theoretical astronomer J. C. Adams, who declined it. It was then offered to Christie. On his acceptance, he became the eighth astronomer royal. That same year Christie married Violette Mary (died 1888), the daughter of Sir Alfred Hickman, a prominent iron manufacturer and MP for Wolverhampton. They had two sons, the younger of whom died in childhood. The elder son became a barrister, and lived with his father. 
By the end of Airy's long reign the Greenwich observatory was physically in a poor condition. In addition, the observatory's expanding workload was leading to a growing shortage of space. Christie proved to be very successful in persuading the Admiralty to provide funds for new buildings, even hinting that it might become necessary to cease distributing time signals unless more accommodation became available. His refurbishment extended beyond buildings to their contents, where he had identified problems during his period as chief assistant. These changes were paralleled by an increase in the number of staff: by the end of the nineteenth century the observatory's establishment had doubled to about fifty. 
Christie also realized the urgent need for updating the observing equipment. He was generally less skilled than Airy in the design of instrumentation -- apart from those for astrophysics -- but his observing experience allowed him to identify difficulties that Airy, a non-observer, might not always have recognized. Christie decided that the first major new item of equipment should be a large (by contemporary standards) telescope to try and keep up with current trends in astronomical research. Consequently, in 1885, the existing 13 inch telescope was replaced by a 28 inch refractor, on the same mounting, to Christie's design. With it he initiated a programme for the observation of visual double stars. The existing dome was too small for the new telescope, so it was replaced in 1893 by a new onion-shaped dome, which soon became a distinctive feature of the Greenwich skyline. In 1887 an international conference in Paris agreed to launch a co-ordinated mapping exercise -- the 'Carte du ciel' project -- for photographing the whole sky and determining stellar positions and magnitudes. Christie, who had attended the conference, arranged for a 13 inch astrographic telescope to be installed at Greenwich in 1890, enabling the observatory to participate in the project. 
The most important building change was linked to Christie's astrophysical interests. A new physical observatory, containing offices and workshops as well as telescopes, was constructed during the 1890s. In 1894 Sir Henry Thompson, an eminent surgeon with a great interest in astronomy, offered to donate $5000 for a 26 inch refracting telescope. He later agreed to pay for a 30 inch reflecting telescope as well. The two telescopes were attached to the same mounting and installed in a dome in the new building. The other major change, at the end of the century, related to geomagnetic measurements. A new site -- the Christie enclosure -- was created for the magnetic instruments in Greenwich Park at some distance from the observatory, so as to decrease the disturbing effects of the magnetic materials in the new buildings. 
Christie introduced relatively few changes into the programme of positional measurements that Airy had developed, though he pursued the long-standing problem of the personal errors of the observers. A new altazimuth to Christie's design was installed during the 1890s, but it was found to suffer from flexure. The most important problems, however, related to the changing environment of the observatory. A forerunner of these difficulties in the 1890s was the decision to discontinue observations of earth currents because of the hindrance caused by passing electric trains. Then, in the early 1900s, an electricity generating station was built right on the Greenwich meridian, where many positional observations were made. This affected observing conditions not only directly via the discharge of hot air and soot, but also indirectly via ground vibration. By this time the Greenwich meridian was of international importance. Until the 1880s numerous standard times existed in different parts of the world. Discussions during that decade, which necessarily included Christie, led to agreement that Greenwich should become the zero meridian for the measurement of longitude, and that, correspondingly, Greenwich Mean Time should become the standard for time measurement. 
Christie did very little observing after becoming astronomer royal, but he made an exception for solar eclipses. His particular interest was in obtaining direct photographs of the solar corona. His first attempt, at the 1896 eclipse which he observed from Japan, was clouded out, but his expeditions to observe the next three eclipses were more successful. He enjoyed travelling abroad. Yachting was a favourite occupation, and in the latter years of his life he spent part of each winter in a warmer climate. 
Christie's importance for astronomy lay less in his personal research than in the way he transformed the Greenwich observatory from a highly conservative establishment to one well attuned to the new world of science. He also established the widely read magazine 'The Observatory', and was its first editor. Though rather reserved by nature, he was an affable man who enjoyed company. He was a friend of the prince of Wales (later Edward VII). Christie was elected to the Royal Society in 1881, and served three times on its council. He was also an influential member of the Royal Astronomical Society, being its president in 1888-90. Foreign learned societies bestowed various honours on him, and Oxford University awarded him an honorary degree. He became the first astronomer royal to act as master of the Clockmakers' Company. He was knighted in 1904. Christie was the first astronomer royal to follow civil service requirements and retire at the age of sixty-five, in 1910. He moved initially to Warlingham in Surrey, and then to Downe in Kent, but continued to make trips abroad. Early in 1922 he set out on a cruise to Morocco. On 22 January he suffered a gastric haemorrhage and died. He was buried at sea near Gibraltar on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 32410


Chrystal, George (1851-1911), mathematician, was born on 8 March 1851 at Mill of Kingoodie in the parish of Bourtie, near Old Meldrum, Aberdeenshire, the son of William Chrystal of Gateside, a man of natural talent and determination, a grain merchant and later a farmer and landed proprietor, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of James Burr of Mains of Glack, Aberdeenshire. He was educated first at the parish school of Old Meldrum where he showed marked intellectual ability, although physically he was not strong and was hampered by a lameness which he later outgrew. After the family moved to Aberdeen he entered the grammar school in 1863, winning several prize medals as well as the Williamson scholarship at the University of Aberdeen, which he entered in 1867; he graduated with first-class honours in 1871. He was much attracted to classical and linguistic studies, interests which he maintained to the end of his life, but he also developed his natural vocation in the mathematical sciences, gaining prizes and scholarships in mathematics and physics as well as an open scholarship at Peterhouse, Cambridge, which he took up in 1872. There he found the work involved in the mathematical tripos relatively straightforward and soon after his arrival began to undertake experimental work in the laboratory and engage in other leisure pursuits. He won the members' prize in 1873 for an English essay on 'Wit and humour in English poetry', and graduated BA in 1875 as second wrangler and Smith's prizeman, proceeding MA in 1878. He was elected to a fellowship of Corpus Christi College in 1875, and was appointed a lecturer there; in later life he was made an honorary fellow. 
While an undergraduate at Cambridge, Chrystal not only read mathematics but studied experimental physics under Professor James Clerk Maxwell, who in 1875 was appointed to a small committee of the British Association given the task of verifying by experiment Ohm's law respecting the relation between the current and the electromotive force in a wire. Maxwell devised two experimental procedures and the work was carried out in the Cavendish Laboratory by Chrystal, whose care and skill in making the delicate measurements contributed much to the accuracy of the results, and enabled the committee to say that Ohm's law had been verified within the almost negligible limits of error of the experiment. To his report on the results, which Maxwell presented to the British Association at Glasgow in 1876, Chrystal added a brief account of another series of experiments he had undertaken on the deflection of a galvanometer. In connection with all these experiments Maxwell expressed his appreciation of the difficulties which Chrystal encountered and overcame in the course of this work. 
In 1877 Chrystal left Cambridge to become professor of mathematics at St Andrews University, and on 26 June 1879 he married Margaret Ann (died 1903), daughter of William Balfour; he had known her since childhood. Chrystal succeeded Professor Philip Kelland in the chair of mathematics at Edinburgh in October 1879, occupying it with much distinction for thirty-two years. There he greatly stimulated interest in mathematics in the university through the clearness and conciseness of his expositions of mathematical theory, although like so many naturally gifted mathematicians his undergraduate lectures were readily absorbed only by the very brightest of his students. At the same time he actively interested himself in the general academic organization. Elected dean of the faculty of arts in 1891, he rendered valuable service in reorganizing the arts curriculum, particularly after the wide-ranging changes introduced by the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1889. He was also first chairman of the provincial committee for the training of teachers, and made other important contributions to the improvement of secondary school education in Scotland. He was highly regarded by his contemporaries as an administrator with an exceptionally quick grasp of complicated detail, and as a tactful and fair negotiator. In addition to his professorial duties Chrystal pursued experimental researches which he had begun at Cambridge, working in the laboratory of his colleague, Peter Guthrie Tait, and took a leading part in the affairs of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was elected a fellow of the society in 1880 and became vice-president in 1887, at the early age of thirty-six. He served in this capacity for twelve years, and in 1901, on Professor Tait's death, he was chosen general secretary. To the society's 'Transactions' (29, 1880, 609-36) he contributed the result of his inquiries into the differential telephone and its application to electrical measurements, for which he was awarded the society's Keith prize. 
Soon after the turn of the century he was asked by Sir John Murray for advice in connection with observations of seiches (periodic oscillations of the water surface) on Scottish lochs. With typical enthusiasm he began a theoretical analysis of the problem, at the same time enrolling a devoted band of observers and inventing more sensitive instruments for them to use, eventually obtaining theoretical and experimental results which shed a new light on the whole set of phenomena. From 1904 to 1910 he published a classic series of papers on the subject, including '''On the hydrodynamical theory of seiches, with a bibliographical sketch' in the' Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh' (41, 1905, 599-649); in the same journal: (with E. Maclagan-Wedderburn) 'Calculation of the periods and nodes of Lochs Earn and Treig, from the bathymetric data of the Scottish lake survey' (41, 1905, 823-50); (with J. Murray) 'An investigation of the seiches of Loch Earn' (45, 1906-7, 361-96, and 46, 1908-9, 455-518), and 'Seiches and other oscillations of lake surfaces, observed by the Scottish lake survey' (in 'Bathymetrical Survey of the Scottish Freshwater Lochs', ed. J. Murray and L. Pullar, 1, 1910, 29-90). For these researches he was awarded a royal medal by the Royal Society of London in 1911. He read a paper on the subject before the Royal Institution in London on 17 May 1907. He was made an honorary LLD of Aberdeen University in March 1887 and of Glasgow in October 1911. 
Chrystal wrote many articles on mathematical, scientific, and biographical subjects for the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', the chief being those on electricity and magnetism, which compress into a small compass remarkably complete accounts of those sciences at that time. His 'Algebra, an Elementary Textbook for the Higher Classes of Secondary Schools and for Colleges' (part 1, 1886, part 2, 1889), became a standard work, and was notable for the originality and lucidity of its reasoning. The text of his address on 'Non-Euclidean geometry' was printed in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh' (10, 1879-80, 638-64). 
Chrystal died on 3 November 1911 at his home, 5 Belgrave Crescent, Edinburgh, and was buried on 8 November at Foveran churchyard, Aberdeenshire. He was survived by four sons and two daughters; his eldest son Sir George (William) Chrystal (1880-1944) studied at Edinburgh University and Balliol College, Oxford. He held a number of posts in the civil service, ending his career as permanent secretary in the Ministry of Health (1935-40). He published a number of literary works and was appointed CB in 1920, and created KCB in 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 32411


Chubb, Sir Lawrence Wensley (1873-1948), environmental campaigner, was born at Lauraville, Victoria, Australia, on 21 December 1873, the eldest son of Lawrence Wensley Chubb JP, prospector and mine owner, of Copeland, New South Wales, and his wife, Esther Collins. He came to England in 1887 and completed his education in London at St Olave's and St Saviour's Grammar School and the Borough Polytechnic. His chief recreation was rambling. At the polytechnic debating society he attracted the attention of Octavia Hill and Robert Hunter; through them he was appointed in 1895 secretary of the Kent and Surrey committee of the Commons Preservation Society and in 1895 first secretary of the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. Although young, Chubb was already remarkable for his discretion and tact as well as for his driving power and ability. 
The countryside rather than buildings was Chubb's great love and in 1896 he resigned from the National Trust to become secretary of the Commons Preservation Society. The society (from 1899 the Commons and Footpaths Preservation Society and from 1910 the Commons, Open Spaces, and Footpaths Preservation Society) had been formed in 1865 to preserve as open space commons near to big cities. It gradually enlarged its remit to encompass the preservation of open space in general and its use for recreation by the general public. For over fifty years (until 1948) Chubb was largely responsible, as secretary, for the work of this body. Notable successes which were largely due to his efforts were the acquisition of the Kenwood estate, adjoining Hampstead Heath, for public recreation, and ensuring that footpaths and common land ploughed up during the wars in the drive to increase food production were restored to recreational use. 
In addition to his work for the society Chubb played an important role in many individual schemes for preserving open spaces, such as the Hindhead Commons, Brockwell Park, and Box Hill. An early member of the Forest Ramblers, Chubb was instrumental in forming the Federation of Rambling Clubs in 1905 and this in turn became the Ramblers' Association, of which he was first secretary and later a vice-president. He was also, from 1915 to 1948, secretary of the Scapa Society for the Prevention of Disfigurement of Town and Country (later the Advisory Council for the Control of Outdoor Advertising); from 1928 to 1947 he was secretary of the National Playing Fields Association; from 1902 until 1929 he was secretary of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society, and in 1926 was an original council member of the Council for Rural Amenities, later the Council for the Protection of Rural England. 
In the course of years Chubb acquired a quite unrivalled legal knowledge of the complex questions related to open spaces, footpaths, and public advertising, and was often consulted by local authorities and government departments. His unfailing tact made him invaluable in negotiation and on deputations to ministers, and he served on many committees concerned with such questions as open spaces, liaison between the Forestry Commission and amenity societies, the establishment of nature reserves and national parks, and the agricultural use of commons in wartime. He was knighted in 1930 for his services to the English countryside which continued almost to the end of his life. 
There was a radical section among the rambling clubs (a fairly disparate bunch) which felt Chubb too ready for compromise and over reliant on painstaking legal work, and he was criticized for trying to do too many things; but this was not the opinion of those who saw the achievements of his tact, judicial temperament, and wide knowledge in the cause he had so deeply at heart. He published various pamphlets on public rights in the countryside and rambling guide books. 
On 25 April 1905 Chubb married Gertrude Elizabeth ('b'. 1880/81), daughter of William Willers Anthony, of Southwark; they had a son, Lawrence Wensley, and a daughter, Gertrude Joyce. He died at their home, 35 Lichfield Court, Sheen Road, Richmond, Surrey, on 18 February 1948. A memorial seat was set up at the spot where Kenwood meets Hampstead Heath, commanding wide views of the countryside he secured for the public. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32412


Church, Sir William Selby, first baronet (1837-1928), physician, was born at Hatfield on 4 December 1837, the youngest of three sons of John Church (1782-1872), of Hatfield, Hertfordshire, and Belshill, Northumberland, and Isabella, daughter of George Selby of Beal, and Twizell House, Northumberland. Church was educated at Harrow School (1851-6), where he played cricket for the first eleven, and at University College, Oxford. He graduated in 1860 with a first-class degree in natural sciences. He was then appointed Dr Lee's reader in anatomy and became a senior student at Christ Church. In 1862 he entered St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and he resigned his readership in 1869. He obtained the BM and DM degrees in 1864 and 1868 respectively, his dissertation for the latter dealing with hydatid cysts of the liver. He obtained membership of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1864 and was elected to the fellowship in 1870. 
In 1866 Church was appointed assistant physician both to the City of London Hospital for Diseases of the Chest and to the Royal General Dispensary; during the cholera epidemic that year he took charge of the cholera wards at St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1867 he was elected assistant physician and lecturer on comparative anatomy; he was appointed full physician to St Bartholomew's in 1874 and held this post until 1902, when he became consulting physician (having retired under the age rule). Later, as treasurer of St Bartholomew's, Church rendered valuable services to the medical school. He apparently made no serious effort to obtain a private practice. When his father died, both Church's elder brothers had predeceased him and he inherited Woodside Place, Hatfield. He could thereafter have lived a country life (he had the tastes of a country squire), but preferred medicine. On 14 July 1875 Church married Sybil Constance (1845/6-1913), daughter of Charles John Bigge of Linden, Northumberland; there were two sons (the elder of whom was killed in the First World War) and one daughter of the marriage. 
At the Royal College of Physicians Church was successively examiner (between 1874 and 1886), councillor (1888-9), censor (1890-91), senior censor (1896), and in 1895 Harveian orator (on the rise of physiology in England); he was elected president in 1899 and held that office until 1905. In 1900 he became a member of the royal commission on the care and treatment of sick and wounded soldiers during the South African campaign; this involved a visit to, and extensive travel in, war areas. Church was created a baronet in 1901 and appointed KCB in 1902, in which year he served on the royal commission on arsenical poisoning in beer-drinkers in the midlands and north of England. He was subsequently appointed to a similar commission on vivisection (1906). He also became chairman of the executive committee of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (1902-23) and of the distribution committees of the King Edward's Hospital Fund for London (1903-18) and the Hospital Sunday Fund (until 1922). From 1889 until 1898 he represented Oxford on the General Medical Council. He was president of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society in 1893-4. In 1907 he was chairman of the committee which recommended amalgamation of seventeen London medical societies to form the Royal Society of Medicine; he filled the office of president of this society in 1908-10. Following retirement he continued to take an active interest in the affairs of his county as a JP and county councillor. 
Church was not a prolific writer (though one of his obituary notices lists sixty-five publications), but contributed a number of articles on embolic aneurysms and, jointly with W. Bulloch, acute rheumatism; the latter work was based on 700 cases and is recorded in Sir Clifford Allbutt's 'System of Medicine'. Between 1877 and 1893 he was editor of 'St Bartholomew's Hospital Reports'. Church was awarded several honorary degrees: DSc (Oxford; Victoria, Manchester), DCL (Durham), and LLD (Glasgow). 
Church was described as tall and handsome, of few words, and incisive of mind and judgement. He could readily sum up a situation with a few terse phrases, and was totally honest and innately courteous. As a physician he was renowned for his diagnostic ability. Apart from his interest and ability at cricket, he played real tennis, rode a bicycle, and was a member of the London Skating Club (being since his student days an accomplished figure skater), and even in his eighties he continued to shoot. He was never present at St Bartholomew's on Derby day and during the Ascot week. 
Church died at Woodside Place on 27 April 1928. The baronetcy passed to his younger son, Major Geoffrey Selby Church MC RFA (1887-1979). 


@@@@@


doc= 32413


Churchill, Sir Winston Leonard Spencer (1874-1965), prime minister, was born at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, the family home of the dukes of Marlborough, on 30 November 1874. His father, Lord Randolph Henry Spencer Churchill (1849-1895), was the third son of the seventh duke and a descendant of John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough, Queen Anne's commander-in-chief during the War of the Spanish Succession. His mother, Jeanette (Jennie) Churchill (1854-1921), was the daughter of Leonard Jerome, a New York financier whose ancestors had fought against the British in the American War of Independence. According to a Jerome family tradition accepted by Churchill himself, Jennie's mother, Clara, was of Iroquois descent, but proof is lacking. 
Jennie and Lord Randolph were married at the British embassy in Paris on 15 April 1874. Winston Churchill's date of birth has given rise to speculation that he was conceived before the wedding, but the only certainty is that he was born prematurely. Preparations were made for the birth to take place in London, but after slipping and falling during a visit to Blenheim Jennie went into labour, the local doctor was summoned, and the baby was delivered at 1.30 a.m. on 30 November. 
When the seventh duke was appointed viceroy of Ireland in January 1877, the Churchills moved to Dublin. Winston was accompanied by his nanny, Mrs Elizabeth Everest, who took him for walks in Phoenix Park and warned him against a group of evil men known as Fenians. Shortly after the birth of his brother John Strange Spencer (Jack) Churchill (1880-1947) in February 1880, the family returned to London, where Winston began to build up an impressive collection of toy soldiers in the nursery. At eight he was sent to a boarding-school at Ascot where the headmaster took a pleasure in flogging the boys until their bottoms ran with blood. Winston performed well in some subjects but his reports often referred to his unruly behaviour. According to one authority, he was birched for stealing sugar from the pantry and retaliated by kicking the headmaster's straw hat to pieces (Churchill and Gilbert, 1.53). When he fell ill his parents transferred him to a school at Brighton where he was much happier but came bottom of the class for conduct. 
Neither of Churchill's parents lacked affection for Winston, but they gave him little attention and he felt profoundly neglected. Lord Randolph's short and troubled life was devoted mainly to politics: Winston could recall only two or three long and intimate conversations with him. Lady Randolph, meanwhile, revelled in high society. 'She shone for me like the Evening Star', Churchill wrote. 'I loved her dearly -- but at a distance' (Churchill, 'Early Life', 19). Unlike his brother, Winston developed a powerful ego. His letters home from boarding-school were full of demands for attention, and protests against his parents' failure to meet his wishes. He was fortunate to discover in Mrs Everest a surrogate parent who gave him the love and admiration he craved. He responded with remarkably open displays of affection for his 'Woom' or 'Woomany'. Inviting her to Harrow, he showed her around the school and walked arm in arm with her up the High Street while other boys jeered at him. During her final illness in July 1895 Churchill, by this time a Sandhurst cadet, rushed to her bedside, afterwards arranging the funeral and the erection of a headstone on her grave. In his novel 'Savrola' (1900) he brought her to life again as the hero's faithful housekeeper, Bettine. 
Churchill entered Harrow in April 1888. Convinced that his son was not clever enough for university, Lord Randolph was impressed by the enthusiasm with which he manoeuvred his army of toy soldiers; he arranged for him to enter the army class, which prepared boys for Sandhurst. Legend has it that Winston was academically a bit of a dunce, but he demonstrated great ability in English, history, and chemistry, subjects that captured his imagination. Mathematics, however, baffled him and in spite of personal tuition from the headmaster, J. E. C. Welldon, he detested Latin. Like Richmal Crompton's fictional hero William, whom in many ways he resembled, the schoolboy Winston was a courageous individualist who flouted the rules and got into scrapes. He lacked self-discipline and his teachers often complained of slovenly or unruly behaviour, but censure or punishment served only to provoke him into a long and indignant defence of his actions. Inevitably, perhaps, team sports held little appeal for him, but in spite of frequent bouts of ill health he was a strong swimmer, excelled at rifle shooting, and won the public schools fencing championship in 1892. None of this could appease his father's wrath when he twice failed the entrance exams for Sandhurst, passing in at the third attempt with marks too low to qualify him for the infantry. Lord Randolph's response was a remarkably cruel letter in which he threatened to break off all contact with his son and warned: 'if you cannot prevent yourself from leading the idle useless unprofitable life you have had during your schooldays & later months you will become a mere social wastrel, one of the hundreds of the public school failures' (Churchill and Gilbert, 1.197). 
At Sandhurst, which he entered as an infantry cadet in September 1893, Churchill enjoyed himself. Military topics such as tactics or fortifications were far more appealing to him than mathematics, and horsemanship the greatest of pleasures. In high spirits and working hard, he eventually passed out twentieth out of 130. During his final term he also plunged, for the first time, into public controversy. When the eminent moral reformer Mrs Ormiston Chant organized a campaign to exclude prostitutes from the bar of the Empire Theatre in Leicester Square, Churchill incited some of his fellow cadets to riot and pull down the screens which had been put up to separate prostitutes from theatregoers. 'Ladies of the Empire', Churchill declared in an impromptu speech, 'I stand for Liberty!' (Gilbert, 'Life', 46-7). 
Churchill's late adolescence was overshadowed by the physical and mental decline of Lord Randolph, who had risen to be chancellor of the exchequer in Lord Salisbury's government of 1886, but overplayed his hand, resigned, and never held office again. As a gentleman cadet Churchill had begun to win his father's respect, but just as the relationship between father and son was about to ripen it was cut short by Lord Randolph's death, at the age of forty-five, on 24 January 1895. His neurologist, Dr Buzzard, diagnosed his illness as syphilis, though it has recently been argued that his symptoms could have been caused by a tumour on the brain (Mather, 23-8). 
Although unaware of Buzzard's diagnosis, Churchill believed that Lord Randolph's death, like that of his brother the eighth duke of Marlborough, 'was yet further proof that the Churchills died young' (Gilbert, 'Life', 49). Driven by the need to appease his father's ghost and vindicate his reputation, he was desperate to make his mark before it was too late. But he was also free at last of Lord Randolph's restraining hand and ready to embark on adventures of his own. After passing out from Sandhurst he obtained his commission (20 February 1895) as a cavalry officer in the Queen's Own hussars. Here he acquired a passion for polo, a game he was to enjoy playing for the next three decades. But much as he enjoyed soldiering he regarded it as a means to an end: the making of a reputation that would propel him into the House of Commons. In October 1895 he travelled with his friend Reggie Barnes to Cuba to report on the rebellion against Spanish rule for the 'Daily Graphic'. Visiting New York 'en route' he was entertained by the Irish-American politician Bourke Cockran, an old flame of Lady Randolph, whose eloquence and oratory made a lasting impression on him. Churchill's twenty-first birthday (30 November 1895) found him in the company of Spanish forces suppressing a rebellion in Cuba. Here he saw shots fired in anger for the first time, and acquired two lifelong habits: Havana cigars, and siestas. 
In October 1896 Churchill sailed with his regiment to India. Comfortably quartered in the British military compound at Bangalore, he displayed little interest in the subcontinent around him, but followed the political news from home with the eagerness and frustration of an exile. With his thoughts fixed firmly on a parliamentary career, he was worried by the fact that unlike so many other ambitious young men he lacked a university education. Enlisting the aid of Lady Randolph, he pursued a remarkable programme of self-education. During the long afternoons while the regiment rested, he devoured the works of Plato, Adam Smith, Gibbon, Macaulay, Hallam, Lecky, Darwin, and Winwood Reade, supplemented by volumes of the 'Annual Register', in which he annotated the summaries of old parliamentary debates with imaginary contributions of his own. Churchill's reading affected both his prose style, which he modelled on Gibbon and Macaulay, and his view of the world. Winwood Reade's 'Martyrdom of Man', a classic of Victorian atheism, completed his loss of faith in orthodox Christianity and left him with a sombre vision of a godless universe in which humanity was destined, nevertheless, to progress through the conflict between the more advanced and the more backward races. He passed for a time through an aggressively anti-religious phase, but this eventually gave way to a more tolerant belief in the workings of some kind of divine providence. 
Churchill's belief that he was destined to accomplish great things was accompanied by a daring scheme of self-advertisement. He told Lady Randolph, 'A few months in South Africa would earn me the S.A. medal and in all probability the Company's star. Thence hot-foot to Egypt -- to return with two more decorations in a year or two -- and beat my sword into an iron despatch box. (Churchill and Gilbert, 'Companion', vol. 1, pt 2, p. 676)' Between 1897 and 1900, with the aid of assiduous lobbying by his mother, he managed to fight in three of Queen Victoria's wars while doubling as a war correspondent and turning all three of his experiences into books. 
When the attacks of Afghan tribesmen on the north-west frontier of India led to the formation of a punitive expeditionary force, under the command of Sir Bindon Blood, Churchill obtained an attachment to the force and a contract as a war correspondent with the 'Daily Telegraph'. He took part in several skirmishes in which he came under fire and witnessed acts of barbarism by both sides. On his return to Bangalore he expanded his reports into his first book, 'The Story of the Malakand Field Force' (1898), which combined an incisive narrative of the fighting with vivid accounts of the landscape and its inhabitants. By this time he was also writing a novel, 'Savrola' (1900), a melodramatic tale of a liberal revolution in an autocratic Mediterranean state: the hero, Savrola, was a compound of himself and Lord Randolph. His work on the book was interrupted, in the summer of 1898, by the final stages of the campaign for the reconquest of the Sudan. 
This time it was the 'Morning Post' which commissioned Churchill to report the war. Overcoming the objections of Kitchener, the commander-in-chief of the expeditionary force, Churchill obtained a temporary posting with the 21st lancers, and arrived in the Sudan in time to take part in the celebrated cavalry charge at the battle of Omdurman (2 September 1898), in which the regiment galloped by accident into a hidden ravine crammed with armed men. Churchill, who shot and killed at least three of the enemy with his Mauser pistol, was cool and courageous but lucky to survive a bout of hand-to-hand fighting in which 22 British officers and men were killed. Nevertheless he was eager to renew the charge at once. 'Another fifty or sixty casualties would have made our performance historic', he explained to Lady Randolph, 'and made us proud of our race and our blood' (Russell, 225). The charge of the lancers, however, was only a sideshow with no significance for the main battle, which ended in the defeat and mass slaughter of the Dervishes. Over 30,000 were killed, compared with 28 British officers and men -- lancers included. 
For a second time Churchill now expanded his war correspondence into a book: 'The River War' (1899), a two-volume work in which the story of the campaign was firmly embedded in a remarkably sympathetic history of the Sudanese revolt against Egyptian rule. Churchill wrote: 'Those whose practice it is to regard their own nation as possessing a monopoly of virtue and common sense are wont to ascribe every military enterprise of savage people to fanaticism. They calmly ignore obvious and legitimate motives... upon the whole there exists no better case for rebellion than presented itself to the Soudanese. (Churchill, 'River War', 1973, 22)' Churchill was also critical of aspects of British imperialism. He censured Kitchener for his part in the desecration of the Mahdi's tomb and the slaughter of wounded dervish soldiers. For all that, he never doubted the 'civilizing mission' of the British in Asia and Africa. 
In the spring of 1899 Churchill completed his tour of duty in India, returned home, and resigned his commission. By the time of the outbreak of the South African War, Churchill had negotiated a contract with the 'Morning Post' which made him the highest-paid war correspondent of the day, with a salary of $250 per month and all expenses paid. The journalist J. B. Atkins, who sailed to South Africa on the same ship, recalled: 'He was slim, slightly reddish-haired, pale, lively, frequently plunging along the deck 'with neck out-thrust' as Browning fancied Napoleon... when the prospects of a career like that of his father, Lord Randolph, excited him, then such a gleam shone from him that he was almost transfigured. I had not before encountered this sort of ambition, unabashed, frankly egotistical, communicating its excitement, and extorting sympathy. (Atkins, 122)' Hastening to the battle front, Churchill was accompanying an armoured train on a reconnaissance mission in Natal when the train was ambushed (15 November 1899). Revealing again an ice-cool nerve, he seized command of the situation and organized a successful attempt to free the engine, but was captured and interned with other British captives in the States Model School in Pretoria. Later it was sometimes alleged that Churchill gave his word to his captors that if released he would not take up arms against them, and subsequently broke his parole. As no promise to release him was ever made, this was untrue. But he did persuade Captain Aylmer Haldane and Sergeant-Major Brockie to include him in their escape plan, on the understanding that all three would leave together. In the event Churchill climbed out first and, finding that his fellow escapees were unable to join him, set off on his own. After a series of adventures worthy of John Buchan's hero Richard Hannay he escaped via Portuguese East Africa and arrived in triumph in Durban. 
Standing out in sharp relief from the military disasters of 'black week', Churchill's exploits made him the hero of the hour. His new fame enabled him to override the objections of the War Office and assume once more the dual role of officer -- lieutenant in the South African light horse -- and war correspondent. In April 1900 he joined the column commanded by his friend Sir Ian Hamilton as it advanced through the Orange Free State to the Transvaal. Galloping over the veldt with his cousin and boon companion Charles Richard John Spencer (Sunny) Churchill, the ninth duke of Marlborough (1871-1934), fortified by regular supplies from Fortnum and Mason, and attended by his valet, Thomas Walden, Churchill was often in the thick of the fighting and again proved himself to be a first-class war correspondent. He turned his dispatches, this time with little adaptation, into two books: 'London to Ladysmith via Pretoria' (1900), which included the story of his escape, and 'Ian Hamilton's March' (1900). The South African War also left an enduring imprint on Churchill's thinking. It convinced him that war was too dangerous to be left to the generals. 
While on leave from India during the summer of 1897 Churchill had made contact with Conservative Party managers and delivered his first speech, at Claverton Manor outside Bath (26 June 1897). Two years later, when the sudden death of the MP for Oldham created a vacancy in one of the constituency's two seats, he was adopted as the Conservative candidate at the ensuing by-election, but was defeated by his Liberal opponent. In autumn 1900, when Lord Salisbury decided to call a general election, Churchill again stood for Oldham. This time his fame tipped the balance and he was returned with a small majority. As there was no autumn session of parliament he put the time to good use with a lecture tour of the United Kingdom, followed by a similar tour in the United States and Canada. The story of his escape from the Boers, accompanied by a magic-lantern show, netted him the handsome sum of $10,000, which he handed over to the banker Sir Ernest Cassel to invest on his behalf. 
Churchill delivered his maiden speech to the House of Commons on 18 February 1901. While strongly supporting the war in South Africa he caused some alarm on the Conservative benches when he declared: 'If I were a Boer I hope I should be fighting in the field' (Gilbert, 'Life', 139). Having acquired a considerable respect for the Boers he wished to see them offered generous peace terms, a theme he was to emphasize repeatedly over the next few years. Nor was this the only issue on which he diverged from the government. He launched a devastating attack on the secretary of state for war, St John Brodrick, whose proposals for army reform he condemned as increasing military expenditure for no strategic purpose. Imitating the parliamentary tactics once employed by his father, he organized with his friend Lord Hugh Cecil a group of young tory MPs who specialized in the harassment of their own leaders and called themselves the Hughligans. Increasingly in sympathy with the opposition, Churchill was closely in touch with Rosebery, Morley, and other leading Liberals. 
Churchill was already a perennial subject of gossip and speculation. Physically he was unimpressive. At 5 feet 61/2 inches, slenderly built, with a 31 inch chest, rounded shoulders, delicate skin, ginger hair, and a pugnacious baby face with twinkling blue eyes, he was striking but not handsome. Though he was a fluent writer, he spoke with a lisp and his speeches were the result of long and elaborate preparation. His practice at first was to deliver the whole of a speech from memory, but after an alarming experience in April 1904 in which he 'dried up' in the House of Commons, he never spoke without copious notes. On those who met him he generally made an instant and powerful impression, though not always a favourable one. Hyperactive and transparently on the make, he was far from the English ideal of a gentleman. To many of his fellow officers he appeared pushy and bumptious. Offspring though he was of the landed aristocracy, he belonged to a plutocratic milieu in which old and new wealth rubbed shoulders. His friends included great financiers like Cassel and Baron de Forest, who invited him aboard their yachts for Mediterranean cruises, or played host in magnificent villas and castles on the continent. Churchill enjoyed fox-hunting and country-house weekends but he was equally at home at the gambling tables of the French Riviera. Meeting him for the first time in July 1903, Beatrice Webb thought him 'egotistical, bumptious, shallow-minded and reactionary, but with a certain personal magnetism, great pluck and some originality, not of intellect but of character. More of the American speculator than the English aristocrat' ('Diary', 287). 
When Arthur Balfour succeeded his uncle, Lord Salisbury, as prime minister in May 1902, there was no place in the new government for Churchill. Then in May 1903 Joseph Chamberlain raised the banner of tariff reform. Churchill announced that he was strongly in favour of free trade and soon became one of the most active of the 'free fooders', a group of about sixty Conservative MPs fighting a losing battle for the cause. At the head of a divided party Balfour himself could only procrastinate, a predicament which laid him open to the taunts of Churchill, whose platform speeches combined lucid expositions of political economy with political slapstick. Most Conservative adherents of free trade decided to remain in the party, but Churchill, after some hesitation, crossed the floor of the house and took his seat, next to David Lloyd George, on the Liberal benches (31 May 1904). He had already accepted an invitation from the Liberal Association of North-West Manchester to contest the forthcoming general election as the free-trade candidate. During the next eighteen months, as the Balfour government drifted helplessly towards the rocks, Churchill attacked his former party with a ferocity that gave rise to lasting enmities and the accusation that he was a turncoat. 
Churchill shrugged off charges of opportunism. It was the Conservatives, he argued, who had abandoned their principles. For good measure he claimed that he was following in the footsteps of his father, whose life he was then writing. In 'Lord Randolph Churchill' (1906), he presented his father as a tory with increasingly radical sympathies, who would probably have opposed the South African War had he lived. His own Liberalism, therefore, could be construed as a continuation of tory democracy. Reviewers were not wholly persuaded by Churchill's portrait of his father as an earnest Victorian statesman, but they acclaimed the book as a literary 'tour de force' and a well-documented political history in which the reputations of the living were handled with delicacy and tact. 
When Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman became prime minister in December 1905 Churchill achieved ministerial office for the first time as under-secretary at the Colonial Office. One of his first acts was to appoint the civil servant and scholar Edward Marsh as his private secretary, a role in which he was to serve Churchill in every one of the offices he held between 1905 and 1929. In the ensuing general election the Liberals won a landslide victory and Churchill was elected MP for North-West Manchester. 
Since the colonial secretary, Lord Elgin, was a member of the House of Lords, Churchill had the responsibility of handling colonial affairs in the Commons. In March 1906 his first important ministerial speech went badly wrong. While seeking to defend Milner from a motion of censure over the question of 'Chinese slavery' in South Africa he unwittingly gave the impression of gloating over his downfall, thus rubbing salt into Conservative wounds. Remembered against him for years to come, the episode was an early example of a flaw in his oratorical style: an overbearing manner that seemed intended to humiliate his opponents, of whose injured feelings he was largely unaware. In July he recovered with a statesmanlike speech announcing the restoration of self-government in the Transvaal, a policy to which he had made a significant contribution. 
Delighted by his new responsibilities, Churchill ranged inquisitively over the affairs of scores of British colonies, annotating documents with a red fountain pen. As one historian has written: 'He had a generous and sensitive, if highly paternalistic, sympathy for subject peoples, and a determination to see that justice was done to humble individuals throughout the empire' (Hyam, 503). In autumn 1907 he set out on a tour of east Africa which began as a hunting expedition but turned into a semi-official inquiry into colonial affairs. In Kenya he went big-game hunting and investigated the conditions of African contract workers. In Uganda he visited Christian missions, took tea with Daudi Chewa, the eleven-year-old kabaka of Buganda, and took up with great enthusiasm the project for a dam across the Ripon Falls. It would, he concluded, 'be hard to find a country where the conditions were more favourable than in Uganda to a practical experiment in State Socialism... A class of rulers is provided by an outside power as remote from, and in all that constitutes fitness to direct, as superior to the Baganda as Mr Wells's Martians would have been to us. (Churchill, 'African Journey', 70-71)' In the interludes Churchill dictated memoranda for the Colonial Office, and a series of articles for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', later published as 'My African Journey' (1908). Even in Africa he gave much thought to the future of politics at home and the prospects for the 'new Liberalism' of social reform, which had begun to attract him. On his return home he published an article, 'The untrodden field in politics', advocating a more active role for the state in the economy and the establishment of a national minimum standard to mitigate poverty. 
When Asquith succeeded as prime minister in March 1908 he took the bold step of bringing Churchill into the cabinet as president of the Board of Trade (16 April 1908). At thirty-three, he was the youngest cabinet minister since 1866. Since constitutional convention required that a minister entering the cabinet must resign his seat, Churchill was compelled to contest Manchester North-West for a second time in a by-election, which he lost. He at once accepted an invitation to stand for the safe Liberal seat of Dundee, where he was returned at a by-election in May 1908 and remained MP until 1922. 
A great admirer of beautiful women, but self-centred and gauche in their company, Churchill had already proposed to Pamela Plowden and Ethel Barrymore, only to be rejected by both. Then, at a dinner party early in 1908, he was re-introduced to Clementine Hozier (1885-1977) ['see 'Churchill, Clementine Ogilvy Spencer], whom he had met briefly once before. Bowled over, he began an ardent courtship. In August he proposed, and was accepted, as they took shelter from the rain in the Temple of Diana overlooking the lake at Blenheim Palace. With Hugh Cecil as best man, and the bishop of St Asaph conducting the ceremony, Winston and Clementine were married at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 12 September 1908. 
Churchill expected his wife to be a loyal follower, and it was a role she was content to play. The unhappy child of a disastrous marriage and a financially precarious home, Clementine found in Winston a faithful husband who loved her, sustained her in material comfort, and placed her in the front row of a great historical drama. He could never be accused of marrying for money or running after other women. She, for her part, was never uncritical of her husband or afraid to express her opinions. A lifelong Liberal, with a puritan streak, she never approved of his more louche tory companions such as F. E. Smith, a close friend from 1907 onwards, or Max Aitken, later Lord Beaverbrook, introduced to Churchill by 'F. E.' in 1911. Winston, nevertheless, discussed all his political affairs with her and she often gave him sound advice, which he seldom took. Given the dissimilarities between them, it was not surprising that Winston and Clementine sometimes quarrelled furiously. She once threw a dish of spinach at him, and missed. Nevertheless they were quick to make up after a row, and their marriage was sustained by a lifelong mutual affection expressed in their pet names for each other. Winston was always 'Pug' or 'Pig', Clementine 'Kat', and the children 'the Kittens'. Their first child, Diana, was born in 1909. Their only son, Randolph Churchill followed in 1911, and Sarah in 1914. Marigold was born in 1918, but died in 1921, and the youngest daughter, Mary, was born in 1922. 
By the time of his marriage Churchill was working in close alliance with the 'Welsh wizard' David Lloyd George, the chancellor of the exchequer. As Asquith's daughter Violet observed, Lloyd George was undoubtedly the dominant partner: 'His was the only personal leadership I have ever known Winston to accept unquestioningly in the whole of his career. He was fascinated by a mind more swift and agile than his own... From Lloyd George he was to learn the language of Radicalism. It was Lloyd George's native tongue, but it was not his own, and despite his efforts he spoke it 'with a difference'. (Bonham-Carter, 'Churchill', 161)' Lloyd George encouraged Churchill to concentrate on social policy. Drawing on the advice of his officials he promoted three major reforms: the 'Trade Boards Act' of 1909 which introduced statutory minimum wages into the 'sweated trades'; state-run labour exchanges, planned by the young William Beveridge, whom Churchill recruited as a civil servant specifically for the purpose; and compulsory unemployment insurance, which later became a part of Lloyd George's 'National Insurance Act' of 1911. Though none of these measures was especially controversial in itself, they were part of a wider radical strategy which Lloyd George and Churchill urged on the cabinet, and for which they campaigned at great public meetings. In order to pay for welfare reforms they demanded reductions in the defence budget, precipitating a cabinet crisis over the naval estimates of 1909. Proclaiming something very like their own foreign policy of peace with Germany, they denounced the prophets of a great European war as alarmists. The greatest threat to Britain's imperial might, Churchill declared, was from the internal decay of its people. But Liberalism, in his view, was the antithesis of socialism. 'Socialism seeks to pull down wealth', he declared in May 1908. 'Liberalism seeks to raise up poverty... Socialism would kill enterprise; Liberalism would rescue enterprise from the trammels of privilege and preference' (Addison, 66). 
When in April 1909 the House of Lords took the unprecedented step of rejecting the proposals of the 'people's budget' for increased taxes on the wealthy, Churchill as president of the budget league toured the country denouncing the peers and the Conservative Party. Collected and published in 1909 as 'The People's Rights', his speeches display him at his most radical. Conservatives, of course, detested both Lloyd George and Churchill, but Churchill was the more despised for 'betraying' both his party and his class. Indeed he was ostracized and traduced, as he recalled in old age: 'They said that I beat Clemmie and that you could hear her crying as you passed our house. They said that I drugged, and if you rolled up my sleeve, my arm was a mass of piqures. We were cut by people we had known well and had looked on as friends. (Montague Brown, 147)' The Liberals meanwhile, though grateful for the loan of Churchill's talents, could never forget that he was an aristocrat who had begun his career as a soldier and a tory. 
After the general election of January 1910 Asquith promoted Churchill to the Home Office, where his many responsibilities ranged from the supervision of the Metropolitan Police to the regulation of prisons, borstals, factories, coalmines, and shops. Churchill was eager to pursue an agenda of social reform. Persuaded by the arguments of eugenicists, who maintained that the 'quality of the race' was degenerating due to the multiplication of the 'unfit', he was briefly an enthusiastic supporter of the compulsory sterilization of the 'feeble-minded'. Nothing came of this, but he did secure the passage of a bill to regulate the hours and conditions of shop assistants. In penal policy he made very active use of the home secretary's right to intervene, frequently mitigating the harsh sentences awarded by magistrates for petty crime. A firm believer in capital punishment, he nevertheless agonized over the fate of prisoners under sentence of death and reprieved many of them. His ambitious plans for reducing the number of petty criminals sent to prison were, however, thwarted by the brevity of his tenure of the Home Office. 
Churchill's more constructive endeavours as home secretary were overshadowed by controversial problems of law and order. Although he was on record as favouring votes for women in principle, he detested the suffragettes for interrupting his meetings. Warning that he would not be 'henpecked' on the issue, he found reasons to object to the suffrage bill of 1910 and subjected it to a slashing attack in the House of Commons. In November 1910 a suffragette rally at Westminster was met by the police with extremely rough tactics in which several women were injured. Churchill was not personally responsible for 'black Friday', but he rejected all allegations against the police and refused to institute an inquiry. 
Within a few days of black Friday a dispute in the south Wales coalfield led to a strike by miners employed by the Cambrian Colliery. Riots and looting broke out in the town of Tonypandy in the Rhondda Valley and one of the rioters was fatally injured in a struggle with the Glamorganshire police. The local magistrates pleaded with the Home Office to authorize the dispatch of troops. Recognizing that any direct clash between troops and strikers might result in bloodshed, Churchill at first refused the request of the local authorities, and sent instead a contingent of the Metropolitan Police. But twenty-four hours later, when it was clear that the riots were continuing unabated, Churchill authorized the dispatch of troops. In a bold and imaginative stroke, which may have been unconstitutional, he appointed General Nevil Macready to command both troops and police, with instructions to ensure that the police acted as a buffer between the strikers and the troops. He thereby took control out of the hands of the local authorities, who might well have been tempted to employ both police and troops as strike-breakers. 
Churchill's conduct of the Tonypandy affair prevented further bloodshed, but he was strongly attacked by Keir Hardie for condoning brutality on the part of the Metropolitan Police. Afterwards the legend grew that Churchill had sent troops to shoot down striking Welsh miners. Although this was a gross distortion, Churchill's response to industrial unrest was not always cool and measured. During the summer of 1911, when strikes in the docks spread to the railways, he was seized by a nightmare vision of a starving community held to ransom by industrial anarchists. Overriding the local authorities, he dispatched troops to many parts of the country and gave army commanders discretion to employ them. When rioters tried to prevent the movement of a train at Llanelli, troops opened fire and two of the rioters were shot dead. Together with Tonypandy, these events marked a turning point in Churchill's relations with the Labour Party and the trade unions. His record as a social reformer was eclipsed by his new reputation as a class warrior with a 'Prussian' love of order, maintained if necessary by military force. 
The impression was deepened by a famous episode in January 1911. Hunted down by the police, a number of Russian anarchists, led by 'Peter the Painter', took refuge in a house in Sidney Street, in the East End of London, and fired at the police. Churchill hastened to the scene, where his conspicuous presence in the danger zone -- recorded by a press photographer -- led critics to accuse him of seizing operational control from the police. The charge was mistaken. When the house suddenly caught fire, Churchill confirmed the decision of the police to let it burn down, but otherwise he was simply an enthralled spectator whose antics caused much amusement. In the House of Commons Balfour enquired: 'I understand what the photographer was doing, but what was the right honourable gentleman doing?' (Churchill and Gilbert, 2.409). Though he was still at the forefront of domestic politics, the soldier in Churchill was never far below the surface. As he explained to Clementine in May 1909: 'I would greatly like to have some practice in the handling of large forces. I have much confidence in my judgment on things, when I see clearly, but on nothing do I seem to 'feel' the truth more than in tactical combinations. (Soames, 23)' From 1910 onwards, contact with the intelligence services made Churchill apprehensive about German intentions and he began to think seriously about the implications of a major war. At about the same time, and possibly as a consequence, there were signs that he was moving to the right. In September 1910 Lloyd George told Churchill that he had two alternatives for the future: a coalition in which the Liberals and Conservatives reached a compromise over the issues that divided them, and a Liberal government with an advanced land and social policy. Churchill was all for a coalition and henceforth made various efforts to find common ground with his Conservative opponents. With a view to assuaging the bitterness caused by the House of Lords crisis, Churchill and F. E. Smith in May 1911 co-founded the Other Club, a bipartisan dining club of which the Liberal and Conservative chief whips were both members. 
The Agadir crisis of July-August 1911 aroused the strategist in Churchill and he composed for the cabinet an important paper entitled 'Military aspects of the continental problem'. At Asquith's invitation he attended a critical meeting of the committee of imperial defence, which revealed a complete lack of co-ordination between the plans of the Admiralty and the War Office. Much impressed by Churchill's interventions, and by his obvious desire to take charge of the Royal Navy, Asquith appointed him first lord of the Admiralty in October 1911. 
Tradition has it that when an admiral spoke reverently to him of naval tradition, Churchill retorted: 'What are the traditions of the Navy? Rum, sodomy, and the lash!' In later years he explained that he had never said this, but wished that he had. His mission at the Admiralty was to modernize. Many of the reforms he proposed were inspired by the retired first sea lord 'Jackie' Fisher, with whom he was in almost daily contact. But Churchill, of course, also had great confidence in his own judgement and was ready to act boldly. 
Churchill's first act was to replace three of the four sea lords. Sir Arthur Wilson was succeeded as first sea lord by Sir Francis Bridgeman, and Prince Louis of Battenberg, a German prince and naturalized British subject, was appointed second sea lord. A dashing young officer, David Beatty, became Churchill's naval secretary. Subsequently, in December 1912, Churchill coerced Bridgeman into retirement, appointing Battenberg in his place. Churchill displayed little respect for many of the senior officers of the Royal Navy, whom he regarded as unimaginative and set in their ways. One of his first actions, in line with Fisher's advice, was to establish a naval war staff of three divisions -- operations, intelligence, and mobilization -- to prepare and co-ordinate war plans. With the assistance of Herbert Richmond he sought to encourage the interest of naval officers in history and strategy, and helped to launch a new periodical, the 'Naval Review'. Eager to explore almost every aspect of naval affairs, Churchill set out to discover the facts for himself. Making frequent use of the Admiralty yacht 'Enchantress' -- where he also entertained his political friends from time to time -- he inspected ships, dockyards, and naval installations with a vigilant eye. In defiance of protocol he sometimes bypassed senior naval officers and sought information directly from junior officers or ordinary seamen. 
Many of the admirals were unimpressed. According to the second sea lord, Sir John Jellicoe, Churchill's fatal error was 'his entire inability to realize his own limitations as a civilian... quite ignorant of naval affairs' (Marder, 'From the Dreadnought', 255). But the admirals, like so many of the experts Churchill was to encounter, were often blinkered by convention. 'In matters of technical advance', writes one historian of Churchill and the navy, 'the First Lord was always in the van, always supporting the pioneers, always sweeping aside the obstruction of the unimaginative' (Gretton, 117). With Fisher's encouragement he developed a fast division of battleships, the Queen Elizabeth class, equipped with the new 15 inch gun. He pressed on with converting the fleet from coal-fired to oil-fired engines. In June 1914 he announced that he had negotiated the purchase by the British government of 51 per cent of the shares in the Anglo-Iranian oil company, thus ensuring a guaranteed supply of oil for the fleet. He promoted the development of submarines and air power, wresting full control of the Royal Naval Air Service from the War Office. In 1913, much to Clementine's alarm, he took up flying lessons and took to the air 150 times, after which she persuaded him to give up flying -- for the moment. 
Churchill was determined that Britain should retain a clear margin of naval supremacy over Germany. In a speech in Glasgow on 8 February 1912 he argued that for Britain a large navy was a necessity whereas for Germany it was a 'luxury' -- a comment which provoked much German anger. When the draft of a new German naval law proposed a further increase in the size of the German fleet, Churchill obtained the cabinet's approval in principle for an expansion of the British naval programme. At the same time he refurbished his Liberal credentials by floating the idea of a 'naval holiday', or joint suspension of naval construction by both countries. Following the German rejection of this idea, Churchill sought a naval arrangement with France under which the British Mediterranean Fleet would be withdrawn and concentrated in home waters, leaving the French to patrol the Mediterranean. Since this would involve the British in a pledge to defend the channel and Atlantic coasts of France, it was tantamount to a military alliance. After long and complex arguments the cabinet agreed in July 1912, but Churchill's expansionist naval policy, and the strengthening of the Anglo-French entente, alienated the radical wing of the Liberal Party and confirmed growing speculation that he was 'moving to the right' or preparing to rejoin the Conservative Party. During the winter of 1913-14 Churchill's insistence on the construction of another four dreadnoughts, and a further increase in the naval estimates, led to a crisis in which he found himself at loggerheads with Lloyd George, the majority of the cabinet, and most of the Liberal Party. Only the delaying tactics of Asquith, and a last-minute decision by Lloyd George to concede most of Churchill's demands, averted his resignation. 
As first lord, Churchill tended to concentrate on naval matters to the exclusion of everything else. 'You have become a water creature', Lloyd George told him in July 1912. 'You think we all live in the sea, and all your thoughts are devoted to sea life, fishes and other aquatic creatures' (Riddell, 'More Pages', 78). Nevertheless Churchill was actively involved in the greatest political issue of the day: Irish home rule. Lord Randolph Churchill had famously declared: 'Ulster will fight, and Ulster will be right'. His son took the opposite line, denouncing Bonar Law and the Conservatives for inciting rebellion. In February 1912 he attempted to confront a Unionist audience in Belfast in the very same hall in which his father had spoken in 1886, but so great was the threat to his safety that the meeting had to be moved at the last minute to the Celtic Road football stadium. In private, however, Churchill made persistent efforts to find a compromise. One possibility, which he proposed in the secrecy of the cabinet room in March 1911, was to include Ireland in an all-round scheme of federal devolution, with seven regional parliaments in England alongside parliaments for Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. The cabinet, however, decided in favour of a single parliament for the whole of Ireland. In September 1912 he caused something of a sensation by airing the concept of federal devolution in a speech in Dundee. By analogy with the seven kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England, it became known as Churchill's plan to revive the 'heptarchy'. Twice in that same year Churchill urged the cabinet, without success, to offer temporary exclusion from home rule to the predominantly protestant counties. During the winter of 1913-14 he was the principal go-between in a number of secret moves to promote a bipartisan settlement. On the Conservative side his main contact was F. E. Smith, who was both a personal friend and a fervent champion of Ulster. Churchill, it was said, was threatening to quit the cabinet if force were employed against Ulster: 'You understand that if a shot is fired I shall go out' (ibid., 194). 
As the hour at which the 'Home Rule Bill' would become law approached, the Ulster Unionists rejected out of hand a belated offer by Asquith to allow the protestant counties to opt out for a six-year period. Churchill now changed tack, arguing that, having obtained a compromise, the Ulster Unionists must accept it. He was also eager to restore his standing in the Liberal Party. In a speech at Bradford on 14 March 1914 he issued a stern warning that Ulster Unionists must agree to the government's plan or take the consequences: 'There are worse things than bloodshed, even on an extended scale', he declared (Rhodes James, 62). 
Meanwhile the cabinet was much alarmed by police reports suggesting that the Ulster Volunteers were planning a military coup. A cabinet committee under Churchill authorized precautionary troop movements and Churchill himself, as first lord of the Admiralty, ordered the 5th battle squadron to steam to Lamlash, menacingly close to Belfast. His actions convinced the Conservatives that the government was planning an 'Ulster pogrom' -- an impression rapidly confirmed by the notorious episode of the 'Curragh mutiny', when fifty-seven of the seventy officers of the 3rd cavalry brigade declared that they would rather be dismissed than take part in the coercion of Ulster. Churchill often employed provocative language on the public platform while pursuing relatively conciliatory policies behind the scenes. Contemporaries, however, tended to equate extremism of style with extremism of intent. Churchill was partly to blame for the Conservative belief that he had attempted a pogrom. 
On the eve of war in July 1914 Churchill wrote to his wife: 'Everything tends towards catastrophe and collapse. I am interested, geared up and happy. Is it not horrible to be built like that?' (Churchill and Gilbert, 2.710). When Austria declared war on Serbia two days later, Churchill, acting with Asquith's approval, ordered the fleets to their battle stations. In the critical cabinet discussions over the next few days Churchill, Grey, and Haldane were consistently in favour of British intervention while others, including Lloyd George, wavered. 
One historian wrote: 'Churchill took a more active part in the day-to-day running of the war than any First Lord in history. His were many of the ideas for action; it was he who drafted many of the signals to the ships. He studied and analysed each operation with great care. (Gretton, 147)' Churchill's interventionism, which he scarcely bothered to conceal, was a double-edged sword. Though he stood to gain the credit from successful actions by the Royal Navy, he was sure to get the blame when things went wrong. During the first few months of the war the Germans achieved a number of naval successes for which Churchill was strongly criticized. In August two German battleships, the 'Goeben' and the 'Breslau', escaped from the Adriatic through the Dardanelles to Constantinople. On 21 September Churchill boasted that if the German fleet did not come out and fight they would be 'dug out like rats in a hole' (Gilbert, 'Life', 281), but on the following day the Germans sank three British cruisers, with the loss of 1459 officers and men, off the Dogger Bank. Two more British cruisers were sunk at the battle of Coronel, off the coast of Chile, on 1 November. On 16 December German battlecruisers shelled Scarborough and other east coast ports, killing or injuring 500 civilians. Criticism of the Admiralty mounted and was only partially offset by successful actions off the Falkland Islands (8 December) and the Dogger Bank (25 January 1915). 
Enthralled by all aspects of the fighting, Churchill was eager to play a part in the land war and ingenious in stretching the Admiralty's responsibilities. He converted the naval reserve into the Royal Naval division, an infantry force of 15,000 men, in which many of his friends were commissioned as officers. Although Churchill promised that the division would later be transferred to the control of the War Office, he now had at his disposal something very like a private army. He also established what soon became known as his 'Dunkirk circus', three squadrons of aircraft which bombed German defences from airfields in northern France, protected by a force of Rolls-Royce cars with armour-plating. His response to the deadlock on the western front was to sponsor the idea of a 'land ship', an armoured troop carrier mounted on caterpillars, that would shield them from the field of fire as they approached the enemy trenches. A prototype was housed in the Admiralty basement. 
For three-and-a-half days in October 1914 Churchill found himself in virtual command of a land battle. The Germans, advancing rapidly along the channel coast, were threatening the Belgian city of Antwerp. The cabinet dispatched Churchill to organize reinforcements and stiffen the resistance of the Belgian government. Churchill did a superb job organizing the defences of Antwerp and delaying the German advance. No sooner was he on the spot than his fascination with the conduct of military operations gained the upper hand. He called in as reinforcements the bulk of three battalions of the Royal Naval division and fired off a telegram offering to resign his cabinet post in return for a high-ranking command in the field. When Asquith read out the telegram to his colleagues there was a roar of laughter and Churchill was ordered home. The laughter illustrated the gulf between Churchill and the other politicians. The politicians were ultimately responsible for the conduct of the war, but since very few of them knew anything of military matters they relied heavily on the judgement of the generals and the admirals. Inside Churchill, however, was a generalissimo struggling to get out. As Churchill's critics saw it, his military ambitions were foolish and his melodramatic defence of Antwerp a tragic sequel to the farce of Sidney Street. When the city fell he was strongly attacked in the press for the apparent failure of the expedition. This, perhaps, was the moment at which long-held suspicions in the political world hardened into the conviction that he lacked judgement. 
In October 1914 the first sea lord, Prince Louis of Battenberg, was forced by anti-German prejudice to resign, and Churchill decided to recall the 73-year-old Fisher to take his place. 'Those who knew them both', wrote E. T. Williams, 'realized that the arrangement involving such domineering characters, each used to having his own way, fond as they were of each other, would not work' ('DNB'). For a time both Churchill and Fisher were excited by the possibility of a naval operation to capture the island of Borkum in the Baltic. But when the Russian government appealed urgently for action to relieve Turkish pressure in the Caucasus, Kitchener, the secretary for war, urged Churchill to undertake a naval demonstration at the Dardanelles. Churchill replied that a naval attack alone would be insufficient: a combined operation would probably be more effective. Kitchener, however, declared that he could not spare any troops, and again pressed the first lord to mount a naval demonstration. Churchill now dispatched a telegram to Admiral Carden, the commander of the Mediterranean squadron, seeking his opinion on whether it would be possible to force the Dardanelles with the aid of obsolete battleships surplus to requirements in home waters. Carden replied that he thought the Dardanelles might be forced by extended operations with a large number of ships. Churchill became captivated by the vision of a fleet sailing through the Dardanelles, bombarding and destroying the Turkish forts and gun batteries on both sides of the straits, and provoking by their appearance in front of Constantinople a revolution and the withdrawal of Turkey from the war. The supply lines to and from Russia through the straits would be opened up, and the Balkan states rallied to the cause of the allies: at a stroke the military balance would be transformed. 
Such was the vision. The outcome was a disaster. Both Kitchener and Churchill wavered between the concept of an operation carried out by ships alone, with troops landing subsequently as an occupation force, and a combined naval and military operation. A naval attack was finally launched on 18 March 1915 under the command of Admiral De Robeck. Whether it could ever have succeeded against the dual threat of minefield defences and gunfire from the Turkish forts remains a subject for debate. After the loss of three battleships De Robeck halted the attack and in spite of Churchill's pleas and injunctions refused to renew it. The war council now came down definitely in favour of a combined operation and the purely Churchillian phase of the action was over. After many delays and hesitations, a combined British, Australian, and New Zealand expeditionary force under the command of Churchill's friend Sir Ian Hamilton landed on the tip of the Gallipoli peninsula on 25 April. Within a few days it was clear that the troops were pinned down on a narrow stretch of beach with the Turks shelling them from the commanding heights above. The war council authorized further reinforcements, but there was no disguising the fact that the news was bad. 
Fortune now deserted Churchill. From the start, Fisher had blown hot and cold about the Dardanelles. Increasingly overwrought and unstable, and fearful of losses, he suddenly cracked when Churchill, without consulting him, added two submarines from home waters to a list of reinforcements for the Mediterranean. On 15 May Fisher resigned and fled into hiding. Churchill might have weathered the storm but for the fact that Asquith, beset by a crisis over munitions, chose this moment to invite the Conservatives into a coalition. Eager to pay off old scores against Churchill, and fearful of his exploits as an amateur strategist, they insisted on his removal from the Admiralty and the war council. Asquith appointed him chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, a post that was largely honorific, together with a place on the new Dardanelles committee. 
The Gallipoli affair dragged on through the summer and autumn. Though casualties mounted and there was little sign of progress, Churchill continued to champion the operation with unquenchable enthusiasm. By October the majority of the Dardanelles committee had come to the conclusion that the operation should be abandoned and when at last the cabinet decided in favour of withdrawal, Churchill was left with no alternative but to resign from the government. One of the few redeeming features of the Gallipoli affair was the brilliant evacuation with which it was brought to a close in January 1916. By that time, however, some 46,000 allied troops, including 8700 Australians and 2700 New Zealanders, had been killed. 
Churchill was, to a great extent, the scapegoat. It was Kitchener who first pressed for a naval operation and Asquith, as prime minister, who authorized it. Fisher concealed his early doubts and subsequently expressed great enthusiasm. Nor did Churchill's responsibility extend much beyond the naval attack on 18 March. The land campaign which began on 25 April was primarily the responsibility of the War Office. Nevertheless Churchill's own egotism and impetuosity were factors in his downfall. He was over-confident of success, trumpeting victory in advance and passionately supporting the operation long after most people had written it off. Gallipoli was a cross to which he nailed himself. 
Churchill was devastated by his fall from grace in May 1915. 'Like a sea-beast fished up from the depths', he wrote, 'or a diver too suddenly hoisted, my veins threatened to burst from the fall in pressure' (Churchill, 'Thoughts and Adventures', 307). Nothing could wholly fill the void, but his family proved a great source of strength. Clemmie was a loyal supporter in time of trouble as was Churchill's brother Jack, currently serving at Gallipoli, and his sister-in-law Gwendeline (Goonie). When the Winston Churchills had to leave Admiralty House, they went to live with Goonie and her two children, John and Peregrine, at 41 Cromwell Road. At the weekends the two families would gather at a weekend retreat: Hoe Farm, near Godalming. Here Churchill discovered a powerful antidote to depression. He took up oil-painting and was shown by Hazel Lavery, the wife of Sir John Lavery, how to daub the canvas with bold strokes and bright colours. Soon he was haunting Lavery's studio and painting alongside him. Churchill never claimed to be a professional artist, let alone a great one, but in the course of a lifetime he greatly enjoyed himself painting hundreds of pictures. Whenever he went on holiday abroad he took his easel and paints with him, and even managed to paint one picture during the Second World War -- a view of Marrakesh, which he presented to President Roosevelt. 
After his resignation in November 1915 Churchill sought active service and obtained from Sir John French a promise of the command of a brigade. In the interim he joined the 2nd battalion of the Grenadier Guards at Laventie for training. To Churchill's dismay, Asquith then vetoed his promotion to brigadier-general and ordered that he be given the command of a battalion instead. On 4 January 1916 Lieutenant-Colonel Winston Churchill was placed in command of the 6th battalion of the Royal Scots Fusiliers. He arranged for his friend Archibald (Archie) Sinclair, a highland laird and aspiring Liberal politician, to join him as second in command. Towards the end of January the battalion moved up to the front line, close to the village of Ploegsteert, near Messines on the Franco-Belgian frontier. 
Churchill's arrival, and his unorthodox methods of command, caused much astonishment, and some resentment at first among the junior officers. But he proved a good commanding officer, combining leadership and inspiration with a great solicitude for the welfare of the ordinary soldier. He waged a successful campaign against lice, reduced punishments, and organized entertainments. The sector of the front on which he was served was relatively quiet and the battle of the Somme (1 July 1916) took place after he had returned home. But Churchill was frequently under fire and had a number of narrow escapes from death. 
Much as Churchill enjoyed soldiering, his military ambitions were thwarted by his modest rank, and he feared that a prolonged absence from Westminster would deny him the chance to restore his fortunes. In March 1916 he returned home on leave to speak in the house but destroyed the effect of an otherwise powerful attack upon Balfour's conduct of the Admiralty with an ill-judged appeal for the return of Fisher as first sea lord. In May 1916 the amalgamation of his battalion with another led to the extinction of his command and gave him a presentable excuse for resigning his commission and coming home. Churchill had spent only 100 days at the front, but the experience had served to confirm his critical estimate of the British high command. To replenish his income, while keeping his name in the public eye, he began to write war commentaries for the press. He also made a number of speeches, critical of the conduct of the war, in the House of Commons. Eagerly awaiting the downfall of Asquith, he planned to ally himself with a victorious combination of Lloyd George, Bonar Law, Curzon, and Carson. They, however, were less eager to ally with him. In the political crisis of December 1916, Asquith was replaced by Lloyd George, but the Unionists under Bonar Law insisted that Churchill should be excluded from the new government. 
Churchill's main achievement during this first period in the political wilderness was the partial rehabilitation of his reputation. In June 1916 Asquith agreed to the appointment of a commission to inquire into the responsibility for the Gallipoli operation. Though handicapped by Asquith's refusal to allow him access to the official records, Churchill devoted much of his time to preparing a very eloquent and plausible defence. The first report of the Dardanelles commission, published in March 1917, made it clear that Churchill was not solely or even principally responsible. 
After the battle of the Somme, Churchill had come to the conclusion that great offensives on the western front were far more costly to the allies than to the enemy, and ought to be avoided until new methods of attack were invented or overwhelming numerical superiority achieved. In a secret session of the House of Commons on 10 May 1917, Churchill argued the case in a powerful speech. Here was one of the perennial sources of his survival in British politics. No one else could match his ability, on a good day, to sway the House of Commons by the force of his argument. Churchill for his part felt a deep and genuine respect for a body that could make or break him, but also something more: a romantic faith in the providential character of an institution at the heart of British history. One evening in March 1917 he was at the house in the company of Alexander MacCullum Scott, a back-bench Liberal MP, who recorded the following scene in his diary: 'As we were leaving the House late tonight, he called me into the Chamber to take a last look round. All was darkness except a ring of faint light all around under the gallery. We could dimly see the table, but walls and roof were invisible. 'Look at it', he said. 'This little place is what makes the difference between us and Germany. It is in virtue of this that we shall muddle through to success & for lack of this Germany's brilliant efficiency leads her to final disaster. This little room is the shrine of the world's liberties.' (MacCullum Scott diary, 5 March 1917, Glasgow University Library, MacCullum Scott MSS)' 

Fearful, perhaps, that Churchill would emerge as the new leader of the opposition, Lloyd George promised to restore him to office. In July 1917, with great difficulty, he obtained Bonar Law's consent to the appointment of Churchill as minister of munitions. Since his new post was outside the war cabinet, this appeared to meet Bonar Law's demand for the exclusion of Churchill from any part in the conduct of the war. Nevertheless 100 Conservative MPs signed a motion deploring his appointment, and the Conservative press complained loudly. 
Accompanied by his bust of Napoleon, Churchill moved into the ministry's quarters in the former premises of the Metropole Hotel in Northumberland Avenue. Created by Lloyd George in 1915, it was already in full swing with a staff of 12,000 officials, two and a half million workers employed in its factories, and the output of guns and shells running at record levels. Churchill's brief was to ensure a continuous and increasing flow of production. He began by reorganizing the ministry itself, compressing fifty separate divisions into ten, and creating a munitions council which met daily to co-ordinate and determine policy. The next priority was industrial unrest. Production was threatened by strikes and Churchill took action to redress some of the most prominent grievances. He abolished the 'leaving certificate' which prevented workers in the munitions trades from moving from one employer to another. More controversially he authorized a 12 per cent bonus for skilled workers on time rates, unwittingly setting off a train of inflationary wage demands as unskilled workers struggled to catch up. Churchill, however, was ready to employ the stick as well as the carrot. In the summer of 1918 he put an end to a strike of engineers in Coventry by threatening to conscript them into the army. 
Although Churchill was excluded from the war cabinet, he displayed all the dynamism of a war leader. Determined to investigate for himself the needs of the armies on the western front, he made frequent visits to France for consultations with his French opposite number, Louis Loucheur, and the British commander-in-chief, Sir Douglas Haig. In spite of Churchill's past criticisms of strategy on the western front, he managed to convince Haig that he was doing everything in his power to assist him. He also struck up a firm friendship with Haig's aide-de-camp, Major Desmond Morton, in later years his most important contact in the world of secret intelligence. 
Churchill continued to urge that the British and French allied armies remain on the defensive until 1919, by which date the build-up of American forces, together with an overwhelming superiority in tanks, aircraft, gas, and machine-guns, would ensure an allied victory. Lloyd George rejected this advice. But during the crisis of March 1918, when the German offensive in the west threatened to break through the allied lines, he turned to Churchill, dispatching him on an urgent mission to Paris to co-ordinate action with the French premier, Georges Clemenceau. Churchill's own links with France dated back to the days when Mrs Everest had wheeled him up and down the 'Shams Elizzie'. At school he had acquired a fluent but ungrammatical command of French with the vowels pronounced in an emphatically English accent. But his love affair with France seems to have begun in 1907 when he first set eyes on the French army at its annual manoeuvres: 'When I saw the great masses of the French infantry storming the position, while the bands played the 'Marseillaise', I felt that by those valiant bayonets the rights of man had been gained and that by them the rights and liberties of Europe would be faithfully guarded. (Kersaudy, 26)' Both Clemenceau and his great rival, Marshal Foch, made an abiding impression on Churchill. They represented for him, he explained, the dual nature of France: Clemenceau its anticlerical, revolutionary, and republican past, Foch its more ancient, aristocratic heritage of Joan of Arc and the chateau of Versailles. 
The First World War came to an end sooner than Churchill expected. With the Liberal Party split Lloyd George went to the country at the head of a coalition of Conservatives and Coalition Liberals, a group in which he and Churchill were the most prominent figures. In the general election of December 1918 the coalition obtained a stupendous majority and Churchill was again victorious in Dundee. 
Churchill hoped to return to the Admiralty, but Lloyd George insisted that he accept the twin posts of secretary for war and air. He was immediately faced with a crisis over demobilization. There was much resentment in the ranks against existing arrangements because they took no account of how long a man had served. So great was the anger that a mutiny broke out at Calais and there were riots at home. Acting with great speed and decision, Churchill introduced a new scheme, based on the principle of 'first in, first out', which defused the discontent. 
In the aftermath of war Churchill was haunted by the spectre of the Bolshevik revolution. Soviet communism, he concluded, was the worst tyranny in history and Lenin and Trotsky more dangerous enemies than the Kaiser's Germany. His loathing of communism found expression in the nightmare imagery with which he depicted 'the foul baboonery of Bolshevism' as 'a plague bacillus', a 'cancer', and a 'horrible form of mental and moral disease' (Rose, 146). His greatest fear was that Bolshevism would conquer both Russia and Germany, thus creating a hostile and aggressive bloc stretching from Europe to the Pacific. He therefore urged the victors to adopt a policy of magnanimity and friendship towards Germany: 'Kill the Bolshie, Kiss the Hun', as he put it to Asquith's daughter Violet (Gilbert, 'Life', 412). 
Churchill claimed to be carrying out the war cabinet's policy of withdrawing from Russia the 14,000 British troops remaining there at the end of the war. But at a meeting of the supreme allied war council in Paris in February 1919, he argued passionately in favour of a concerted allied attempt to send extra troops, money, and supplies to the white armies. Although he managed to persuade the war cabinet -- which remained in being until September 1919 -- to furnish extra supplies to the white Russian forces, his repeated pleas in favour of more direct intervention fell on deaf ears. Lloyd George, who was bombarded by Churchill with memoranda on the subject, complained that he was obsessed with Russia to the exclusion of all other issues, but Churchill was unmoved. He was strongly opposed to opening trade negotiations with Russia and hovered on the brink of resignation when an Anglo-Soviet trade treaty was approved by the cabinet in November 1920. Churchill's perceptions of the evils and barbarism of the Bolshevik regime have been vindicated by the passage of time. But after the bloodbath of the First World War neither Britain nor its allies could mobilize the money, the manpower, or the popular consent essential for continued military intervention. 
Churchill was also anxious about developments at home. The intelligence services supplied him with intercepts of messages from Moscow authorizing Soviet agents in Britain to subsidize with Russian gold the 'Daily Herald', the British Communist Party, and other left-wing organizations. The 'Herald' had already identified Churchill as the labour movement's most dangerous enemy; Churchill, for his part, denounced the Labour Party as unfit to govern, and a prey to the manipulations of extremists. 
Preoccupied by the 'red peril', Churchill did not realize until the beginning of 1920 that Ireland was sliding into chaos. The chief of the Imperial General Staff, Sir Henry Wilson, pressed for the introduction of martial law. Churchill, like the rest of the cabinet, was against this, but he gave strong support to Lloyd George's policy of recruiting two paramilitary forces, the Black and Tans and the auxiliary police force, the 'Auxis', who carried out unofficial reprisals against the IRA and also murdered some innocent civilians. When Lloyd George appointed him chairman of a cabinet committee on Ireland in June 1920, Churchill was full of rash ideas for intensifying the conflict including raising a force of 30,000 Ulstermen to maintain British authority throughout Ireland. But as he also explained to the cabinet, his aim was to achieve a position of strength from which constitutional concessions could be granted. 
In May 1921 Churchill, by now colonial secretary, urged the cabinet to enter into negotiations on the grounds that British forces now had the upper hand. Two months later Lloyd George called a truce and Churchill was drawn once more into the prime minister's confidence. During the negotiations which led to the Anglo-Irish treaty of 6 December 1921, Churchill was a member of the British delegation and determined to drive a hard bargain. He was chiefly responsible for the military clauses of the treaty, which reserved for Britain three naval bases: the 'treaty ports' as they were later called. His opposite number in the military negotiations was Michael Collins, the leader of the IRA, with whom he established a good working relationship. With the granting of dominion status to the Irish Free State, Churchill as colonial secretary became responsible for Anglo-Irish relations during an extremely tense period in which there was violence along the border between north and south, and the south itself was descending into civil war. Collins feared that in signing the treaty he was signing his own death warrant, and so it proved. But shortly before his assassination in August he sent Churchill a message to thank him for all the support he had given to the precarious government of the Irish Free State during the first few troubled months of its existence: 'Tell Winston that we could never have done anything without him' (Churchill, 'World Crisis', 5.348). Churchill felt a sense of paternity towards the Irish Free State and was greatly affronted when De Valera came to power in 1932 and began to abrogate the constitutional terms of the treaty. He was even more incensed when Neville Chamberlain returned the treaty ports to Ireland in 1938. 
Churchill's reputation as a militarist was often at variance with his record in cutting defence expenditure. In the aftermath of the First World War the pressures to reduce public spending were overwhelming. In August 1919 the cabinet adopted, without dissent from Churchill, the 'ten year rule', whereby military expenditure was to be based on the assumption that there would be no major war for the next ten years. Churchill himself chafed at the expense involved in the British occupation of the former Ottoman territories of Palestine and Mesopotamia (Iraq) -- regions which, he told the House of Commons in July 1921, were 'unduly stocked with peppery, pugnacious, proud politicians and theologians' (Churchill and Gilbert, 4.619). He recommended that the League of Nations mandate for Palestine be given to the United States: it was Lloyd George who insisted that it should go to Britain. 
Churchill's drive for a settlement of the Middle East led him to propose that both Palestine and Iraq should be run by a new Middle East department of the Colonial Office. In February 1921, Lloyd George took the logical step of appointing Churchill himself colonial secretary (until April 1921 he also retained the air portfolio), and the new Middle East department was established, with a staff which included T. E. Lawrence. In March Churchill visited Cairo to preside over a conference to settle the affairs of Palestine and Mesopotamia. Although the details of the settlement owed much to others, it was Churchill who took the final decisions. Mesopotamia was transformed into the kingdom of Iraq and the emir Feisal of the Hashemite dynasty was installed as the first monarch. To the dismay of Zionists, Churchill also decided that the whole of Palestine east of the River Jordan should become a second Arab kingdom of Transjordan under Feisal's brother, the emir Abdullah. In accordance with the Balfour declaration of 1917, the League of Nations mandate for Palestine included the provision that Palestine should become a 'national home' for the Jews. Under Churchill's settlement, the promise of a Jewish national home was to apply only to Palestine west of the Jordan, and even then it was to be cautiously interpreted. Though Churchill had been personally sympathetic to Zionism ever since his contacts with Manchester Jews in the Edwardian period, he recognized the need to assuage Arab fears of unlimited Jewish immigration. In a white paper of June 1922, drafted by the British high commissioner in Palestine, Sir Herbert Samuel, but fully endorsed by Churchill, the government declared that the 'Jewish National Home' did not mean 'the imposition of a Jewish nationality upon the inhabitants of Palestine as a whole' but the continued development of the existing Jewish community (Rose, 157). 
Churchill could point to great achievements, but they failed to dispel doubts and reservations about him. The general consensus was well expressed by a political commentator who wrote in 1920: 'Unhappily for himself, and perhaps for the nation, since he has many of the qualities of real greatness, Mr Churchill lacks the unifying spirit of 'character' which alone can master the discrepant or even antagonistic elements in a single mind, giving them not merely force, which is something, but direction, which is much more. He is a man of truly brilliant gifts, but you cannot depend upon him. His love for danger runs away with his discretion; his passion for adventure makes him forget the importance of the goal. (Begbie, 103)' The Lloyd George coalition was essentially an alliance between Lloyd George himself and the Conservative Party, a temporary arrangement which left the Coalition Liberals insecure. Both Lloyd George and Churchill sought a way out of the problem by advocating 'fusion' -- an amalgamation of the two wings of the coalition to form a new centre party based on resistance to socialism. Churchill campaigned strongly for this during the first half of 1920, at a time when the Conservatives might have accepted the idea, but it foundered on the opposition of many Coalition Liberals. After this, Lloyd George and Churchill could only hope to find some means of prolonging the life of the coalition. 
In 1920, with the enthusiastic support of Lloyd George, but much against the will of Churchill, the allies had imposed on the Turks the draconian treaty of Sevres. In response Turkish nationalists under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal rose up against the treaty and began to force the Greeks into retreat. Up to this point Churchill had taken a robustly pro-Turkish line. But in August 1922 Turkish forces drove the Greeks into the sea and advanced towards the British garrison at Chanak on the eastern shore of the Dardanelles. For about a fortnight it looked as though the garrison might be attacked or overrun, and the cabinet decided on 29 September to instruct Sir Charles Harington, the British commander on the spot, to deliver an ultimatum to the Turks. Churchill, by this time, was an excitable member of the war party in the cabinet: he did not mean to suffer a second humiliation at the Dardanelles. When Harington decided not to deliver the ultimatum the Chanak crisis petered out, but the government's warlike stance was highly unpopular and helped to seal the fate of Lloyd George's tottering regime. At the Carlton Club meeting on 19 October, Conservative MPs voted to bring down the coalition and fight the general election as an independent party. 
Churchill, who had been operated on for appendicitis, was too ill to take part in the opening stages of the election. Clementine bravely stood in for him but quickly discovered that the mood of the electorate had turned ugly. When a pale and fragile Churchill at last arrived he had to be carried to the platform on a makeshift sedan, and address the audience seated. He was howled down. He and his fellow Liberal candidate were defeated by the Labour candidate, E. D. Morel, and the veteran prohibitionist Edwin Scrymgeour. 'In the twinkling of an eye', Churchill was to write, 'I found myself without an office, without a seat, without a party, and without an appendix' (Churchill, 'Thoughts and Adventures', 213). 
Churchill had also been going through a troubled phase in his family life. In April 1921 Clementine's brother, William Hozier, shot himself in a hotel in Paris. The following June, Lady Randolph died suddenly after the amputation of a leg. The most shattering blow for Winston and Clementine was the death from septicaemia in August of their youngest daughter, Marigold ('the Duckadilly'), aged two years nine months. At the end of 1921 Clementine collapsed from nervous exhaustion. 'What changes in a year!', Churchill wrote to her, 'What gaps! What a sense of fleeting shadows! But your sweet love and comradeship is a light that burns. The stronger as our brief years pass' (Soames, 203). Before long there was cause for rejoicing after all. On 15 September 1922 Clementine gave birth to their fifth and last child, Mary. 
After the fall of the coalition Churchill withdrew to the south of France. Ever since 1918 hecklers had been interrupting him at public meetings with the cry of 'What about Gallipoli?'. Determined to confound the critics, he set to work with astonishing speed and energy on a mammoth history of the First World War. The first volume of 'The World Crisis', published in April 1923, was devoted mainly to his reorganization of the Royal Navy between 1911 and 1914. In the second, which appeared six months later, he concentrated on Gallipoli and the argument that it was a strategically sound concept flawed by errors and tricks of fate for which he was not responsible. The main theme of the third part, published in two volumes in March 1927, was his measured critique of Haig's strategy on the western front. A fifth volume on the crises of the immediate post-war period, 'The Aftermath', appeared in March 1929, and a sixth, 'The Eastern Front', in November 1931. 
Although parts of 'The World Crisis' were highly autobiographical, drawing on documents from Churchill's private papers, the book as a whole was a stupendous narrative of the war in Europe featuring masterly set-piece accounts of major battles. Dictated to secretaries as he strode up and down the room, it exhibited his passionate interest in war and his romantic conception of the 'true glory' of the troops who perished on the Somme. But he could not write of the bloodbaths on the western front without sombre reflections on the growing destructive power of modern warfare: 'Mankind has never been in this position before. Without having improved appreciably in virtue or enjoying wiser guidance, it has got into its hands for the first time the tools by which it can unfailingly accomplish its own extermination' (Churchill, 'World Crisis', 5.454). 
The writing of 'The World Crisis' proceeded in parallel with the restoration of Churchill's political fortunes. In May 1923 his old opponent Bonar Law was succeeded as prime minister and leader of the Conservative Party by the more accommodating Stanley Baldwin. Churchill's hopes of reunion with the Conservatives were temporarily blocked when Baldwin declared in favour of protection and called a general election in December 1923. Standing for the last time as a Liberal, at Leicester West, Churchill was defeated by the Labour candidate. When the Liberals decided to support a minority Labour government under the leadership of Ramsay MacDonald, Churchill seized the chance of putting himself at the head of the many right-wing Liberals who would have preferred an anti-socialist alliance. He issued a statement declaring: 'The enthronement in office of a Socialist Government will be a serious national misfortune such as usually has befallen great states only on the morrow of defeat in war' (Pelling, 287). In the Westminster Abbey by-election of March 1924 Churchill entered the fray as an 'independent anti-socialist', and almost beat the Conservative candidate. Having served notice that he was still a force to be reckoned with, he was shortly afterwards adopted by the local Conservative association as the 'constitutionalist' candidate for the safe Conservative seat of Epping. 
In the ensuing general election of October 1924 the Conservatives were returned with a substantial overall majority, Churchill's own majority at Epping being nearly 10,000; he held the seat until his retirement in 1964. To Churchill's astonishment Baldwin -- whose aim was to detach him from Lloyd George -- asked him whether he would accept the Treasury. Churchill recalled, 'I should have liked to have answered, 'Will the bloody duck swim?', but as it was a formal and important conversation I replied, 'This fulfils my ambition. I still have my father's robe as Chancellor. I shall be proud to serve you in this splendid office.' (Churchill and Gilbert, 5.59)' Having taken office on 7 November 1924, Churchill's first major decision as chancellor of the exchequer delighted the Bank of England, the Treasury, and the Conservative Party. In the budget of April 1925 he announced the restoration of the gold standard at the pre-war parity of $4.86 to the pound. Warned against this step by Beaverbrook and Keynes, Churchill conducted a thorough investigation into the arguments for and against before coming to the conclusion that the decision was inevitable and possibly right. The consequence, however, was an overvalued pound, which had damaging effects on British export industries, including coal, and thus precipitated the general strike. So, at least, historians have tended to argue and Churchill himself, in later years, came to regard the restoration of the gold standard as a disastrous mistake. 
In financial policy Churchill was in principle a Gladstonian Liberal committed to free trade, strict economy in public expenditure, and balanced budgets. On free trade he demonstrated some flexibility, accepting the relatively minor instalments of protectionism that had already been introduced, but rejecting the demands of tariff reformers like L. S. Amery for protective duties on iron and steel. He launched a vigorous drive for reductions in public spending, outraged the Admiralty by compelling reductions in its cruiser programme, and refused to finance the construction of a naval base at Singapore. For what, he asked in a letter to Baldwin (15 December 1924), was the Admiralty preparing? 'A war with Japan! But why should there be a war with Japan? I do not believe there is the slightest chance of it in our lifetime' (Churchill and Gilbert, 'Companion', vol. 5, pt 1, p. 306). In June 1928 the cabinet accepted Churchill's proposal that the ten year rule should be placed on a permanent basis, advancing day by day until such time as a decision was taken to revise it. 
Churchill set his face firmly against the radical programme of public works advocated by Lloyd George and the Liberals as the solution to unemployment. Nevertheless he brought to the annual budget a showmanship reminiscent of the Welsh wizard. In his first budget he was able to announce a substantial cut in income tax, coupled with a new scheme (devised by the minister of health, Neville Chamberlain) of widows' and orphans' pensions. In 1927 he was captivated by the idea of derating -- abolishing local authority rates on industry -- which he hoped would act as a powerful stimulus to trade and industry. But his proposals led to prolonged battles with Chamberlain. The final scheme, announced by Churchill in the budget of 1928, was a compromise. Industry and the railways were to be freed of 75 per cent of local authority rates, and agriculture of 100 per cent, but a new tax of 4died in the pound on petrol was introduced as partial compensation for the loss of revenue. Derating proved to be a damp squib and was subsequently abandoned by the second Labour government. 
Wherever he turned, Churchill found that his hopes for economic expansion were thwarted. Like previous chancellors, he tried hard to cut through the tangle of war debts and reparations which had arisen out of the First World War, but found the United States unwilling to cancel the debts incurred by Britain and France. He also complained about the strict monetary policies of the Bank of England under its governor, Montagu Norman. Even more alarming was the prospect of the harm that might be done to the economy through industrial strife. In June 1925 Churchill averted a major strike in the coal industry by agreeing to a nine-month Treasury subsidy for miners' wages. But this was a temporary measure to give both sides in the coal industry a breathing space in which to reach a settlement. When the nine months expired without a settlement there was no question of any more state subsidies. And when the general council of the TUC called a general strike (May 1926) in support of the miners, Churchill was determined to break the strike. 
So too were Baldwin and the rest of the cabinet. If Churchill appeared more militant than his colleagues it was because he was more rhetorical and demonstrative. Baldwin put him in charge of an emergency government newspaper, the 'British Gazette', to which he contributed unsigned editorials that breathed defiance. When he arranged for troops to convoy supplies from the London docks through the streets, rumour had it that he was itching to put down the strike by military force. After nine days the strike petered out, but the dispute in the coal industry lingered on, with very little attempt by Baldwin to resolve it. Churchill had always distinguished clearly between the general strike, which he regarded as a challenge to the constitution, and the coal dispute, which he regarded as purely industrial. In the autumn, while Baldwin was away on holiday, Churchill intervened and tried to put pressure on the coal owners to settle, but was thwarted by powerful interests in the Conservative Party. 
To the alarm of the Foreign Office, Churchill continued to keep a close watch on the international scene. He remained bitterly hostile to the Soviet Union and rejoiced when diplomatic relations were broken off after the Arcos raid. More surprising, given his long-standing commitment to the improvement of relations between Britain and the United States, he passed through a brief phase of anti-Americanism, prompted by naval rivalries. Nor was Churchill a Francophile at this period. When the foreign secretary, Austen Chamberlain, proposed an Anglo-French alliance, Churchill came out strongly against the idea. According to Sir Eyre Crowe, he was all for letting France 'stew in her own juice' (Blake and Louis, 53). 
In September 1922 Churchill paid $5000 for a new home. Chartwell Manor, near Westerham in Kent, was a dilapidated house, built on a hilltop overlooking the Weald of Kent, with 80 acres of land including a valley and a lake. Captivated by the view, Churchill acted without the agreement of Clementine, who disliked the house but nevertheless worked hard to make the best of it. After hiring the architect Philip Tilden, Churchill began to pour a fortune into the renovation, redesign, and extension of Chartwell. By the spring of 1924 it was ready for occupation. 
Chartwell was Churchill's first permanent home. Here he could enjoy family life and the company of his friends in a more spacious and hospitable setting, but the house was also his political headquarters. Among those who soon became frequent visitors were F. A. Lindemann ('the Prof'), professor of experimental philosophy (physics) at Oxford, and Brendan Bracken, a youthful Irish adventurer mistakenly rumoured to be Churchill's illegitimate son. Both were attracted by his swashbuckling Conservatism and love of adventure. In Churchill himself, Chartwell brought out a hitherto unsuspected love of the land. He experimented with the raising of pigs, chickens, and other livestock, investing large sums with very little return. He took up bricklaying and was recruited by a local branch official as a member of the Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Workers, but the union's executive, failing to share the joke, ruled that he was ineligible for membership. 
In the general election of May 1929 the Baldwin government lost its overall majority and was succeeded by a second minority Labour government, dependent for office on the support of the Liberals. Churchill sought vainly for a Liberal-Conservative alliance against the government. In August 1929 he sailed with his brother Jack and his son Randolph to Canada, which he traversed from east to west as a guest of the Canadian Pacific Railway. After a visit to the Calgary oilfields, Randolph criticized the oil magnates for their lack of culture. Churchill rebuked him: 'Cultured people are merely the glittering scum which floats upon the deep river of production!' (Churchill, 'Twenty-one Years', 74). 
As the Conservatives edged towards protectionism, Churchill's free-trade credentials were a waning asset and he was much in need of a new rallying cry to restore him to the front line of the political battle. He found it in the defence of British rule in India. In October 1929 the viceroy, Lord Irwin, declared that the ultimate goal of British rule in India was 'dominion status'. To Churchill's dismay Baldwin endorsed the Irwin declaration, and supported a round-table conference of British and Indian representatives to discuss constitutional reform. Although Churchill was prepared to accept a measure of self-government at the provincial level, he was passionately opposed to the idea of an all-India federation with an element of self-government at the centre. After months of tension the final break between Churchill and Baldwin came in January 1931, when Gandhi and other Congress politicians were released from gaol to enable them to attend the round-table conference. Resigning in protest from the shadow cabinet, Churchill launched into a campaign to mobilize the tory back-benches and the constituency activists against Baldwin. 
Whether or not Churchill's aim was to seize the leadership of the Conservative Party, there is no reason to doubt the strength of his convictions on the subject. Churchill believed that British rule in India was a guarantee of good government and the protection of the masses. Self-government, he predicted, would lead to exploitation, corruption, and communal strife between Muslim and the Hindu. Unlike the viceroy and his officials, who were in touch with the political realities, he failed to appreciate the strength of the nationalist movement. The Congress leaders, he imagined, could be swept aside in a vigorous display of imperial will: attempts to appease them would only increase their appetite for power. He declared on 23 February 1931: 'It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr Gandhi, a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir of a type well-known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of the Viceregal Palace while he is still organising and conducting a campaign of civil disobedience, to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor. (Gilbert, 'Life', 499)' In October 1930 Churchill published 'My Early Life', a witty and elegiac account of his youth shot through with regret at the decline of the social and imperial order in which he had grown up. Parliamentary politics, Churchill felt, were now in the hands of lesser men drifting on the fickle currents of a mass electorate. What was needed was strong leadership both at home and in India. As Baldwin wrote in November 1930: 'He wants... the Tory party to go back to pre-war and govern with a strong hand. He has become once more the subaltern of Hussars of '96' (Davidson, 355). When Baldwin and MacDonald joined forces in the National Government of August 1931, Churchill's views on India ensured his exclusion from office. 
Churchill was visiting the United States on a money-making lecture tour when he was knocked down by a car and badly injured while attempting to cross Fifth Avenue in New York (13 December 1931). Had he been killed he would perhaps be remembered today as the most illustrious and interesting failure in twentieth-century British politics. Instead he recovered and returned home to resume his India campaign. In April 1933 he turned down an invitation to join the joint select committee appointed to examine and report on the government's proposals for constitutional reform. Though he seldom enjoyed the support of more than sixty back-bench MPs, it was a different story in the constituencies, where he and his fellow diehards organized, through the India Defence League, a highly effective campaign of subversion. At the annual party conference they won a third of the vote in October 1933 and nearly a half in October 1934. The battle reached a climax in the 1934-5 session of parliament, as the secretary for India, Samuel Hoare, struggled to pilot the 'Government of India Bill' through the Commons. Though it reached the statute book, it had already been wrecked by the refusal of the Indian princes to participate in the federal provisions of the new constitution: hence the all-India federation to which Churchill had objected so strongly was never to materialize. 
Churchill's India campaign distracted attention from his simultaneous warnings over the rise of Hitler's Germany. Churchill was horrified by the brutally repressive character of the Nazi regime and repelled by its antisemitism, which he frequently condemned in his speeches. 'I remember', Attlee recalled, 'the tears pouring down his cheeks one day before the war in the House of Commons, when he was telling me what was being done to the Jews in Germany' ('Churchill by his Contemporaries', 23). But it was the external ambitions of the Nazis, not their internal policies, that caused Churchill most alarm. With fascism as such -- a loose term which covered a variety of regimes -- he had no quarrel. In February 1933 he praised Mussolini, at that time a potential ally of Great Britain, as 'the greatest lawgiver among living men' (Churchill and Gilbert, 5.457). While recognizing Germany's legitimate grievances over the treaty of Versailles, Churchill argued that it would be folly for the victors to disarm before the grievances of the vanquished were redressed. He therefore condemned the attempts made by the British government and the international disarmament conference in Geneva (1932-4) to reduce Britain and France's armed forces to the level of Germany's. If Germany were granted equality in armaments, he warned the House of Commons in April 1933, 'so surely we should see ourselves within a measurable distance of the renewal of general European war' (Rhodes James, 'Study in Failure', 287). Following the withdrawal of Germany from the League of Nations and the disarmament conference in autumn 1934, he strongly opposed unilateral concessions like the Anglo-German naval treaty of 1935. Diplomacy, he argued, must be backed by military force. From 1934 onwards he campaigned for rearmament in the air with the aim of achieving parity of front-line strength between the RAF and the Luftwaffe. 
Churchill's campaign was fuelled by information leaked to him, probably in breach of the 'Official Secrets Act', by high-level civil servants who feared that the pace of rearmament was too slow. One of his principal informants was his old friend Desmond Morton, whose role as director of the industrial intelligence centre was to monitor the economic preparations that Germany and other European nations were making for war. Another was Ralph Wigram, the head of the central department of the Foreign Office, which had its own intelligence sources. Both Morton and Wigram supplied Churchill with secret estimates of German aircraft production that appeared to contradict Baldwin's pledge that parity in the air would be maintained. In the House of Commons, Churchill gathered around him a formidable body of Conservative supporters and pressed the government hard in powerful speeches, full of detailed allegations, that sent shock waves through the cabinet. Although he was out of office, Churchill was no outsider. As a privy councillor and elder statesman he always had access to the inner circle and was often consulted on matters of defence. In September 1934, when Baldwin was on holiday at Aix-les-Bains, Churchill and Lindemann called in to see him and urged the establishment of a high-powered committee to inquire into the problems of defence against air attack. Their initiative led to the setting up of the air defence research committee of the committee of imperial defence. When Baldwin succeeded MacDonald in June 1935 he invited Churchill to serve on the air defence committee, of which he remained a member up to the outbreak of war in 1939. Churchill was therefore well briefed on the development of radar and Fighter Command's plans to combat the Luftwaffe. 
On some aspects of defence Churchill's judgement was questionable. The intelligence assessments that both he and the government received greatly overestimated the front-line strength and capabilities of the German air force. 'No more than his informants', wrote D. C. Watt, 'did he realise that the capacities of the aircraft in production in Germany and Britain up to 1939 made it impossible for either country to launch a serious bombing attack against the other from bases in their own territory' (Watt, 204). In spite of the part he had played in the invention of the tank, he was unaware of the revolutionary doctrines of tank warfare adopted by the German army. His faith in the French army was unshakeable but misplaced. After a tour of the Maginot line in August 1939 he wrote: 'The French front cannot be surprised. It cannot be broken at any point except by an effort which would be enormously costly in life and would take so much time that the general situation would be transformed while it was in progress. (Gilbert, 'Companion', vol. 5, pt 3, p. 1594)' Consequently Churchill paid little attention to the state of the army or the need to prepare a properly trained and equipped expeditionary force. As for naval warfare, Churchill accepted the Admiralty's over-optimistic assessments of the ability of warships to defend themselves against attack from the air, and the effectiveness of the asdic detection device in reducing the menace posed by submarine warfare. Churchill prophesied war, but not the kind of war the British were compelled in the end to fight. 
In Churchill's view, all other threats were eclipsed by the danger from Nazi Germany. Acts of aggression by other nations might therefore have to be tolerated or condoned. When Italy attacked Abyssinia in 1935 he was torn between expressions of support for the League of Nations and the desire to maintain friendly relations with Italy as a potential counterweight to Germany. The outbreak of war between China and Japan in 1937 seems to have caused him little anxiety, as he was largely oblivious of the threat posed by Japan to the British empire in the Far East. 
By 1936 the India question was out of the way, the government was pressing on with rearmament, and there were large areas of foreign policy -- such as the need for non-intervention in the Spanish Civil War -- on which Churchill agreed with the cabinet. There was much talk of Churchill's imminent return to office, though Baldwin failed to appoint him, in March 1936, to the newly created post of minister for the co-ordination of defence. But new differences between Churchill and the government were beginning to emerge. In principle at least, the cabinet fully accepted the need to give priority to the air defence of Great Britain. But Churchill argued that measures to defend the homeland, however essential, were no substitute for the establishment of a military balance of power on the continent. Following the German remilitarization of the Rhineland (to which he reacted with studied moderation), Churchill therefore began to call for Britain to take the lead in the pursuit of collective security through the League of Nations, a policy that opened up the possibility of co-operation with the Soviet Union. And although he continued to base himself mainly on the Conservative Party, he began to reach out -- with the assistance of a cross-party organization, the Focus -- for Liberal and Labour support. 
In December 1936 Churchill's campaign for 'arms and the covenant' was interrupted by the abdication crisis. His plea for Edward VIII to be given more time to reach a decision was mistakenly interpreted by conspiracy theorists as an intrigue to overthrow Baldwin, and his reputation suffered. When Baldwin finally departed in May 1937, Churchill welcomed his successor, Neville Chamberlain, and warmly seconded his nomination as leader of the Conservative Party. At first he was slow to realize that Chamberlain's policies were diametrically opposed to his own. Eden's resignation from the Foreign Office in February 1938 gave him cause for concern and he stressed the need for an Anglo-French alliance, but when the Czech crisis came to a climax in September 1938 he continued up to the last minute to hope that Chamberlain and Halifax would adopt his own policy of a 'grand alliance' with France and the Soviet Union to deter Hitler. Only after the Munich agreement did Churchill break decisively with Chamberlain. Speaking in the Commons he declared: 'We have suffered a total and unmitigated defeat... What I find unendurable is the sense of our country falling... into the orbit and influence of Nazi Germany and of our existence becoming dependent on their good will or pleasure' (Churchill and Gilbert, 5.999-1000). 
During the winter of 1938-9, the true period of Churchill's exile in the wilderness, he was ostracized by his own party and narrowly survived a vote of confidence in his constituency association. Even Anthony Eden, and the small group of MPs who followed him, held aloof. After the German occupation of Prague in March 1939, however, Churchill's stock began to recover rapidly. By the summer a number of newspapers, including the 'Daily Telegraph', were campaigning for his recall to office. Churchill now applauded Chamberlain's apparent change of policy while strongly urging a Soviet alliance, a course the prime minister was loath to follow. 
Driven as much by financial need as by political motives, Churchill devoted much of the 1930s to literary endeavours. In 1929 he began work on the life of his ancestor the first duke of Marlborough. Churchill had the advantage of exclusive access to the Blenheim archives, and the services of the young Maurice Ashley as his research assistant. But the book owed its force to Churchill's deep knowledge of high politics and military operations, his mastery of the source materials, and his passionate desire to vindicate his ancestor's character from the charges levelled against him by Macaulay. Published in four volumes between October 1933 and September 1938, 'Marlborough: his Life and Times' took its place at once among the classics of historical writing. As the story of his ancestor's leadership of a grand alliance to prevent the domination of the continent by a single power, it was also a source of inspiration to Churchill in his campaign against appeasement. He also signed a contract in 1932 for another multi-volume work, 'A History of the English-Speaking Peoples', for which Cassell agreed to pay an advance of $20,000. Setting himself a target of 1000 words a day, he began work on the book on 1 August 1938. By the outbreak of war in September 1939, when plans for publication had to be suspended, there were 530,000 words in proof and the book was almost finished. In the intervals between writing history and making it, he poured out a stream of articles for the press, including a series of biographical profiles later collected and published as 'Great Contemporaries' (1937). His weekly commentaries in the 'Evening Standard', syndicated throughout Europe by a Hungarian Jew, Emery Reves, were published in book form as 'Step by Step' (1939). 
Churchill was probably the highest-paid English author of his day, but his earning powers were rarely sufficient to meet the bills resulting from his extravagant spending habits. 'To run his estate efficiently,', wrote one of his biographers, 'Churchill was helped by eight or nine indoor servants, a nannie or governess, two secretaries, a chauffeur, three gardeners, a groom, and a working bailiff' (Rose, 193). In spring 1938 losses on the stock market compelled him to put Chartwell up for sale, but he was rescued by the generosity of the financier Sir Henry Strakosch, who agreed to cover his share losses and take control of his American investments. 
Churchill's marriage to Clemmie endured, but there were many storms as the children grew up. The uncontrollable Randolph veered between adoration of his father, drunken escapades, and rash political initiatives, like his intervention in the Wavertree by-election of January 1935. Diana's marriage in 1932 to John Bailey ended in divorce after three years, though she subsequently married the Conservative MP Duncan Sandys, who became a loyal follower of Churchill. Both Winston and Clementine were horrified when Sarah Churchill, who had become a successful actress, defied them by marrying a divorced Viennese entertainer, Vic Oliver: 'He did not impress me with being a bad man,' wrote Churchill after their first encounter, 'but common as dirt' (Soames, 412). Later he became fond of his son-in-law and was distressed when the marriage broke up. 
The outbreak of war in September 1939 compelled Chamberlain to offer Churchill a place in the war cabinet. He was thrilled to return, as first lord of the Admiralty, to the very same post he had occupied in August 1914. 'Winston is back', the Admiralty signalled to the fleet, or so tradition has it -- no record of the signal has ever been found. 
The overall direction of the war was now in the hands of Chamberlain and the war cabinet, acting on the advice of the new military co-ordination committee chaired by Lord Chatfield. Chamberlain, who was fearful at first of Churchillian intrigues, was surprised to discover that the first lord of the Admiralty was a remarkably loyal colleague. For the first and only occasion, Mr and Mrs Churchill and Mr and Mrs Chamberlain dined together. Nevertheless the two politicians were rivals. While Chamberlain seemed ill at ease as a war minister, Churchill's beaming face and flamboyant style threatened to eclipse him. 
Churchill's dynamism quickly made its mark at the Admiralty. He ordered that all naval vessels should be fitted with radar and all merchant ships armed. Confident that the U-boat menace would rapidly be overcome, he announced figures for German losses which his advisers knew to be greatly exaggerated. When Captain Talbot, the director of anti-submarine warfare, queried the figures, Churchill telephoned him to say: 'There are two people who sink U-boats in this war Talbot. You sink them in the Atlantic and I sink them in the House of Commons. The trouble is that you are sinking them at exactly half the rate I am. ('Sunday Times', 13 July 1980)' In April 1940 Talbot was dismissed on Churchill's instructions (Roskill, 94). 
Churchill sought a daring role for the navy. Apparently unaware of the danger posed by bombers to ships without fighter cover, he repeatedly pressed the naval staff to adopt a hair-raising plan, eventually thwarted by the first sea lord, Admiral Pound, to send a naval force into the Baltic. Another idea that captured his imagination was the mining of Norwegian coastal waters to prevent the transport of Swedish iron ore to Germany. After the Russian invasion of Finland on 30 November 1939, he urged the dispatch of an expeditionary force to Narvik to seize the Swedish ore fields, under the pretext of going to the aid of Finland. Not until the end of March 1940 did the supreme allied war council authorize the mining of the leads. On 9 April, German forces marched into Denmark and Norway. 
Chatfield having resigned a few days before, Churchill at Chamberlain's request now took the chair of the military co-ordination committee and began to dominate operations. An expeditionary force under the command of Admiral Cork was dispatched to Narvik but a few days later Churchill decided to open up a second front around Trondheim, and the rear half of the convoy was diverted to central Norway. When Churchill suggested a naval bombardment of Narvik, the land commander, General Mackesy, protested that it would be shameful to bombard thousands of Norwegian men, women, and children. Churchill signalled to Cork: 'If this Officer appears to be spreading a bad spirit through the higher ranks of the land forces, do not hesitate to relieve him or place him under arrest' (Marder, 'Winston is back', 54). After further rapid changes of plan on Churchill's part the forces sent to the Trondheim area were overwhelmed and evacuated. 
Churchill's critics began to murmur that the Norway fiasco was a second Gallipoli, but this time the deeper political currents were in his favour. Chamberlain and his colleagues had been in office since 1931. They could no longer escape the blame when disaster struck. On 8 May 1940, the second day of the parliamentary debate on Norway, Churchill wound up with a strong fighting speech in defence of the government. But when the house divided, the government's majority fell from its normal level of more than 200 to 81, a decisive moral defeat. 
Chamberlain realized that a coalition government was now inevitable, and that in the likely event of Labour refusing to serve under him he would have to resign. But who was to be the successor? The alternative leader preferred by the 'establishment' was the foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, and there is some evidence to suggest that initially Churchill was prepared to serve under him. At 4.30 p.m. on 9 May, Chamberlain called a meeting to discuss the succession, the others present being Churchill, Halifax, and the Conservative chief whip, David Margesson. Chamberlain and Margesson raised the question and waited for the others to speak. Churchill, however, had been urged by Kingsley Wood, and possibly Brendan Bracken as well, not to disclaim the succession. Churchill therefore said nothing, and after a brief silence Halifax explained the reasons why he did not think a member of the House of Lords should be prime minister. Churchill had won the premiership with scarcely a hint of intrigue or disloyalty. 
When Chamberlain awoke next morning to the news that Germany had invaded Belgium, he imagined at first that he could stay on, but his fate was sealed by a message from the Labour Party reiterating its refusal to serve under him. On Chamberlain's advice Churchill was summoned to the palace and at six o'clock that evening he accepted the king's invitation to form a government. 'It was the irony, or fatality of history', wrote Liddell Hart, 'that Churchill should have gained his opportunity of supreme power as the result of a fiasco to which he had been the main contributor' (Taylor and others, 187). In ruling circles his appointment as prime minister was generally regarded as a gamble, and a dangerous one at that, but Churchill himself was confident. 'I felt', he wrote, 'as though I were walking with destiny and that all my past life had been a preparation for this hour and for this trial' (Churchill, 'Second World War', 1.527). 
Churchill immediately invited the Labour and Liberal parties to join a coalition government. At the top he set up a war cabinet of only five members consisting of himself and the leaders of the two main parties: Chamberlain and Halifax for the Conservatives, Attlee and Greenwood for Labour. Although he found room in his administration for non-party figures like Woolton and Anderson, the government he established was based firmly on the party system, with a balance maintained between Conservative and Labour, and a whips' office staffed jointly by the two parties. The leader of the Liberals, his old friend Archie Sinclair, came in as secretary for air. To begin with, the war cabinet was based on the Lloyd George model of 1916, with four of its five members free of departmental responsibilities. But Churchill gradually moved away from this: by January 1941 there was a war cabinet of eight, of whom four were departmental ministers. 
While avoiding a purge, Churchill began to disperse the inner circle of the 'men of Munich'. Sir Horace Wilson, the head of the Treasury and 'eminence grise' of the Chamberlain regime, was banished from 10 Downing Street. Hoare was sent into exile as ambassador to Madrid, and Simon removed to the Lords as lord chancellor. Chamberlain, however, stayed on as lord president, retaining the leadership of the Conservative Party, and Halifax continued as foreign secretary. Churchill brought in Ernest Bevin, the general secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, as minister of labour, to mobilize the trade unions behind the war effort. And in fulfilment of his long campaign for rearmament in the air, he stripped the Air Ministry of its responsibility for the manufacture of aircraft and transferred it to a ministry of aircraft production under his old friend Beaverbrook. 
Like most incoming prime ministers, Churchill arrived with his own 'kitchen cabinet' of personal advisers, consisting principally of Bracken, his parliamentary private secretary; Lindemann, his scientific adviser, who became head of the prime minister's statistical section; and Desmond Morton, his liaison officer with the intelligence services. John Colville, one of Chamberlain's private secretaries, stayed on to become a devoted Churchillian, and the author of a diary which remains the most intimate and authoritative portrait of Churchill as prime minister. At the request of the war cabinet, the Harley Street physician Sir Charles Wilson, later Lord Moran, was appointed in May 1940 to watch over the prime minister's health. When Churchill crossed the Atlantic in December 1941 he took his doctor with him, and subsequently Wilson accompanied the prime minister on all his travels. He supplied Churchill with sleeping pills and other prescriptions, and summoned the appropriate consultants whenever the prime minister fell seriously ill. 'To his unfailing care', Churchill wrote after the war, 'I probably owe my life' (Churchill, 'Second World War', 3.556). The notes Moran took of conversations with his patient, including confidential details of his medical history, later formed the basis of a controversial book, 'Winston Churchill: the Struggle for Survival, 1940-1965' (1966). 
In his first speech in the House of Commons as prime minister, on 13 May 1940, Churchill said: 'You ask, what is our aim? I can answer in one word: it is victory, victory at all costs, victory in spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be' (Churchill and Gilbert, 6.333). With the French army already in retreat, Churchill authorized the dispatch of additional fighter squadrons to France and flew to Paris to investigate the position for himself. When he asked the French commander-in-chief, General Gamelin, 'Ou est la masse de manoeuvre?', he was appalled when Gamelin replied: 'aucune'. With no realistic prospect of a counter-attack, Churchill's priority was to prevent the encirclement of the British expeditionary force (BEF) under Lord Gort. He ordered Gort to retreat towards Dunkirk and the garrison at Calais to fight to the end to delay the German advance. 
While the fate of the BEF hung in the balance, the war cabinet discussed an Italian offer to mediate between Germany and the allies, with the implication that Britain and France would enter into negotiations with Germany. Halifax, supported at first by Chamberlain, argued in favour of exploring the Italian proposal. Churchill, while not in principle ruling out the possibility of negotiations, was passionately opposed on the ground that any terms Hitler was likely to offer would be unacceptable. To strengthen his position he summoned a meeting of ministers outside the war cabinet and was loudly applauded when he declared: 'If this long island story of ours is to end at last, let it end only when each one of us lies choking in his own blood upon the ground' ('War Diary', 28). By the evening of 28 May, Churchill had won the crucial debate in the war cabinet. Within a few days the bulk of the BEF had been successfully evacuated from Dunkirk. 
In June 1940 Churchill flew twice to France in a fruitless effort to persuade the French government to fight on. In a last-minute bid to revive their morale he even grasped at the idea of a declaration of perpetual union between Britain and France and proposed this to the Reynaud government, which turned it down. Reynaud was succeeded by Marshal Petain, who at once concluded an armistice with Germany. When the French fleet in harbour at Oran refused to surrender to the Royal Navy, Churchill ordered it to be bombarded and sunk (4 July 1940). Meanwhile, on 17 June, General Charles de Gaulle had arrived in London proclaiming himself the leader of the 'Free French'. Overriding much opposition from within his own government, Churchill gave him official recognition and built him up as a rallying point for opposition to the Petain regime. 
Fearful that the Nazis would be assisted from within by a 'fifth column', Churchill ordered a mass round-up of enemy aliens. Between May and July about 22,000 Germans and Austrians were interned, a panic measure which he soon began to regret. As German air attacks intensified in July and August 1940 he toured the country, inspecting coastal defences and Fighter Command bases in the eye of the storm. On his instructions the Local Defence Volunteers were renamed the Home Guard, and eventually supplied with arms. But there was little Churchill could do to alter the course of the battle of Britain. His most important contribution at this point was the bracing effect of his presence, and most of all of his speeches, on the morale of government and people. 
Churchill's speeches during the summer and autumn of 1940 were the most inspired and inspiring of his long political life. Contrary to folk memory he made few broadcasts at this period, and there is no evidence to support the claim that the BBC employed the actor Norman Shelley to impersonate him. When he promised 'blood, toil, tears and sweat' (13 May) or vowed that 'we shall fight on the beaches' (4 June), he was addressing the House of Commons only, though he went on to make recordings of this and other wartime speeches after 1945. The same was true of his tribute (20 August) to the fighter pilots of the battle of Britain: 'Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few' (Churchill and Gilbert, 6.333, 468, 742). After the fall of France, however, he reluctantly agreed to repeat over the radio a speech made earlier in the day in the house. Families gathered around the wireless therefore did hear him say, on 18 June: 'Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duty and so bear ourselves that if the British Empire and its Commonwealth lasts for a thousand years, men will still say: 'This was their finest hour'' (ibid., 571). 
Churchill's patriotic rhetoric aroused the emotions, but his speeches also commanded attention for a different reason. They pierced the fog of rumour and speculation with vivid and authoritative commentaries on the military and strategic situation. Although there was a strong propaganda element in his presentation of the facts, and many secrets lay concealed, they were the speeches of a great parliamentary democrat, leading, informing, and instructing a nation. Not everyone was impressed or won over. There were pockets of society where pre-war mistrust of Churchill lingered, and old wounds festered. By July 1940, however, opinion polls recorded that 88 per cent of the public approved of him as prime minister, a phenomenally high level of support that continued throughout the war. 
It nevertheless took some time for Churchill to establish his authority in Whitehall and Westminster. During the first few weeks of the new government the applause for Churchill came from the Labour benches while the majority of Conservatives displayed their loyalty to Chamberlain. As Churchill's stature grew during the summer and autumn of 1940 he achieved a personal ascendancy over all parties, but when Chamberlain retired through ill health in September 1940 Churchill prudently arranged for his own election as leader of the Conservatives. He thereby obtained control of the majority party in the house, an essential power-base if he were to weather the storms ahead. The sequel followed in December when the British embassy in Washington fell vacant. Churchill sent Halifax to Washington, replacing him as foreign secretary with Anthony Eden. 
Churchill's authority was great but he never sought or possessed the powers of a despot. As a general rule he was punctilious in seeking the support of the war cabinet for major decisions in foreign, imperial, or domestic policy, and there were times when his colleagues overrode his wishes. The war cabinet, however, soon lost control over the military conduct of the war. On becoming prime minister Churchill took the title of minister of defence, and the military secretariat of the war cabinet and the chiefs of staff committee were incorporated into an embryonic department under his personal direction. His defence office was headed by Major-General Hastings Ismay and his two deputies, Colonel Leslie Hollis and Colonel Ian Jacob. Working under their direction were the joint planning committee and the joint intelligence committee, whose task it was both to propose operations and to report on the feasibility of plans submitted to them by Churchill and the chiefs of staff. Ismay also served as Churchill's representative on the chiefs of staff committee, which continued to meet separately. But as minister of defence Churchill had the right both to summon the chiefs of staff and to give them instructions on the conduct of the war. 
The new machinery for the conduct of the war owed much to Churchill's thinking, and proved highly successful in preventing the rifts between 'frocks' and 'brasshats' which had occurred in the First World War. At first Churchill called frequent meetings of the defence committee of the war cabinet -- which consisted of Attlee, Beaverbrook, and the three service ministers -- but as his power grew it was summoned less and less, and the three service ministers were relegated to administrative roles. Thereafter Churchill ran the military side of the war himself in conjunction with the chiefs of staff committee, the most significant of all the checks and balances limiting his power. With his buccaneering spirit, colossal energy, and fertile imagination, he drove his professional advisers hard, and sometimes to distraction. His favourite was the first sea lord, Admiral Pound, whose dogged loyalty was, however, tempered by devious methods of resistance. It was much to Churchill's credit that the service chiefs he himself appointed were sturdily independent characters: Sir John Dill in succession to Ironside in May 1940, Sir Charles Portal in succession to Newall in October 1940, and Sir Andrew Cunningham in succession to Pound in September 1943. Dill clashed with Churchill once too often and was removed in December 1941, but in his place Churchill appointed Sir Alan Brooke, of whom he remarked: 'When I thump the table and push my face towards him, what does he do? Thumps the table harder and glares back at me' (Alanbrooke, xvi). Though Churchill often tried to bully Brooke into submission, he never forgot the fatal consequences of Admiral Fisher's resignation in 1915, and seldom overruled the chiefs of staff on a strategic issue. 
Within a fortnight of taking over as prime minister, Churchill acquired 'a source of undreamed-of power; knowledge to use against the unsuspecting enemy, but also a trump card in his negotiations with his Chiefs of Staff and allies' (Stafford, 189). On 22 May the code-breakers at Bletchley Park broke the main operational key of the Luftwaffe's Enigma enciphering machine. This marked the beginning of Ultra, the daily flow of transcripts of radio messages sent by the German armed forces. Though Ultra was continuously monitored and reported on by the joint intelligence committee, Churchill insisted that he should have direct and independent access to the raw materials. In September 1940 the head of the Secret Intelligence Service, Sir Stewart Menzies, was instructed to send all the original transcripts in a daily box to the prime minister. As the volume of transcripts grew, Churchill authorized Menzies to send him a selection only, but he continued to receive a box of what he called his 'golden eggs' on almost every day of the war. The wartime expansion of British intelligence services, and the high repute they acquired in Whitehall, owed much to Churchill's support. 
When Italy declared war on Britain on 10 July 1940 a new theatre of operations opened up in the Middle East. The following month, at great risk to home defence, Churchill sent 154 tanks to Egypt to reinforce Wavell, the British commander-in-chief. He was now in charge of a promising war against a lesser enemy in a distant theatre. But how was Britain to defeat Germany? As yet he could not tell. In the vain hope of opening up a line of communication with Stalin he sent a prominent left-wing politician, Sir Stafford Cripps, as ambassador to Moscow. Inspired by a vision of the occupied peoples of Europe rising up against their Nazi oppressors, he authorized the creation of the Special Operations Executive (SOE) to 'set Europe ablaze' ('War Diary of Hugh Dalton', 62). To harass the enemy he ordered commando raids around the coasts of occupied Europe. Churchill also believed in the importance of strategic bombing, but his main hopes were pinned on the prospect of American intervention. 
In October 1939 President Roosevelt had initiated a correspondence with Churchill and the two had exchanged a handful of messages on naval matters. Once Churchill became prime minister the correspondence, in which he signed himself 'Former Naval Person', assumed an altogether new significance. Churchill had long possessed a romantic faith in the common destiny of the 'English-speaking peoples': the British empire and the United States. Perhaps because of this, there was more than a touch of wishful thinking in his view of Roosevelt. He tended to exaggerate the extent of the president's commitment to Britain. Addressing a secret session of the House of Commons on 20 June he predicted that once the forthcoming presidential election was over, 'the whole English-speaking world will be in line together' (Churchill, 'Secret Session Speeches', 15). Nevertheless Churchill's view of the United States was grounded in military and strategic reality. As he repeatedly reminded Roosevelt, the defeat of Britain, and the capture or destruction of the Royal Navy, would lay the United States open to attack by Nazi Germany. Hence the United States must come to the aid of Britain in order to defend itself. 
Churchill's most important achievement in the summer of 1940 was to convince Roosevelt and his advisers that the British had the will to fight on and were therefore worth supporting. Nevertheless he was impatient for more American aid than he received. The 'destroyers for bases' deal was of greater military value to the United States than to Britain. In December 1940 Churchill sent Roosevelt a long, detailed, and urgent request for military supplies. Roosevelt responded by proclaiming the principle of lend-lease, enacted by congress in March 1941, whereby the United States supplied Britain with food, weapons, and other essentials on credit for the duration of the war. Lend-lease was a lifeline for the future, but Churchill's hopes of an early American entry into the war were disappointed. 
In May 1940 the prime minister and the president were still virtually strangers. They had met once before, at a banquet in Gray's Inn in 1918, but to Roosevelt's chagrin Churchill had forgotten the occasion. The arrival in London of Harry Hopkins in January 1941 marked the beginning of a closer relationship in which Churchill dealt informally with trusted intermediaries of the president like Hopkins himself and Averell Harriman. When he was entertaining important American visitors, Churchill was the most generous and agreeable of hosts and one of the most persuasive of propagandists -- but he too was susceptible to charm offensives. His first wartime meeting with the president, an event carefully stage-managed for the benefit of a global audience, took place aboard a British battleship, the 'Prince of Wales', at Placentia Bay off Newfoundland, on 9 August 1941. Churchill came away momentarily convinced that Roosevelt was about to bring the United States into the war, but within a few days he realized that he had read too much into the president's warm words. One tangible outcome of the meeting was the Atlantic charter, a rather nebulous joint declaration of war aims. But from Churchill's point of view a more important consequence was the extension of American activity in the battle of the Atlantic: for much of 1941 the threat posed by U-boats to Britain's Atlantic lifeline was the greatest of all his anxieties. 
When Greece was invaded by Germany in March 1941, Churchill accepted the advice of Eden and Wavell and sent in British and Commonwealth troops, but in April Greece was overrun. In May, Crete in turn was invaded and captured and British forces were again evacuated. Meanwhile German Panzer divisions under the command of Rommel had arrived in north Africa. When a British counter-offensive failed in June 1941 Churchill ran out of patience with Wavell and replaced him as commander-in-chief Middle East with General Claud Auchinleck. During the autumn of 1941 Churchill bombarded the chiefs of staff with projects for landings on the coasts of Norway, Sicily, Italy, and French north Africa. Conversely he paid little attention to the Far East, discounting the idea that Japan would dare to attack the United States or the British empire. Even if they did attack, he believed, the defences of Singapore would be strong enough to withstand assault for at least six months. Churchill was the driving force of British grand strategy, but his butterfly imagination, fluttering from one attractive prospect to another, drove Brooke to the verge of despair. 'He cannot grasp the relationship of various theatres of war to each other', he wrote in May 1943. 'He always gets carried away by the one he is examining and in prosecuting it is prepared to sacrifice most of the others' (Alanbrooke, 401). 
It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that between June 1940 and December 1941, Churchill carried the world on his shoulders. The burdens he bore, and the anxieties he endured, would have crushed many a lesser mortal. When Auchinleck was summoned home to explain why he had not yet taken the offensive, Ismay took him aside and briefed him about the prime minister. He explained: 'Churchill could not be judged by ordinary standards; he was different from anyone we had ever met before, or would ever meet again. As a war leader, he was head and shoulders above anyone the British or any other nation could produce. He was indispensable and completely irreplaceable... He was a child of nature. He venerated tradition, but ridiculed convention. When the occasion demanded, he could be the personification of dignity; when the spirit moved him, he could be a 'gamin'. His courage, enthusiasm and industry were boundless, and his loyalty was absolute. No commander who engaged the enemy need ever fear that he would not be supported. (Ismay, 269-70)' Conversely, Churchill could be ruthless in his treatment of commanders he deemed lacking in offensive spirit. He warmed to the dash and charm of Alexander, and the maverick qualities of Wingate, but the self-effacing and the inarticulate found little favour. Dill he described as 'the dead hand of inanition' (Alanbrooke, xv). Of Wavell he remarked: 'It may be my own fault, but I always feel as if in the presence of the chairman of a golf club' (Lewin, 57). Of his dealings with the admirals, Captain Roskill wrote: 'Churchill wielded the executioner's axe so indiscriminately, and with so little attempt to ascertain whether his intended victims really were incompetent, that the injustices perpetrated were not few' (Roskill, 278). 
When Chamberlain was prime minister, the business of government was conducted through formal meetings at prearranged times. Under Churchill, the formal business was only a small part of the story. As Bridges, the secretary to the war cabinet, recalled: 'There were no frontiers between home and office, between work hours and the rest of the day: work went on everywhere, in his study, in the dining-room, in his bedroom. A summons would come at almost any hour of the day or night to help in some job. Minutes would be dictated, corrected, re-dictated. One might find oneself unexpectedly sitting in the family circle or sharing a meal while one took his orders. (Bridges, 95)' Within the intimacy of the inner circle, he was a man of transparent emotions and changeable moods. Another civil servant who observed him at close quarters describes how, when he took the chair at a meeting, 'that child-like face became the reflection of the man -- the set bulldog look, the sulky look of a pouting child, the angry violent look of an animal at bay, the tearful look of a compassionate woman, and the sudden spontaneous smiling look of a boy. (Mallaby, 29-30)' Churchill usually began the morning's work in his bedroom, going through his boxes, telephoning, and summoning people to see him. Visitors would find him sitting up in bed in a dressing gown emblazoned with dragons, top-secret papers strewn over the bedclothes, and a favourite cat curled up at his feet. From time to time he would dictate to a secretary a series of minutes for dispatch to all corners of Whitehall. The more urgent, which caused great alarm to the recipients, carried a label with the instruction 'action this day' printed in red capitals. If there were no meetings of the war cabinet or other appointments Churchill would sometimes work in bed all morning. Over lunch, at which friends and family rubbed shoulders with politicians and military chiefs, Churchill would discourse on the war, or anything else that came to mind, with a bottle of champagne -- he had been a loyal customer of Pol Roger since 1908 -- followed by brandy. After lunch he would retire for a siesta while everyone else continued to work. By the late afternoon he was a giant refreshed, sipping a whisky and soda, and ready for another round of meetings followed by dinner with more champagne and brandy. His early training as a soldier had taught him to abhor drunkenness and there is 'no credible testimony of Churchill's being drunk, in the falling-down slurred-words sense, while he was Prime Minister' (Kimball, 'Forged in War', 22). But Churchill was clearly dependent on alcohol, and capable on occasion of absorbing quantities that would have rendered lesser men incapable -- a feat that stood him in good stead at Kremlin banquets. 
If Churchill was spending the weekend at Chequers or Ditchley Park the guests were often invited to join him in watching a film. His favourite, produced in Hollywood by his friend Alexander Korda, was 'That Hamilton Woman', with Laurence Olivier as Nelson and Vivien Leigh as Lady Hamilton. By this time it was nearly midnight and Churchill was ready to return to work. Struggling to keep their eyes open, his advisers would be summoned to a meeting at which key strategic or operational issues were discussed and informal decisions reached. Churchill's 'midnight follies', as they were known in Whitehall, caused much resentment among the exhausted officials who were compelled to attend them. Often Churchill would work until three or four in the morning before taking his sleeping capsules and retiring to bed. 
When he was not driving his officials to the limit, Churchill was the most visible of prime ministers, with a showmanship that upstaged the shy and stammering George VI. He strode through the blitzed areas with a bulldog expression in which anger and sorrow were mingled. His most famous theatrical prop was a large Havana cigar, which he would light and flourish with much ceremony, but seldom smoke. His most famous gesture, the V-sign with the palm of the hand turned outwards, was an adaptation of a notoriously rude gesture. In addition to his normal Westminster attire of bow-tie and striped suit, he appeared at various times in the uniforms of air commodore, elder brother of Trinity House, and colonel of hussars. Early on in the war he gave up wearing a dinner jacket in favour of a zip-up 'siren' suit which he sometimes wore in public, an eccentricity for which he was criticized by Aneurin Bevan. On official trips he was often accompanied by Clementine, whose Aid to Russia Fund also made her prominent in her own right. With Mary serving in the ATS, Sarah in the WAAF, and Randolph a staff officer in the Middle East, later parachuted into Yugoslavia as a special envoy to Tito, Churchill's own family played a notable supporting role. In October 1939 Randolph had married Pamela Digby. In symbolic defiance of Hitler, their son, Winston Spencer Churchill, was born at the height of the London blitz (10 October 1940). The marriage, however, was short-lived, and the relationship between Randolph and his father continued to be fraught. 'We have a deep animal love for one another', Churchill reflected, 'but every time we meet we have a bloody row' (Churchill and Gilbert, 8.308). 
From intelligence sources Churchill was aware in the spring of 1941 that Germany was planning to invade Russia. By the time operation Barbarossa was launched on 22 June his own response had been carefully thought out. That same day he broadcast from Chequers declaring that Britain would send all possible aid to Russia, a promise he made strenuous efforts to fulfil. While concealing the existence of Ultra he authorized the sharing of secret intelligence with Moscow and the dropping by SOE of Soviet agents into Europe. In September he dispatched Beaverbrook to Moscow on a mission to ascertain Soviet needs. At a time when every tank and gun was urgently required in Britain, the chiefs of staff were reluctant to accept the diversion of resources to Russia, but Churchill intervened to ensure that key supplies were sent by convoy through the Arctic. 
Churchill's dealings with the Soviet Union touched on a dilemma at the heart of his war leadership. Between the wars he had strongly opposed socialism and communism. But in order to defeat Hitler he was compelled to ally with forces subversive of the world in which he believed. If this were true at home, where the coalition inaugurated a form of 'war socialism' of which Labour and the trade unions were the main beneficiaries, the contradiction between Churchill the anti-Bolshevik and Churchill the Soviet ally was even more stark. In his broadcast of 22 June Churchill refused, as he put it, 'to unsay one word' he had said against communism in the past. But as he had remarked only the day before: 'If Hitler invaded Hell, he would make at least a favourable reference to the Devil!' (Colville, 'Fringes of Power', 404). As Stalin's ally he was compelled to remain silent about the horrors of the Soviet system. When Stalin demanded formal British recognition of the Soviet frontiers of 1941, Churchill narrowly escaped an embarrassing surrender. 
Churchill had no advance warning from intelligence services of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941, the news of which was confirmed for him by the butler, Sawyers, who had heard it on the radio. Churchill was overcome with joy and relief. 'So we had won after all!... Hitler's fate was sealed. Mussolini's fate was sealed. As for the Japanese, they would be ground to powder. All the rest was merely the proper application of overwhelming force' (Churchill and Gilbert, 3.539). Within a week Churchill set sail for the United States with a high-powered delegation on board the 'Duke of York'. At a series of meetings in Washington, Churchill and Roosevelt established a combined chiefs of staff representing both countries. On 26 December, Churchill received a rapturous reception when he addressed a joint session of both houses of congress. 'I cannot help reflecting', he declared, 'that if my father had been American, and my Mother British, instead of the other way round, I might have got here on my own' (ibid., 7.29). From Washington, Churchill travelled to Ottawa where he put on another bravura performance in a speech to the Canadian parliament. In 1940, he recalled, the French generals had told their prime minister: ''In three weeks England will have her neck wrung like a chicken'. Some chicken!', Churchill declared to thunderous applause, 'some neck!' (ibid., 7.34). 
Although Churchill was now certain of ultimate victory, the immediate prospects were grim. In the hope of deterring Japan from entering the war he had dispatched the 'Prince of Wales' and the 'Repulse' to the Far East. On 10 December 1941 Japanese torpedo bombers sank them both. In a bitter contrast two German battleships, the 'Scharnhorst' and the 'Gneisenau', successfully ran the gauntlet of British air power in the channel. On 15 February 1942 Singapore and its garrison of 130,000 British and Commonwealth troops surrendered, a body blow from which the British empire was never to recover. Until a few weeks previously Churchill had been ignorant of the fact that Singapore had no landward defences. 'I ought to have known', he wrote. 'My advisers ought to have known and I ought to have been told, and I ought to have asked' (Churchill, 'Second World War', 4.43). 
Though Churchill won a vote on confidence in the house by a majority of 464 to 1 on 29 January, he was threatened by powerful undercurrents of discontent and the emergence of Sir Stafford Cripps, newly returned from Moscow, as a potential rival. Bowing to the pressure, Churchill reconstructed his government, bringing Cripps into the war cabinet. Shortly afterwards he dispatched Cripps to India on a mission to negotiate a constitutional settlement with Gandhi and the Congress Party. As Churchill may well have calculated in advance, the mission failed and Cripps's reputation was diminished. 
When in April 1942 Roosevelt sent Marshall and Hopkins to London to persuade the British to agree to a cross-channel invasion that same year, or possibly in 1943, Churchill appeared to be enthusiastic and full agreement was reached in principle. The British chiefs of staff, however, believed that an invasion in 1942 would be premature and disastrous. Gradually, Brooke convinced Churchill that the route to victory lay through Italy via north Africa. Visiting Washington in June, Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to agree to an alternative: operation Torch, an Anglo-American landing in north Africa. 
Churchill was at the White House when the news arrived of another British disaster: the surrender of Tobruk. Although he defeated a motion of censure in the House of Commons by 475 votes to 25 (2 July 1942), he was well aware that he was on trial, and might not survive another great military defeat. In August he flew out to Egypt with Brooke to reorganize the Middle East command. Auchinleck was replaced by Alexander and Montgomery put in command of the Eighth Army. From Cairo Churchill flew on to Moscow for his first meeting with Stalin, who was urgently demanding the opening up of a second front in Europe. Explaining to Stalin that there would be no cross-channel invasion in 1942, Churchill drew on all his powers of persuasion to impress on him the significance of Anglo-American plans for the strategic bombing of Germany and the invasion of French north Africa. Drawing a sketch of a crocodile, he explained to Stalin that it was Anglo-American strategy 'to attack the soft belly of the crocodile as we attacked the hard snout' (Churchill and Gilbert, 4.433). To Churchill's relief, Stalin immediately grasped the strategic importance of Torch and the visit to Moscow ended cordially with a Kremlin banquet lasting seven hours. 
The monthly opinion polls continued to register a phenomenally high approval rating for Churchill as prime minister of around 80 per cent, and there was scarcely a murmur against him in the national press. Within the political elite, however, there was much discontent accompanied by pressures to restrict his powers as minister of defence in a fashion that he would have found impossible to accept. 'The Prime Minister', Brendan Bracken told Moran, 'must win his battle in the desert or get out' (Moran, 72). Montgomery's decisive victory at El Alamein, followed by the success of the landings in north Africa, transformed both the military prospects and Churchill's own fortunes. He ordered the church bells to be rung for the first time since 1940 (15 November 1942), and pugnaciously declared: 'I have not become the King's First Minister in order to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire' (Churchill and Gilbert, 7.254). 
Churchill was still not certain how the war would be won. Portal, the chief of the air staff, and Sir Arthur Harris, the commander-in-chief of Bomber Command from February 1942, were fervent believers in the theory that Germany could be defeated by strategic bombing alone. They were supported by Churchill's scientific adviser, Professor Lindemann, who submitted a paper in March 1942 arguing that bombing would destroy Germany's power of resistance by making one-third of her population homeless. Churchill never wholly accepted this theory. Generally speaking he strongly supported the strategic bombing offensive, and the vast production programme it entailed, but he saw it as an essential precondition for the invasion of the continent, not as an alternative. 'Even if all the towns of Germany were rendered largely uninhabitable', he wrote to Portal in October 1941, 'it does not follow that the military control would be weakened or even that war industry could not be carried on' (Gilbert, 'War Papers', 3.1313). 
The British government never admitted that it was deliberately bombing civilians, but reports of the scale of the destruction visited on German towns and industrial areas made the truth fairly obvious. A handful of dissenters condemned the policy on ethical grounds, and Churchill himself suffered occasional pangs of conscience. In June 1943 he was watching a film of bombing raids on German towns when he suddenly exclaimed: 'Are we beasts? Are we taking this too far?' (Churchill and Gilbert, 7.437). After the destruction of Dresden in February 1945 led to public controversy Churchill wrote a memorandum in which he argued that 'the moment has come when the question of bombing of German cities, simply for the sake of increasing the terror, though under other pretexts, should be reviewed' (ibid., 7.1257). Dismayed by this apparent attempt to dissociate himself from a policy for which he had been largely responsible, Portal persuaded Churchill to withdraw and revise the minute. 
By autumn 1941 Churchill was aware from intelligence reports of Nazi atrocities against the Jews on the eastern front. He spoke out against Nazi war crimes and called for the prosecution of the guilty after the war. In a public letter to the archbishop of Canterbury (29 October 1942) he declared: 'The systematic cruelties to which the Jewish people -- men, women and children -- have been exposed under the Nazi regime are amongst the most terrible events of history. Free men and women denounce these vile crimes, and when this world struggle ends with the enthronement of human rights, racial persecution will be ended. (Churchill and Gilbert, 7.245)' Nor were these the only signs of Churchill's pro-Jewish sympathies. During the first eighteen months of the war he was strongly in favour of arming the Jews, a policy which eventually led to the creation of a Jewish brigade in 1944. He persuaded the war cabinet to accept in principle the partition of Palestine, and the creation of a separate Jewish state, thus overturning the policy of the Chamberlain government. In spite of all this, some historians argue that Churchill's government could and should have done more to assist the Jews. Some accounts acquit him of responsibility on the ground that his wishes were thwarted by powerful forces in Whitehall; others assert that he could have overcome the opposition if he had summoned up the political will to do so. Either way there is no disputing the fact that his sympathy for the Zionist cause wavered for a time after the assassination by Jewish terrorists in November 1944 of his close friend Lord Moyne, the minister of state in the Middle East. 
In August 1941 Churchill authorized a top-secret programme of research, codenamed Tube Alloys, into the production of a British atom bomb. Meanwhile parallel research was in progress in the United States. In June 1942 Churchill and Roosevelt reached an unwritten agreement to make nuclear research a joint enterprise with free exchange of information and the sharing of results. Disputes then arose when the Americans cut off the supply of information but these were resolved by Churchill and Roosevelt in the Quebec agreement of 19 August 1943. The free exchange of scientific data was resumed and it was agreed that no information should be given to any other power. With his usual concentration on the military issues at the expense of post-war questions, Churchill formally disclaimed all British interest in the industrial and commercial applications of the project. It was also agreed that neither Britain nor the United States would use the bomb without obtaining the other's approval. Churchill's consent to the use of nuclear weapons against Japan was sought and received (4 July 1945) before the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In all this he acted without informing or consulting the war cabinet. 
Churchill and Roosevelt met on nine different occasions and spent about 120 days in each other's company. During the second half of 1942 and the first half of 1943 Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to pursue a Mediterranean strategy in preference to the alternative of an early cross-channel invasion favoured by the American chiefs of staff. But when Churchill and Roosevelt met at Quebec in August 1943, Churchill's desire to reinforce the Italian campaign caused sharp differences, fuelling American suspicions that he wished to avoid a cross-channel invasion altogether. At the Tehran conference (27 November to 2 December 1943) Roosevelt joined Stalin in rejecting Churchill's Mediterranean schemes, which included the seizure of Rhodes, the opening up of supply lines to Tito and the partisans, and (a persistent pipe dream) the entry of Turkey into the war on the allied side. Churchill was dismayed. He remarked later, 'When I was at Teheran I realized for the first time what a very 'small' country this is. On one hand the big Russian bear with its paws outstretched -- on the other the great American Elephant -- & between them the poor little English donkey -- who is the only one that knows the right way home. ('Champion Redoubtable', 313)' Henceforth Britain was the junior partner in the Anglo-American alliance, and Churchill a subordinate whose advice was frequently overridden. Churchill has been criticized for his 'appeasement' of the United States but, according to Brooke, he 'hated having to give up the position of dominant partner which we had held at the start. As a result he became inclined at times to put up strategic proposals which he knew were unsound merely to spite the Americans... There lay in the back of his mind the desire to form a purely British theatre where the laurels would be all ours. (Alanbrooke, 473)' In October 1943, with the encouragement of his old friend Smuts, the prime minister of South Africa, Churchill came close to abandoning his commitment to a cross-channel invasion. In the event it was only a brief flirtation with a strategic independence after which he swallowed his pride and reverted to the principle that no dispute with the United States should ever be pushed to the point where it would imperil the alliance. One of his greatest strengths as a war leader was his ability to focus on the main priorities to the exclusion of almost everything else. In January 1944 he established a committee, over which he presided with his customary energy and vigilance, to finalize the technical preparations for Overlord, but his doubts and fears about the operation persisted almost to the last minute. 
The most vexatious of Churchill's allies was de Gaulle. Churchill admired his haughty demeanour and prickly nationalism whenever disputes arose between the British and the Free French. But the differences between Churchill and de Gaulle were serious. Churchill hoped to detach elements of Vichy France and win them over to the allied side. De Gaulle, on the other hand, would tolerate no rivals for the leadership of France. Given the fact that de Gaulle was almost wholly dependent on British support, Churchill found his pretensions extremely tiresome. Since Roosevelt harboured an almost paranoid hostility to de Gaulle, tensions mounted after the United States entered the war. Under pressure from Roosevelt, Churchill came very close in 1943 to breaking with de Gaulle altogether, but was restrained by Eden and the cabinet. Relations were temporarily improved after the liberation when Churchill was invited to Paris. On 11 November 1944, amid the cheers of half a million people, Churchill and de Gaulle walked in a triumphant procession down the avenue des Champs-Elysees. In spite of their quarrels the two possessed a shared goal: the restoration of France as a European power. 
So great was Churchill's desire to be at the scene of the action that he scarcely stopped travelling. With the formation of the grand alliance he became a globe-trotter undertaking long and hazardous journeys as though they were a matter of routine. In November 1943 Captain Pim, who was in charge of the prime minister's map room, calculated that since the outbreak of war he had travelled 110,000 miles by ship or plane. For a man in his late sixties his energy and stamina were astonishing, but the gruelling schedule and constant burden of responsibility began to take their toll. During his first visit to Washington, in December 1941, he suffered a minor heart attack. At Tunis, in December 1943, he collapsed with a severe bout of pneumonia which put him out of action for nearly a month. Though he rallied and returned to work he was a leader on the brink of exhaustion for the rest of the war. 
After the allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944, Churchill's influence over grand strategy continued to decline, and he was incensed when four French and three American divisions were diverted from the Italian campaign for landings in the Riviera (Anvil) in August 1944. Churchill also blamed the Americans for the frustration of his strategic ambitions in the Far East, where British and Commonwealth forces were tied up in Burma at the expense of operations to recapture Singapore. 'Thus two-thirds of our forces are being mis-employed for American convenience', Churchill wrote to his wife in August 1944 (Soames, 501). In September, after a therapeutic visit to Alexander's army in Italy, Churchill crossed the Atlantic on the 'Queen Mary' for another meeting with Roosevelt at Quebec. There he was presented by the US treasury secretary, Henry Morgenthau, with a plan for the de-industrialization of Germany which conflicted with his own belief that a prosperous Germany was essential to the future prosperity of Europe. Although Churchill was briefly attracted to the plan, he soon changed his mind and was much relieved when it was rejected by officials on both sides of the Atlantic. 
It is easy to exaggerate the consistency of Churchill's views about Soviet expansionism. In the case of Yugoslavia he decided to support the communist partisans, led by Tito, at the expense of the right-wing Chetniks, led by Mihailovic. He oscillated between phases of deep anxiety about Soviet intentions, and moments of optimism when he believed that he could establish a good working relationship with Stalin. When Churchill paid his second visit to Moscow in October 1944 he wrote out on a single sheet of paper a proposal for the division of the Balkan countries into spheres of influence expressed in percentages. Romania, for example, was to be 90 per cent in the Russian sphere and 10 per cent in the British; Greece 90 per cent British and 10 per cent Russian. Stalin read the paper, put a large tick on it, and handed it back. With the Red Army advancing into Poland, there was clearly a danger that Stalin would set up a puppet government in Warsaw. Churchill worked hard to secure a compromise that would ensure the independence of Poland, the cause for which Britain had declared war in September 1939, while conceding Polish territory east of the Curzon line to the Soviet Union. 'I have had very nice talks with the Old Bear [Stalin]', Churchill wrote to his wife. 'I like him the more I see of him. 'Now' they respect us here & I am sure they wish to work with us' (Soames, 506). 
In December 1944, when Churchill ordered the suppression of the Greek left, and flew to Athens to impose his will, Stalin -- unlike Roosevelt -- offered no dissent or opposition. Deeply impressed, Churchill concluded that Stalin had been true to his word. When the 'big three' met for the last time at Yalta in February 1945 Stalin promised to allow free elections in Poland and to respect Polish independence. 'Poor Neville believed he could trust Hitler', Churchill told his ministers. 'He was wrong. But I don't think I'm wrong about Stalin' ('War Diary of Hugh Dalton', 836). In the aftermath of Yalta, however, as Stalin strengthened his grip on Poland, Churchill began to have second thoughts. Fears of a Germany under communist control led him to urge Roosevelt and Eisenhower to march on Berlin and capture it before the Russians could get there, but they rejected his advice. When Roosevelt died on 12 April 1945 Churchill decided not to attend the funeral -- a sign perhaps of some coolness towards an overmighty ally, and a lost opportunity for an early meeting with the new president, Harry S. Truman. 
Owing to his intense concentration on the conduct of the war, and frequent absences from Britain, Churchill's contacts with home affairs were intermittent. For the most part he was content to delegate. The management of the war economy was largely in the hands of the lord president's committee, chaired successively by Chamberlain, Anderson, and Attlee, while Bevin, the minister of labour, dealt with industrial relations and the reconstruction committee under Woolton took charge of post-war problems. But no prime minister can afford to ignore domestic political currents for long. The price Churchill paid for doing so was defeat in the general election of 1945. 
The publication in December 1942 of the Beveridge report opened up a host of peacetime questions. The immediate consequence was a crisis in the coalition as a division of opinion arose between the Labour and Conservative parties. The war cabinet attempted to paper over the cracks and Churchill himself, in a broadcast in March 1943, sought a middle way between acceptance and rejection of the report. But his determination to postpone any legislation until after the war left the Conservatives wide open to attack from Labour on post-war questions. In March 1944 he was startled when the government lost a vote in the House of Commons on the question of equal pay for women teachers. Determined to teach his critics a lesson, Churchill turned the question into a vote of confidence which he won by a crushing majority. This merely served to confirm the widespread popular impression that Churchill was unlikely to make a good peacetime leader. 
As the end of the war in Europe approached, Churchill wavered between fighting a general election and seeking to maintain the coalition for a further period. In May 1945 he invited the Labour and the Liberal parties to continue in office until the defeat of Japan, which was not expected to occur for another eighteen months. When both parties refused, Churchill resigned and returned at the head of an interim or caretaker administration: a Conservative government with a sprinkling of 'non-party' figures. During the opening broadcast of the election campaign Churchill astonished many of his admirers by warning that a Labour government would introduce into Britain 'some form of Gestapo, no doubt humanely administered in the first instance'. Churchill had been genuinely worried during the war by the inroads of state bureaucracy into civil liberty, and was clearly influenced by F. A. Hayek's anti-totalitarian tract, 'The Road to Serfdom' (1944). The claim that his own deputy prime minister would resort to Nazi methods was patently absurd but probably had little impact on the result of the general election. The new generation which voted for the first time in 1945 was predominantly Labour, shaped by the egalitarianism and left-wing propaganda of the war years. 
Unusually, there was an interlude between polling day (5 July) and the declaration of the results (26 July), during which Churchill attended the Potsdam conference. Stalin -- whom he was never to meet again -- seems again to have persuaded him, for the moment, that his intentions were benign. After a brief holiday Churchill was back in Britain for the result of the general election, which proved to be a landslide Labour victory. 'It may well be a blessing in disguise', Clementine remarked. 'At the moment it seems quite effectively disguised', Churchill replied (Churchill, 'Second World War', 6.583). He had, however, a majority of over 17,000 in his constituency of Woodford (as it was now designated). At 7 p.m. on 26 July he drove to Buckingham Palace and resigned, declining the king's offer of the Order of the Garter. 
Clementine urged Churchill to retire but he was determined to stay on. With the next general election a distant prospect, he tended to neglect his role as Conservative leader, absenting himself for long periods from the House of Commons. In foreign and defence policy the scope for opposition was limited, since he was broadly in agreement with the government's policies, but he lashed out with much hyperbole against alleged socialist mismanagement of the economy and the proliferation of controls in which he detected totalitarian tendencies. Nor did Churchill approve of the government's preparations for the transfer of power in India, which he regarded as hasty and irresponsible. He warned in March 1947, 'In handing over the Government of India to these so-called political classes, we are handing over to men of straw, of whom, in a few years, no trace will remain... It is with deep grief I watch the clattering down of the British Empire with all its glories and all the services it has rendered to mankind. (Churchill, 'Europe Unite', 21, 25)' Churchill nevertheless had to accept that it was too late to put the clock back, and finally gave his support to the 'Independence of India Bill'. 
Due to his lavish spending habits, Churchill had never amassed great wealth. But in 1946 a consortium of wealthy benefactors, led by Lord Camrose, purchased Chartwell and presented it to the National Trust, on condition that he and Clementine would have the right to live there for the rest of their lives. In order to avoid penal rates of income tax on the prodigious sums Churchill could now command as an author, he gave his papers to the Chartwell Trust, which then sold the literary rights, employed the tax-free income generated for the benefit of his children and grandchildren, and paid him $20,000 a year -- double the prime minister's salary -- for living and research expenses. In his book 'In Command of History', one of the great landmarks in Churchill scholarship, David Reynolds calculated that the literary rights to 'The Second World War' were sold for a figure worth somewhere between eighteen million and sixty million dollars in today's money (Reynolds, 62). 
In order to write 'The Second World War' Churchill assembled a team of researchers under the leadership of his pre-war assistant, the Oxford historian William Deakin. Churchill and his team enjoyed the full co-operation of the cabinet secretary, Norman Brook, who gave them almost unlimited access to wartime files. In return Churchill submitted drafts of the book to be vetted by Whitehall, thus turning it into a semi-official history. His method was to have all the relevant documents set up in galley proof so that he could then insert linking passages or narratives of events. The tone and structure of the final text were unmistakably Churchillian, and so too were his personal recollections, but it would have come as a great surprise to readers at the time to learn that a number of key passages, like the account of the rise of Hitler or the evacuation from Dunkirk, were ghost written. There were even a few pages written by Norman Brook himself. 
Appearing in six volumes between 1948 and 1954, 'The Second World War' was published in hardback in fifteen countries and translated into eleven languages. 
It was not history, Churchill insisted, but a contribution to history. Nevertheless he imprinted his version of events on the minds of a generation. He savaged the policies of appeasement and argued that the Second World War could have been prevented by timely action against Hitler. Perhaps for reasons of national prestige, he suppressed all reference to the war cabinet's discussion of compromise peace in May 1940. Writing in the context of the cold war, he played down or suppressed evidence of Anglo-American differences, and contrived, with some sleight of hand, to refute American critics who claimed that he had tried to avoid a cross-channel invasion of Europe. There was no mention of Ultra, which remained a closely guarded secret until the 1970s, and barely a hint of his disputes with the chiefs of staff. 
Churchill's interpretation of the Second World War was one of a triptych of themes he developed between 1945 and 1951: the second was the Soviet danger and the third the case for European unity. Towards the end of 1945 Churchill received an invitation to give one in a series of annual lectures at Westminster College, at Fulton in Missouri. There, on 5 March 1946, he gave the first public warning by a leading British or American statesman of the impending struggle between the West and the Soviet Union. 'From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic', he declared, 'an iron curtain has descended across the Continent' (Churchill and Gilbert, 8.200). Delivered at a time when there was still much goodwill towards Russia as a wartime ally, Churchill's 'iron curtain' speech provoked much hostile comment in the United States and western Europe. But it was in harmony with the views of many insiders in Washington and Whitehall. Truman himself, though feigning ignorance of its contents, had read and endorsed the speech in advance. Subsequently, as relations between the West and the Soviet Union deteriorated, Churchill's views achieved wide acceptance, and his Fulton speech was hailed as prophetic. By this time, however, Churchill was privately urging that Britain and the United States should exploit their temporary nuclear monopoly to deliver an ultimatum to the Soviet Union: if it was rejected, the atom bomb would be dropped on Russia. The news of a successful Soviet atomic test in August 1949 seems to have put an end to these reckless imaginings. 
In September 1946 Churchill made his second great contribution to the post-war world in a speech at the University of Zurich. As at Fulton, he was attempting to detach his audience from wartime emotions and prepare them for a new post-war reality. He called for the reconciliation of France and Germany and the establishment of a united Europe in which the sovereignty of nation states was pooled for the common good. Evidently his call for the unification of Europe owed something to the cold war context, but it was a concept he had first formulated in 1930, and reverted to between 1940 and 1945. So great was Churchill's stature that his speeches gave a powerful impetus to the movement for a united Europe and he came to be regarded as one of its founding fathers. Churchill also accepted the leadership of the British European movement and criticized the Labour government for failing to play a more constructive role in the formation of European unity. In June 1950 he attacked the government for refusing to participate in the conference called to implement the Schuman plan for a European iron and steel community. In August, at the opening session of the consultative assembly of the Council of Europe at Strasbourg, he successfully moved a resolution in favour of the creation of a European army and appeared to suggest that Britain would play a part in it. All this led some observers to conclude that Churchill was a committed European. But as he explained in a speech to the Conservative Party conference (9 October 1948), Churchill believed that Britain had a unique role to play as the link between 'the three great circles among the free nations and democracies' -- Britain and the empire, the United States, and a united Europe (Parker, 'Statesmanship', 201). 
In the post-war years honours and hospitality were showered upon Churchill. He was awarded the freedom of several European cities, together with medals and honorary doctorates. While the British endured rationing, austerity, and restrictions on overseas travel, villas and chateaux in the sun were at his disposal, and few begrudged him the fruits of victory. His marriage to Clemmie remained the cornerstone of his private life, though his oldest friend and companion, his younger brother Jack, died in 1947. Churchill took up painting again, exhibiting at the Royal Academy, and suddenly acquired an enthusiasm for one of his father's recreations, the turf. He was the owner, at various times, of some thirty-seven racehorses, including a French stallion, Colonist II, who won thirteen races in Lord Randolph's colours before he was put to stud. When asked if Colonist was still racing he replied: 'No, he has given up racing. He is now rogering' (Montague Browne, 151). 
In January 1950 Attlee called a general election. Churchill took a less prominent part in the campaign than in 1945, and his attacks on socialism were balanced by a more conciliatory tone in home affairs. He also called, in a speech in Edinburgh, for a summit meeting between the leaders of the great powers -- the first indication of a new approach to the Soviet Union. The government, however, was returned to power with a precarious majority of six, and managed to struggle on until autumn 1951. Churchill strongly supported the government over the Korean War, which broke out in June 1950, but attacked them vigorously for their alleged weakness in Iran, where a revolutionary regime under Dr Mussadiq nationalized the Anglo-Iranian oil company. (As prime minister Churchill was later to be a party to the Anglo-American-inspired coup which led to the overthrow of Mussadiq in 1953.) 
When another general election was called in October 1951, Churchill again floated the idea of a 'conference at the summit'. He was strongly attacked from the Labour side as a warmonger and on polling day the 'Daily Mirror' carried on its front page a large picture of a revolver and the question: 'Whose finger? Today YOUR finger is on the trigger.' This time, however, Labour was defeated and the Conservatives restored to power with a majority of seventeen. 
Returning to 10 Downing Street (26 October 1951) at nearly seventy-seven years of age, Churchill formed a government with many echoes of his wartime premiership. He even resumed the title of minister of defence, though after a few months he persuaded a reluctant Field Marshal Alexander to accept the post. Eden returned in the role of foreign secretary, crown prince, and long-suffering subordinate. Ismay and Cherwell were both given cabinet posts, and Colville was recalled as his private secretary. Churchill attempted to create a coalition by inviting the Liberal leader, Clement Davies, to be minister of education, but the offer was declined. In home affairs the appointments of R. A. Butler as chancellor of the exchequer, Walter Monckton as minister of labour, and Harold Macmillan as minister of housing, signalled a relatively moderate approach. In a curious experiment, Churchill began by appointing a number of peers, including Leathers and Woolton, as 'overlords' to co-ordinate the policies of groups of departments. The overlords, however, having no departments to sustain them in the battles of Whitehall, quickly faded away. 
At the death of George VI on 6 February 1952, Churchill broadcast a graceful tribute over the radio. He was deeply moved by the king's death and the succession of Elizabeth II, from whom he accepted the Order of the Garter in April 1953. The coronation (2 June 1953) was the last great pageant of an empire whose decline was masked, for the time being, by the charismatic conjunction of the aged statesman and the beautiful young queen. 
Churchill was no longer a dynamic force. A fresh supply of 'action this day' stickers was printed, but this time they were left unused. As he was going deaf, he had to be supplied with a hearing aid for cabinet meetings. With much guidance from the cabinet secretary, Norman Brook, he chaired the cabinet in his usual discursive style until June 1953, when he suffered a stroke which left him partially paralysed. The nature of his illness was concealed by a secret circle of conspirators, led by R. A. Butler and Lord Salisbury, who doctored the medical bulletin and persuaded the press to collude in the fiction that Churchill was merely taking a rest. His son-in-law, Christopher Soames, took over the running of 10 Downing Street in the interim. At first Churchill thought he was finished but within a few days he began to recover and by the autumn he was well enough to return to work. On great occasions, like his speech to the Conservative Party conference at Blackpool in October, he could still put on a dazzling performance, but the remainder of his political life hung by a thread. 
The first few months of Churchill's peacetime government were overshadowed by economic crisis, a fresh round of austerity, and a great debate in Whitehall over whether or not to adopt the radical course of floating the pound (operation Robot). These were matters in which Churchill was out of his depth, though not without a politician's instinct for survival. The programme of the tory party, he explained late one night at Chequers, must be 'houses and meat and not being scuppered' (Colville, 'Fringes of Power', 644). Largely on the advice of Cherwell, he decided against Robot. Generally speaking Churchill was bored by home affairs, but he rejoiced in the abolition of food rationing, and welcomed the decision to end the BBC's monopoly of television. Simultaneously he gave strong support to Harold Macmillan's housing programme against opposition from the Treasury. Determined to avoid industrial strife he instructed his minister of labour, Walter Monckton, to pursue a policy of appeasing the trade unions at the cost, if necessary, of inflationary wage settlements. On racial questions, Churchill was still a late Victorian. He tried in vain to manoeuvre the cabinet into restricting West Indian immigration. 'Keep England White' was a good slogan, he told the cabinet in January 1955 (Hennessy, 205). 
Churchill sought a quiet life at home in order to concentrate on his main objective, the restoration of Britain as a great power. Once in office, he displayed no more enthusiasm than the Labour government for British involvement in the Schuman plan and his support for the creation of a European army (which he privately referred to as a 'sludgy amalgam') did not extend to British participation. But he threw himself into a passionate last-ditch defence of Britain's military base in the Suez Canal zone against the demands of Egyptian leaders for a British withdrawal. 'He never wavered', wrote Roger Louis, 'from his Victorian opinion that the Egyptians were an inferior and essentially cowardly people' (Blake and Louis, 473). This was an issue on which Churchill was frequently at odds with his foreign secretary, Anthony Eden, whose attempts to reach a settlement with Egypt he stigmatized as appeasement. By 1954, however, Churchill was compelled to recognize that his views commanded little support. Consoling himself with the argument that the Suez base was strategically obsolete in a nuclear age, he accepted the inevitable. 
Churchill's first priority when he returned to power was the re-establishment of the Anglo-American 'special relationship'. In January 1952 he crossed the Atlantic in the 'Queen Mary' for discussions with President Truman. Outwardly relations were full of bonhomie, but the president and his advisers did not share Churchill's conception of an Anglo-American global alliance. They rejected his pleas for American military support in the Suez Canal zone and made few concessions to his request for the restoration of the Quebec agreement on the use of nuclear weapons. When Eisenhower was elected president in November 1952, Churchill hastened to Washington for consultations with his former wartime comrade-in-arms. But greatly though Eisenhower liked and admired Churchill, he thought his view of Anglo-American relations sentimental and privately concluded that he was living in the wartime past. Churchill's pleas for diplomatic support over Egypt were rejected. Nor did 'Ike' warm to Churchill's idea of a summit conference with the Russians. Even more discouraging was the new secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, a doctrinaire anti-communist for whom Churchill developed a strong antipathy. 
Although Churchill pressed repeatedly for discussions with the Kremlin, he never defined the terms of the settlement he was seeking, and his motives appear to have been mixed. Surrounded by whispers that he was unfit for office, and under constant pressure to make way for Eden, he badly needed a justification for clinging to power, and also, perhaps, relished the prospect of outmanoeuvring the Labour Party. Whatever his motives, there is no doubt that his last great ambition was to play the role of peacemaker. With the death of Stalin on 5 March 1953 his hopes of 'detente' rose, but his attempts to seize the initiative were interrupted by illness. In December 1953 Eisenhower attended a conference in Bermuda at Churchill's invitation, but again rejected his proposals for a common approach to Russia. When Churchill flew to Washington in June 1954 he was surprised and elated when Eisenhower withdrew his objections and even agreed that Churchill should go alone to Moscow. During the return voyage on the 'Queen Elizabeth' Churchill in cavalier fashion dispatched a telegram to Molotov without consulting the cabinet. The consequence, when he got home, was a cabinet crisis in which he was strongly opposed by Eden and other senior ministers. From this impasse the Russians, quite unwittingly, extricated him by clumsy diplomacy. 
Churchill was, of course, no unilateral disarmer. It was under his chairmanship that the defence committee of the cabinet decided in June 1954 to recommend that Britain must build its hydrogen bomb as a deterrent against Soviet attack. But Churchill also grasped the fact that with both the United States and the Soviet Union in possession of nuclear weapons, the world now stood on the brink of self-destruction. His last major speech in the House of Commons (1 March 1955) was devoted to the dangers of nuclear holocaust but ended on a note of hope: 'It may well be that we shall, by a process of sublime irony, have reached a stage where safety will be the sturdy shield of terror, and survival the twin brother of annihilation' (Churchill and Gilbert, 8.1100). 
In November 1954 Churchill celebrated his eightieth birthday. Presented by parliament with an official portrait by Graham Sutherland, he declared that it was 'a remarkable example of modern art', but was deeply wounded by the artist's presentation of him as an old man battling against physical decay. The painting was later burnt by Clementine. Even Churchill, however, had to accept that he was too old to lead the Conservatives into another general election. On 5 April 1955, after entertaining the queen and the duke of Edinburgh to dinner at 10 Downing Street, he tendered his resignation. The queen offered him a dukedom but Churchill remained an MP until 1964, sometimes voting in parliamentary divisions, but never again speaking in the house. At the height of the Suez crisis in October 1956 Eden contacted Churchill's private secretary, Anthony Montague Browne, to ask whether Churchill would accept a seat in the cabinet. Montague Browne took it upon himself to decline on his master's behalf. Churchill's private verdict on the Suez fiasco was telling: 'I would never have done it without squaring the Americans, and once I'd started I'd never have dared stop' (Montague Browne, 213). When Eden resigned, Churchill was among those advising the queen to choose Harold Macmillan as his successor. 
In his retirement Churchill set one new project on foot. Impressed by Cherwell's warnings about the lack of scientific and technological manpower in Britain, he led a financial appeal for the establishment of a British equivalent of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The outcome, though less ambitious than Churchill intended, was a new Cambridge college named after him and devoted to science and technology. Churchill also returned to the task of revising his 'History of the English-Speaking Peoples'. Published in four volumes in 1956 and 1957, it was received with widespread acclaim, but of all his major works it was the least successful in standing the test of time. That it should take the form of a narrative of kings, battles, and constitutional landmarks, with social and economic history relegated to the margins, was only to be expected. The real problem was that it lacked the true Churchillian fire of passionate engagement with the subject. Most of the book read like a carefully polished synthesis of the drafts prepared for him by academic historians. Churchill had originally intended that it would demonstrate the shared heritage and destiny of Britain and the United States, but this was a theme he failed to dramatize or develop. 
As Churchill's mental and physical faculties decayed, he began to lose the battle he had fought for so long against the 'black dog' of depression. He found some solace in the sunshine and colours of the Mediterranean. He took long holidays with his literary adviser Emery Reves and his wife, Wendy Russell, at La Pausa, their villa on the French Riviera. Clementine, who was often herself in poor health and did not approve of Winston's growing affection for Wendy, seldom joined him on these excursions. He also took eight cruises aboard the yacht 'Christina' as the guest of the Greek shipowner Aristotle Onassis. Once, when the 'Christina' had to pass through the Dardanelles, Onassis gave instructions that it was to do so during the night, so as not to disturb his guest with unhappy memories. 
Churchill's final years were melancholy. He approved the appointment of Randolph as his official biographer, but the love-hate relationship between father and son was never resolved. Sarah was descending into alcoholism and Diana committed suicide in the autumn of 1964. Churchill himself suffered a number of minor strokes. It was a figure ravaged by age and sorrow who appeared at the window of his London home, 28 Hyde Park Gate, to greet the photographers on his ninetieth birthday in November 1964. In December he dined for the last time at the Other Club, sitting in silence but apparently knowing where he was. On 10 January he suffered another stroke and after lingering for a fortnight died at 28 Hyde Park Gate shortly after eight o'clock on the morning of Sunday 24 January 1965, seventy years to the day after the death of Lord Randolph. 
On the instructions of the queen, a state funeral had been long planned by officials under the codename operation Hope-Not. After lying in state for three days in Westminster Hall the coffin, covered in a union flag, was taken in procession to St Paul's Cathedral for the funeral service, then embarked at Tower Pier on a Port of London launch. As the launch passed up river, the quayside cranes were dipped in salute. From Waterloo station the coffin travelled slowly by train to Bladon. In the fields along the route, and at the stations through which the train passed, thousands stood in silence to pay their last respects. In the village churchyard at Bladon, where his mother and father and his brother Jack were buried, his body was interred in a private family ceremony. 
In September 1965 the queen unveiled a memorial stone set in the floor of Westminster Abbey and inscribed: 'Remember Winston Churchill'. At the time it seemed unthinkable that anyone could forget. He was not only a British hero, but a hero of western Europe and the English-speaking world. At the beginning of the twenty-first century some of that fame endures, but young people know little of him, and shifting historical perspectives have made the task of assessing him more complex. Churchill's war leadership, together with his writings and speeches, persuaded a generation to accept his version of history and the part he had played in it. In his own estimate he was a prophet, a strategist of deep insight, and a statesman of strong and consistent convictions. But this version of the past was at odds with the experience of many of the people with whom he had worked, not to mention those who had fought or opposed him. Among his contemporaries, only the most narrow-minded denied him great qualities: volcanic energy, physical and mental courage, eloquence and vision, humanity and wit. Almost all conceded that he possessed elements of genius. But he was, they concluded, a genius 'manque' whose more brilliant qualities were offset by serious flaws: supreme egotism, an adventurer's love of daring but perilous courses of action, poor judgement of men, erratic changes of course, susceptibility to rhetoric and flights of the imagination. Brooke mused in August 1943, 'I wonder whether any historian of the future will ever be able to paint Winston in his true colours. It is a wonderful character -- the most marvellous qualities and superhuman genius mixed with an astonishing lack of vision at times, and an impetuosity which if not guided must inevitably bring him into trouble again and again. (Alanbrooke, 451)' Churchill's death was followed by a flurry of revisionism in which the doubts and criticisms, buried for a quarter of a century beneath the wartime legend, were rediscovered. In the works of Robert Rhodes James, Lord Moran, and others, Churchill was depicted warts and all, with a focus on errors of judgement and foibles of character. But revisionism proved to be a two-way street. The official biography of Churchill, begun by Randolph Churchill and carried to a triumphant conclusion by the prodigious labours of Martin Gilbert, was an exhaustive, day-by-day chronicle without an analytical framework. But it also set the record straight. Many of the more facile allegations against Churchill 'the warmonger' were shown to be untrue, and a more rounded portrait created through an emphasis on his more peaceful and constructive endeavours. 
The completion of the official biography was followed by a second wave of revisionism, more radical than the first. Churchill was accused of racism, militarism, and sympathy with fascism. Hitherto acclaimed as the saviour of his country, he was now accused of leading Britain into a war that fatally undermined its power and prestige. His faith in the special relationship between Britain and the United States was interpreted as a dangerous illusion and the outcome of the war as a self-inflicted defeat. As John Charmley put it, 'Churchill stood for the British Empire, for British independence and for an 'anti-Socialist' vision of Britain. By July 1945 the first of these was on the skids, the second was dependent solely on America, and the third had just vanished in a Labour election victory. It was indeed the end of glory. (Charmley, 'End of Glory', 649)' Iconoclasm attracted much attention but was no more persuasive than the hagiography it sought to replace. There is no reason to doubt the essential truth of the portrait of Churchill painted by those who knew him best. His unexpected emergence as a national hero in 1940 was the consequence of an exceptional moment in British history that transformed even his flaws into virtues: suddenly his egotism, bellicosity, imperious demands, high-flown rhetoric, romantic vision, and cavalier indifference to party were rare and precious assets, while the elements of genius which had been evident for so long shone far more brightly than ever. All his adult life Churchill had been a master of the English language: now it fell to him to express the general will. As he said himself, on his eightieth birthday: 'It was the nation and the race dwelling all round the globe that had the lion's heart. I had the luck to be called upon to give the roar' (Churchill and Gilbert, 8.1075). 
For Churchill himself the Second World War was both 'triumph and tragedy' -- the title he gave to the sixth and final volume of his book. The triumph lay in the defeat of Nazi Germany, the preservation of British institutions, and the restoration of parliamentary democracy in western Europe. The tragedy lay in the decline of the empire, the advance of Soviet communism into eastern Europe, and the failure of the Anglo-American relationship to live up to Churchill's expectations. In the last years of his life, oppressed by physical decay and the black dog of depression, he began to think that his life's work had come to nothing. There is no need to accept this verdict. Whatever the price the British paid for victory in the Second World War, the cost of defeat would have been much greater. In all essentials Churchill was right about the rise of Hitler's Germany, the need for rearmament and collective security, and the necessity of waging war. Without him the whole of Europe, Britain included, might have experienced decades of Nazi rule. 
Churchill sometimes blundered, but his giant stature does not rest on the claim that he was always right. Right or wrong, he was an exceptionally great man by virtue of the extraordinary range of qualities he possessed. In his obituary of Churchill the Labour politician Michael Foot accused him of numerous failings and follies. But he also wrote: 'Seen from any angle, the scale of the figure on the vast canvas is stupendous. Not merely does Churchill bestride the century; not merely has he been a foremost performer in British and world politics for a longer period than almost any rival in ancient or modern times. The same giant lineaments are revealed when his particular faculties are examined. His vitality, his brainpower, his endurance, his wit, his eloquence, his industry, his application were superabundant, superhuman... the man was huge. (Foot, 168)' 

In the course of a lifetime Churchill was the recipient of thirty-seven orders, decorations, and medals. He was made a Companion of Honour in 1922, awarded the Order of Merit in 1946, and the Order of the Garter in 1953. After stepping down as prime minister Churchill refused the offer of a dukedom, though he was tempted for a while by the prospect of becoming duke of London. His medals included the Spanish cross of the order of military merit (1895), the India medal with clasp, Punjab Frontier 1897-8 (1898), the queen's Sudan medal, 1896-8 (1899), and the queen's South Africa medal, 1899-1902, with six clasps (1901). After the Second World War he was awarded high honours by Belgium, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, and France. 
Churchill was sworn of the privy council in 1907, was created lord warden of the Cinque Ports in 1941, and was made fellow of the Royal Society the same year. He was rector of the universities of Aberdeen (1914-18) and Edinburgh (1929-32), and chancellor of the University of Bristol (1930). He received honorary doctorates in law from Rochester and Harvard universities in the United States, and McGill University in Canada, and an honorary doctorate in philosophy from the University of Copenhagen. In 1953 he was awarded the Nobel prize for literature 'for his mastery of historical and biographical description as well as for brilliant oratory in defending exalted human values' (www.nobel.se/literature/laureates/1953/index.html). On the initiative of President John F. Kennedy, the two houses of the United States congress passed in 1963 a resolution making him an honorary citizen of the United States. In April 1999 he became the first Briton to have a United States warship named after him: the USS 'Winston S. Churchill', a guided missile destroyer. 
The earliest known portrait of Churchill, as a boy aged four in Dublin, is by Cyron Ward (1878). Of the many later portraits the most notable are perhaps those by Sir William Orpen (1915) and Sir John Lavery (1916), depicting a sombre and troubled Churchill at the nadir of his fortunes. The most memorable portraits of Churchill in the Second World War were the work of photographers including Cecil Beaton (1940), showing him at work in the cabinet room, and Karsh of Ottawa (1941), who claimed to have captured Churchill's bulldog expression in one of the photographs by snatching the cigar from his mouth. There is, of course, a wealth of press photographs in the picture libraries, and the newsreel archives contain hundreds of Churchill sequences. Among the cartoonists, the New Zealander David Low was pre-eminent in portraying Churchill over a period of more than three decades in a sequence of caricatures from a left-wing perspective. Equally famous in his day was Sidney Strube, staff cartoonist for the 'Daily Express' from 1912 to 1948. It was he who first drew the head of Churchill on the body of a bulldog (8 June 1940) thus creating the classic wartime image. 'Vicky' (Victor Weisz) produced one of the wittiest of all commentaries on the many facets of Churchill with his depiction of the different styles in which his portrait might have been painted by artists from Holbein to Picasso. In addition to the bronze head of Churchill by Jacob Epstein (1946), there are statues of Churchill by David McFall at Woodford (1959), William McVey outside the British embassy in Washington (1966), Franta Belsky at Fulton, Missouri (1969), Oscar Nemon in the House of Commons (1969), and Jean Cardot in Paris (1998). In Ivor Roberts-Jones's statue in Parliament Square (1976) Churchill appears as a hunched and brooding giant, stalking defiantly into a menacing future. 
Churchill was also commemorated in ephemera which date back to the earliest years of his fame. He first appeared on a piece of commemorative china -- a teapot -- in 1900. Cigarette cards recorded his escape from Boer prisoner-of-war camp and postcards his wedding to Clementine. As first lord of the Admiralty during the First World War he appeared on scarves, handkerchieves, and ceramics. The first-ever Churchill toby jug featured him as chancellor of the exchequer in 1927, the forerunner of a spate of toby jugs, bronze bulldogs, tea plates, and other patriotic memorabilia which flooded onto the market between 1939 and 1945. The iconography of Churchill owed much to his awareness of the importance of imagery in politics and his image was no less important in establishing his fame than his speeches. 


@@@@@


doc= 32414


Ede, James Chuter Chuter-, Baron Chuter-Ede (1882-1965), politician and educationist, was born on 11 September 1882 at Epsom, Surrey, the son of James Ede, a grocer, and his wife, Agnes Mary Chuter. He had one sister. In common with many lower-middle-class shopkeepers in the late Victorian period, Ede's father was firmly attached to religious nonconformity (in the shape of Unitarianism) and to political radicalism, in the form of Gladstone's Liberal Party. In addition to sustaining these concerns, he also inherited from his parents a passion for education and learning. Later in his career he would often be introduced as someone who started life as a teacher. To this he would add the corrective that he began as a pupil, and had been on the side of the underdog ever since. 
From his local elementary school (Epsom national schools), Ede progressed to Dorking high school, and then to Battersea Pupil Teachers' Centre, and eventually to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he studied natural science. But lack of money meant he had to leave Cambridge before securing a degree, and he returned to his native Surrey, where he became an assistant master at a council elementary school in Mortlake. Increasingly, however, his energies were directed towards public service and political activity, which in the eyes of his parents were inseparable from their religious convictions. 
Ede's political career began to take shape in the Edwardian period. As a forthright critic of contemporary teaching conditions (he was placed in charge of classes of up to seventy pupils), he became active within the National Union of Teachers and was the youngest member elected to the post of president of the Surrey County Teachers' Association. He also became active in local politics. In 1908 he was elected to Epsom urban district council, where he was an assiduous attender -- missing only four meetings over the next six years -- and where he made no attempt to hide his pronounced Liberal views, which he developed as secretary and agent of the local association. In the summer of 1914 he was elected as Epsom's representative on Surrey county council, but the further advancement of his career was delayed by the outbreak of the First World War. 
The war proved to be an important watershed in Ede's life, both personally and politically. He served in the front line with the East Surreys and the Royal Engineers, reaching the rank of sergeant, and while home on leave in 1917 he married Lilian Mary Stephens Williams (died 1948), the daughter of Richard Williams, a Plymouth doctor. She was herself a teacher in Surrey and became a member of the county council. He also abandoned the Liberal Party in favour of the emerging labour movement, believing it had become a more effective representative of the cause of the underdog. At the 1918 general election he was heavily defeated when he stood as the Labour candidate for Epsom. 
In the early 1920s Ede concentrated on establishing himself as a county councillor, and in March 1923 he was returned to parliament after defeating the Conservative minister of health, Sir Arthur Griffith-Boscawen, by the margin of 800 votes in a fiercely contested by-election at Mitcham. In the House of Commons he was quickly recognized as a knowledgeable speaker with a dry sense of humour. But in a general election held later in 1923 Ede was narrowly beaten in Mitcham, and suffered the same fate in a further contest a year later; his entry into national politics had been impressive but short-lived. 
In 1929 Ede secured a narrow victory at South Shields -- a seat which had returned a Liberal MP at every election since the '1832 Reform Act' -- this time by a mere forty votes. He was privately critical of the inability of Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government to tackle mounting unemployment, but voted against the administration only once in parliament, conscious of the party's precarious position in office. Like many colleagues, he was soundly defeated at the election which followed the formation of the National Government in 1931. 
In spite of this set-back, the 1930s witnessed a consolidation of Ede's political career. In 1933 he became chairman of Surrey county council and in 1935 he won a handsome victory at South Shields -- the constituency he represented without further interruption until 1964. At last, in his mid-fifties, his talents received recognition within the Parliamentary Labour Party, and in 1939 he was appointed to a vacancy on the opposition front bench. 
At the time of the formation of Winston Churchill's wartime coalition in May 1940, Ede was appointed as parliamentary secretary at the Board of Education, serving after 1941 under the Conservative minister R. A. Butler. During his five years at the board, Ede played a central role in preparing plans for reform, culminating in the passage of the '1944 Education Act', which introduced compulsory secondary schooling for all children over eleven in the state sector. His expertise was invaluable: in setting out the nonconformist case while devising a settlement for the vexed issue of religious education; in negotiating with the teaching profession; in preparing for a reorganization of local education authorities; and in liaising with Labour MPs. 
When later asked what he regarded as his main contribution to the socialist cause, Ede pointed with great pride to his part in drafting the 'Education Bill' and ensuring its passage through parliament. Wartime reform was later much criticized as local authorities, using the flexibility offered by the act, developed prestigious grammar schools alongside the markedly inferior secondary modern schools in which most children found themselves. In time Ede concurred with the growing view in Labour ranks that continuing inequality could only be remedied by the introduction of a single form of comprehensive education for all children over the age of eleven. But his admiration for the 1944 act remained undiminished. During the war years there were few, either in the Labour Party or the educational world, who questioned the assumption that 'parity of esteem' between various types of secondary school was attainable. He regarded secondary education for all -- in whatever form -- as a great improvement on pre-1939 provision, and nothing could detract from securing a settlement for church schools that had eluded policy makers since the turn of the century. Ede's attachment to the cause of educational reform was such that at one point in the war he rejected the prime minister's offer of promotion to another department. This was an action, he noted ironically, that gave him the distinction of being the only man to turn down a move from the Board of Education. 
Ede's administrative ability, and his association with the successful passage of the 'Education Act', ensured his promotion to cabinet rank in the Labour government elected at the end of the war in 1945. The new prime minister, Clement Attlee, saw him as a natural choice for the Home Office, combining long experience of local government with knowledge of the judiciary as a magistrate. As home secretary for the next six years he was responsible for a large body of legislation, including measures on deprived children, police pensions, reform of magistrates' courts, and changes to the licensing laws. The most controversial problem he encountered came during the passage of the 'Criminal Justice Act' in 1948, when he argued against a Commons motion calling for the abolition of capital punishment for an experimental period of five years. The Commons rejected his advice by a small majority. The issue was only defused, temporarily, by agreeing to establish a royal commission on the working of the death penalty. 
Ede was also criticized for his handling of electoral boundary changes, which were said to have assisted the Conservative recovery at the 1950 general election. But on the whole he was considered a fair-minded and efficient home secretary, and the esteem in which he was held by members of all parties was one factor behind his appointment as leader of the House of Commons for a brief period before Attlee's government lost office in 1951. 
Ede remained an influential figure in Labour politics for several years to come, though successive Conservative election victories in the 1950s afforded him no opportunity of a return to high office. When he eventually left the front bench, he was able to take up the seat in the house traditionally reserved for the opposition spokesman of highest standing. In 1964 he ended his connection with South Shields, changed his name by deed poll to Chuter-Ede, and went to the upper chamber as a life peer with the title Lord Chuter-Ede of Epsom. 
Although overshadowed by more powerful personalities at the top of the Labour hierarchy, Ede had been a respected party figure for over two decades. Close colleagues were struck by his tolerance, humour, and deep commitment to what he called the good old causes of freedom and social justice. Those who knew him less well found him to carry the aura of an austere schoolmaster, especially after the death of his wife in 1948. They were a devoted couple and he was much affected by the loss. There were no children. 
The public issue which overshadowed Ede's later life was that of the death penalty. Growing evidence emerged in the mid-1950s that a serious miscarriage of justice had taken place in the case of Timothy John Evans, who had been sentenced to death for murder during Ede's term as home secretary. Ede maintained that he could not have granted a reprieve to Evans on the basis of the evidence available to him at the time, and in this he was supported by official inquiries. But his anguish over the case encouraged him to revise his view of capital punishment. 
In old age Ede campaigned for the abolition of the death penalty and for a posthumous free pardon in the case of Evans, whose remains he argued should be transferred from prison to family relatives. This was to be the last struggle of a liberal nonconformist of the old school. After suffering from a fall, Chuter-Ede was admitted to a nursing home, Wilmor Lodge, Epsom Road, Ewell, Surrey, where he died on 11 November 1965 -- one day after the remains of Evans had been transferred from prison. 


@@@@@


doc= 32415


Clapham, Sir Alfred William (1883-1950), architectural historian and archaeologist, was born in Dalston, London, on 27 May 1883, the son of the Revd James Ernest Clapham, a Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Lucy Elizabeth Hutchinson. He was educated at Dulwich College and subsequently articled to the architect James Weir. After working for the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England' for a number of years, in 1912 he became a member of staff of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England), where he spent the rest of his working life except for the interruption of the First World War, in which he served with the Royal Sussex regiment. He was technical editor at the commission from 1918 to 1933, when he succeeded Sir George Duckworth as secretary to the commissioners. He retired in 1948. 
Clapham was a prolific scholar. His entries in the inventories of the royal commission include buildings of all dates in the middle ages, but his greatest interest and expertise lay in the period from the late sixth century to the end of the twelfth, that is, from the introduction of the Roman church into Britain to the transition from the Romanesque style of building to the Gothic. His first article, on the foundation of Lesnes Abbey in Essex and excavations there, appeared in 1910, after which he published a large number of articles, especially on monastic churches and other buildings. His last publications were four essays published posthumously in 1952, including pieces on Tewkesbury Abbey and the cathedrals and Cistercian buildings of Ireland, while some of his guides for the then Ministry of Works continued to be reprinted into the 1970s and beyond. 
Clapham was an architect turned historian who combined a thorough knowledge of the documents with a detailed analysis of the buildings. He worked in the tradition established by Robert Willis in the middle of the nineteenth century and developed by John Bilson. Willis brought the analysis of medieval buildings to a new level of accuracy and sophistication, while Bilson added an engineer's understanding of structure and an even more precise approach to the analysis of masonry. Clapham performed an equally valuable service for the discipline of architectural history by writing a single overview of the Anglo-Saxon and Norman periods in his 'English Romanesque Architecture before the Conquest' and 'English Romanesque Architecture after the Conquest', published in 1930 and 1934 respectively, treating the subject as a narrative and not as a series of individual problems. He also had an extensive understanding of the wider European architectural context, which he put to good use in his 'Romanesque Architecture in Western Europe' of 1936. 
In addition to his work for the commission, Clapham devoted much of his time to the affairs of the Society of Antiquaries of London. He was elected a fellow in 1913, with the support of Charles Peers, William Page, and Aymer Vallance, among others; he was a council member at various times from 1922, secretary from 1929 to 1939, and president from 1939 to 1944. In 1948 he received the society's gold medal. He became a trustee of the British Museum in 1944, played a leading part in the founding of the Council for British Archaeology in 1944, and was its first president. He joined the Archaeological Institute in 1921, and served as a council member, vice-president, and president in turn, also contributing numerous entries to the programmes of the summer meetings of the institute from 1928 until the year of his death. He was appointed CBE in 1932 and was knighted in 1944. Clapham died, unmarried, at Clova Nursing Home in Ripon, Yorkshire, on 26 October 1950 and in 1952 was honoured by a memorial supplement to volume 106 of the 'Archaeological Journal', which contains a bibliography of his work and a memoir of his life by C. A. R. Radford. 


@@@@@


doc= 32416


Clapham, Sir John Harold (1873-1946), economic historian, was born at Broughton, Salford, Lancashire, on 13 September 1873, the younger son of John Clapham, jeweller and silversmith, and his second wife, Mary Jane, daughter of John Chambers, accountant, of Manchester. There were two sons and a daughter. 
Clapham's father was a Methodist who, in the words of M. M. Postan, handed down 'the intellectual and moral virtues of the Victorian middle classes at their best -- a head which was shrewd and cool, an outlook which was wholly unsentimental and a rule of life disciplined to the point of being hard' (Postan, 56). In 1887 Clapham was sent to the Leys School in Cambridge, which had been founded by Wesleyan Methodists in 1875. He distinguished himself as an enthusiastic sportsman who came second in the public schools' quarter-mile. He was 'tall, strongly built and energetic' (Clark, 339), and he became a mountaineer, climbing in the Alps or Cumberland every summer for forty years; he was elected vice-president of the Alpine Club. He also distinguished himself in the classroom, and particularly in history. His father's leisure was spent in reading the works of Lecky, Buckle, and Freeman, and at the Leys Clapham's interest in history was recognized when he was excused from ordinary routine and placed under the supervision of G. E. Green, who had graduated from Cambridge with a first in history in 1885. Clapham won a history exhibition to King's College in 1892, was elected to a scholarship in 1894, and graduated with a first in 1895. 
In 1896, Clapham won the Lightfoot scholarship in ecclesiastical history, and in 1898 his fellowship dissertation on the causes of the war of 1792 won the prince consort prize, which was awarded to the best dissertation involving original research by members of the university who were no more than four years from admission to their first Cambridge degree. The dissertation secured him a fellowship of King's College. At this stage Clapham was influenced by Acton, at whose suggestion he turned to study the French Revolution: 'The Abbe Sieyes: an Essay in the Politics of the French Revolution' was published in 1912. Neither study showed any inclination to explain political events and ideas in terms of economics, which was peripheral to an essentially political narrative. However, another crucial influence on his historical career was Alfred Marshall, for whom he worked for a time in marking essays. In 1897 Marshall informed Acton that the absence of a decent account of the economic development of England in the last 150 years was 'a disgrace to the land, and a grievous hindrance to the right understanding of the economic problems of our time'. Marshall felt that Clapham was the man to provide this account, for he 'has more analytic faculty than any thorough historian whom I have ever taught.... If he works at anything but recent economic history he will disobey Babbage's canon that every one should do that work for which all his best faculties are wanted and no other. (Marshall to Acton, 13 Nov 1897, cited in 'CHJ', 8, 1946, 115)' The decision to turn to economic history was not intended to be permanent, and did not mark a rejection of political history. As Clapham explained to G. N. Clark, 'I decided to shift into economic history for twenty years -- if I were allowed -- and to begin at 50 to build up some part of history on its economic frame'. He feared (correctly as it transpired) that by the time he completed his account of the economic development of modern Britain he would not have the 'years, learning and vigour' (Clapham to Clark, 9 Feb 1930, quoted in Clark, 343) for the wider task, but he did return to an interest in the French Revolution at the end of his life. In the preface to his last book, the 'Concise History', his frustrated ambition was apparent: 'Of all varieties of history the economic is the most fundamental. Not the most important: foundations exist to carry better things' (Introduction to 'Concise Economic History of Britain from the Earliest Times to 1750', ed. J. Saltmarsh, 1949). This remark should not be taken to imply that he was a historical materialist. He always assumed that economic and political history could be written as separate narratives without any causal superiority; he never made any general reflections on the connection between economics and politics. 
Clapham's decision to turn to economic history had a practical basis, for the lack of openings to teach history in Cambridge led to his reluctant move in 1902 to the chair of economics at the Yorkshire College, shortly to become the University of Leeds, at the instigation of Marshall. He turned to a study of the local worsted and woollen industries, which appeared in 1907. The book was not primarily historical, but it could only have been written by a historian with an orderly mind; he took an optimistic and robust approach to the problems of the industry, and showed a quality which was to appear in his future work: a careful use of statistics, and a 'vivid imagination of physical facts' (Clark, 344). In 1905, he married Mary Margaret, daughter of William Edward Green, surgeon of Ross, Herefordshire, who was working in Leeds for the Yorkshire Ladies' Council of Education; they had one son, Sir Michael John Sinclair Clapham (1912-2002), printer and industrialist, and three daughters. He returned to a fellowship of King's College in 1908, as assistant history tutor and, from 1913, tutor. In 1916 he joined the Board of Trade and served as a member of the cabinet committee on priorities, for which he was appointed CBE in 1918. 
In 1921 Clapham published an account of the economic development of France and Germany between 1815 and 1914, but the work on which his reputation was based was 'An Economic History of Modern Britain', which appeared in three volumes, covering 1820 to 1914: 'The Early Railway Age, 1820-50' (1926); 'Free Trade and Steel, 1850-86' (1932); and 'Machines and National Rivalries, 1887-1914, with an Epilogue, 1914-1929' (1938). The first volume, and the project as a whole, was welcomed by 'The Times' for offering 'a picture of normal society in a past age in the same fullness of detail as we can picture our own age.... It is the beginning of what we have never had before, a history of the English 'people'' (quoted on jacket of vol. 3). The great strength of the three volumes was a combination of carefully used statistics in order to challenge legends too easily accepted by literary historians. He therefore offered an account which was more quantitative, but he also warned that the statistician's world was not that of the historian. He balanced the 'unreality of the generalised statistical statement' by 'scattered historical facts' to produce a sense of divergent social realities throughout Britain (Preface to Clapham, 'The Early Railway Age', 1926, viii). 
The achievement was impressive, and in 1928 Clapham was elected to the newly created chair of economic history at Cambridge, which he held until his formal retirement in 1938. He continued to teach during the war, and had an impressive range of commitments to the end of his life. He was appointed vice-provost of King's in 1933, and held the position to 1943. He chaired the Cambridge employment committee, the refugee committee, and the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning, as well as serving as a member of the conscientious objectors' tribunal. The death of Eileen Power in 1940 meant that he had sole responsibility for editing the first volume of the 'Cambridge Economic History of Europe', which appeared in 1941, and he was well advanced with editing a second volume. He wrote a two-volume history of the Bank of England up to 1914 to mark the 250th anniversary of the charter of the bank, which appeared in 1944. The posthumous publication of the 'Concise Economic History of Britain from the Earliest Times to 1750' preserved the substance of his undergraduate lectures from 1908 to 1935, which were highly regarded for their 'complete mastery in delivery and presentation' (Clark in 'DNB'). He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1928, and served as president from 1940 to his death in 1946. At the time of his death he was chair of the government's committee on social and economic research; he saw the report in draft, and its recommendations were adopted by the government. He was knighted in 1943. 
G. N. Clark commented that 'as an historian, after his sheer capacity for work, his best quality was a power of reducing large masses of detailed facts to systematic form' ('DNB'). Clapham did not make explicit use of economic theory, preferring to supply concrete information which indicated the complexity of the past than to develop a theoretical position. He saw his task as supplying accurate, well-chosen and -presented factual information for economists. He took no pleasure in speculation or in keeping abreast of recent developments in economics: he never read the 'General Theory' for he concluded from discussions with Keynes that it would be too difficult, and he had no interest in other social sciences. He preferred to put his commentary 'in the form of a well-regulated assemblage of facts' (Clark, 348). This left him open to criticism for failing to analyse the significance of his material, and for producing books divided into separate compartments rather than forming a single argument. As Postan remarked, he was the master of the 'mot juste' and the arresting sentence, but not of the fluent page or balanced volume. However, Postan's general assessment of the three volumes gives a fair measure of their importance: 'He was a pioneer in the sense in which all men who colonise virgin lands are pioneers; there were beasts and even men in the field before him, but he was the first to live and to build in a civilised way' (Postan, 57). 
Although Clapham accepted Marshall's point that economic history could not be entirely separated from an interest in contemporary social problems, he felt that the writing of history should be a scientific activity separate from immediate political or policy aims. As for his own position, he was a free-trade Liberal and supporter of social reforms, but he did not use economic history for immediate political ends as did Cunningham (in arguing for protection) or the Hammonds, R. H. Tawney, or G. D. H. Cole in arguing for social reform or socialism. One of his few contributions to current policy debates accused tariff reformers of being 'amateurs in economic pathology' (J. H. Clapham, 'Protection and the wool trade', 'Independent Review', 1, 1904). But Clapham was not one to adopt a dogmatic position. His approach was careful and hostile to over-assertive generalization, and in his study of the woollen and worsted industries he argued that the case for protection depended on comparative economic research rather than categoric assertion: protection was linked in Germany with rising exports and in France with falling exports, and controversialists exaggerated the importance of government action compared with 'deep working economic forces' beyond government control. 'That this is a moral distasteful to the controversialists cannot be helped' (J. H. Clapham, 'The Worsted and Woollen Industries', 1907, 293-4). It followed that such topics should be removed from theoreticians and controversialists and passed to political economists and their successors, the economic historians. 
Clapham's interest in history and economic history did not emerge from 'pursuit of some external ideology' (Kadish, 223), and he avoided any sense of moral outrage at the horrors of capitalism in favour of a dispassionate account which stressed gains as well as losses. In the opinion of some critics, he aimed to debunk the views of the left and to reinstate the complacency of Samuel Smiles, but G. N. Clark was moved to defend Clapham's economic history of modern Britain from accusations of lack of sympathy for economic misery and oppression. As Clark explained, Clapham 'felt sympathies which he did not put into words', preferring to support charity in secret and taking for granted the need for social reforms proposed by the Liberal Party. 'His purpose was scientific: he wanted to make available the information which economists, statesmen, and general historians needed, and in the form which would be useful to them.... He did not write against anyone' (Clark, 347-8). Clapham had an 'admiring appreciation of the self-adjusting action of the economic mechanism' (Postan, 56), and a horror of sudden and dramatic change. He was a liberal reformer who believed that 'great inequalities of wealth are a danger and an evil'. What was needed was gradual reform to prevent casual employment, to make towns healthy, to prevent dangerous and unhealthy work, and to mitigate the worst inequalities of wealth, so that 'trades and classes will have learnt to work better together than they now do'. These changes rested on the growth of Christian virtues of 'self-restraint, self-denial, an honest attempt on the part of all classes to understand and help one another.... A Christian nation in the real sense of the word would certainly come very near to the socialist ideal' (Clapham, 'Christianity and the problem of poverty', 'Social Ideas', 1909, 90, 100-01). Clapham remained a committed Christian throughout his life, retaining an interest in biblical scholarship, and gradually moving from Methodism to Anglicanism. 
In terms of methodology, Clapham was always a historian rather than an economist. In 1930 he explained that 'the method of economic history differs in no way from that of history in general.... The central problems of economic theory, although they may be stated in terms of some particular historical phase, are in essence independent of history' (Clapham's entry on economic history in 'Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences', 5, 1930). His obituary of Eileen Power could apply to his own approach: '[she] was not an economist. She was not trained as one. That is unimportant: Ricardo was not nor, I think, Jevons. Much more fundamental -- she would have hated to spend her life with attention concentrated on one aspect of human activity, and could never have brought herself to neglect men and women for generalizations about them.... And from the other side, as she was the first to allow, even proclaim, she had not that combination of speculative and practical interest and sagacity which makes the ideal economist. (Clapham, 'Economica', 7, 1940, 351)' Much the same point was made of Clapham, that 'men and women, the things they made, the villages and the towns and the land in which they lived, came first, for their own sake. Explanations and theories came afterwards' (J. Saltmarsh in 'John Harold Clapham... a Memoir', 8). 
Clapham developed the point in his famous article on 'empty economic boxes' of 1922, when he expressed doubts on the utility of modern economic theory. Economists could be divided into those who studied things and those who studied categories and had great difficulty in filling their empty boxes with complex reality. He suggested that empirical research should not be controlled by theoretical categories, and implied that facts should come before or be separated from theory. He had hoped for the reappearance of a comprehensive political economy, as he had hinted in his study of the woollen and worsted industries; he continued to refer to himself as 'a political economist and historian. I underline the word political' ('Authority and Individual', 'Harvard Tercentenary Publications', 1937, 117). However, A. C. Pigou responded by reasserting the boundaries between economics and economic history, and defending the use of 'empty boxes'. In his inaugural lecture in 1929, Clapham accepted that the economists and economic historians were at peace in Cambridge, and that he should go about the work assigned to him by Marshall of filling empty economic boxes with empirical fact. But he did not entirely accept his subordinate role. Although 'the economic historian has his modesties in the presence of the pure economist, he also has his pride. He is proud because, by definition an historian, he is one to whom the tangled variety of human life is attractive in itself' (Clapham, 'The Study of Economic History: an Inaugural Lecture', 1929, 32-5). At the founding meeting of the Economic History Society, of which he was to become president, he urged his colleagues to 'beware of becoming a 'craft gild'' (Barker, 15), and to retain their links with history and economics. 
Clapham 'absorbed to the full the sober Nonconformist spirit of his paternal household' (Postan, 56) and Cambridge did not have much impact. As a fellow undergraduate remarked: 'he was not the man to throw up the old lightheartedly and plunge without restraint into a more highly coloured world. I imagined him fighting a strong defensive fight for each old position and, when it was finally abandoned, taking resolute care that all that was good in the old one was retained. Such a progress would be quiet, a little dour, and very self-contained. (L. F. Giblin in 'John Harold Clapham... a Memoir', 15)' He retained an attachment to 'the old standards of morality and patriotism that might be called conservative and conventional' (Clark, 345). He had a strong sense of his own intellectual limits, which he carefully marked out and worked within. Although he was a kind and just man, he had a certain dourness and experienced difficulties in forming easy relations. His manner was 'professorial', 'rather formal and perhaps a little important. He did not cultivate airs and graces; he was never effusive in praises or complaints, and he sometimes expressed disapproval or disagreement with uncompromising bluntness' (Clark, 351). Only at the end of his life did he become more tolerant, and his response to life 'kindlier and freer' (Postan, 58). He died on 29 March 1946, on the train returning from London to Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32417


Clark, Albert Curtis (1859-1937), classical scholar, was born at Salisbury on 21 February 1859, the eldest son of Albert Charles Clark, writing master at Haileybury College, and his wife, Ellen Curtis. He was educated at Hertford grammar school and later attended lessons with the sixth form at Haileybury, although he was not a member of the college. He was elected to a classical exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford, in November 1877 and went up in January 1878. After a brilliant undergraduate career, during which he gained first classes in classical moderation (1879) and 'literae humaniores' (1881), and won the Ireland (1879) and the Craven (1882) scholarships, Clark was elected (1882) to a classical fellowship at Queen's College, where, first as lecturer (1882-7), and then as tutor (1887-1913), he not only proved himself a teacher and lecturer of exceptional ability, but won a worldwide reputation by the distinction and originality of his work on the text of Cicero's orations. 
In 1895 Clark produced a full-scale edition of the 'Pro Milone' (with English notes), which was followed by four volumes (1900-11) containing the texts of many other speeches. To these must be added his edition of Asconius (1907). These volumes reveal scholarship, learning, and industry of the highest quality, and are notable among early 'Oxford Classical Texts' for the variety and importance of their new material. Clark made a thorough collation and classification of the manuscripts, and threw new light on their history and value in his 'Collations from the Harleian MS. of Cicero 2682' (1891), 'The Vetus cluniacensis of Poggio' (1905), and the 'Inventa Italorum' (1909). Of these 'The Vetus cluniacensis' is his 'chef d'oeuvre', a masterpiece of erudition, detective ability, and constructive power in which he 'combined textual and historical evidence in a way that has not been surpassed' (Reynolds, 96). He made himself an expert palaeographer, and travelled regularly to the libraries of Europe to consult manuscripts. 
In 1909 Clark was appointed university reader in Latin, a deserved tribute to the distinction of his work, and when in 1913 the Corpus Christi professorship of Latin fell vacant, his claim to the succession was universally acknowledged. He migrated to Corpus where he became a popular member of the common room. There is an elegant Latin memorial to him in the cloisters. Three minor works of considerable interest belong to the period of his readership: the 'Fontes prosae numerosae' (1909), a collection of ancient evidences for Latin prose rhythms; 'The Cursus in Mediaeval and Vulgar Latin' (1910), a fascinating study showing that the rhythms of classical oratory were preserved in medieval Latin, the only difference being that the classical rhythm was based on quantity and the medieval on stress accent; and 'Prose Rhythm in English' (1913) in which he sought, not altogether successfully, to relate the Latin rhythms to those of English. 
The works published by Clark during his tenure of the chair, despite their erudition and ingenuity, are on the whole less convincing. They are largely concerned with the application of stichometry to textual problems presented by the 'Greek Testament', a field in which he moved with less security, while his interest in this method had become almost an obsession. In his 'Primitive Text of the Gospels and Acts' (1914) he employed it to explain the difference between the two main families of manuscripts, contending that the longer text of the 'Codex Bezae' and its kindred represented the primitive form, and that the shorter version given by the 'Codex Sinaiticus' and 'Codex Vaticanus' was due to line omissions. To this scheme Clark returned in the elaborate edition of 'The Acts of the Apostles' published in 1933; there, however, he laid less emphasis on stichometric principles and held that the shorter version of the 'Acts' was largely due to deliberate revision. He also sought to show that the 'Codex Bezae' came not from the West but from Egypt, and that the author of the 'Acts' was not the author of 'St Luke's gospel'. Clark was greatly disappointed by the reception of this work, to which he had devoted twenty years. It received favourable reviews from B. H. Streeter, provost of Queen's, in the 'Oxford Magazine' and 'Journal of Theological Studies', but most 'New Testament' scholars remained silent. Between the publication of these two works Clark returned to his first love in a learned and valuable work, 'The Descent of Manuscripts' (1918), illustrated in the main from the text of Cicero, but extending its survey to the manuscripts of Plato and Demosthenes. Here again the importance of stichometry is perhaps overstressed. 
In 1934 ill health and failing sight led Clark to resign his chair: he retired to London, where he died, unmarried, at St Mary's Nursing Home, Chiswick, on 5 February 1937. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Durham, Dublin, Manchester, and Oxford, and was elected an honorary fellow of his three colleges, Balliol, Queen's, and Corpus Christi and a fellow of the British Academy 1916. At Oxford he served on the hebdomadal council and was a curator of the Bodleian. Outside the university he was one of the earliest supporters of the Classical Association and a long-serving member of the classical journals board. Those who knew him paid tribute to his personal qualities: he could carry his learning lightly, was the best of company, full of humour and of wit, and a perfect raconteur; above all, he was courteous, warm-hearted, and kindly, ready with his help and counsel for all who sought it. As a scholar he won admiration; as a man, affection and regard. 


@@@@@


doc= 32418


Clark, Sir Allen George (1898-1962), entrepreneur and industrialist, was born on 24 August 1898 in Brookline, Massachusetts, in the United States of America, the elder child and only son of Byron George Clark, a businessman who travelled extensively in Europe on behalf of the United Shoe Machinery Corporation, and his wife, Helen Peirce. After coming to the UK with his parents and younger sister Marion in 1905, Clark was educated at Felsted School (1913-15) and subsequently served in the British army (with the London Scottish) until he was wounded at Cambrai in 1917. After recovery he was commissioned in the Royal Flying Corps and served in Egypt until the armistice. After the war he purchased, with the aid of his father, a share in the struggling engineering company, Plessey, which then had six employees at its works in Ilford, Essex. With his fellow managing director, W. O. Heyne, he was to build Plessey into a major international company. 
The first important step towards success for Clark, Heyne, and Plessey was an order in 1922 from Marconi for domestic radio receivers. This took the company into the rapidly developing electronics business, and Clark into his lifelong involvement with this industry. Subsequently, the company designed and built the first portable radio sets made in Britain. A few years later it manufactured the first commercially produced television set in the world, on behalf of Baird. 
Clark and Heyne concentrated on making the company a supplier to other manufacturers, rather than on selling direct to the public, and in those pioneering days they achieved major advances in the rationalization of the production of electronic components. Clark's talents were particularly suited to selling; he was very much an extrovert, with complete confidence in the abilities of himself and the company, regarding business as a challenge and having high ambitions for the company's growth. A major factor in the company's success was Clark's talent for getting on to good personal terms with potential customers -- he was the commercial driving force behind the company, while Heyne was the engineer. 'A. G.', as Clark was generally known, believed strongly in management involvement with the workforce, and was a familiar and distinctive figure on the shop floor. 
On 25 April 1925 Clark married Jocelyne Anina Marie Louise, daughter of Percy Emerson Culverhouse, then chief architect to the Great Western Railway. They had a daughter, and two sons. The couple were subsequently divorced, but neither of them remarried. 
Clark believed that the right way for his company to remain technically up to date in the early days was to buy the necessary technology. The very significant contribution that the company made to the British effort during the Second World War resulted partly from this policy. In particular, Clark took out licences, from America, to manufacture both the fuel pumps which fed the Merlin engines for Spitfires and the electrical connectors which were also for use in aircraft. By allowing aircraft wiring to be prefabricated and built in at an early stage of airframe construction, these connectors helped to make possible the very high production rates of aircraft which Britain achieved. Clark was also responsible for the purchase, immediately before the outbreak of war, of machinery that made possible the company's large output of munitions during the war -- ironically enough, this was bought from Germany, and Clark himself brought back some vital components in his personal baggage as late as 1 September 1939. 
During the war years Clark was able to build up the company's expertise in electronic systems -- for example, Plessey supplied more than 160,000 complete radio and electrical installations for many famous fighters and bombers. At the same time important pioneer developments in such areas as direction-finding receivers (including specially designed cathode-ray direction-finding equipment for the detection of U-boats) took place under Clark's control. 
Immediately after the war Clark had to supervise a period of retrenchment as Plessey geared itself to peacetime markets. From a wartime peak of nearly 11,500, the number employed dropped to fewer than 5250. Under his direction, the company again prospered, growing very rapidly through both internal growth and acquisitions. By 1953 the number employed had grown far beyond the wartime peak. 
At this time the expertise in electronics that Clark had built within the company really came into its own, while additionally Clark now sanctioned far greater expenditure on internal research and development, rather than on buying technology through licensing agreements, as had been his previous policy. As early as 1952, for example, the company was deeply involved in silicon technology. In the last years of Clark's life the move into systems was accelerated by the acquisition of the telephone companies Automatic Telephone and Electric and the British Ericsson Telephones. 
Clark's hobbies were fishing, golf, and shooting; he was a member of the team representing Great Britain at the clay pigeon shooting world championship held in Berlin in 1936 in conjunction with the Olympic games. He shot for England in the eight home international matches held between 1935 and 1950. 
Clark, who was American by birth, and naturalized in 1927, was knighted in 1961; he was a council member of both the Society of British Aircraft Constructors and the Telecommunications Engineering and Manufacturing Association. He died at his home, at Flat 1, 26 St James's Place, London, on 30 June 1962 (the last day of the company's financial year), after some months of illness from cancer. By the time of his death he had seen Plessey grow from a struggling company employing a handful of people to a multi-million pound organization with some 50,000 employees. His two sons took over the running of Plessey following their father's death. Both achieved distinction, John Allen Clark (1926-2001) being knighted in 1971 for services to exports, and Michael William Clark being appointed CBE in 1977, again for services to exports. 
H. T. Parker', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32419


Clark, James (1936-1968), racing driver, was born in Kilmany, Fife, on 4 March 1936, the only son and fifth child of James Clark, farmer, and his wife, Helen Rorie Niven. Educated at Loretto School, Edinburgh, he left at sixteen and went to work on the family sheep farm on the borders. Like many farmers' sons he was at home with machinery and handling cars off the road long before he was old enough to take a driving test. Another border farmer, his older brother-in-law Alec Calder, brought motor racing into the Clark family through driving a Brooklands Riley on Scottish circuits in the early 1950s. The young Jim Clark would go and watch, and it was not long before he was taking part in local motor club events with a Sunbeam Talbot Mark III which he would drive with great style. 
Ecurie Ecosse, Le Mans winners in 1956 and 1957, were the heroes of Scottish motor racing and it was Ian Scott Watson's revival of the Border Reivers racing team in opposition to them that was to set his friend Jim Clark on the road to two world drivers' championships. Clark's intended role had been that of mechanic to Scott Watson but his natural driving genius was soon so apparent that a secondhand D-type Jaguar was bought to do it justice. In winning with the car at Full Sutton on 5 April 1958, Clark became, at twenty-two, the first post-war sports car driver to lap a British circuit at over 100 m.p.h. With his innate ability he had started as he was to continue during a decade that saw him become the greatest driver of his time. 
Success with the Border Reivers led to wider recognition and Clark's connection with Colin Chapman's Lotus team, which was to last throughout his career in top-class motor racing. In 1960 he had his first race in a Lotus grand prix car at Zandvoort and contested fourth place with Graham Hill's BRM before retiring with a seized gearbox on the forty-third lap. Resisting offers from other grand prix teams, including Ferrari, Clark stayed with Lotus for 1961, the first year of the new 1.5 litre engine formula. During the Italian grand prix at Monza, Clark's Lotus and Wolfgang von Trip's Ferrari touched at the Vedano curve. The German driver was killed with fourteen spectators when his car crashed into the crowd. Clark was numbed with horror but physically unhurt. 
A winter trip to South Africa, where he won three races out of four, restored Clark's morale and he was able to look forward to the 1962 season with confidence. Lotus now had the Coventry Climax V-8 engine and, with BRM, were in a better position to do battle with the Ferraris. In only his third season in grand prix racing Clark was established as a contender for the world championship, which he was destined to lose to Graham Hill's BRM during the last race of the season in South Africa. Clark was leading as usual when a bolt failed on the sixty-third lap, causing the engine oil to leak away. 
It was a different story in 1963 and the combination of Clark and the Climax-engined Lotus 25 achieved seven grand prix victories in a season -- a record which long remained unbeaten. Clark also nearly won the American Indianapolis 500 classic. In 1964 the pattern of 'Clark wins' or 'Clark retires' was well established, but in that year he had more than his fair share of mechanical problems. Despite this it was again the last race of the season that was to decide between Clark, Graham Hill, and John Surtees (Ferrari). This time a fractured oil pipe ended Clark's chances and Surtees became world champion. 
The year 1965 was Clark's greatest, with a second world championship and victory at a new record speed at Indianapolis. At the Nurburgring, the most difficult circuit of all, he set race and lap records and there was another remarkable feat -- five consecutive grand prix wins. Twice world champion, and having just missed the title twice more, Clark had dominated the 1.5 litre formula which was superseded by the 3 litre formula in 1966. Only Jack Brabham was properly prepared, with his Repco engine, and he took the title. In an unhappy season with unsuitable engines Clark won only one grand prix race. 
The following year, 1967, saw the arrival of the most successful grand prix engine ever, the Cosworth-Ford DFV, which went first to Lotus. Clark won his fifth British grand prix at Silverstone and four others but the world championship went to Denis Hulme (Brabham). Clark won the first grand prix of 1968, in South Africa, to bring his total to twenty-five, a figure not passed until 1973, by his friend and fellow Scot Jackie Stewart. He seemed set for another championship year until his death on 7 April 1968 in a minor Formula 2 race at Hockenheim. The Lotus swerved off the track at high speed into trees, killing Clark instantly. The most likely explanation is thought to be a puncture. Clark's death stunned the motor racing world. In the most competitive of sports he was admitted to be master by those who raced against him. Juan Manuel Fangio, five times world champion, described him as 'the greatest driver in the world'. His incredible car control, race craft, and ability to nurse an ailing car to victory were matched by his sportsmanship. 
Of medium height, with dark hair and a flashing smile which could light up his whole face, Clark was a true representative of his border farming stock. Modest, unassuming, and shy of the fame his racing exploits attracted, he was never happier than when relaxing at home. Reserved with strangers, only his friends knew the impish, practical joker in his nature. Had he survived the 1968 season, he might have retired from motor racing and combined farming with his new love of flying light aircraft. Since he believed that racing drivers should not marry, he was a bachelor. 
Appointed OBE in 1964, Clark became first honorary burgess of Duns the following year. The Jim Clark Memorial Room at Duns contains many of his trophies and a painting in oils by Gordon Ellis. 
Colin Dryden', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32420


Clark, John Willis (1833-1910), university administrator and antiquary, born at Cambridge on 24 June 1833, was the only child of Dr William Clark, professor of anatomy at Cambridge, and his wife, Mary Willis, sister of Robert Willis, Jacksonian professor. In 1847 he entered Eton College as an oppidan. His tutor was William Johnson (afterwards Cory). In 1852 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, of which he became a scholar in April 1855, and a fellow in October 1858, having graduated BA in 1856 as thirteenth in the first class of the classical tripos. 
During parts of the years 1860 and 1861 Clark acted as tutor to Viscount Milton, eldest son of Earl Fitzwilliam, at Wentworth; but a considerable portion of his leisure in these and in the following years was spent in foreign travel. He visited the Faeroe Islands and Iceland in 1860, Italy and Germany in 1861 and 1864 respectively, and Norway and Denmark in 1866. Accounts of some of these expeditions were among Clark's earliest publications. While residing at Cambridge he assisted his father in the work of his professorship. Dr Clark resigned that post in 1865, and in 1866 his son was appointed superintendent of the museum of zoology and secretary to the museums and lecture rooms syndicate. These posts he retained until his election as registrary in 1891. His energy and exceptional talent for methodical arrangement and organization enabled him to effect great improvements in the classification and exhibition of the specimens in the museum, as well as to increase the collections. He contributed a good many papers to scientific journals, principally on the marine mammalia, and it seemed likely at this time that natural science would become the main subject of his studies. This, however, was not to be the case. In 1875 Professor Willis died, and bequeathed to Clark the unfinished manuscript of his 'Architectural History of the University and Colleges of Cambridge'. The completion of this monumental work entailed a vast amount of research among college records and a close study of existing buildings. A very large proportion of the book was rewritten, and all Willis's conclusions verified. The book finally appeared in four volumes in 1886, and must rank as Clark's most considerable achievement. Besides the history of the Cambridge buildings, it includes an architectural history of Eton College, and also a number of essays on the constituent parts of a college (chapel, hall, library, and so on) and an admirable series of plans, showing the development of each collegiate site. It was reprinted in 1988 but without the volume of plans. 
In 1873 Clark married Frances Matilda (1845-1908), daughter of Sir Andrew Buchanan GCB, with whom he had two sons, Edward and William Henry Clark. A part of 1874 was spent in an expedition to Algiers. In 1877-80 Clark acted as deputy for Dr H. R. Luard, registrary of the university; in 1887 he was a candidate for the Disney professorship of archaeology, and in 1889 for the post of university librarian. He was elected FSA on 26 May 1887. In 1891, at the death of Luard, he was chosen registrary, and continued in the office until a few days before his death. The work of this post was in many ways congenial; it brought Clark into contact with the whole personnel of the university, and it gave him a voice in the arrangement of ceremonies and 'functions', which appealed to his instinct for stage-management. Much was also required of him in the way of codifying university regulations and investigation of records. Of the numerous publications issued by Clark as registrary the most important is probably an edition of the 'University Endowments', which appeared in 1904. 
During these years Clark was one of the best-known personalities in Cambridge, alike in his private and in his public capacity. In university politics he was a liberal, and a fiery supporter of every cause which he took up. His quickness of temper and freedom of expression involved him in many somewhat acute personal controversies; but the geniality which was his leading characteristic seldom allowed a quarrel to develop into an enmity. No university institution benefited more largely by his efforts than the library. For many years he was an active member of the syndicate which governed it; in 1905 he initiated a movement for procuring further endowment for it, and the appeal resulted in substantial contributions. 
Clark's relations with the younger members of the university were always of the happiest. He wholly ignored, and did much to break down, any barriers established by university convention between dons and undergraduates, and he had a genius for making friends of his juniors. In one branch of undergraduate activities -- the dramatic -- he was specially helpful. In 1861 he became an honorary member of the Amateur Dramatic Club; for many years he acted as its treasurer, and was finally elected perpetual vice-president of it. He also took a large part in the production of Greek plays at Cambridge from their inception in 1882. His appearance in 1897 in the melodrama 'The Bells', a charity performance, caused a local sensation. Always an enthusiastic student of English and French drama, he hardly allowed a year to pass without paying a visit to the Paris theatres. He was the author of some dramatic adaptations, and in earlier years of a considerable mass of theatrical critiques. 
The bulk of Clark's published work, however, naturally centred round Cambridge, where his whole life was passed. Besides the 'Architectural History' and 'Cambridge: Brief Historical and Descriptive Notes' (illustrated, 1880; reissued, 1890 and 1908), he produced a very large number of less considerable books and papers dealing with all sides of Cambridge life. Many of these will be found in the 'Transactions' of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society. Of his many contributions to Cambridge biography, the most important is the 'Life of Professor Sedgwick', written in collaboration with Professor T. McKenny Hughes (2 vols., 1890). 
Closely connected with Cambridge history were the two volumes of Barnwell Priory documents which Clark issued in 1897 and 1907 under the titles respectively of 'The Observances in Use at the Augustinian Priory of S. Giles and S. Andrew' and 'Liber memorandorum ecclesie de Bernwelle'. His excellent monograph on the externals of ancient libraries ('The Care of Books'), which first appeared in 1901 (2nd edn, 1902), developed the essay on college libraries appended to the 'Architectural History', and his lectures as Rede lecturer (1894) and Sandars reader in bibliography (1899). A 'Concise Guide to Cambridge' (1898; 4th edn, 1910), an edition of Loggan's seventeenth-century engravings of the colleges ('Cantabrigia illustrata', 1905), and 'Old Friends at Cambridge and Elsewhere' (1900), an unfinished series of reminiscences of social life at Cambridge, were among the more noteworthy writings of his later years. The variety of his interests is strikingly exemplified in a Festschrift ('Fasciculus Joanni Willis Clark dicatus') presented to him by a number of friends on his seventy-sixth birthday (June 1909). To this volume a bibliography of his published work is appended. 
The death of Clark's wife on 13 December 1908 inflicted a shock from which he never recovered; during considerable portions of the years 1909 and 1910 he was away from Cambridge, or prostrated by illness. In 1909 he resigned the auditorship of Trinity College, which he had held for twenty-seven years; on 1 October 1910 he gave up the post of registrary, and on 10 October he died at his home, Scroope House, in Cambridge. He was buried in the Mill Road cemetery on the 13th. He bequeathed his valuable collections of Cambridge books and pamphlets to the university library. 


@@@@@


doc= 32421


Clark, Sir William Henry (1876-1952), civil servant and diplomatist, was born on 1 January 1876 in Cambridge, the younger of the two sons of John Willis Clark (1833-1910), superintendent of the Museum of Zoology and later registrar of Cambridge University, and his wife, Frances Matilda (1845-1908), daughter of Sir Andrew Buchanan. Clark won a scholarship to Eton College and later to Trinity College, Cambridge, where in 1897 he was awarded a BA, with first-class honours in the classical tripos. The next year he achieved a high position in the civil service entrance examinations and was appointed in 1899 as a clerk in the Board of Trade. There he soon acquired a reputation for incisiveness and efficiency. He was secretary to the special British mission which went to Shanghai to negotiate a commercial treaty with China in 1901-2. During 1902 he was made acting second secretary in the diplomatic service, an even more unusual, if temporary, elevation in those days. In 1903 he was appointed CMG, a rare honour for so young a civil servant. 
For the next two years, 1903-5, Clark was secretary to the royal commission set up to consider the supply of food and raw materials in time of war and in light of the searing lessons of the recent South African War. From 1906 to 1908 he was private secretary to the president of the Board of Trade, Lloyd George, and for a brief time to his successor, Winston Churchill. Then Lloyd George, who had become chancellor of the exchequer, arranged for Clark's transfer to the Treasury to serve again as his private secretary. On 21 December 1909 Clark married Anne Elizabeth (died 1946), daughter of William Thomas Monsell, and widow of William Bennett Pike, barrister. They had one son and two daughters. 
Clark's next appointment, in 1910, as member for commerce and industry on the executive council of the viceroy of India, initially elicited some criticism, ostensibly because of his comparative youth and inexperience of India. Very soon, however, Clark was evidently capable in this job, and his skills and repute were acknowledged by his appointment as CSI in 1911 and KCSI in 1915. 
In 1916 Clark returned to England and to the Board of Trade. He was made head of the commercial intelligence department with a brief to make recommendations to the wartime coalition government about how best to maximize channels of trade, still disrupted by war, and to help British exporters against increasing overseas competition. An outcome was the establishment in 1917 of a new department of overseas trade in Whitehall, of which Clark was made first head and comptroller-general from September 1917, a post he held with great distinction to 1928. This new department soon won wide acceptance among British exporters for the help it was giving them. Clark set up and personally oversaw a rigorous system for its selection of staff for headquarters and for many newly created posts overseas in Commonwealth and foreign countries. Among his many initiatives were the British Industries Fair, which became an annual event; British participation in important international exhibitions; and the occasional organization overseas of specifically British trade fairs. He began the systematic publication of economic and commercial reports about numerous overseas markets. His department was also largely responsible for organizing the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924-5. 
Clark was Britain's first high commissioner to be appointed to Canada, arriving in Ottawa in 1928. As well as his high reputation as an expert on trade he was acceptable to the Foreign Office, the Treasury, and in Whitehall generally, in a way that no Dominions Office appointee would have been. He made himself well known and respected in the small politico-diplomatic world of Ottawa, and with more difficulty, but purposefully, within the much scattered provincial populations across the wide expanse of Canada, when travel was still exclusively by train, bus, and car. He was a principal adviser to the unprecedentedly large high-level British delegation in Ottawa for what turned out to be the rather acrimonious Imperial Economic Conference of 1932. This long meeting launched the British Commonwealth on a complex system of tariff preferences at a time of world economic depression and imperial economic insufficiency. 
One of Clark's first actions in Ottawa was to appoint the Board of Trade's senior trade commissioner in Canada as economic adviser on his staff, thereby enabling himself to keep closely in touch with Anglo-Canadian trade issues while avoiding a re-enactment on Canadian soil of some of Whitehall's inter-departmental battles. This precedent regarding the trade commissioner was soon followed by all other British high commissions. Clark was appointed KCMG in 1930 and stayed in Canada until 1934. 
Clark was then appointed high commissioner in the Union of South Africa and simultaneously to the high commission territories of Basutoland, the Bechuanaland protectorate, and Swaziland, posts which he took up in January 1935. Clark navigated skilfully in the political shoals of J. B. M. Hertzog's prickly assertiveness and of J. C. Smuts's more mellow calculations, at a time when South Africa was experimenting tentatively with white man's coalition governments and when the 'Status of the Union Act' of 1934 had altered substantially the 'South Africa Act' of 1909, its founding statute. Clark had to handle a number of tricky issues involving South Africa and the high commission territories, the mandate over South-West Africa, its gold and other trade, immigration, and its government's suspiciousness about events elsewhere on the continent of Africa and in international affairs generally. It was a tribute to his skills and standing that in 1937 he was promoted to GCMG. Lord Garner, who knew Clark well from 1930 until his death, later wrote that he was the 'outstanding' British high commissioner before the Second World War, and 'showed qualities of firmness and flexibility both in Canada and South Africa' (Garner, 46). 
Clark returned to England in 1939 when he succeeded Sir Halford Mackinder as chairman of the imperial shipping committee. He retired from public service in 1940. In 1941 the council of the Royal Empire Society elected Clark as their chairman. Soon, however, the council released him from his duties, initially for four months, so that he could accede to a request by Lord Swinton to become head of the Lisbon branch of the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation. His prolonged absence from London impelled him in 1942 to write to the council of the Royal Empire Society resigning the chairmanship, though he continued to be actively interested in its proceedings for the rest of his life and was much in demand as a counsellor and speaker. In 1946 he accepted an invitation from the Dominions Office to visit its overseas posts and to make recommendations regarding future arrangements for the conduct of diplomacy in the British Commonwealth. 
Over 6 feet tall, with bright blue eyes and a springy, athletic stride, Clark was affable and gregarious but dignified, with a quietly understated sense of humour. A close friend over many years aptly summed up his personal qualities in the following terms: 'he combined with an unfailing sense of humour and an old-world charm great tact, imperturbability and, in important issues, determination. These qualities and his patent integrity served him well throughout his public life' ('DNB'). Taking his public service as a whole, few, if any, did more to develop the diplomacy of the inter-war Commonwealth in practical terms. No single contemporary, certainly no civil servant, did more than he for his country's foreign trade in the inter-war years. He died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 22 November 1952, and was survived by his son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 32422


Kerr, Archibald John Kerr Clark, Baron Inverchapel (1882-1951), diplomatist, was born on 17 March 1882 at Watson's Bay, near Sydney, Australia, the fifth son of John Kerr Clark (1838-1910), sheep station owner, originally from Crossbasket, Hamilton, Lanarkshire, and his wife, Kate Louisa (1846-1926), daughter of Sir John Robertson, prime minister of New South Wales. Both sides of his family had Scottish roots and Clark Kerr would later acquire land at Inverchapel on Loch Eck, Argyll, where the family had been since the fifteenth century. In March 1911 he took the additional surname of Kerr. In 1889 his parents moved to England, though his father later returned to Australia. He was educated at Bath College, and in France, Germany, and Italy where he studied languages. In March 1906 he passed the examination for the diplomatic service and was posted to Berlin, where he remained from October 1906 to April 1910. He was promoted third secretary in March 1908. He was transferred in April 1910 to Buenos Aires, and in March 1911 to Washington, where he served as British secretary of the British and American claims arbitration tribunal. He was posted to Rome in June 1913, being promoted second secretary in February 1914, and then to Tehran in December 1914, where he served as secretary in charge of commercial matters. He returned to the Foreign Office in November 1916. After an older brother was killed in the First World War he volunteered for service and, despite opposition from the Foreign Office, was finally allowed to enlist as a private in the Scots Guards, though he served only from June to November 1918 before being returned to the Foreign Office at the end of hostilities. In September 1919 he was promoted first secretary and posted to Tangier. 
In February 1922 Clark Kerr was posted to Cairo, serving as deputy to Lord Allenby, the high commissioner. He was promoted acting counsellor in November 1923. He favoured support for Egyptian aspirations to end the British protectorate, which he considered inevitable, as the best way of protecting British interests in the future. In November 1924, when Egyptian nationalists shot the sirdar, Sir Lee Stack, it was Clark Kerr who found him, slumped in his car, which had managed to reach the residency. The resultant crisis between Britain and Egypt almost proved fatal for Clark Kerr's career. Allenby acted robustly, but not with the full concurrence of London, which decided to send out a senior diplomat to join Allenby to brief him more fully on London's views. This new official, Nevile Henderson, would be senior to Clark Kerr, and Allenby, taking umbrage at what he interpreted as an attempt to undermine his authority, proffered his resignation. The Foreign Office felt that Clark Kerr bore some responsibility for the high commissioner's hasty actions and, since he had previously fallen foul of the new permanent under-secretary, Sir William Tyrrell, it was not long before an attempt was made to transfer him to Tokyo. 
Clark Kerr, frustrated by the Foreign Office's attitude, considered leaving the service, but supporters in London, most surprisingly Winston Churchill, came to his aid. Churchill's assistance was ironical, since Clark Kerr had previously detested his politics. Churchill, however, approved of Clerk Kerr for maintaining an effective British policy in Egypt, and this goodwill would later be critical in his career. Thus in late 1925 Clark Kerr found himself not only travelling to the Central American republics rather than Tokyo, but with the rank of minister, for which he was still relatively young. The final leg of his journey to Guatemala, where he took up his post in December, was made on a Fyffes banana boat. His time in the region was otherwise uneventful. In February 1928 he was transferred to Chile and in April 1931 he was moved again, this time to be minister at Stockholm. In this as in previous legations he showed diplomatic competence, though there was still a feeling that a shadow hung over him from his time in Egypt which was preventing his appointment to major posts. In January 1935, however, he was appointed KCMG, and in March 1935 he was appointed ambassador to Iraq, one of the least prestigious of the embassy grade posts, but still placing him in the highest rank of the service. The situation in Baghdad was very fluid and Clark Kerr proved adept at dealing with the local complexities. This helped lead to his appointment, after only three years, as ambassador to war-torn China. 
It was with his appointment to China, in February 1938, that Clark Kerr embarked upon the greatest phase of his career, serving after Peking (Beijing) as ambassador in Moscow and then in Washington. An opponent of appeasement, he made every effort to pursue policies which would deter Japanese aggression. These views brought him into conflict with those seeking to conciliate Japan, in particular the British ambassador to Tokyo, Sir Robert Craigie. Clark Kerr's views on the rivalry between the Chinese nationalists and the communists were more ambivalent. It appears that in private conversation he predicted the inevitable victory of the forces of Mao Zedong, but his dispatches to London do not convey this view. The truth probably lies in his official dispatches, while his comments in conversation may well have been a product of his diplomatic skill at assessing others' views. 
Clark Kerr's success in China was rewarded in January 1942 with promotion to GCMG and in February 1942 with a move to Moscow. His tasks included maintaining serviceable Anglo-Soviet relations, which were being placed under stress by Stalin's demands for a second front. He played a key role in the 1943 Moscow meeting of the foreign ministers of the 'big three' allied powers, which was recognized by his appointment as a privy councillor in January 1944. His three and a half years at Moscow were notable for the skill with which he succeeded in smoothing over the rough places in the wartime relationship between Britain and the USSR. His success was recognized with elevation to the peerage, in April 1946, as Baron Inverchapel of Loch Eck, and appointment, in May 1946, to the post with which he had long wished to cap his career, the Washington embassy. Nevertheless, in many ways Washington was an anticlimax. He thrived best in daunting situations, but in the post-war climate of Washington he faced mostly economic issues, a sphere of diplomatic activity that bored him. He did, however, play a major role in persuading the United States government of the stresses under which Britain was operating, which in turn led to the Truman doctrine and the Marshall plan. 
Inverchapel retired from the foreign service in March 1948, but was almost immediately appointed to the new committee on European unity (1948-9). He always affected support for the Labour Party and socialist aspirations. While capable of being a stickler for diplomatic formalities, he insisted that everyone call him Archie. He was eccentric, refusing to write with anything other than goose quill pens. One of the most colourful representatives of an age of notable diplomatists, he was a genuine individual. 
Clark Kerr's personal life was complex. He had always enjoyed a close relationship with his mother, who accompanied him to Central America, and he was devastated when she died a few months later. Three years afterwards, while serving in Chile, he married, on 24 April 1929, a Chilean twenty-nine years his junior, Maria Teresa (Tita) Diaz Salas (died 1987), daughter of Don Javier Diaz Lira, of Santiago. It proved a volatile marriage, with Tita leaving him during the difficult years of his embassy to China. Divorced in 1945, they remarried in 1947, when he held the more salubrious Washington embassy. They had no children. There can be no doubt that Clark Kerr was devoted to his young wife, and that her desertion caused him immense pain, and her subsequent return great joy. He also enjoyed close and emotionally fulfilling relationships with some of his colleagues, among them Harold Nicolson, whom he affectionately dubbed Clarice, and Gerald Villiers. He died at Greenock on 5 July 1951 and was buried at Inverchapel on the 9th. 


@@@@@


doc= 32423


Clarke, Sir Andrew (1824-1902), military engineer and colonial official, was born on 27 July 1824 at Southsea, Hampshire, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Andrew Clarke KH (1793-1847), governor of Western Australia (1846-7), the descendant of a Scottish family who had settled in Ireland in the seventeenth century, and his wife, Frances, the daughter of Philip Lardner of Devonshire and the widow of the Revd Edward Jackson, a former chaplain with the East India Company. While his father was away on military duty abroad, Clarke was brought up by his grandfather and uncles at Belmont, near Lifford, co. Donegal, Ireland, but he later attended the King's School at Canterbury and Portora School, Enniskillen, before entering the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in 1840. After graduating in 1844 he was commissioned second lieutenant on 18 June, and following a year of professional instruction at Chatham he was sent to Fermoy, co. Cork, to assist in the public works programme for famine relief. In 1846 he was nominated to serve on the Oregon boundary commission, but his father, then governor of Western Australia, persuaded him to go to Australia instead. He was promoted lieutenant on 1 April 1846, and sailed for Van Diemen's Land on 13 October that year in command of a detachment of sappers and miners with the new governor and a fellow engineer, Sir William Thomas Denison. They reached Hobart Town on 26 January 1847. 
Clarke was employed superintending convict labour on public works and planning wharves for the capital, but in September, when Governor Sir George Grey of New Zealand asked for engineer officers for road building, Clarke was transferred there, where, in addition to his engineering work, he successfully conducted a peace mission to the Maori at the Bay of Islands. In 1849 he returned to Hobart as private secretary to Denison, and in 1851 was appointed a member of the legislative council and head of the mounted police. During the struggle over transportation between 1849 and 1852 he was helpful to the governor, with whom he occasionally went hunting and shooting, but in March 1853 he was glad to accept an invitation to the more responsible position of surveyor-general in Victoria with a seat in the legislative council and a salary of $1200 a year. After arriving in Melbourne in May, he proceeded to reorganize his department and managed to persuade his reluctant colleagues to authorize the first electric telegraph line in the colony -- to the port at Williamstown. He travelled widely throughout the colony, planning routes for roads and possible railways; he extended the surveys and organized the sale of more than half a million acres, especially near the goldfields, so that the cultivated area doubled in twelve months. He encouraged the formation of rural roads boards after the central roads board was established in 1853, but more important for local government was the 'Municipal Corporations Act', which he drafted and which was passed in December 1854. This set up municipal districts in which all householders had a vote -- thus providing, as he said, 'the first instalment of self-government in the colony' ('The Argus', 3 Nov 1854), though legislative council amendments confined them to the suburbs and small townships. The same year Clarke again displayed his liberalism when he drafted the bill for the colony's new democratic constitution, which came into force in 1856 after passing the imperial parliament. 
This ended Clarke's existing appointment, but the provision of a civil pension of $800 was a valuable addition to his army pay and allowed him to spend freely in winning the seat of South Melbourne as a Liberal at the 1856 elections. He joined the first cabinet as surveyor-general, and while in office he won assent to proposals for the government-controlled (though privately contracted) construction of a railway line to the Murray River. In March 1857 the ministry was defeated, but as a private member Clarke was able to support the enactment of full manhood suffrage for elections to the legislative assembly. 
In March of the following year, after he had failed to form another ministry himself, Clarke was appointed permanent head of the lands and survey department, but by this time he was increasingly anxious to return to England. He had wanted to rejoin his regiment when the Crimean War broke out in 1854, he had been promoted first captain on 19 March 1857, and he hoped he might be appointed the first governor of Queensland when it became a separate colony. So in 1858 he planned to leave Victoria -- where he had become known as 'Spicy Andrew' -- and after a farewell visit to Denison in Sydney and a banquet given by the freemasons, of which he was grand master, he sailed in August of that year. 
Although 'The Argus' acidly remarked that it was 'not apprehended that the colony will suffer any material loss or inconvenience' (11 Aug 1858), Clarke's career had not been without distinction. In Melbourne in 1853 he had initiated the Museum of Natural History, and for two years had controlled its expenditure on exhibits. In 1854 he had designed the building for Melbourne's first industrial exhibition. He held office in both the Philosophical Society of Victoria and the Victorian Institute for the Advancement of Science, and when they amalgamated to form the Philosophical Institute (later the Royal Society) of Victoria he was elected its first president, in July 1855. 
In England in January 1859 Clarke was appointed to command the Royal Engineers at Colchester. While there he was commissioned to buy arms for Victoria and was able to prevent the British government fobbing off obsolete weapons on the colony. In 1862 he was transferred to Birmingham, where he helped to form a Colonial Emigration Society. Having been promoted major, in 1863 he was sent to the Gold Coast, where war had broken out. While there, despite suffering from fever himself, he filled various offices made vacant by sickness or death and even acted temporarily as chief justice; more importantly, he wrote a report which proved useful to Sir Garnet Wolseley's expedition in 1873. Back in London in 1864, he served temporarily as agent-general for Victoria before being appointed director of engineering works at the Admiralty. This appointment was renewed in 1869, by which time he had married, at St George's, Hanover Square, on 17 September 1867, Mary Margaret, the daughter of Charles William MacKillop of the Indian Civil Service. In his Admiralty post, to meet the needs of the new ironclads and much larger ships, he planned a floating dock for Bermuda, which was launched at Woolwich in September 1868, new docks at Cork and Malta, which were completed in February 1871, and large extensions to the docks at Chatham and Portsmouth, completed that August. In 1870, with the naval hydrographer, he reported on the improvements necessary to allow the larger ironclads to pass through the Suez Canal; he also recommended the purchase of the canal by an English company, but the government rejected this. Meanwhile he had been promoted lieutenant-colonel on 6 July 1867. He was made full colonel on 6 July 1872, and created a CB in 1869 and KCMG in April 1873. 
Later in 1873 Clarke left the Admiralty to become governor of the Straits Settlements, which had been made a separate colony in 1867. He arrived at Singapore on 4 November 1873, and soon he succeeded in reducing the rampant piracy and imposing some control over the local Chinese secret societies. He was also successful in ensuring that the native sultans of Perak and Selangor were persuaded to accept British 'advisers', as was the practice in India, while at the same time cultivating the friendship of the neighbouring maharaja of Johore. He hoped to increase British influence in Siam and made two visits to the king, but apathy in London allowed the French to strengthen their position there. However, overall Clarke helped to maintain the peace and stability of the peninsula and pave the way for its future prosperity. 
In 1875 Clarke moved again, to the council of the viceroy of India (Lord Northbrook), as head of the public works department. He reached Calcutta on 4 June, and was soon hoping to promote railway building and irrigation works. Unfortunately he was able to do little in that direction owing to the financial stringency caused by the famine of 1876-8 and by the Anglo-Afghan wars conducted by Lord Lytton, the new viceroy. He failed to persuade the latter even of the need to build new frontier railways. He was appointed CIE in January 1877 and in February 1880 went home on leave, but his ship was wrecked off Otranto. Although Clarke returned to India with the new Liberal viceroy (Lord Ripon), his term of office expired almost immediately, and he reached England on his retirement on 23 July 1880. 
Clarke then served as commandant of the School of Military Engineering at Chatham, but in June 1882 was appointed inspector-general of fortifications, with the temporary rank of major-general. In this post he strengthened the defences of Colombo and Singapore and successfully promoted a new type of torpedo used for coastal defence invented in Melbourne in 1874 by Louis Brennan. He also interested himself in dirigible balloons and submarines, though without success. In 1883 he organized a railway corps for the pending campaign in Egypt and in 1884 he served as a British representative on the international committee on the Suez Canal. The same year he urged the building of a railway from Suakin to Berber in the eastern Sudan, and pressed in vain for the use of this route for the relief of General Gordon in Khartoum. On 8 June 1885 Clarke was made a GCMG; the following year he retired, in accordance with army regulations on age, and was given the honorary rank of lieutenant-general. 
At the 1886 election following the defeat of Gladstone's proposals for Irish home rule, Clarke stood, without success, as a Liberal candidate for Chatham, a defeat repeated in 1892. But he continued a busy man. In 1886 he again acted temporarily as agent-general of Victoria at the time of the dispute with France over her wish to annex the New Hebrides. He acted without pay in connection with the stability of the dam of the Vyrnwy waterworks, for which he received the freedom of the city of Liverpool. He became a director of Palmers shipbuilding company at Jarrow, of the Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society, of the Maxim Nondenfelt Gun Company, and of the British North Borneo Company -- which named the Clarke province after him. He was chairman of the Delhi-Umballa Railway Company. He was agent-general of Victoria again from 1891 to 1894 and from 1897 until his death, and was of great service to the colony in London during the banking and financial crisis which climaxed in 1893. In 1899 he was one of the Australian representatives at the International Commercial Congress in Philadelphia and on the Pacific Telegraph Cable Company board, and was interested in an 'all-red' line of telegraph to connect scattered parts of the British empire without entering foreign territory. On 8 January 1902 he was appointed colonel commandant of the corps of Royal Engineers, but he died eleven weeks later, at his home, 31 Portland Place, London, on 29 March. He was buried on 3 April in the Locksbrook cemetery at Bath, alongside his wife, who had predeceased him on 8 November 1895; he was survived by their only child, Elinor Mary de Winton, who had married the naval officer Murray Frazer Sueter. 
Bulky and ruggedly handsome, Clarke was tactful, genial, energetic, hasty but kind, and universally popular. Not deeply religious, he was a humanitarian scientist who gave distinguished service in all his varied appointments. He was one of the empire's most deserving public servants, and his work at Singapore placed him in the front rank of its colonial governors. 


@@@@@


doc= 32424


Clarke, Sir Caspar Purdon (1846-1911), museum director and architect, was born at Richmond, co. Dublin, on 21 December 1846, the second son of Edward Marmaduke Clarke, of an old Somerset family, who married Mary Agnes, daughter of James Close of Armagh. Clarke was educated at Gaultier's School, Sydenham, Kent, and at Beaucourt's School in Boulogne, France. In 1862 he entered the National Art Training Schools at South Kensington, where he studied architecture. In 1865 he entered the office of works, and distinguished himself in work for the Houses of Parliament. The following year he married on 20 November Frances Susannah, daughter of Charles Collins, with whom he had eight children. In 1867 Clarke was transferred to the works department of the South Kensington Museum. In 1869 he superintended the reproduction of mosaics in Venice, Florence, and Rome, and in 1872 he supervised the decorative work at St Mark's Church, Alexandria. In 1874 he was appointed HM superintendent of works for the consular buildings in Tehran, where he spent the following two years, completing during this time the Roman Catholic church of St Mary. 
On his return to London in 1876, Clarke was sent on a purchasing tour for the South Kensington Museum through Turkey, Syria, and Greece. A similar mission took him in 1879 to Spain, Italy, and Germany. He acted as architect of the Indian section and commercial agent to the Indian government at the Paris Exhibition, 1878. He continued to be active as an architect and undertook several commissions in the Indian style. These included Lord Brassey's Indian museum in Park Lane in 1887 and the Indian palace at the 1889 Paris Exhibition. His most renowned architectural commission -- in conjunction with William Young -- is the Indian hall at Elvedon, Suffolk, commissioned in 1899 by Edward Cecil Guinness, first earl of Iveagh (1847-1927). Clarke later also advised Iveagh on the furniture and tapestries for Elvedon. In 1880 he arranged the Indian collections at South Kensington, and after spending two years as special commissioner in India, became keeper of the India Museum at South Kensington in 1883. In that capacity he displayed splendid gifts as an organizer. His acquisitions included the Hamzanama folios, early Mughal illustrations of the epic adventures of Hamza by northern Indian and Iranian artists 'c'.1562-77. He also bought contemporary crafts, architectural woodwork, and drawings. He was consequently appointed keeper of the art collections at the South Kensington Museum in 1892, assistant director in 1893, and director in 1896. He also filled the posts of royal commissioner at the Paris Exhibition in 1900, and at St Louis in 1904. In 1905 he resigned his directorship of the South Kensington Museum (renamed in 1899 the Victoria and Albert Museum) and accepted the post of director of the Metropolitan Museum, New York, from which he retired on a year's leave of absence on account of ill health in 1909, when he returned to Britain. He resigned his directorship in 1910, but remained European correspondent of the museum. He died at his home, 17 Penywern Road, Earls Court, London, on 29 March 1911, and was buried at Kensal Green. He was survived by his wife. 
Clarke's strenuous official duties did not prevent him from notable work in other directions. He organized and conducted evening art classes for artisans in Soho, Lambeth, and Clerkenwell in 1870; and among the other buildings which he designed and built were Cotherstone church, Durham (1876), Alexandra House, Kensington (1886, for students at the Royal College of Music), and the National School of Cookery, South Kensington (1887). He visited America to study the housing of female students at Boston in 1884, edited a work on oriental carpets for the Austrian government in 1892, and besides lecturing, contributed numerous papers on architecture, Eastern arts and crafts, and arms and armour to the 'Journal of the Society of Arts', the 'Journal of Indian Art', the 'Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects', and other publications. In 1910 he published a catalogue of the 'Arms and Armour at Sandringham' which had been given to Edward VII on his visit to India as prince of Wales in 1875-6. He was made chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1878, in which year he also received silver and bronze medals at the Paris Exhibition, which were followed by a gold medal in 1889. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 4 May 1893. He was created companion of the Indian Empire in 1883, and knighted in 1902. He was also given the commander's cross of the order of the crown of Germany. Of Clarke's three sons and five daughters, the eldest son, C. Stanley Clarke, became assistant keeper of the Indian section of the Victoria and Albert Museum, which largely owes its present status to the joint contribution of father and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 32425


Clarke, Charles Baron (1832-1906), botanist, was born on 17 June 1832 at Andover, Hampshire, the eldest son of Turner Poulter Clarke JP, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Parker and Elizabeth Ward. Botany ran in the family: his father's mother, Elizabeth Baron, had botanical interests and her brother, Charles, founded the Agricultural Society of Saffron Walden and was an enthusiastic gardener. Clarke was a pupil at Mr Tomlinson's Preparatory School in Salisbury (1840-46), and at King's College School, London (1846-52). He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1852. At the university he became the close friend of Henry Fawcett, of Leslie Stephen, and of John Rigby. This coterie was noted for their unconventional dress and interest in current politics. After graduating BA in 1856 he was elected fellow of Queens' College in 1857, and from 1858 to 1865 was lecturer in mathematics there. He proceeded MA in 1859 and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1860 but never practised. 
Clarke was throughout his life a tireless walker, and spent most of his Easter vacations in the Lake District. On his last visit in 1865 he and Leslie Stephen climbed together the Pillar Rock, Wastdale. In Switzerland, too, he combined alpine climbing with plant collecting. In 1862 he collected plants in Madeira. Meanwhile he actively helped Fawcett in his candidature for parliament, at Cambridge in 1863 and at Brighton in 1864, and aided him in his studies in political economy. 
In 1865 Clarke entered the uncovenanted civil service of Bengal and was taken on the establishment of the Bengal educational department. He joined the staff of the presidency college at Calcutta the following year and was subsequently inspector of schools in eastern Bengal, with his headquarters at Dacca. He had already collected plants of his native town, and he published at Calcutta in 1866, in a threepenny pamphlet, 'A List of the Flowering Plants... of Andover'. He continued to collect in India and within two and a half years in eastern Bengal he got together 7000 specimens, which were lost in the wreck of a boat in 1868. The Clarke collections, later placed at Kew, date from after May 1868. His knowledge of the Indian country soon equalled that of the best contemporary specialists, and was considered second only to that of William Griffith. To all his specimens he attached full field notes made on the spot. He generally neglected trees, and concentrated his efforts for several years together upon single natural orders, paying particular attention to weeds growing in cultivated fields. 
From 1869 to 1871, in the absence of Thomas Anderson (1832-1870), who was invalided home, Clarke acted as superintendent of the Calcutta Botanical Gardens and of cinchona cultivation in Sikkim. Returning to his work as an inspector of schools in 1871, he studied the eastern Sundarbans in 1872, and in the following year he visited Chittagong. Transferred to Calcutta in 1874, he published there his second work, 'Commelynaceae et Cyrtandraceae Bengalenses', describing two families of tropical plants, and reprinted Roxburgh's 'Flora Indica' of 1832 at his own expense, believing it to be more useful to the amateur botanist than J. D. Hooker's multi-volume work. In 1876 he issued a monograph on the Compositae, to which, along with the Gentianaceae, his interest was now directed. In 1875 he was transferred to Darjeeling, and explored the Nepal frontier and British Bhutan. Next year, during a three months' furlough, he visited Kashmir, ascending 17,000 feet in the Karakoram range. 
In 1877 Clarke came home on two years' leave and presented his herbarium, some 25,000 specimens, representing 5000 species, to the Kew herbarium. He settled down to voluntary botanical work for Sir Joseph Hooker's 'Flora of British India', and was placed on special duty at Kew by the government of India on the expiration of his leave in 1879. Between March 1879 and April 1883 he described more than fifty plant families for the second, third, and fourth volumes of Hooker's work. He was the most prolific of all Hooker's collaborators. 
After his return to India in 1883 Clarke was temporarily appointed director of public instruction in Bengal in 1884, and went the next year as inspector to Shillong in Assam, when he studied the flora of the Khasi, Naga, and Manipur hills. He had always taken every opportunity to botanize during his official tours of duty. 
Clarke retired from India in June 1887 and moved to Kew, where he lived with his brother, Poulter Clarke. He spent the next nineteen years working as a volunteer in the Kew herbarium. He set out to write a monograph on the Cyperaceae, a plant family covering sedges and reeds which had interested him for more than a decade, but did not live to complete it. However, much of the material that he prepared was published in his lifetime in article form, and more appeared posthumously, in particular his 'New Genera and Species of Cyperaceae' (1908), which was extracted from his enormous accumulation of notes. 
Clarke was a fellow of the Linnean Society, on whose council he served almost continuously for sixteen years from 1880, as president from 1884 to 1896. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1882, serving on the council from 1888 to 1890. In 1897 he joined the Geologists' Association, and took frequent part in its excursions. Towards the end of his life he became an enthusiast for cycling, riding long distances by day only, without lamp, brake, or bell. (Indeed some contemporaries attributed his final illness to excessive cycling.) He never married. His impressive versatility found expression in writings on a wide variety of non-botanical topics, including political economy, anthropology, English history, and musical theory. Moreover, in addition to his work on Indian plants, he also contributed material relating to the flora of South Africa, of tropical Africa, and of the Malayan peninsula. The genus 'Clarkella', which is found in the Himalayas, was named after Clarke in 1880 by Sir Joseph Hooker. He died at his home, 13 Kew Gardens Road, London, on 25 August 1906, and was buried at Andover on 30 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 32426


Clarke, Sir Edward George (1841-1931), lawyer and politician, was the eldest son and third of the six children of Job Grey Clarke and his wife, Frances, daughter of Henry George, of Bath. His father, who came from Axbridge in Somerset, kept a small silversmith's shop in King William Street in the City of London, in the rooms over which he lived with his family, and there Clarke was born on 15 February 1841. At the age of ten he was sent for two years as a boarder to College House, Edmonton, where his health, previously delicate, markedly improved. In December 1854 he was taken from the City Commercial School in Lombard Street, where he had spent another two years, to assist his father in the shop, which he did until nearly the end of 1858. In February 1859 he took up a clerkship in the recently established India Office. He won the clerkship by examination. There were 400 candidates and Clarke was placed seventh on the list, a very remarkable achievement considering the character of his education. But he had seized his chances: when serving in the shop he spent any spare time in reading and, after the shop was closed, he attended evening classes regularly, becoming, in 1858, the first associate in arts of the University of Oxford. Moreover he was gifted with a very retentive memory and his industry never flagged. 
Clarke found that the life of a clerk in a government office was as little to his liking as that of a shop assistant. In 1860 he happened to hear the aged Lord Lyndhurst make one of his last speeches in the House of Lords and was fired with ambition to be called to the bar and to make such a career for himself. Accordingly, when, later that year, in the interests of reducing the clerical staff at the India Office, the government offered compensation to clerks who were willing to resign, Clarke sent in his resignation and received $253 by way of compensation. It was an act of great courage and self-confidence -- qualities which Clarke displayed throughout his life -- to give up an assured competence for the hazards of a career at the bar, more especially since several years would necessarily elapse before he could be called and begin to earn an income at that profession. During those years he supported himself by reporting law cases and parliamentary debates and by writing literary reviews; but in addition to those sources of income he obtained, in 1861, one of the Tancred studentships at Lincoln's Inn which provided him with an income of $95 for six years. In June 1861 he was admitted as a student of Lincoln's Inn; in November 1864 he was called to the bar; and in 1880 he took silk. He became a bencher of his inn in 1892 and was treasurer in 1906. From the time when he became a QC he was beyond all question one of the most eminent, if not the most eminent, of the leaders of the common-law bar. He was an admirable forensic orator in jury cases, and for many years he was engaged on one side or the other in most of the important cases on the common-law side of the High Court. 
From the time when he quitted the India Office, Clarke took an active interest in politics. He was a strong Conservative and an enthusiastic admirer of Lord Beaconsfield. He was one of the first members of the National Union of Conservative Associations, representing York, in 1867. In February 1880 he stood as the Conservative candidate at a by-election for the borough of Southwark and won a notable victory over his Liberal opponent. He was defeated at the general election which took place in April of that year; but he was elected at a by-election for Plymouth in July, and for the next twenty years he represented that constituency in the House of Commons. 
While making a name for himself at the bar Clarke worked hard for the Conservative cause both in parliament and in the country and when, in the summer of 1885, Lord Salisbury formed his first administration, Clarke had reasonable grounds for thinking that he might be appointed one of the law officers. His claims were, however, disregarded. Richard Webster, subsequently Viscount Alverstone and lord chief justice of England, who was not then and had never been a member of parliament, was appointed attorney-general. On hearing a rumour that Webster would be thus appointed Clarke actually wrote to Salisbury that it would be a mistake to make such an appointment and at the same time with characteristic frankness he sent a copy of the letter to Webster himself. In the following year, when Salisbury, after the defeat of Gladstone's first 'Home Rule Bill', was again called upon to form a government, Clarke's claims were recognized and he was appointed solicitor-general (and knighted), an office which he continued to hold until 1892 when the government resigned and Gladstone formed his last administration. Although solicitor-general, he was Captain W. H. O'Shea's counsel during the divorce proceedings in 1890 which brought down Parnell. 
The general election of 1895 gave the Unionist Party a clear majority over the combined forces of the Liberals and the Irish nationalists and Lord Salisbury became prime minister for the third time. He invited Clarke to resume the office of solicitor-general subject, however, to the condition, which Webster as attorney-general had accepted, that he would not take any private practice so long as he held the office. Clarke refused the office on that condition. Two years later Salisbury offered Clarke the important judicial office of master of the rolls, but Clarke declined that office also, because it would have precluded him from taking any part in politics. During the parliament which sat from 1895 to 1900 Clarke, although sitting as a private member on the government side of the house, seems to have developed a cross-bench mind. He criticized the conduct of the Foreign Office in the matter of the Venezuelan boundary dispute; he crossed swords with the chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Michael Hicks Beach, on the subject of Irish taxation; and he denounced the conduct of the colonial secretary, Joseph Chamberlain, with regard to the Boer republics. He even went so far as to suggest that Salisbury should himself take over from Chamberlain the management of South African affairs. His speeches on these subjects -- for Clarke considered it his duty to express his opinions publicly -- were very displeasing to many of his supporters in Plymouth. He was asked in 1900 to resign his seat, and did so. 
At the general election of 1906 Clarke was elected as the senior member for the City of London; but in May he resigned his seat, ostensibly on the ground that his health was no longer good enough for both his work at the bar and his parliamentary duties. Thus at the age of sixty-five he abandoned the political ambition which he had formed when he was a clerk at the India Office. He continued in practice at the bar until 1914, retiring nearly fifty years after the date of his call. The position which he had attained in the profession is marked by the fact that in 1908 he was sworn of the privy council, and that on his retirement the bench and bar gave him a dinner in Lincoln's Inn hall, at which the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, presided. When W. F. Monypenny died, Clarke applied to finish the official life of Disraeli; being refused, he published his adulatory 'Benjamin Disraeli' (1926). 
Clarke was twice married: first, in 1866, to Ann (died 1881), eldest daughter of George Mitchell, builder, of Camberwell; second, in 1882, to Kathleen Mathilda (died 1944), daughter of Augustus William Bryant. With his first wife he had one son and three daughters, the eldest of whom died in infancy and the second as a child; with his second wife he had two sons, the younger of whom died at birth. The surviving son of this marriage was the intelligence officer and code-breaker William Francis Clarke (1883-1961). Clarke was a staunch supporter of the Church of England, and in 1894 had built at his sole expense a church beside the river at Staines, dedicated in honour of St Peter, and on his retirement from the bar he lived at a house called Peterhouse which he had built adjacent to the church. There he died on 26 April 1931 in his ninety-first year; his ashes were buried in St Peter's Church. On 27 April there appeared in 'The Times' a long obituary notice which he had himself written and sent to the newspaper eighteen years before with a covering letter expressing the remarkable opinion that an obituary notice of a man who has reached old age should be written by himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 32427


Clarke, Sir Fred (1880-1952), educationist, was born on 2 August 1880 at High Coggs, near Witney, Oxfordshire, the third son of the nine children of William Clarke and Annie Clarke ('nee' Figg), a dressmaker. William Clarke worked in a variety of occupations connected with farming, and he also promoted social and educational reforms, for example as the founder of the Weston-on-the-Green Friendly Society in 1875. Fred Clarke was educated at St Ebbe's Boys' School, an Anglican elementary school in Oxford, where he served as a pupil teacher from 1894 to 1898 and as an uncertificated teacher in 1899. Between 1894 and 1899 he also attended classes at the Oxford Central Municipal Technical School. In 1899, having secured a first class in the queen's scholarship examination, he entered the Oxford University Day Training College as a non-collegiate student. In 1903 he graduated with a first-class honours degree in history and a first-class teacher's certificate. 
After a few weeks of teaching in a higher grade school in north London, in September 1903 Clarke was appointed senior master of method at the York Diocesan Training College. In March 1906 he became professor of education at Hartley University College, Southampton, and in the following year, on 25 August 1907, he married Edith Annie Gillams, a former fellow student at the municipal technical school. He threw himself into the work at Southampton, both within the college and outside. He wrote 'A School History of Hampshire' (1909) and collaborated with F. J. C. Hearnshaw in editing and writing the two-volume 'Short History of Southampton' (1910). 
Hartley College's financial and administrative problems, however, were considerable, and in March 1911 Clarke arrived in Cape Town to take up the post of foundation professor of education at the South African College. (In 1918 this became the University of Cape Town with Clarke as dean of the faculty of education.) He began with nine students; by 1929 there were nearly 200. Clarke learned Afrikaans and soon became a national figure in South Africa. His inaugural lecture, in 1911, was entitled 'National ideas in education', and for the next eighteen years he campaigned, albeit unsuccessfully, for a national educational policy. He deplored the neglect of educational provision for the black majority population. He also argued forcibly against a system which placed formal schooling under provincial control while vocational (in common with higher) education was reserved to the union. Clarke had a lifelong commitment to the promotion of school curricula and general culture which valued both liberal and vocational education. He was president of the Cape Teachers' Association in 1915 and of the South African Teachers' Association in 1920. He also played a leading role in the establishment of juvenile affairs boards, chairing the national conference of 1915 and the national printing apprenticeship committee established under the 'Apprenticeship Act' of 1922. His advocacy of secondary education for all predated the publication of R. H. Tawney's volume of 1922, and was conceived of in a more generous spirit. Clarke's 'Foundations of History-Teaching' was published in 1929. 
One of the key works from Clarke's South African period was a collection entitled 'Essays in the Politics of Education' (1923). In the first essay, entitled 'The need for a philosophy', Clarke criticized excessive individualism as expressed in competitive economics and 'laissez-faire', and in educational terms in Percy Nunn's 'Education: its Data and First Principles' (1920). In contrast, Clarke argued for synthesis and unity, aligning himself with such educationists as Dewey and Kerschensteiner in their belief that school and industry needed to be brought together into one educative system. For Clarke, however, the purpose of education was unequivocally expressed in Christian terms. It was: 'To know God and to enjoy him for ever' ('Essays in the Politics of Education', 2). 
Clarke maintained contacts with England and spent several vacations there. His long association with the Round Table movement, which sought to employ cultural, educational, and other ties to promote the unity of the British empire, led to a close friendship with John Dove. His international activities included leadership of the South African delegations to the Geneva international labour conference in 1925, and to the London Imperial Education Conference of 1927. In 1929 he was appointed one of the three members of the commission on education in Southern Rhodesia. 
By 1929, however, Clarke had become increasingly disillusioned by the policies of the premier, J. B. M. Hertzog, and the Nationalist Party. Attempts to secure a post in England were unsuccessful, and he accepted the chair of education at McGill University in Montreal. In 1930 he visited New York and spent time with staff and friends from the Carnegie Corporation and Teachers' College. In the following year, in a speech to the centenary meeting of the British Association, he outlined his vision of a central institute for the study of education throughout the British empire. In 1932 the London Day Training College became the University of London Institute of Education, and the Carnegie Corporation made a grant of $67,500 to establish an oversea division within the institute and to cover its costs for three years. In 1935 Clarke took up the new post of 'adviser to oversea students' at the institute and made a grand tour of western Canada, Australia, and New Zealand to prepare himself for his duties. In the following year, while retaining his role as adviser, he succeeded Nunn as director of the institute and assumed the title of professor of education within the university. 
As director of the institute, Clarke wanted to develop its intellectual base by the establishment not only of a chair in comparative education but also of others in the history, philosophy, and sociology of education. His unremitting activity led to a breakdown in health in October 1937, precipitated in part by the accidental death of his friend Sir Edwin Deller while inspecting the new University of London building. Clarke returned to his duties towards the end of 1938, by which time the institute had moved into new premises in the north wing of the Senate House. In 1939 the institute was evacuated to Nottingham, where he was at the hub of a community much reduced in size by the absence on war service of many staff and students, though in 1943 it returned to temporary premises in Portman Square, London. 
The war years, and their immediate aftermath, indeed, marked the height of Clarke's fame and influence. His influential 'Education and Social Change' (1940) reiterated many of his long-cherished ideals and developed Karl Mannheim's notion of 'planning for freedom' with specific reference to education. Clarke was a central figure in the Moot, a group of distinguished Christian figures, lay and clerical, who met for residential weekend discussions from 1938, and in the All Souls Group, founded in 1941 specifically to consider the shape of post-war education. He served on the McNair committee on the supply, recruitment, and training of teachers and youth leaders which reported in 1944, and strongly supported scheme A, which proposed the establishment of university schools of education. Following the 'Education Act' of 1944, he was appointed the first chairman of the Central Advisory Council for Education (England). His 1943 pamphlet, 'The Study of Education in England', called attention to the need for a body analogous to the Medical Research Council to undertake research in education. He chaired the interim committee of the National Foundation for Educational Research, 1943-7, its executive committee, 1947-9, and served as vice-president, 1949-52. He also played a full role in Colonial Office and British Council activities, serving on the advisory committee on education in the colonies from 1937, and on the Colonial Universities Commission from 1943. He was knighted in 1943. 
In 1945 Clarke retired from the directorship of the Institute of Education and took up a new post as adviser on educational developments and research to the National Union of Teachers. In 1948 he returned to the post of adviser to oversea students at the institute; his final book, 'Freedom in the Educative Society', with its remarkable coda on original sin, was published in the same year. He collapsed and died at his home, 33 Tavistock Square, London, on 6 January 1952, having attended morning communion at St Pancras Church earlier in the day. A memorial service was held at Christ Church, Woburn Square, London, and he was cremated at Golders Green crematorium. 
Clarke was awarded honorary degrees by Columbia and Durham universities, but he was essentially a modest person, with a frank and open manner, an immense knowledge about education, sincere Christian principles, and a deep attachment to his wife and five daughters. He was always writing, and the bibliography of his works, which were mainly in article or review form, occupies some twenty-five pages in Frank Mitchell's biography of 1967. But above all, he was a teacher. Mitchell concludes 'that he was a terrific worker, a devoted husband and father, an outstanding citizen, a thinker, a pioneer reformer and a commentator. But of all the roles he filled, it was that of the teacher which warmed his heart and was the central core of his life's work. (Mitchell, 141)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32428


Clarke, George Sydenham, Baron Sydenham of Combe (1848-1933), defence expert and colonial administrator, was born on 4 July 1848 at the vicarage, Swinderby, Lincolnshire, the eldest of the ten children of Walter John Clarke (1813-1903), the vicar of Swinderby, and his wife, Maria Frances Mayor (died 1906). Sent to Repton School, Rossall School, and Haileybury College in succession, George seemed an unenthusiastic pupil until his parents noticed his mechanical bent and suggested that he study engineering. After briefly attending Wimbledon House School, he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1866. Two years later, he passed out first and joined the Royal Engineers. 
From 1871 Clarke taught geometry at the Royal Indian Engineering College near Staines. He married Caroline Emily Fellowes (died 1908), the daughter of General Peregrine Henry Fellowes, on 1 June 1871; (Constance) Violet (1878-1909) was their only child. In 1880 Captain Clarke returned to regular service, first in Bermuda, then in Gibraltar. There he met Sir Andrew Clarke (no relation), who sent him to evaluate the bombardment of Alexandria in 1882. Employed at the War Office as adviser to the inspector-general of fortifications from 1883, Clarke held that earthworks could be as good as fortresses. The Sudan crisis (1885) took him to Suakin for two months on an abortive railway-building mission. 
Clarke was secretary (1885-92) of the interdepartmental colonial defence committee, which monitored the military plans of overseas territories. Its proceedings disturbed him: generals and admirals ignored each other and presented contradictory advice. Thus arose his lifelong aspiration to devise a framework of agreed strategic principles into which all component details should fit. The first premise of integrated defence policy was evident: naval supremacy sustained the British empire, which did not need an army capable of fighting a European war. Clarke, a major from 1887, strongly backed the 'maritime school' against the 'continental school'. 
Writing for publication became Clarke's one obsessive pastime. Having started with technical articles and military history, he now addressed all aspects of warfare in his frequent contributions to 'The Times' and dozens of other periodicals. He expressed far-sighted ideas about submarines and 'invisibility' (camouflage) and repeatedly put the case for co-ordinated 'imperial defence' (a term which he claimed to have coined). 
Clarke served as secretary to the Hartington commission on army and navy administration (1888-90). When politicians shrank from implementing its report, he lambasted the inefficiency and over-centralization of the War Office in the press. Despite his many pseudonyms (Custos, Miles, Navalis, Vetus), insiders recognized his opinions. Clarke found himself peremptorily transferred to humdrum duties in Malta in October 1892. Three months later he received a consolatory knighthood, thanks to his friends in the Admiralty and Colonial Office. Bitter faction-fighting characterized the politics of defence in this period. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Sir George Clarke became superintendent of the royal carriage department at Woolwich in autumn 1894. He relished improving gun mountings but quarrelled ferociously with ordnance factory managers. Dissatisfied with the Dawkins committee on War Office re-organization, on which he sat from 1900 to 1901, he chose to look elsewhere for advancement. In October 1901 Clarke left the army and sailed for Australia as the new governor of Victoria. He was hardly an obvious choice for this largely ornamental post: his domed bald pate, small penetrating eyes, and shaggy drooping moustache created a lugubrious image, and anodyne speechifying was not his forte. Ever conscientious, though, he managed to avoid serious political controversy. The populism of local politicians actually disgusted him. Hitherto a radical himself, he afterwards said that Australia shattered his faith in manhood suffrage. He desperately missed being in London now that Balfour, the new prime minister, was tackling defence deficiencies revealed by the South African War. 
Great was Clarke's joy when a telegram recalled him from Melbourne in November 1903 to join the three-man Esher committee on War Office reconstitution. He was so much of a mind with Lord Esher and Admiral Fisher that at first they mistook him for an easy-going fellow. 'The Dauntless Three' set out to smash the 'old gang' at the War Office. Their brisk report, accepted by Balfour in 1904, recommended abolishing the post of commander-in-chief, creating an army council and a general staff, and providing the emergent committee of imperial defence (CID) with a permanent secretariat. Clarke had been advocating such changes for fifteen years. In May 1904 he became the first ever secretary of the CID, intended to co-ordinate naval and military advice to the cabinet. 
Consolidating the CID in the face of departmental jealousies was never going to be easy. Clarke had courage, drive, and expertise, but lacked patience, tolerance, and tact. Men incapable of swift logical argument risked hearing their views discounted as self-serving balderdash. He appeared to see the CID as an embryonic joint defence staff and to hanker after executive authority to impose a systematic maritime strategy (within which the role of the army would be narrowly defined). Senior soldiers generally disdained Clarke as a jumped-up leader writer or naval officer 'manque'. Working closely with Balfour, he yet made some headway towards his goal of a small cheap army, despite being at odds with Arnold-Forster, the war secretary. Government policies on the invasion danger, Indian defence, and the extension of the Anglo-Japanese alliance definitely bore Clarke's imprint. He regretted the replacement of Balfour by Campbell-Bannerman. 
The Moroccan crisis of 1905-6 transformed the contest between the army and navy in the CID. Much as Clarke liked the idea of amphibious raids on the German coast, he feared that Fisher's scheme was simply unfeasible. Therefore he acquiesced in the War Office plan to land troops in France in the event of conflict. Clarke saw the British expeditionary force as an 'ad hoc' expedient; Fisher viewed it as a Trojan horse for the continental strategy and effectively withdrew the Admiralty from co-operation with the CID. Clarke was flabbergasted, and these two headstrong navalists were so foolish as to widen their disagreement into a feud. Fisher infuriated the CID secretary by refusing to clarify the navy's war plans. Clarke opposed the construction of dreadnoughts: the technological shift in the naval race would vitiate existing British superiority over Germany in smaller battleships. Meanwhile, the military exploited their chance to edge closer to a continental army. Clarke did not altogether like Haldane's army reforms, but by 1906-7 he was too isolated to exert much influence. Without a supportive premier, his grand ambitions for the CID were going nowhere. Fortunately for Clarke, his anti-alarmist line on Indian security impressed John Morley, the Indian secretary, who in July 1907 selected him as governor of the Bombay presidency. 
Clarke arrived in Bombay in October 1907. He formed a low opinion of the government of India -- tardy, cumbrous, unimaginative -- and bypassed it when possible. Moderate Indian nationalists praised a governor who questioned accepted wisdom; the resident British were disgruntled. Then, in June 1908, under pressure from his officials, Clarke agreed to prosecute B. G. Tilak for advocating terrorism in his newspaper, 'Kesari'. The trial started a cycle of riots and repression that radicalized Indian nationalism. Morley was appalled; Clarke stood by his decision. Though shaken by the loss of his wife and daughter (to whom he was close) within four months in 1908-9, he did not resign. His zeal for tough policing and censorship embarrassed the Liberal government. Yet no governor was keener to give Indians a meaningful legislative role under the Morley-Minto reforms. He believed in dividing moderates from extremists -- until he concluded that the former were hopeless cowards. 
Clarke wed his second wife, Phyllis Angelina Rosamond Reynolds (died 1952), widow of Captain Arthur Reynolds of the East Surrey regiment, and youngest daughter of George Morant of Carrickmacross, co. Monaghan, in Bombay on 4 November 1910. He was made Baron Sydenham of Combe (a former family property in Somerset) two months before completing his term of office in April 1913. 
Retirement irked Lord Sydenham: he had his cello, his dogs, and his garden at The Priory, Lamberhurst, but why was a man of his ability not viceroy of India or war secretary? A cross-bencher, he addressed the House of Lords about a dozen times a year and, from 1913 to 1916, headed a royal commission on venereal disease. He expected far wider responsibilities in wartime. In the press he scolded British leaders for failing to follow his strategic insights. 
From December 1915 to May 1916 Sydenham chaired the Central Appeal Tribunal, administering the 'National Service Act'. Then the Air Board occupied him until December 1916. At Lord Bryce's second chamber conference (1917-18) he argued for a stronger hereditary House of Lords. The 1918 franchise horrified him, as he now rated democracy a dangerously bad form of government. This belief drove him to lead opposition to the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms: Britain should not inflict democratic institutions upon India. He founded the Indo-British Association in 1917, but with the Conservatives bound to the coalition the India Office could easily ignore him. Sydenham remained a hate figure for Indian nationalists. 
Diverse causes enjoyed Sydenham's journalistic support: imperial unity, eugenics, a written constitution, road safety, Montenegro, White Russians, science teaching, the channel tunnel, and the Baconian theory of Shakespeare. He headed the British Empire League from 1915 to 1921 and the British Science Guild from 1917 to 1920. During the war he had decided that the chief internal foes of the empire -- socialists, suffragettes, Sinn Feiners, pacifists, and Indian nationalists -- were all, whether or not they knew it, agents of Germany, which controlled them via a network of Jews. Post-war unrest modified this analysis: encouraged by H. H. Beamish and Nesta Webster, he identified German militarism, Bolshevism, Brahmanism, Zionism, and the League of Nations as instruments of a ubiquitous 150-year-old Jewish conspiracy to establish the global dominion of the Antichrist. His task was to infuse diehard conservatives with radical antisemitism. When this failed he campaigned to save Christian youth from the 'Jewish' poisons of jazz, modern art, and cinema (while Lady Sydenham ran the British Fascists' children's club). His prophecies of doom ceased only with his death on 7 February 1933 from a cerebral haemorrhage at his London home, 101 Onslow Square, when his peerage became extinct. He was cremated three days later at Golders Green. 
George Clarke was a diligent man of independent mind who prided himself on his imagined objectivity. When British supremacy in world affairs was just beginning to crumble, he promptly emerged among the few early, persistent, and constructive proponents of necessary defence reform. His combative personality did not aid the development of the CID after 1904, however, and its failure as a strategic planning body greatly disappointed him. The same tendency to seek an all-embracing synthesis may be seen in both his doctrine of imperial defence and his conspiracy theories of the 1920s, when he was probably the highest-placed right-wing extremist in British public life. 


@@@@@


doc= 32429


Clarke, Henry Butler (1863-1904), historian of Spain, born on 9 November 1863 at Marchington, Staffordshire, of which parish his father was incumbent, was the elder son of Henry Clarke (died 1884) and his wife, Helen, daughter of John Leech of Etwall, near Derby. In 1867 his father became rector of Rokeby. Henry was educated successively at a small school at Whorlton, near Rokeby, at a preparatory school at Richmond, Yorkshire, and finally (1879-83), owing to delicate health, at St Jean de Luz in the French Pyrenees, near the Spanish border, where he read with the Basque scholar Wentworth Webster, and where his father was British chaplain in 1882-4. Spanish history and literature thus came to attract him, and during early visits to Spain he met many social and political leaders, including Canovas de Castillo. In 1883 he went for a time to Germany with a pupil. Improved health enabled him to matriculate at Wadham College, Oxford, in October 1885, and although with little previous knowledge of Greek, he obtained a good second class in honour moderations in 1887. In 1888 he won the Taylorian scholarship for Spanish. An attack of neurasthenia, which recurred regularly throughout his life, obliged him to content himself with a pass degree the following year. 
From 1890 to 1892 Clarke was Taylorian teacher of Spanish at Oxford and in 1894 he was elected to a Fereday fellowship (open to those born in Staffordshire) at St John's College, Oxford, where he usually lived for a term every year until his death. In 1891 he built for himself a house at St Jean de Luz, which he named Aice Errota, after a windmill which had once stood there. He spent much of his time there, studying Spanish literature and history. He did not marry. 
Clarke published a 'Spanish Grammar' (1892), a 'History of Spanish Literature' (1893), and a study of 'The Cid Campeador' (1897), for which he learned Arabic. He was a contributor to the first volume of the 'Cambridge Modern History' (1902). His major work, published posthumously, was 'Modern Spain, 1815-1898' (1906), adjudged by Sir Charles Firth to be 'remarkable at once for its rigour, its vivacity, and the sobriety of its judgement' (C. Firth, 'Modern Languages at Oxford, 1724-1929', 1929, 68). It remains of value as containing 'much information not easily obtainable elsewhere' (R. Carr, 'Modern Spain, 1808-1975', 1978, 780). Clarke was widely travelled, and made an annual continental tour which extended on one occasion as far as Syria and India. A keen fisherman, a knowledgeable ornithologist, and a fair shot, he was a collector of ancient brasswork, tiles, and manuscripts, became keenly interested in art, and painted in watercolours. He was considered strikingly handsome, possessing remarkable personal charm as both a humorous and profound conversationalist. 
In 1904 Clarke set to work seriously on what he planned to be his most wide-ranging study, on the early history of Spanish civilization. He had collected a large number of rare and valuable works for the purpose, and travelled extensively through Spain to get to know the people about whom he would be writing. But he suffered a severe recurrence of nervous illness, and while recuperating at Torquay his mind gave way and he shot himself on 10 September 1904. He was buried in Torquay cemetery on 13 September. The greater part of his fine library was presented by his family to St John's College. 


@@@@@


doc= 32430


Clarke, Louis Colville Gray (1881-1960), art connoisseur and museum director, was born in Croydon on 2 May 1881, tenth son and youngest of the fourteen children of Stephenson Clarke, coal factor, and his wife, Agnes Maria Bridger. He was schooled privately. He went up to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, to read the history tripos, graduating in 1903. The family fortune sufficed to provide an ample income even for its youngest member. As a rich undergraduate, Clarke travelled widely in Europe, forming the taste and developing the interests, aesthetic and scientific, which were to distinguish his life. A confirmed bachelor, with an initial bias towards anthropology and archaeology, he journeyed also to Central America, Mexico, Chile, and Peru in 1906; and he made in 1910 the first of two visits to Ethiopia. 
On returning to London, where he had already begun to collect works of art, Clarke formed a lasting friendship with Augustus John, of whose slighter oils he bought a few and of whose best drawings he gradually acquired a considerable collection. He saw active service in the First World War, but his physique being unequal to the rigours of army life, he was quickly invalided out. In 1919 he matriculated as a mature candidate for the diploma in anthropology at Exeter College, Oxford, attracted by the opportunity to study under R. R. Marett, Arthur Thomson, and Henry Balfour. Guided by Balfour, his tutor in archaeology and technology, Clarke did valuable work as a volunteer in the Pitt Rivers Museum, of which he continued a lifelong benefactor. 
In 1922 Clarke succeeded Baron Anatole von Hugel as curator of the university museum of archaeology and ethnology at Cambridge. The appointment, made, it is believed, at the instance of Sir William Ridgeway, Disney professor of archaeology, was somewhat unexpected, but was soon justified by the quality of Clarke's work both in the university and abroad. In 1923 he took part in important excavations at Kechipaun, New Mexico. Socially gifted, with a prodigious memory manifest in a welter of genealogical information, Clarke renewed in the 1920s friendships made in his youth with members of the senior Austro-Hungarian families, when he took part in digs at Toszey and elsewhere in Hungary. To the growth of what has become the faculty of archaeology and anthropology, Clarke made a notable contribution by methodically building up and rearranging the collections, by reconciling conflicting academic interests, and by financing much excavation abroad and other work in Cambridge. In 1929 he was elected a fellow of Trinity Hall, and he remained a much appreciated member of that high table. Easy manners and hospitable inclinations endeared him to a wide circle of every age and many nationalities. 
In 1937, when Sir Sydney Cockerell retired after twenty-nine years as director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Clarke was chosen to succeed him. It was a measure of his gifts and experience in dealing with every kind of antiquity and work of art that he was able to settle rapidly in his new post. Under Cockerell the collections and buildings had been greatly extended; and the Fitzwilliam had gained through his idiosyncratic lead much of the atmosphere of a private mansion which, as a public building, became its mark. Clarke unfortunately had little time to impress his particular personal taste, one more eclectic than Cockerell's, upon the museum and its collections, before the onset of war in 1939 dictated the removal of its treasures to safer places. With what remained, supplemented by loans, he kept interest in the arts alive in Cambridge, arranging in the museum over forty wartime exhibitions. Himself the owner of precious maiolica, French porcelain, English eighteenth-century furniture and silver, European 'objets de vertu', paintings, and drawings (some of the latter collected by his brother Charles, who bequeathed them to him in 1935), he used the Fitzwilliam's scant purchase funds advantageously, during these years when prices were low, to enhance the collections. What he bought was notably supplemented by his own generosity and by the benefactions he obtained for the museum. Between 1937 and 1960 he presented more than 2700 works of art, including nearly 2000 choice engravings. When he retired in 1946 he was nominated honorary keeper of the prints, an appointment which, like his honorary keepership of the American collections in the museum of archaeology, he retained until his death at the Evelyn Nursing Home in Cambridge on 13 December 1960. The university had conferred upon him in 1959 an honorary LLD. He bequeathed the cream of his library and collections to the university, mainly for the benefit of the Fitzwilliam, including superb drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, Correggio, Parmigianino, and Rubens. His only obvious lapse in 'connaissance' was to leave a portrait drawing of Charles I as by Van Dyck; but it is only a copy of an original in the Rijksmuseum. It was supposed that he saw in it a mirror of his own features. The long eighteenth-century table at which he loved to entertain, the mahogany of exceptionally handsome colour, is used by his successors in office and by the syndics for their meetings. His unique dog in Vincennes porcelain has been shifted from its velvet-lined kennel to a showcase. 
Of slight build and birdlike speed of mind and pitch of utterance, as well as of bodily movement, Clarke possessed to an extraordinary degree intuitive understanding fortified by extensive knowledge of most kinds of art. He had neither the patience nor the methodical habit of thought, nor did he feel the need, to submit himself to the discipline of serious writing. He produced only a few short articles. He had the order of merit of Hungary, an honorary fellowship of the Society of Archaeological and Historical Arts of Hungary, and in London membership of the Society of Dilettanti. 


@@@@@


doc= 32431


Clarke, Sir Marshal James (1841-1909), colonial administrator and army officer, born at Shronell, co. Tipperary, on 18 October 1841, was the eldest son of the Revd Mark Clarke (1809-1848) of Shronell and his wife, Maria Hill. Educated at a private school in Dublin and later at Trinity College, Dublin, he went to Woolwich in 1860 and obtained a commission in the Royal Artillery in 1863; he retired in 1883 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He married in 1880 Anne Stacy (died 1933), daughter of Major-General Bannastre Pryce Lloyd; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Clarke spent most of his career in South Africa, serving in a civil more often than in a military capacity. In 1874 he became magistrate of Pietermaritzburg in Natal, and in 1876 was aide-de-camp to Sir Theophilus Shepstone. He was then appointed special commissioner for Lydenburg. In 1877 he was sent on a mission to Sekukuni, who had been at war with the Boers on the northern frontier of the Transvaal near the Lydenburg goldfields, and in the same year was political officer and special commissioner at Lydenburg. He served in the Anglo-Transvaal War (1880-81), was twice mentioned in dispatches, and was in charge of the landdrost's office at Potchefstroom when it was attacked and compelled to surrender by the insurgent Boers in December 1880. 
In 1881 Clarke became resident magistrate at Quthing in Basutoland, and in 1882 commissioner of Cape police at King William's Town in Cape Colony. In the same year he was sent to Egypt and appointed colonel commanding the Turkish regiment of Egyptian gendarmerie, which he helped to reorganize; he received the third class of the order of the Mejidiye. On 13 March 1884 Basutoland was taken over by the crown from the Cape government, and Clarke, who had now retired from the army and had lost his left arm in a shooting accident, was appointed resident commissioner. He held that post until 1893, maintaining peace, establishing a Basuto mounted police force, and involving the Basuto chiefs in government. In 1893 he was made resident commissioner and chief magistrate of Zululand where, as a competent and conciliatory administrator, he could best serve the Zulu people who were restless after the uprising in 1888. After Zululand had been annexed to Natal, he was in 1898 appointed imperial resident commissioner of Rhodesia, under the Southern Rhodesia order in council of that year, and held that appointment until he retired in 1905. 
Clarke showed great capacity in administration of the African people. Basutoland, which under the Cape government had been in a constant state of ferment, made marked progress in peace and prosperity under his guidance. Constantly selected to fill difficult positions in South Africa, he was conspicuous among the men who won the confidence and respect of the African people. He was created CMG in 1880 and KCMG in 1886. Clarke died at his home, The Lodge, Enniskerry, co. Wicklow, on 1 April 1909, and was buried at Mount Jerome, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 32432


Clarke, Maude Violet (1892-1935), historian, was born in Belfast on 7 May 1892, the second child and only daughter of Richard James Clarke (1856-1953), rector of Trinity Church, Belfast, and his wife, Anne Frances Nugent Jessop (died 1942), daughter of John Thomas Jessop of Mount Jessop, co. Longford. In 1903 her father (later archdeacon of Connor) accepted the living of Carnmoney on the outskirts of the city, and there, in an atmosphere of religion and scholarship, Maude and her three brothers grew up. She was initially educated in Belfast, and then at the Alexandra School and College, Dublin. She read history at Queen's University, Belfast, taking a first-class degree in 1913. She then went with a scholarship to Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she was awarded a first in modern history in 1915. 
In 1916 Clarke returned to Queen's University, Belfast, where she deputized for F. M. Powicke, the professor of modern history, for three years. She was appointed history tutor at Somerville College, Oxford, in 1919, a move from 'the selfish intrigues of a provincial university, demoralised by the war' which she likened to 'coming from darkness to daylight' (Adams, 155). The rest of her life was divided between Coole Glebe (her father's rectory) and Somerville College, of which she became a fellow in 1922. She was appointed a university lecturer in 1930. Her witty tongue masked a deeply religious nature and an iron will, and she made an indelible impression on her students and contemporaries, living a free social life and extending open hospitality to a wide circle of friends. 
Clarke made for herself in these years a many-sided reputation as a college tutor and administrator, lecturer, and scholar. At a time when the history profession was still predominantly male, Clarke distinguished herself as a medievalist in a series of influential articles, including 'Irish parliaments in the reign of Edward II' (1926), 'The Wilton diptych' (1931), and 'The origin of impeachment' (1934). A collection of her papers was published posthumously as 'Fourteenth Century Studies' (1937), edited by two of her former pupils, Lucy Sutherland and May McKisack. Her important study of the 'modus tenendi parliamentum' was finished shortly before her death and published in 1936 as 'Medieval Representation and Consent'. Her work was widely accepted and became part of the mainstream in the understanding of the fourteenth century. Colleagues and contemporaries regretted that her early death prevented her from undertaking a projected history of England in the fourteenth century. 
Maude Clarke was influential at Somerville, where 'her strong sense of constitutional propriety' (Adams, 73) was a distinctive legacy to the college's governance. In 1933 she was appointed vice-principal, but in the same year was stricken by cancer. She continued to work, and her resignation in 1935 on grounds of ill health was refused; she took sabbatical leave instead. She died in her father's house at Coole Glebe, Carnmoney, on 17 November 1935. A visiting professorship at Queen's University, Belfast, bears her name. 


@@@@@


doc= 32433


Clarke, Thomas (1884-1957), journalist and broadcaster, was born at 39 High Street, Bolton, on 6 June 1884, the youngest child of five sons and three daughters of Joseph Clarke, a Lancashire-born Irish cotton spinner, and later an insurance salesman, and his wife, Martha Marsh, a Baptist. Clarke attended Clarence Street higher grade school, forerunner of Bolton grammar school, and contributed to Bolton's newspaper, the 'Northern Weekly'. Encouraged by his mother and by his eldest brother, the journalist Charles Allen Clarke (1863-1935), he applied to Ruskin Hall where he won a scholarship, going up to Oxford in May 1902, just before his eighteenth birthday. At Ruskin, Dennis Hird guided and inspired his intellectual zest. Following his study in Oxford, he worked on the 'Lewisham Journal', at $1 a week, where his editor, Frederick George Kellaway, remarked that, after a year, Clarke had learned all he needed to know of journalism and urged him to travel abroad. 
So at the age of nineteen Clarke went in 1903 to Hong Kong to work on the 'South China Morning Post', and found himself involved in some world shaking events in the Far East. He served as correspondent for the 'Daily Mail' and the 'Chicago Tribune' in French Indo-China and, at the end of the Russo-Japanese War, visited China, Japan, Korea, and Russia, including Siberia. On his return to London the 'Daily Mail' informed him that living in the Far East had put him out of touch with events in Britain and Europe and he retreated to Manchester where Henry Marriott Richardson, literary editor of the Manchester 'Evening Chronicle' (later general secretary of the National Union of Journalists), offered him a post at $2 5's'. a week. A story about a flying meeting at Blackpool resulted in James Heddle, editor of the 'Daily Sketch' (established in 1908 and printed in Manchester), offering him the position of London news editor at $5 a week. This was 1909 and on 1 June 1910 Clarke married his first wife, Elizabeth Naylor Waddington (1887/8-1957), the only daughter of Richard Waddington JP, schoolmaster and educational publisher, of Bolton. 
In 1911 Clarke joined the foreign news desk of the 'Daily Mail', serving as night news editor from 1914 until December 1916, when he joined the army, where 'as a signals officer in the Army I... developed a keen personal interest in wireless' broadcasting (Clarke, 'My Northcliffe Diary'). He rejoined the 'Mail' in 1919 when Alfred, Viscount Northcliffe appointed him news editor of the 'Mail', and dispatched him on a tour of the United States and Canada to study newspaper production. He relished foreign travel, visiting Northcliffe in various European resorts frequented by the wealthy and famous, and became an ardent skiing enthusiast. 
Clarke kept a diary and studied Northcliffe's methods and character, and later published two books on him which reveal much about Northcliffe's working methods and place in modern journalism, but provide little analysis of his political influence and are more hagiography than biography. 
On 15 June 1920 Clarke secured the first musical broadcast on wireless by arranging for Nellie Melba to sing excerpts from 'La Boheme' from the Marconi factory at Chelmsford -- a broadcast which was heard around the world. In the following November, 1920, the American 'Wireless Age' published a two-page interview with Clarke on this 'epochal achievement belonging to the other side of the Atlantic'. 
After Northcliffe's death in 1922, Clarke accepted the invitation of Keith Murdoch to become assistant editor of the 'Melbourne Herald'; he lived in Australia with his family from 1923 to 1926, and related some of his experiences in his book 'Marriage at 6 a.m.' (1934). Then he made what he later regarded as the biggest mistake of his career, and became managing editor of the 'Daily News' in July 1926 -- and editor, as well as a member of the board of directors, when it merged with its rival the 'Daily Chronicle' in 1930 to become the 'News Chronicle'. Under his influence the paper's circulation rose above one million, and he revolutionized its format to compete with other national newspapers -- so much so that Lord Beaverbrook several times tempted him to become editor of the 'Daily Express', but Clarke felt he had to honour his contract. However, the political problems surrounding the 'News Chronicle', not least having to contend with three boards of directors caused by amalgamating the 'Daily News', the 'Daily Chronicle', and the 'Westminster Gazette', forced him to resign in October 1933. A year later he worked, briefly, in Finland on 'Berlingske Tidende', before returning to the 'Daily Mail' to cover the Australian cricket tour of England in 1934. 
Clarke's appointment as director of practical journalism for London University's diploma of journalism (really Britain's first professor of journalism), in 1935, was celebrated by a public luncheon in his honour. He had previously lectured at the university while news editor of the 'Daily Mail' and served on the university's journalism committee from 1925. In his new position he revolutionized the course. He ensured that it was centred in King's College, and added practical reporting assignments, ably organized by his assistant and former student Joan Skipsey, at the lawcourts, local government offices, the Port of London Authority, Selfridges, train and travel companies, and so on. These had to be of a prescribed length and submitted before a deadline. Together with the academic tutor to journalism students, the well-known editor of the Penguin Shakespeare books, George Bagshawe Harrison, Clarke modernized the syllabus so that students were taught the background to the modern world. Although the course closed in 1939, never to be re-established, Clarke's legacy to British journalism continued through the 1980s when Geoffrey Pinnington, the Harmsworth gold medallist in journalism for 1939, became the editor of the 'Sunday People'. Clarke condensed his lecture notes, now in the Senate House Library, London University, to publish a textbook, 'Journalism' (1947). 
In summer 1936 Clarke toured the world with his daughter Patricia, as his wife was by then incapacitated by the mental illness which affected her until her death. One result of the tour was the publication of 'Round the World with Tom Clarke' (1937). About this time Clarke began an affair with Sheila Irene Emily Castle, then wife of Edward Cyril Castle, a journalist and later Lord Castle of Islington. The daughter of Harry Samuel Green, a coastguard officer, she took Clarke's name by deed poll at the birth of their daughter, Judith, although they did not marry until 1952, by which time he had divorced his first wife. At the outbreak of war Clarke became deputy director of the news division of the Ministry of Information, but he left in 1940, allegedly because of his wife's illness, and most probably to find her suitable care in residential accommodation. 
During 1941 Clarke joined Edward Hulton in establishing a chain of specialized news agencies, with a parent company under the title of Britanova, and he sailed from Liverpool in September to establish its operations in Rio de Janeiro. Ostensibly a private venture, the company was secretly subsidized by the Foreign Office to counteract German propaganda south of Panama. This operation lasted only a year and resulted in another book, 'The Word of an Englishman' (1943), in which Clarke revealed his interest in the writings of William Henry Hudson. He continued with the news agency, but inaugurated a weekly newsletter from London in the BBC South American service which lasted from 1942 to 1948. Clarke suffered his first heart attack in August 1945 immediately after reading his 'Letter from London' and a second attack in April 1948 while attending a cattle show in Berkshire. Although the BBC offered to send a mobile studio to record his talks at his Surrey home in Honeysuckle Bottom, East Horsley, Clarke retired from broadcasting but, never one to miss an opportunity, he published 'Living Happily with a 'Heart'' (1954). 
Clarke had a brisk manner, friendly brown eyes, very dark hair which he kept all his life, and what a friend described as a Lancashire-Irish glow. He maintained his friendships over decades and on his travels met many people with whom he had worked in earlier days. Perhaps his friendship with F. G. Kellaway, later a member of parliament and postmaster-general and a director of Marconi, motivated Clarke's pioneering approach to wireless broadcasting. 
Clarke reveals most about himself in his book 'Brian', written in 1936, five years after his youngest son died of meningitis aged nine. Clarke died at 19 Lexden Road, Colchester, on 18 June 1957, survived by his two wives and two daughters, and an American granddaughter. His two sons predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32434


Clasper, John Hawks (1836-1908), boat builder and oarsman, born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 13 October 1836, was the eldest of thirteen children (eight daughters and five sons) of Henry Clasper (1812-1870), oarsman and boat builder, and his wife, Suzannah, 'nee' Hawks. In 1861 he married Ann Bilton, who died in 1866; in 1871 he was married again, this time to Elizabeth, daughter of George Rough of Wandsworth. 
Clasper's father was one of the best-known professional oarsmen of his day and was also a boat builder of vision. Jack Clasper began his rowing career as a coxswain at the age of ten, and in 1849 he coxed his father's four, which won the championship of England at the Royal Thames regatta. In 1851 he steered his father's boat again at Henley royal regatta, the only time that the stewards have ever offered a prize for professionals. In 1854 he was apprenticed to a London waterman and about the same time he embarked on a sculling and rowing career that was to last for twenty-two years. He was slight in build, his rowing weight being just over 8 stone and his height slightly below 5 feet 6 inches. This may have handicapped him as a sculler since he was never quite in the same class as the best professionals. Nevertheless, he had a number of important victories, most notably over George Francis in 1858 on the Thames, twice over Tom Pocock in 1861, also on the Thames, and over George Drewitt in 1861, on the Tyne; the last of these was for $200, a reasonably large sum for a professional sculler. Clasper frequently rowed in a pair-oar with his father, and W. B. Woodgate, a noted amateur, described their skill in such a boat as 'the acme of homogeneous rowing'. But it was in four-oared boats that Clasper had his greatest success. He won many professional races on the Tyne, on the Wear at Durham, and elsewhere; and in 1857, 1859, and 1862 he won the four-oared championship of England at the Thames National, the most important of the watermen's regattas. His last known race was in 1876, when he stroked and won a prize in a scratch eight at Oxford regatta. 
Clasper was also well-known as a pilot of scullers, sitting in the bow of a following eight guiding a sculler during a race, a practice allowed in professional matches. He was also an expert trainer, his most successful pupil being Robert Chambers of the Tyne, whom he coached to his fifth sculling championship of England on 22 November 1866, over the Putney to Mortlake course on the Thames in London. 
Clasper began to learn boat-building skills from his father at an early age. By 1863 he had established himself in the boat-building business at Durham, and his workshop there was still being used for making boats over a hundred years later. He then moved south to the Thames in London, first to Lambeth and then to Wandsworth before finally settling at Putney in 1868. His premises there still bore his name in the 1990s, when they were being used as the Westminster School boathouse. Clasper subsequently extended the business to Oxford, although in 1883 he handed over the Oxford branch to his brother-in-law Frederick Rough; he also left the Putney branch to Rough on his death. 
Clasper's emergence as a first-class boat builder coincided with two developments. One was the extension to eights of his father's innovative methods; these included fitting the keel on the inside, making the shell smooth, and fitting outriggers. Henry Clasper's one attempt to build an eight in this manner had apparently been a failure but Matthew Taylor, another Tyne professional, had been more successful with an eight of this type built for the Royal Chester Club in 1856. Jack Clasper also experimented with the shape and length of such boats, setting the widest part of an eight well forward towards the bows. This design idea, with which Taylor also experimented, produced a porpoise-like shape. Clasper also experimented with a shallow draft in an attempt to reduce water friction, and by the 1890s he had lengthened his eights to 63 feet or more, seeking to avoid the problem of longitudinal oscillation. He also addressed the issue of the effect of side winds on the steering of boats, first by installing a countervail to the bows and then, more successfully, by adding a metal fin below the stern. 
The other development was the sliding seat, an American invention, first used in England on the Tyne in 1871. Several oarsmen and scullers, amateurs as well as professionals (and including Clasper himself), had tried sliding on the greased deck of their boats, but it was a long time before the sliding seat mechanism became reliable. Clasper played an important part in bringing it to perfection through his experiments with various combinations of brass and steel slides together with glass and bone rollers. 
By the 1880s, Clasper had established a high reputation as a builder of good racing boats. (His main rivals were Swaddle and Winship, a Tyne-based business, and Sims of Putney.) By the end of the century he was building boats for export to the continent and to many other parts of the world, including South America and New Zealand. Oxford and Cambridge both used his eights for the boat race, and the victorious boats of 1870, 1871, 1872, 1873, and 1883 were all from his workshop. The last of these was a particularly fine example of his craft. Oxford took delivery of it after training in a Swaddle and Winship boat, and they proceeded to win against the odds. 
A well-known and much respected figure in the rowing world, Jack Clasper's integrity and expertise were 'recognised among all classes of oarsmen' ('DNB'). He died of bronchitis on 15 September 1908 at his home at 154 Lower Richmond Road, Putney. His funeral at Putney cemetery was attended by many watermen as well as by representatives of amateur clubs from Britain and abroad, including Oxford University Boat Club and the Societe Nautique de la Basse Seine, a French club of which he was a life member. 


@@@@@


doc= 32435


Clausen, Sir George (1852-1944), painter, was born at 8 William Street, Regent's Park, London, on 18 April 1852, the second son of Jurgen Johnsen Clausen (1821-1911), a decorative painter of Danish extraction, and his Scottish wife, Elizabeth Fillan. In 1867, after attending St Mark's School, Chelsea, Clausen became a learner in the drawing office of the Chelsea firm of decorators Messrs Trollope, where he remained until 1873. During these years he received additional drawing instruction from John Cleghorn which prepared him for entry, with a two-year national scholarship, to the National Art Training School, South Kensington, in 1873. About this time he also worked as an assistant to the classical painter Edwin Long (1829-1891), and copied works by Rembrandt, Titian, and Velazquez in the National Gallery. Clausen then studied briefly at the Antwerp Academy, and he returned regularly to Holland until 1880. He made his debut at the Royal Academy in 1876 with 'High Mass at a Fishing Village on the Zuyder Zee' (Nottingham Castle Museum) when he was mistaken by 'The Times' critic for a 'very clever Dutch painter' (22 May 1876, 6). Throughout the 1870s Clausen worked in London, and exhibited street scenes such as 'A Spring Morning, Haverstock Hill' (1881; Bury Art Gallery, Bury). However, in 1881, following his marriage to Agnes Mary Webster (1856/7-1944) on 1 June, he decided to leave London for Childwick Green near St Albans. This move, and a term spent at the Academie Julian in Paris, heralded a significant change in Clausen's output. In the country he was able to paint pictures of rural life which showed, as he stated, 'people doing simple things under good conditions of lighting: and there was always landscape. And nothing was made easy for you: you had to dig out what you wanted' (Clausen, 'Autobiographical notes', 19). The resulting works revealed Clausen's allegiance to the almost photographic detail of the rustic naturalist painter Jules Bastien-Lepage, whose work was much admired by the younger artists of his generation. With subjects such as 'Winter Work' (1883-4; Tate Collection), shown at the Grosvenor Gallery and so obviously different in treatment from those of more conservative Victorian painters of rural life, he stormed the citadel of 'aesthetic' and late Pre-Raphaelite painting. 
Clausen's radical posture was confirmed by his role in the founding of the New English Art Club in 1886 and by his attempts to defend continental methods of art training in a polemical article, 'The English school in peril: a reply', published in the 'Magazine of Art' in 1887. This was followed by two essays on Bastien-Lepage in 1888 and 1892 in which he attempted to show that only through objective recording of appearances was the painter able to free himself from studio conventions. 'All his personages', he wrote, 'are placed before us in the most satisfying completeness, without the appearance of artifice, but as they live; and without comment, as far as is possible on the author's part' (Clausen, 'Bastien-Lepage and modern realism', 114). The exemplification of this new objectivity is found in 'The Girl at the Gate' (1889; Tate Collection), a work that Clausen showed at the final Grosvenor Gallery summer exhibition and which was purchased by the Chantrey Trust for the national collection. 
However, while he was working on this picture, Clausen became interested in a broader range of technical and atmospheric effects. Closer contact with the work of the impressionists led him by 1892, in works such as 'The Mowers' (Usher Gallery, Lincoln), to abandon the grey tonalities of Bastien-Lepage for a much brighter palette. This change is apparent in 'Evening Song' (1893; priv. coll.), of which the critic D. S. MacColl noted that the painter was moving 'in the direction of colour and shaking off the photographic idea of drawing' ('Saturday Review', 13 May 1893, 515). In 1890 Clausen moved to the village of Widdington, Essex, and it was there that the rural scenes of the 1890s were painted in the rickyards, barns, and fields around nearby Newport. These images present a glowing report upon country life, linking Clausen to writers such as Rider Haggard and Charles Masterman, for whom the values of rural England were infinitely preferable to those of the metropolis. Clausen, in association with Thomas Hardy, supported the struggle to retain Stonehenge when it was purchased and threatened with shipment to America in 1899. 
Such was Clausen's standing in the late 1890s that after his election as associate of the Royal Academy in 1895 he was invited to teach at the Royal Academy Schools. Then, in 1904, he was appointed professor of painting. The two lecture series he delivered during this appointment were extremely popular with students, and were later published as 'Six Lectures on Painting' (1904) and 'Aims and Ideals in Art' (1906). Throughout this period of intense activity, the quality of Clausen's work remained undiminished. Works like 'Sons of the Soil' (1901; priv. coll.), 'The Golden Barn' (1901; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), and 'Harvest, in the Beanfield' (1904; Durban Art Gallery, South Africa), exemplify the painter's ability, acquired from studying the works of Raphael, to find 'naturalness and variety' in the grouping of figures (Clausen, 'Lectures', 219). About 1910 Clausen's peasant figures became more heroic and monumental, and by the time of the First World War he had introduced a new strand into his work, in the nudes and intimate interiors painted at his London home at Carlton Hill, St John's Wood. 
As an official war artist in 1918 Clausen was assigned to the Woolwich arsenal. The monumental work that he produced, 'In the Gun Factory at Woolwich Arsenal' (1918; IWM), recording the cavernous interior, the huge radial crane, and the tiny workmen, was regarded as one of the most successful war works to have been commissioned by the Ministry of Information. It led directly to a further commission to paint 'Returning to the Reconquered Land' (1919; Canadian War Museum, Ottawa) for Lord Beaverbrook's Canadian War Memorials Fund and to a private scheme to decorate High Royd, a house near Huddersfield, owned by G. P. Norton (1921). In 1925 Clausen was chosen as one of the muralists for a series 'The Building of Britain' in St Stephen's Hall in the Palace of Westminster. Working alongside painters such as William Rothenstein, Charles Sims, and D. Y. Cameron, he painted 'The English people, in spite of persecution for heresy, persist in gathering secretly to read aloud Wycliffe's English Bible' (1927), a work that was praised as being 'simple in arrangement... of singular beauty... [and] deeply moving' (H. Furst, 'Apollo', Sept 1927, 119). Following the unveiling, the painter was knighted by George V for his services to art, on 7 July 1927. 
Throughout the inter-war period Clausen continued to live in London, although he now maintained a country cottage at Duton Hill, Essex, close to the home of one of his most faithful patrons, W. F. Crittal (1887-1956). The surrounding fields provided material for a succession of misty landscapes which became Clausen's hallmark. When not at work in the Royal Academy Schools, of which he was temporarily appointed director and master of the painting school in 1927, following the resignation and then death of its keeper, Charles Sims, he could be found pushing his bike to favourite sketching haunts in the Essex countryside. With the outbreak of the Second World War, he and Lady Clausen left London to live at Cold Ash, Newbury, Berkshire, where he continued to work intermittently. Throughout the war Lady Clausen's health was poor, and her death in March 1944 was followed by that of the artist himself on 22 November 1944, at Cold Ash. A few months earlier Clausen had received a letter from Kenneth Clark inviting him to stage a retrospective exhibition at the National Gallery. With characteristic modesty he wrote, 'I think such an exhibition as you suggest would be more appropriate when I am dead and indifferent to praise or censure! However, I will help you all I can' (letter dated 10 June 1944, McConkey, 'Sir George Clausen, RA', 98). 


@@@@@


doc= 32436


Clauson, Albert Charles, Baron Clauson (1870-1946), judge, was born on 14 January 1870 in Paddington, London, the younger of the two sons of Charles Clauson, merchant, and his wife, Julia Burton, daughter of the Revd John Wall Buckley, vicar of St Mary's, Paddington. His mother's family was one of considerable note, and several of its members had a recognizable influence on his career, particularly his uncle Henry Burton Buckley, the eminent lawyer who became the first Baron Wrenbury. From a home of quiet distinction Clauson entered the Merchant Taylors' School in 1881, proceeding as a scholar to St John's College, Oxford, where he won firsts in both classical moderations (1889) and 'literae humaniores' (1891). Later he became a senior scholar of the college (1894) and an honorary fellow (1927). 
Clauson was called to the bar in 1891 by Lincoln's Inn, of which he was treasurer in 1937. On 15 December 1902 he married Kate, daughter of James Thomas Hopwood, barrister, of Lincoln's Inn, widow of Lucas Thomasson and sister of Sir Francis Hopwood (later Lord Southborough). Clauson's association with his uncle, who had taken silk in 1886, assisted him to acquire a large junior practice at an unusually early age. He edited the seventh (1897) and eighth (1902) editions of Buckley's classical treatise on the 'Companies Acts', which brought him lucrative business in that branch of the law. When he took silk in 1910 he was one of the busiest of the Chancery juniors. His success as a leader was soon such that he ceased to be attached to the court of a particular judge, as was then the rule, and joined the select band of 'specials' who accepted briefs only when marked with a special fee. During the First World War Clauson took up work at the Admiralty, where he acted as the legal member, unpaid, of the controller's staff. He was appointed CBE for his services in 1920. In 1918-19 he was in India with his brother-in-law Lord Southborough, who was chairman of the Indian franchise committee. 
On his return to the bar Clauson resumed his position as one of the leading equity practitioners, and was soon engaged as much in the House of Lords and privy council as in the Strand. He was standing counsel to the University of Oxford and to the Royal College of Physicians. The success of Clauson's advocacy was due less to profundity of knowledge than to a clear and logical mind finding felicitous expression in apt and lucid language. He argued his cases with much distinction of style, although his precision of manner appeared on occasions to be pedantic, and as with many Chancery practitioners he was more at home in legal argument than in the handling of witnesses. 
Clauson was appointed to the Chancery bench in 1926 and received the customary knighthood. Many of his qualities appeared to even greater advantage after he became a judge; he was courteous, and he was rapid, although inclined at times to an excess of subtlety and ingenuity. His twelve years' work as a Chancery judge was efficient and unobtrusive. His judgments in every branch of the equity jurisdiction were careful and scholarly, and he did much to elucidate the 'Law of Property Act' of 1925, and the other reforming and consolidating statutes known to lawyers as the 'Birkenhead Acts' which came into force in the year of his appointment. A citation from a Clauson judgment, especially in a Chancery matter, is always treated as authoritative and worthy of great respect. 
Clauson was made a lord justice of appeal and sworn of the privy council in 1938, and displayed in the higher tribunal the same judicial aptitudes. But his time there was comparatively brief. He retired at the beginning of 1942 and was created a baron. Thereafter, until shortly before his death, he occasionally sat at the hearing of appeals both in the House of Lords and in the privy council. 
Clauson's intellectual gifts found ample and congenial scope in the administration and practice of the law, and his ambitions were fully satisfied by the success which he achieved. By a kindliness of heart imperfectly concealed by a somewhat austere manner he won the affection of a large circle of friends both in his profession and beyond it. He maintained throughout his life a close interest in the Merchant Taylors' Company of which he was twice master. His portrait painted by L. Campbell Taylor in 1939 fortunately survived the destruction of the company's hall. He died at his home, Hawkshead House, North Mimms, near Hatfield, Hertfordshire, on 15 March 1946, a few weeks after the death of his wife. He had no children and the peerage became extinct on his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 32437


Claxton, (Brian) Brooke (1898-1960), politician in Canada, was born on 23 August 1898 in Montreal, the only child of Alfred George Brooke Claxton (1866-1945) and his wife, Blanche Lovat Simpson. The young Brooke Claxton was born to a privileged family in the rather conservative protestant circles of English Montreal. His childhood was, however, disrupted by the divorce of his parents and subsequent controversy between them. He attended the elite Lower Canada College from the age of seven and McGill University where, after interrupting his studies during the First World War, he completed a degree in law and was called to the Quebec bar in 1921. He joined his father's law firm, specializing in insurance law, and married on 19 June 1925 Helen Galt, daughter of John G. Savage, of Westmount, Quebec, with whom he had two sons and one daughter. 
Claxton was destined for a much more active and reformist life than might have been expected from his early upbringing. Two things conspired to change his conservative early outlook and to focus him on public service. The first was the First World War. Claxton interrupted his studies at McGill in 1916 to join the Royal Canadian Artillery. He served honourably in France (as a battery sergeant-major he was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal) and returned at war's end to recommence his studies at McGill. For him, as for so many of his generation, however, the war was disillusioning. He believed his generation had been sacrificed by the 'diplomats (not statesmen) of Europe' (letter to his uncle, 20 Nov 1920, Claxton MSS, vol. 18). He returned to Canada determined that his generation must quickly assert its place in the shattered world of the 1920s. 
This resolution fostered the second trend which was to shape Claxton. As he moved into public associations and clubs he came into contact with like-minded reformers -- young, well educated, and ambitious. They argued for a new kind of government, based on intellectual expertise rather than party connections. Only with such a transformation, they believed, could Canada overcome the problems of modern industrial society. It was also a generation whose memories of the war gave it definite nationalist overtones. Indeed, Claxton emerged as a public figure as a nationalist and then progressed to reform. 
Through the 1920s Claxton participated in a range of clubs and volunteer activities which moved in the effervescent zones in which politics, volunteerism, and intellectual debate overlapped. By the early 1930s he had become known for his work with the association of Canadian clubs and the Canadian Radio League, a body promoting a publicly owned radio network in Canada. In May 1931 he took the cause of federally regulated broadcasting to the supreme court of Canada. The depression of the 1930s reinforced his political activism and pragmatic reformism. Throughout the decade he acted as a critic of all parties, though common cause with fellow reformers and the times gradually led him to identify with the Liberal Party of William Lyon Mackenzie King. When war came in 1939 he felt he could no longer stand outside the system. In 1940 he ran for office as a Liberal and was handily elected for the Montreal constituency of St Lawrence-St George. 
Claxton's strong network of activists, intellectuals, and politicians gave him an unusual degree of influence as a new member of parliament. Two decades of public activity had linked him to the new breed of politicians and civil servants who were now scattered through key positions in the government. They were believers in the importance of effective government and the power of Keynesian thinking at a time when war made both more acceptable than ever before. Claxton was everywhere, pushing labour reform, procedural change for the House of Commons, and a more effective Canadian broadcasting system. His aggressive style may actually have slowed his rise to a cabinet post but the more likely reason lies in the complex regional politics of Canadian cabinet representation. There was just no need for an additional English Montrealer at the cabinet table. In 1943 he was, however, given the new post of parliamentary assistant to the privy council, reporting directly to the prime minister. 
By 1944 the Liberal government was turning its attention to the post-war world. Alternative parties were gaining in favour and both public and government feared a repeat of the sharp recession which had marked the end of the First World War. Part of the new attention to reform involved the creation of the new department of national health and welfare, a revolutionary step because both areas were constitutionally the responsibility of the provinces. Claxton and other reformers were convinced of the need for decisive federal action, however, and Claxton was one of the primary architects of the new department. His contributions were recognized when, in September 1944, he was elevated to the cabinet as Canada's first minister of national health and welfare. His time in the portfolio was relatively short-lived but while there he was involved in the implementation of several major reform measures, including the massive family allowance scheme. He also took an active role in the peace conferences at war's end, travelling to the Paris peace conference of 1946 as part of the Canadian delegation. 
Claxton's active reformism seemed to make him a natural choice for a social portfolio such as health and welfare. However, that was not where he was to spend most of his time in cabinet. In December 1946 he was appointed minister of national defence. Initially it was not an auspicious appointment. The portfolio that had been so important in war now seemed destined for cuts and relative obscurity. As it turned out, however, the cold war made the portfolio more important than at any other time in peace in Canadian history. After a brief period of reductions, Claxton was faced with the challenge of rebuilding the forces in the face of commitments to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Korean War. He supported the former but was sceptical about involvement in the latter. He was especially hostile to the hawkish attitudes of American General Douglas MacArthur. 
Claxton remained in defence from 1946 to 1954. He found King's successor, Louis St Laurent, a congenial superior and became a trusted confidant of St Laurent's inner circle. He also took on an increasingly active role as a party organizer. The truth, though, was that while national defence was more important than expected it was still a cul-de-sac for an ambitious politician. Canadians were not very interested in military matters, especially as so much of defence policy rested upon the power of the United States. A mixture of overwork and frustration led to recurring periods of exhaustion and reports of overdrinking. Claxton was a competent minister and cabinet stalwart but he appears not to have been very happy in his role as minister of defence. When, in 1954, he was offered the vice-presidency of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company at double his ministerial salary, he accepted. On 1 July 1954 he resigned his portfolio and returned to Montreal. 
Claxton was successful in his role at Metropolitan Life but he had one more role to play in public life. In 1957 the government created the Canada Council to support research and creative activity in the arts, humanities, and social sciences. Claxton was instrumental in establishing this important new public body and served as chairman until illness forced him to resign in 1959. He died of cancer at 112 Acacia Street, Ottawa, on 13 June 1960 and was buried in Ottawa three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 32438


Clay, Sir Henry (1883-1954), economist, was the third son and fourth child of James Henry Clay and his wife, Elizabeth Bulmer, of Bradford. He was born on 9 May 1883 in Germany, near Munchen-Gladbach. His father, a woollen manufacturer, had formed the firm of Goetz, Clay & Co., a partnership that lasted for eight years before the Clays returned to Yorkshire with their two girls and four boys. Henry Clay went to Bradford grammar school, which he left as head boy to go as a scholar to University College, Oxford, in 1902. 
Disappointed of his immediate hopes of an academic career because of his second class in 'literae humaniores' (1906), Clay became, first, secretary to a London charity organization, then, for two years, warden of the neighbourhood guild settlement in Sheffield. Between 1909 and 1917 he lectured for the Workers' Educational Association under the university extension scheme, an experience that led to the writing of 'Economics: an Introduction for the General Reader' (1916; 2nd edn, 1942). The book had great success, especially in Great Britain and the United States, and, by reason of its clarity and real-world examples, broadened public interest in economic matters. 
Clay was a temporary civil servant between 1917 and 1919 in the newly established Ministry of Labour, where he worked closely on industrial relations and other labour problems with H. D. Butler, later director of the International Labour Office. From 1919 to 1921 he was a fellow of New College, Oxford, and a special correspondent on industrial questions to the New York 'Evening Post'. During his first visit to America in 1921 he made close friendships with some outstanding young economists, especially Lewis Douglas and Walter Stewart, which he maintained throughout his life. 
In 1922 Clay became the Stanley Jevons professor of political economy at Manchester, and the following eight years there were academically very productive for him. They marked something of a golden age for the economics department, which both developed its links to the local community and became a centre of excellence in applied economics. In 1925 he went to South Africa as a member of the Economic and Wage Commission, and was largely responsible for the subsequent report. This was to be the first of many commissions, at home and abroad, to act as an arbitrator and adviser. 
In 1927 Clay asked to exchange his chair for the new professorship of social economics established through the generosity of E. D. Simon, a post that would relieve him of administrative duties, which did not interest him. He was never happy with large groups or in the public lecture. He perceived that applied economics could be strengthened by closer regular contacts between economists and business people, and he instituted his Manchester Thursday lunches as a successful pioneering effort. It was the influence of such business networks, together with his close observation of local industries (especially the Lancashire cotton industry), much more than his subscribing to any particular school of theoretical economics, that made Clay pre-eminently a man of affairs and a very practical economist. He was thus more at home writing balanced treatments of contemporary economic issues for the 'Manchester Guardian' -- where his swift and polished productions were something of a marvel even to its seasoned staff -- than reviews and articles in the learned journals, though (when public duties permitted) he was a frequent contributor to the 'Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies' and to the 'Economic Journal', the journal of the Royal Economic Society, upon whose council he served for a quarter of a century. 
Clay was not a foremost economic theorist. Indeed, he often expressed doubts about the value of much of the theorizing then in fashion. As he told Edwin Cannan, another leading economist who shared his structural diagnosis of Britain's industrial problems, he 'always felt that as a Professor of Economics I was a fraud... My reading of English economics has been scrappy... I don't know enough mathematics to follow our Cambridge friends, however suspicious I may be of their results; and I cannot suppress my interest in current political and social questions sufficiently to stick to any one part of the field of economics and so do some serious work on it. (Casson, 18-19)' He was a tool-user rather than a tool-designer -- and frequently impatient of the tools provided. Representative of this phase are 'The Post-War Unemployment Problem' (1929) and 'The Problem of Industrial Relations' (1929). 
In 1930 Clay resigned his chair to join the Bank of England, in the first instance as adviser to the newly established Securities Management Trust, a bank subsidiary charged with financing and promoting the rationalization of the depressed staple industries, problems upon which Clay was now especially qualified to advise. In 1930-31 he was a member of the royal commission on unemployment insurance. In 1933 he went with Sir Otto Niemeyer to Argentina to advise on the organization of its banking system. Clay's shrewd advice and his knack of getting on with people, especially with Montagu Norman, led to his appointment in the same year as economic adviser to the governor of the Bank of England. In practice he had been discharging this broader advisory role since the financial crisis of the summer of 1931, which had led, much to his consternation, to Britain's forced abandonment of the gold standard. Temperamentally Clay and Norman were poles apart: the governor a prima donna, Clay gentle, scholarly, sensitive, and undogmatic. Yet in many ways their views ran parallel, and Clay's pragmatic capacity for swift and clear draftsmanship must have been a godsend to Norman, whose inadequacy in expression was in sharp contrast to his considerable powers of thought and decision. 
Clay and Norman shared the opinion that, necessary as was a proper budgetary and monetary framework, financial ingenuity by governments in the form of large-scale loan-financed public works did not offer a long-term solution to the problems of British industry. They believed that the solution lay more on the supply side, where widespread inefficiencies in the use of capital and labour resulted in high costs and low productivity, problems that were being addressed by the bank in its promotion of industrial rationalization. Ostensibly both men were antipathetic towards the solution for unemployment being developed by J. M. Keynes, but, as we now know from the Per Jacobsson diaries and from Sayers's official history of the bank, through Clay, Norman came to favour a controlled demand expansion by Keynesian means, while by 1936 Clay had 'made himself a monetary economist of a stature that went unrecognised by the academic world from which he had been so completely withdrawn' (Sayers, 'Bank of England', 2.462, 489). Clay's, as Norman's, openness to new economic ideas is confirmed by their later joint support for Keynes's influential plan, 'How to Pay for the War' (1940). 
With Lord Stamp, Clay was one of the most active in the establishment in 1938 of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, and he guided its research as chairman of its council (1940-49) and later president (1949-52). Shortly before the outbreak of war Stamp was called upon by the government to produce a broad survey of national economic resources, and Clay and Hubert Henderson were his chief assistants in an organization that became the forerunner of the economic section and the central statistical office in the cabinet secretariat. Many of Clay's former Manchester colleagues and students were recruited: their applied economics skills were exactly those required for administering the war economy. After Stamp was killed in an air raid in 1941, Clay went to the Board of Trade as economic adviser and later to the Ministry of War Transport. 
In 1944 Clay left Whitehall to become the second warden of Nuffield College, Oxford, in succession to his former colleague H. D. Butler. He took particular pleasure in the appointment of visiting fellows chosen for their practical experience in the professions, industry, or commerce. He was successful in gaining the confidence of Lord Nuffield, who was not at that stage entirely happy about the development of his benefaction. The foundation-stone of the permanent building was not laid until 1949, just before Clay retired; his success as warden, especially with those small groups with which he was always happiest, was despite the temporary and limited premises in which the college was forced to operate. 
Clay was knighted in 1946, and after his early retirement from the wardenship of Nuffield he continued to enjoy a busy life. He became part-time economic adviser to Unilever; he was actively engaged in the collection and editing of Sir Hubert Henderson's papers (published posthumously as 'The Interwar Years and other Papers', 1955); and he pursued his work on a biography of Lord Norman (published posthumously in 1957 and described by Sayers as Clay's best and most important book). 
Clay's writings from his first and famous book in 1916 to the papers unfinished at his death show the main lines of his thinking unbroken. He was in many ways a Gladstonian Liberal, believing that private enterprise was the most efficient form of organizing production, that the liberty of the individual would be endangered by the continued growth of government, and that Britain should maintain its historic internationalism in its economic policies. However, his friendliness and complete absence of stridency in whatever he said or wrote tended to conceal the strength of his convictions, while his pragmatism and inventiveness made him open to policy experimentation in times of national emergency. His views diverged from the main stream of contemporary Liberal economic thought in at least two ways: in his doubts about the practical results of the Keynesian solution to unemployment or more especially of the views of some of Keynes's disciples; secondly, concerning industrial monopoly. Clay was not prepared to agree that a competitive system would inevitably degenerate into monopoly unless safeguarded by the state: anti-monopoly legislation in his view was unnecessary, inexpedient, and inequitable. 
Clay's greatest joys were found in his family circle. In 1910 he married Gladys (died 1941), the eldest daughter of Arthur Priestman, a worsted manufacturer, of Bradford; they had three sons and a daughter. Clay had a passion for sailing and the whole family would be taken, first on the broads, later on more venturesome journeys on the high seas. Outside this intimate family group was a vast circle of friends drawn by the charm of his wife and by Henry Clay's own kindness, modesty, and most entertaining conversational gifts. Although in later years he became something of a man of affairs, he retained the habits and enthusiasms of the scholar; nor might he be mistaken for anything else. Outside economics he was especially interested in architecture, painting, and music. He could never resist a second-hand bookshelf and he collected a large library, which included many bargains. His personal needs reflected his solid Yorkshire upbringing and he was the most economical of men. His first wife died in 1941, and in 1951 he married Rosalind, widow of E. Murray Wrong (the son of G. M. Wrong) and daughter of A. L. Smith, sometime master of Balliol. They spent three extremely happy years together before Clay's death, on 30 July 1954, as a result of a street accident in Middelburg, the Netherlands, where he had gone to join his children for a North Sea trip in the family yacht. 


@@@@@


doc= 32439


Clayden, Peter William (1827-1902), journalist and author, eldest son (of four children) of Peter Clayden (died 1865), ironmonger, and Eliza Greene (died 1873), was born at Wallingford on 20 October 1827. He was educated at a private school in Wallingford, and early went into business. Brought up among Congregationalists, he was led by the writings of Dr James Martineau to unitarian views, and was admitted to the Unitarian ministry. He married in 1853 Jane (died 1870), daughter of Charles Fowle of Dorchester, Oxfordshire. For thirteen years -- from 1855 to 1868 -- he was an active Unitarian minister. He was in charge, successively, of Unitarian churches at Boston (1855-9), Rochdale (1859-60), and Nottingham (1860-68). In 1865 Clayden appealed to Dr Martineau to act as leader in a movement for the union of all congregations that rested on a spiritual and not on a dogmatic basis; and on 14 March 1866 the Free Church Union was formed, of which Clayden became secretary. Meanwhile, he was also devoting himself to journalism. While at Boston he edited for a time the 'Boston Guardian'; while at Nottingham he wrote chiefly on political and social questions for the 'Edinburgh Review', 'The Fortnightly', and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. He strongly advocated the cause of the north during the American Civil War. He had already become acquainted with Harriet Martineau, and she, in 1866, introduced him to Thomas Walker, editor of the 'Daily News', who immediately engaged him as an occasional writer -- the start of a thirty-year association with the paper. In 1868, when the price of the 'Daily News' was reduced to 1died, Clayden resigned his ministry and joined the regular staff in London as leader writer and assistant editor. In 1887 he became night editor, a post he retained until 1896. In 1887 he married Ellen (died 1897), daughter of Henry Sharpe, of Hampstead. His second wife was great-niece of Samuel Rogers, the poet (of whom Clayden published two memoirs, in 1887 and 1889), and a niece of Samuel Sharpe, the Egyptologist (of whom he published a biography in 1883). 
Clayden, an ardent Liberal of strong nonconformist leanings, greatly increased the influence of the 'Daily News' as an organ of Liberal nonconformist opinion. He was especially active in support of Gladstone's anti-Turkish views on the Eastern question, and in opposition to the pro-Turkish policy of Lord Beaconsfield and his successors. He was a notable chronicler of his times in 'England under Lord Beaconsfield' (1880; used by Gladstone in preparing the Midlothian campaign) and 'Five Years of Liberal and Six Years of Conservative Government' (1880). These books were his best work, linking his experience of journalism and politics. He thrice sought in vain to enter parliament as a Liberal, contesting Nottingham in 1868, Norwood in 1885, and North Islington in 1886. He was a member of the executive committee of the National Liberal Federation and an alderman of St Pancras. 
Clayden's journalistic efficiency and honesty of purpose were well recognized by professional colleagues; in 1893 he was elected president of the Institute of Journalists, and in 1894 president of the International Congress of the Press at Antwerp. In 1896, when freed from regular journalistic work, he championed the cause of the Armenians against Turkish persecution. He was honorary secretary of the Armenian committee, and in 1897 published 'Armenia: the Case against Lord Salisbury'. Clayden died suddenly from acute bronchitis at his home, 1 Upper Woburn Place, London, on 19 February 1902. The eldest son of his first marriage, Arthur William Clayden, became principal of University College, Exeter. 


@@@@@


doc= 32440


Clayton, Sir Gilbert Falkingham (1875-1929), army officer and colonial administrator, was born on 6 July 1875 at Ryde, Isle of Wight, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel William Lewis Nicholl Clayton of Sandown, and his wife, Maria Martha Pilkington. Having been educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Clayton received his commission in the Royal Artillery in 1895. He served under Kitchener in the Sudan campaign of 1898, was present at the battles of the Atbara and Omdurman, and received British and Egyptian decorations. In 1900 he joined the Egyptian army, which by then had occupied the Sudan, and in 1901 he was promoted captain. In 1902-3 he was district commissioner at Wau in the Bahr al-Ghazal, and from 1903 to 1908 he served as deputy assistant adjutant-general at headquarters in Cairo. He returned to Khartoum in 1908 as private secretary to the 'sirdar' (commander-in-chief) and governor-general of Sudan, Sir Reginald Wingate, in which capacity he accompanied Wingate on a mission to Somaliland in 1909. In 1910 he retired from the army and transferred permanently to the Sudan government. Having won Wingate's confidence, he was promoted in 1913 to the sensitive dual position of director of intelligence and Sudan agent in Cairo. On 18 September 1912 he married Enid Caroline ('b'. 1885/6), second daughter of Frank Napier Thorowgood, civil engineer. They had five children. 
At the outbreak of the First World War, Clayton returned to active service. In addition to his other duties he now assumed the role of director of military intelligence at British headquarters. Thus at the nexus of Anglo-Egyptian and allied military and political intelligence, Clayton was the logical choice to head the new Arab bureau and assist in co-ordinating the complex diplomatic and military aspects of the Arab revolt against the Ottoman Turks. In 1917 Clayton was promoted brigadier-general and became chief political officer of the Egyptian expeditionary force that began the invasion of Palestine, where he served as military governor. 
Clayton returned to Cairo in 1919 as adviser to the Egyptian ministry of the interior. With the end of the war, Egyptian nationalist aspirations had burst to the surface, and the importance of Clayton's sensitive position was increased during the long months of Anglo-Egyptian negotiations and political disturbances in Egypt that ensued. Like other prominent soldier-administrators on the scene, most notably Field Marshal Allenby (then high commissioner in Egypt), Clayton came to recognize the need to abolish the British protectorate. This view eventually won the day, and when the British declared Egyptian independence in 1922 Clayton's position became anomalous and he resigned. 
Thereafter Clayton was employed in Palestine as chief secretary and acting high commissioner from 1922 to 1925, in which capacity he assisted in negotiating a treaty between Britain and Transjordan (1922-3). He was next commissioned to settle frontier disputes between Arabia and its neighbours Iraq and Transjordan. Negotiations at Kuwait (1924) having failed, Clayton concluded at Jiddah the Bahra and Hadda agreements (1925) with 'Abd al- 'Aziz ibn Sa'ud, the ruler of Najd and Hejaz. In 1926 at San'a' he orchestrated discussions between Yahya ibn Muhammad Hamid al-Din, the imam of the Yemen, and the Aden protectorate, a negotiation that ended in failure. But negotiations with Ibn Sa'ud resulted in the treaty of Jiddah (1927), which finally settled outstanding differences between Britain and Hejaz. Following his settlement of two minor issues in Arabia in the following year, he was made high commissioner and commander-in-chief in Iraq in 1929. He had barely taken up that appointment when he died from a heart attack at Baghdad on 11 September 1929, while playing polo. 
Clayton's premature death cut short a distinguished career of great promise. In the multilateral and multifaceted arena of Near-Eastern politics Clayton, a skilled Arabist, succeeded through tact, loyalty, keen observation, and deft management of information and personalities. His years of administrative experience in the Sudan served him well in Cairo; his personal qualities and wartime experience made him an ideal emissary in Arabia. While colleagues and subordinates such as T. E. Lawrence achieved worldwide fame, the confidential nature of Clayton's successive offices necessarily obscured the importance of his achievements which have only recently attracted more attention from historians. Clayton was created CMG (1915), CB (1917), KBE (1919), and KCMG (1926), and held many foreign decorations and honours. 


