@@@@@


doc= 32441


Clementi, Sir Cecil (1875-1947), colonial governor, was born on 1 September 1875 at Cawnpore in India, the eldest child of Colonel Montagu Clementi (1839-1919), judge advocate-general in India, and his wife, Isabel Collard (1850-1930). He was educated at St Paul's School in London and at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was elected a demy. Studying classics and Sanskrit, he received a first class in classical moderations in 1896, the Boden Sanskrit scholarship in 1897, a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1898, and the chancellor's Latin essay prize in 1899. 
In 1899 Clementi came fourth in the competitive examination for posts in the home, India or colonial civil service and selected Hong Kong as his first choice. He was appointed a Hong Kong cadet that year and on arrival in Hong Kong was sent up to Canton (Guangzhou) to learn Cantonese. Unrest on the Chinese mainland resulted in his return to Hong Kong in July 1900. He was to spend the next twelve years working in the administration there, with the exception of two secondments, to India in 1902 and to Kwangsi (Guangxi) province in 1903. From 1903 to 1906 he had the arduous task of registering land titles in the New Territories in Hong Kong. On 16 April 1912 he married (Marie) Penelope Rose Cobbold Eyres (1889-1970), the beautiful daughter of an admiral based in Hong Kong. They had four children; Clementi adored Penelope, and she was a constant support throughout his career. 
Clementi was sent to British Guiana as colonial secretary in 1913. He remained there until 1922, administering the government on three occasions during his tenure. From there, he was posted to Ceylon as colonial secretary and also administered the government once. In October 1925 he was appointed governor of Hong Kong, only the second cadet to achieve this position. The colony was at that point in a state of extreme civil unrest. A general strike and boycott was paralysing the colony's trade and relations between Hong Kong and China had rarely been worse. Clementi immediately instigated informal talks with the authorities in Canton. His negotiating stance was stern but open and within a year the boycott was over and diplomatic relations repaired. Overcoming the major physical and economic threats from China throughout 1925 and 1926 was an undoubted victory for Clementi. An extremely active governor, he also introduced effective measures to counteract further communist penetration of the unions and brought in important public health, factory, and employment legislation. He also took steps to improve Hong Kong's water supplies following the severe drought of 1928-9. Other achievements during his tenure included the nomination of the first Chinese member to the executive council and improving the balance in the annual budget. Clementi's major disappointment in Hong Kong was his lack of success in persuading the London government to extend land leases in the New Territories beyond 1997. In 1930 Britain returned Weihaiwei in north China to the Chinese and Clementi argued that this rendition should have been used as a bargaining counter to secure Hong Kong for Britain beyond 1997. 
In 1930 Clementi was transferred to the governorship of the Straits Settlements following the sudden retirement of the previous incumbent on health grounds. The post, which incorporated the duties of high commissioner of the Malay states, was one of the most important in the empire. The administrative organization he inherited was complex and unwieldy and he decentralized the administration whenever possible in moves he hoped would eventually defederalize the states. He also introduced administrative posts for members of the indigenous population and supported Malayan culture and language in his reorganization of the education system. Many of these moves were unpopular with the Chinese and Malay populations and at times, notably in his educational and administrative reforms, Clementi was forced to compromise. With hindsight, his undiluted reforms would probably have been the better option for the region. In Singapore he developed diabetes and as a result was forced to retire in 1934, his work in the area unfinished. 
Clementi was tall and slim and it was the opinion of his peers that he was both hard-working and extremely intelligent. Despite his sometimes controversial approach to colonial administration and his propensity for giving notice of his gubernatorial actions retrospectively to London, he was highly rated within the Colonial Office. He was appointed CMG in 1916, KCMG in 1926, and GCMG in 1931 for his services. A fine negotiator who was charming in private, he preferred academic pursuits to parties and found great joy in travelling. He travelled to all of the Chinese provinces and took every opportunity to explore the countries in which he worked. His twin beliefs of equality of opportunity and education determined many of his actions as a governor. A scholar who was fluent in several Chinese dialects, his translations of Chinese love poems are charmingly phrased. His two publications on British Guiana remain important sources of information on the area. 
Clementi was closely associated with the foundation of the University of Hong Kong and was chancellor from 1925 to 1930. He was awarded an honorary LLD by the institution in 1926. His support included writing the anthem (in Latin verse) for the university in 1912, gifting an important collection of Chinese books, and raising funds for the study of Anglo-Chinese cultural relationships. He spent his retirement in Britain writing and studying. He died of heart failure at Holmer Court, Holmer Green, near High Wycombe, on 5 April 1947; his ashes were buried in Penn Street church, Buckinghamshire. 
A creative administrator in the Straits Settlements and one of Hong Kong's most distinguished governors, a reassessment of Clementi's historical importance during the height of British imperialism is long overdue. In his own lifetime he was acknowledged as one of Britain's brightest and most able colonial officers. However, his proposals for reforms in Hong Kong and the Straits Settlements frequently caused conflict with the local populations. Many of his ideas on equality and education were decades ahead of colonial policy but his interventionist tendencies have been criticized by historians writing since his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 32442


Clerk, Sir Dugald (1854-1932), mechanical engineer, was born at Glasgow on 31 March 1854, the eldest son of Donald Clerk, machinist, of Glasgow, and his wife, Martha Symington, second daughter of John Brown, of Glasgow. He was about fifteen years old when he began his training in the drawing office of H. O. Robinson & Co., of Glasgow, and in his father's works, also attending classes at Anderson's University, Glasgow. From 1871 to 1876 he studied at Anderson's University and the Yorkshire College of Science, Leeds, under the chemist T. E. Thorpe, who made him one of his assistants and set him to work on the fractionation of petroleum oils. He had intended to become a chemical engineer, but after seeing a Lenoir gas engine at work in a joiner's shop in Glasgow, this and other forms of the internal combustion engine became the leading interest of his life. 
After his return to Glasgow, Clerk was for a short time assistant to E. J. Mills, the Young professor of technical chemistry at Anderson's University; he then devoted himself to research on the theory and design of the gas engine, first with the Glasgow firm of Thomson, Sterne & Co., from 1877 to 1885, then with Messrs Tangyes, of Birmingham. Clerk married, in 1883, Margaret (died 1930), elder daughter of Alexander Hanney, of Helensburgh. 
In 1888 Clerk joined his friend George Croydon Marks in the firm of Marks and Clerk, consulting engineers and patent agents; this partnership lasted for the rest of his life. From 1892 to 1899 he was engineering director of Messrs Kynoch, of Birmingham, for whom he designed machinery for the manufacture of ammunition, and from 1902 he was a director and from 1929 until his death chairman of the National Gas Engine Company, of Ashton under Lyne. 
Clerk began his work on the gas engine at the end of 1876. His first patent, taken out in 1877, was followed by a second in 1878, and in 1881 he patented an engine working on what became known as the Clerk (two-stroke) cycle, in which the main crankshaft received an impulse at each revolution, in contrast to the Otto (four-stroke) engine in which there was one impulse for each two revolutions. Engines of the Clerk type were manufactured in considerable numbers, but their popularity waned for a time after the lapse of the Otto patent in 1890. The Clerk cycle, however, came into extensive use for gas engines of the larger sizes. 
Clerk's assiduous researches on the internal combustion engine, the specific heat of gases, and the explosion of gaseous mixtures won him an international reputation. He embodied his results in a book, 'The Gas Engine' (1886), which subsequently appeared as 'The Gas, Petrol and Oil Engine' (1909), and in many communications to scientific and technical societies, particularly the Institution of Civil Engineers, to which, between 1882 and 1928, he contributed five papers and two James Forrest lectures (1904 and 1920). The second of these lectures dealt with coal conservation in the United Kingdom and followed the theme of his Thomas Hawksley lecture to the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1915 on the world's supplies of fuel and motive power. In 1917 he delivered the first Trueman Wood lecture to the Royal Society of Arts. 
During the First World War, Clerk was director of engineering research at the Admiralty (1916-17) and served on many committees concerned with the war effort. He was also chairman of the water power resources committee of the conjoint board of scientific societies (1917) and a member of the water power resources committee appointed by the Board of Trade in 1918. Other activities included chairmanship of the delegacy of the City and Guilds College, South Kensington, London (1918-19), and membership of the University Grants Committee and the Carnegie Trust for Scotland. He was frequently a judge at the reliability trials which were fashionable in the early days of the motor car. 
Clerk, who was appointed KBE in 1917, received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, and St Andrews. The Royal Society of Arts awarded him the Albert medal in 1922, and the Royal Society, of which he was elected a fellow in 1908, a royal medal in 1924. For the papers which he read before the Institution of Civil Engineers he received the Watt medal (1882), Telford prize (1882 and 1886), and Telford gold medal (1907). Ill health dogged his latter years; he died at his home, Lukyns, Ewhurst, Surrey, on 12 November 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 32443


Clerk, Sir George Russell (1874-1951), diplomatist, was born on 29 November 1874 in India, the only son of General Sir Godfrey Clerk (1835-1908), army officer, later commandant of the rifle brigade and groom-in-waiting to Queen Victoria and Edward VII, and his wife, Alice Mary, daughter of William Edward Frere, of the Bombay civil service; his grandfather was Sir George Russell Clerk (1800-1889), East India Company servant. He was educated at Eton College and at New College, Oxford, where he received a third class in 'literae humaniores' (1897). After studying foreign languages abroad, he passed the Foreign Office entrance examination in December 1898. 
Clerk served in March-April 1901 as acting third secretary to the duke of Abercorn's special mission to the courts of northern Europe, announcing the accession of Edward VII. In April 1903 he was posted, at his own request, to Abyssinia, where the British agency was no more than a group of round tuguls with thatched roofs and mud and wattle walls. He was twice left in charge and learnt Amharic before being recalled owing to ill health. He was promoted to second secretary in February 1907 and to assistant clerk in May 1907, and again served at the Foreign Office from May 1907 to October 1910. In the latter month he was promoted to first secretary and posted to the embassy at Constantinople, and in his spare time learned Turkish. In February 1912 he returned to the Foreign Office, where he was promoted in October 1913 to senior clerk and head of the Eastern department. On 16 June 1908 he had married (Janet) Muriel Whitwell, an accomplished artist, and daughter of Edward Robson Whitwell, of Yarm-on-Tees, Yorkshire. They had no children. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Clerk was appointed head of the Foreign Office's new war department, which combined the pre-war regional departments covering Europe. He was promoted counsellor in December 1916. He worked closely with the secretary to the war cabinet, Maurice Hankey, forming one of his most important official relationships. In January 1917 he attended the conference in Rome at which the allies' overall campaign strategy for the year was planned. Later that month he accompanied Lord Milner on his mission to Russia. From January to September 1919 he was private secretary to Lord Curzon, the acting foreign secretary, and, with many of the senior officials in attendance at the Paris peace conference, he was in effect under-secretary. In August 1919 he was himself sent to Paris to serve as secretary to the foreign secretary, Sir Arthur Balfour. 
In September 1919 Clerk was appointed the first British minister to the new Czechoslovak state. First, however, he was sent on a special mission by the peace conference to Bucharest and Budapest, to secure the evacuation of the Romanian army from Hungary. During a stay in Budapest from October to December 1919, he witnessed the removal of the Romanian army, which in turn opened the way for the entry of the White forces under Admiral Horthy. Clerk's anti-Bolshevism made him tolerant of Horthy and the 'White terror' he unleashed upon Hungary, and his association with the admiral became controversial. In his defence, it was argued that his attitude was dictated by necessity since there was little choice but to use these forces if order was to be restored in the country. 
Throughout the war Clerk had advocated the dismemberment of the Habsburg empire and had been sympathetic to the views of the 'New Europe' group led by R. W. Seton-Watson. This connection led him to become acquainted with many of eastern Europe's future leaders. The decision to send him to Prague was inspired in part by his good relations with President Masaryk. Clerk did much to establish a good diplomatic atmosphere in Prague, and he was one of the few British ministers to sympathize with the Czechoslovaks over their efforts to handle the minorities question. He was less successful in his aspiration to make Czechoslovakia a centre for British influence in central Europe, when Curzon decided to swing away from Prague to Budapest. Arguments with the British ministers to Budapest and Vienna over policy also marked Clerk's tenure. 
In November 1926 Clerk was appointed ambassador to Turkey and once again he was called upon to improve a strained diplomatic relationship. He succeeded in bringing about a rapprochement in Anglo-Turkish relations, damaged not only by the First World War but also by Britain's subsequent support for Greece's invasion in 1919 and compounded by a longer-lasting distrust of the Turkish leader, Kemal Ataturk. Clerk could have expected a major embassy, such as Berlin, as his next posting, but he received instead the minor embassy at Brussels, in October 1933. A few months later, however, in April 1934, he was the surprise choice to become ambassador to Paris in succession to Lord Tyrrell. Clerk's tenure of the Paris embassy witnessed the prelude to the Second World War. Acting upon instructions Clerk played an important role during the Spanish Civil War when, in a meeting with the foreign minister, Yvon Delbos, on 7 August 1936, he helped to convince the French government to adopt the British policy of non-intervention. None the less, Clerk was one of the group of ambassadors, including Horace Rumbold and Eric Phipps, who were alive to, and warned of, the threat from Germany. As ambassador he was a notable host and particularly enjoyed entertaining members of the French aristocracy at the Jockey Club in Paris. Lady Clerk, with whom his relationship was often strained, preferred informality as much as her husband preferred formality. 
Clerk retired from the diplomatic service in April 1937 and became an active member of the Royal Geographical Society, serving as president during the difficult war years of 1941-5. He played an important role in overseeing the transition from the age of exploration to that of the scholarly study of detail. A cigar smoker, he was a passionate fisherman, stag hunter, polo player, card player, and lover of books. Harold Nicolson, who served under him, observed that the habitually tidy Clerk 'was impervious to disturbance; he would have mounted the scaffold with the same imperturbability as he mounted the steps of the Turf Club, his spats and monocle shining in the summer air' (Nicolson, 859). An apparent dilettantism masked a forceful personality which enabled Clerk either to smooth previously ruffled feelings, as he did in Prague and Turkey, or to implement difficult policies, as he did in Budapest, or to see to the efficient administration of a wartime department, as he did during the First World War. He was appointed CMG (1908), CB (1914), KCMG (1917), PC (1926), and GCMG (1929). He held the grand cordon of the Legion d'honneur from France and decorations from Italy, Russia, and Czechoslovakia. He died at 29 Cleveland Gardens, Paddington, London, on 18 June 1951. A funeral service was held at Golders Green, and a memorial service at St Margaret's, Westminster, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32444


Clerke, Agnes Mary (1842-1907), writer on astronomy, born at Skibbereen, co. Cork, on 10 February 1842, was the younger daughter of John William Clerke (1814-1890), and his wife, Catherine (1818-1897), daughter of Rickard Deasy of Clonakilty, co. Cork, and sister of Rickard Deasy, an Irish politician and judge. Her elder sister was Ellen Mary Clerke (1840-1906). Her only brother, Aubrey St John Clerke, (1843-1923), after a brilliant career as a scholar and medallist in mathematics and science at Trinity College, Dublin, became a Chancery barrister in London. The father, a classical scholar and graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, was manager until 1861 of a bank at Skibbereen, owned land in the district, and practised astronomy as a recreation. From 1861 to 1877 he was registrar to his brother-in-law at the court of the exchequer, Dublin. 
Interested as a child by her father in astronomy, Agnes Clerke was highly educated at home. In 1861 she moved with her family to Dublin. She and her sister, Ellen Mary, spent the years 1867-77 in Italy, chiefly in Florence, where Agnes studied in the libraries and wrote her first article of astronomical interest, 'Copernicus in Italy', published in the 'Edinburgh Review' in July 1877. A total of fifty articles mainly on scientific themes, both contemporary and historical, appeared in the 'Edinburgh Review' between that year and her death. In 1877 the family settled in London, which was thereafter Agnes Clerke's home. A paper in the 'Edinburgh Review' on 'The chemistry of the stars' in 1880 was followed in 1885 by her first book, 'A Popular History of Astronomy during the Nineteenth Century' (4th edn, 1902). Nothing of the kind had appeared since 1852, when the 'History of Physical Astronomy' was published by Robert Grant. In the interval the spectroscope had been applied to astronomy and the science of astronomical physics established. Agnes Clerke's work, which at once became the standard work in its field, was especially valuable for its wealth of references. In 1888 she had the opportunity of practical astronomical work during a two months' visit to Sir David and Lady Gill at the observatory at the Cape of Good Hope. Soon after her return she was offered, but declined, a post at the nominal rank of computer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. In 1890 her second book, 'The System of the Stars' (2nd edn, 1905), which shows clear evidence of Gill's influence, maintained her reputation. The third and last of her larger works, 'Problems in Astrophysics', came out in 1903. Smaller volumes were 'The Herschels and Modern Astronomy' (1895) in the 'Century Science' series, edited by Sir Henry Roscoe, 'Astronomy' (1898) in the 'Concise Knowledge' series, and 'Modern Cosmogonies' (1905). Each annual volume of the 'Observatory Magazine' from 1886 until her death contained reviews by her of books or descriptions of new advances in astronomy. She contributed many articles, including those on Galileo, Laplace, and Lavoisier, to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn). In the 11th edition (1910) she was the author of the main article on the history of astronomy as well as of numerous biographies of astronomers. For the 'Dictionary of National Biography' she wrote 150 entries, which include almost all the lives of astronomers from the first volume to the supplementary volumes in 1901. In 1893 the governors of the Royal Institution awarded to Agnes Clerke the Actonian prize of 100 guineas for her writings on astronomy. She was commissioned to write the Hodgkins Trust essay on 'Low temperature research at the Royal Institution 1893-1900', published in 1901 ('Proceedings of the Royal Institution', 16.699-718). This substantial essay, and her 'Modern Cosmogonies', reveal her interest in her later years in new developments in physics and chemistry. In 1903 she was elected an honorary member of the Royal Astronomical Society, a rare distinction among women, shared at the time with Lady Huggins; it had been accorded previously only to Mary Somerville, Caroline Herschel, and Ann Sheepshanks. 
Clerke's devotion to science never lessened her interest in literature and cultural matters generally, on which she wrote from time to time in the 'Edinburgh Review', as, for example, in her essays on Don Sebastian (1882) and the letters of Edward Fitzgerald (1894). In 1892 she published 'Familiar Studies in Homer', which illustrated her breadth of learning. She was also an accomplished musician. In private life she was shy and unpretentious. 'No purer, loftier and yet sweetly unselfish and human soul has lived', was Lady Huggins's appraisal of her character. Never particularly robust, her health declined in the last few years of her life, though she worked to the very end. She died of pneumonia at her residence, 68 Redcliffe Square, London, on 20 January 1907, and was buried three days later in Brompton cemetery. 
Agnes Clerke's active years spanned a period of exceptionally rapid development in astronomy. Her meticulous 'Popular History of Astronomy in the Nineteenth Century', with its abundance of references to the work of minor as well as of major figures, remains a valuable chronicle of that important era. 'The System of the Stars', with its assertion as 'a practical certainty' that 'the entire contents, stellar and nebular, of the entire sphere belong to one mighty aggregation' represents the generally accepted view of the universe at the turn of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 32445


Clerke, Ellen Mary (1840-1906), translator and writer, was born on 26 September 1840 at Skibbereen, co. Cork. She was the eldest of three children of John William Clerke (1814-1890), classical scholar, graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, and manager of a bank in Skibbereen, and his wife, Catherine (1818-1897), daughter of Rickard Deasy of Clonakilty, co. Cork. 
Her sister, Agnes Mary Clerke (1842-1907), whose middle name, like Ellen's, was an indication of the Clerke family's devout Catholicism, was born two years later. Neither married and the Clerke sisters were to be close companions throughout their lives. Their younger brother, Aubrey St John Clerke, became a Chancery barrister in London. Both women were very intelligent and had wide-ranging interests. They were educated to an exceptionally high degree at home and grew up to share a taste for literature, science, and music. Their father initially taught them astronomy, of which he was a keen amateur student. Both Clerke sisters later wrote about astronomy and Agnes became an eminent authority on the subject -- it remained a subsidiary interest for Ellen. 
The Clerke family moved to Dublin in 1861 and then, in 1863, back to co. Cork to the small port of Queenstown (renamed Kobh after 1922), presumably in connection with John Clerke's work. By 1867, when Ellen was twenty-seven, they had settled in Italy where they remained for ten years, living mostly in Florence. During her time in Italy, Ellen, ever keen to enlarge the horizons of her knowledge, became fluent in the Italian language. She began to study Italian literature and to translate Italian texts for English publication. She also wrote critiques of Italian literature, samples of which can be read in Richard Garnett's 'History of Italian Literature' (1897). Her 'Fable and Song in Italy', which was eventually published by Grant Edwards in 1899, and which was dedicated to Garnett, gathered together some of her earlier essays which had first appeared in periodicals such as the 'Dublin Review' and the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. It also included line-by-line verse translations of poets such as Boiardo, a fifteenth-century Tuscan. 
Shortly after the family's return from Italy to settle in London, where John Clerke died in 1890, Ellen had published in 1881 by W. Satchell & Co. a volume entitled 'The Flying Dutchman and other Poems'. It contains some of her own ballads, early and miscellaneous poems, along with some translations from Italian. Like most of her writing, the style, to the modern ear, is too controlled and self-consciously accurate to evince any real passion, though the range of mythological and literary subjects shows a formidable breadth and depth of learning. 
Once she had taken up residence in London, Ellen also embarked on a weekly leader column in 'The Tablet' which she kept up for twenty years. Always a woman of eclectic interests she wrote monographs on Jupiter and on Venus, published by Edward Stanford in 1892 and 1893 respectively. She also wrote occasional pieces for 'The Observatory', the journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, founded by William Christie in 1877, though her sister Agnes wrote many more of these. 
Ellen was sixty-two before her novel 'Flowers of Fire' was published by Hutchinson in 1902. It is a well enough written romance, in her usual careful prose, set in the cosmopolitan upper strata of Italian society which she knew so well. Its quaint formality has not worn well, though the physical description of the eruption of Vesuvius in chapter 24 imaginatively and effectively evokes the horror of the flames and fear as the heroine and her lover flee to safety while everyone else in the party perishes. 
Ellen Mary Clerke died from bronchitis on 2 March 1906 at 68 Redcliffe Square in Kensington, the home she shared with Agnes, who outlived her by only ten months. Although she had written a great deal and achieved much, she seemed all her life to be overshadowed by her younger and better known sister. When 'The Times' published its 400-word obituary of Agnes on 22 January 1907 it dismissed her sister with the words: 'Her sister Miss EM Clerke, who died a few months ago, also wrote on astronomical matters, though in a far more humble way.' 'Agnes Mary and Ellen Mary Clerke: an Appreciation' was printed for private circulation in 1907. It was written by Lady Huggins, wife of the eminent scientist Sir William Huggins, with a foreword by Aubrey St John Clerke. 


@@@@@


doc= 32446


Clery, Sir Cornelius Francis (1838-1926), army officer, was born at 2 Sidney Place, Cork, on 13 February 1838, the fourth son of James Clery, wine merchant, of Cork, and his wife, Catherine Walsh. After being educated at Dublin and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he was commissioned ensign in the 32nd foot in March 1858. He was promoted lieutenant in June 1859 and captain in January 1866. From 1868 to 1870 he studied at the Staff College. In 1871 he was appointed an instructor of tactics at Sandhurst, where he proved an immediate success, and in September 1872 was appointed professor of tactics. On completing his term of office in May 1875 he published 'Minor Tactics', the result of his Sandhurst teaching, which for thirty years was a leading and influential textbook. 
Clery left Sandhurst in 1875 in order to join the administrative staff at army headquarters in Ireland; from there he was transferred to Aldershot in April 1877. A year later he was sent to the Cape on special service as a major on half pay. On the outbreak of the Anglo-Zulu War in January 1879 he was appointed operational staff officer to Colonel R. T. Glynn's column, and later adjutant-general to the flying column. He was present at the battle of Ulundi (4 July). After the war he returned home, and was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel for his services. In August 1882 he went to Egypt as brigade major in Wolseley's army. After the battle of Tell al-Kebir (13 September), Clery remained in Egypt on the headquarters staff, and subsequently acted as chief of staff in the Suakin expedition under Major-General Sir Gerald Graham in 1884, taking part in the actions at al-Teb (29 February) and Tamai (13 March). In these he was conspicuous, as he refused to wear the new khaki uniform, choosing instead a smartly cut scarlet jacket. For his services he was promoted brevet colonel in May 1884 and was made CB. 
Clery served as deputy adjutant and quartermaster-general in the Gordon relief expedition, and was appointed chief of staff of the army of occupation in Egypt in March 1886. Having shown he was a fighting soldier, and no mere theorist, Clery was appointed commandant of the Staff College in August 1888. After five years there he reverted to half pay until promoted major-general in December 1894. In 1896 he was appointed deputy adjutant-general at the War Office. 
Clery remained there until, on the outbreak of the South African War in October 1899, he was appointed to command the 2nd division in Natal. This he led throughout the campaign to relieve Ladysmith (28 February 1900) and the subsequent invasion of the eastern Transvaal. In October 1900 the Natal army was broken up to garrison the territory it had captured. Without a command Clery, like many others, returned to England. The reason for his recall was the subject of many rumours: indecisiveness in command, ill health, or personal considerations in high places that had no connection with his professional ability. He was created KCB in 1899 and KCMG in 1900, and retired in February 1901. A dandy of the old school, who dyed his whiskers and dressed impeccably even on campaign, Clery was a brave soldier. He died, unmarried, at his home, 4 Whitehall Court, Westminster, London, on 25 June 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 32447


Cleworth, Thomas Ebenezer (1854-1909), religious educationist, eldest survivor of the seven sons and five daughters of Enoch Cleworth of Tyldesley, near Manchester, and Mary Sykes of Heywood, was born at Westminster on 2 April 1854, his father at that date being a London city missionary. Cleworth was educated at the West Ham Pelly Memorial School, and was for some years a teacher there. About 1871 he began mission work under the Evangelisation Society and attached himself to the American missioner D. L. Moody, for whom he addressed meetings in Dublin and Cork. In 1874 his health broke down. In 1879 he entered St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated as a passman in 1882. He was stroke of one of the college boats. Ordained deacon and priest in 1881, he served in the Cambridge long vacations as curate of Kirk German, Isle of Man. 
In 1882 Cleworth joined the staff of the Church Parochial Mission Society under Canon Hay Aitken, and in 1884, on the nomination of the trustees, he became vicar of St Thomas, Nottingham. In the same year he married Edith Annie, daughter of Alfred Butterworth JP, of Oldham and Andover. Cleworth's father-in-law presented him in 1888 to the rectory of Middleton, Lancashire. In 1899 Dr James Moorhouse, bishop of Manchester, created him rural dean of Middleton and Prestwich, and in 1902 an honorary canon of Manchester. At Middleton he organized many missions and 'instruction services' held after the Sunday evening service in Lent. His parochial schools, on which he spent much time as well as money, were of unusual efficiency. The renovation of the parish church was another focus of Cleworth's endeavours, and the chancel was restored in his memory after his death. 
Convinced that the efficiency of church life ultimately depended on the schools, Cleworth actively devoted himself to educational controversy, especially resisting, during the discussion of the 'Education Bill' of 1902, every proposal to diminish the absolute control of the church over the religious teaching of its schools. In November 1903 he formed the Church Schools Emergency League, for the maintenance of church schools as such and of religious education by church teachers and clergy in school and church during school hours. Cleworth acted as secretary and treasurer of the league, which opposed with effect much of the Board of Education's policy touching church schools, and attacked the passive attitude of the National Society. Ultimately Cleworth's policy, while maintaining the 'status quo' of the church schools, claimed that church teaching should be given in council schools by a church teacher on the staff, with parallel rights for nonconformists. He was a member of the Middleton local education authority, a member of the standing committee of the National Society, and a leader of the 'no surrender' party in 1906; he was largely responsible for the great demonstrations in Lancashire and London against the Liberal government's 'Education Bill' of 1906, which the House of Lords rejected. A constant speaker throughout the country, he compiled the first eighty-four leaflets of the Emergency League (which were afterwards bound in seven volumes), besides contributing largely to the Manchester and London press, including 'The Times' and the 'Church Family Newspaper'. He published a volume on the education crisis in 1906 jointly with the Revd John Wakeford. Cleworth died on 5 April 1909 at Middleton rectory, Lancashire. 'In days of fluid convictions and wavering beliefs Canon Cleworth was pre-eminently 'justus ac tenax propositi vir'' (Dr Knox, bishop of Manchester, in 'Manchester Diocesan Magazine', May 1909). He was survived by his wife, two sons, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 32448


Clifford, Sir Bede Edmund Hugh (1890-1969), colonial governor, was born on 3 July 1890 on his father's sheep farm in the South Island of New Zealand. He was the third and youngest son of William Hugh Clifford (1858-1943), later tenth Baron Clifford of Chudleigh, and his wife, Catherine Mary, daughter of R. Bassett, a New Zealander. His mother died when he was very young, and he moved with his father from one unsuccessful farm to another. At an early age he displayed outstanding intelligence with an unorthodox bent. Although he entered a Melbourne boarding-school at the age of ten without knowing the alphabet, he became the star pupil. After a brief spell at Melbourne University he joined a firm of surveyors in Western Australia, but eventually signed on as fourth officer on a tramp steamer, of which his brother was the navigating officer, in order to reach England. He took the opportunity to master the use of the sextant for solar and stellar observations. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Clifford enlisted in the Royal Fusiliers and soon gained his commission. He was gassed and invalided and in 1917 was appointed aide-de-camp to Sir Ronald Munro-Ferguson (later Viscount Novar), governor-general of Australia. He was quickly promoted to the more congenial position of private secretary (1918-20) and was therefore privileged to meet with many famous figures. He accompanied Admiral Jellicoe on an inspection of the outlying defences of Australia, and for his services during the visit of the prince of Wales was appointed MVO. In 1921 Clifford was selected by Lord Milner as secretary to Prince Arthur of Connaught, governor-general of South Africa. J. C. Smuts, the prime minister, quickly appreciated Clifford's ability and consulted him on imperial problems. 
In 1924 Clifford was appointed secretary to Prince Arthur's successor, the earl of Athlone; but in the same year he became imperial secretary to the South African high commission. The protectorates of Bechuanaland, Swaziland, and Basutoland being under his jurisdiction, he immediately carried out a detailed tour. In 1925 he married Alice Devin (died 1980), daughter of John Murton Gundry, an eminent banker, of Cleveland, Ohio. His very beautiful and highly talented wife played a most important role in helping him in their arduous public life. They had three daughters famous for their beauty and wit. 
In 1928 Clifford became the first white man to cross the Kalahari Desert, a fine feat of navigation. In 1929 and 1931 he surveyed the boundaries and determined the size of the Great Makarikari salt lake for a possible railway route from Southern Rhodesia to Walvis Bay. In the meantime J. B. M. Hertzog had applied for Clifford to be appointed (1928) first representative of the United Kingdom to the Union of South Africa. He was able to persuade Hertzog to defer constitutional changes until after he had attended the prime ministers' conference; and by subtle argument he persuaded the government to join in financing the Imperial Airways link with South Africa in spite of strong German competition. For his services in South Africa, Clifford was appointed CMG in 1923 and CB in 1931. 
At the end of 1931 Clifford was appointed governor of the Bahamas, the youngest governor in the colonial service. Owing to his imagination and initiative in encouraging the development of the tourist industry the prosperity of the islands was greatly increased. He was promoted KCMG in 1933. In 1937 a visit to Germany convinced Clifford that war was inevitable. In the same year he was appointed governor of Mauritius, and during a visit to Diego Suarez 'en route', he made a careful study of the harbour defences which helped in its eventual capture. 
On arrival in Mauritius, Clifford stimulated research for the improvement of the sugar and pineapple industries. In case of war, he laid in large stocks of coal, so that the railways could be maintained. He developed the hydroelectric and irrigation resources: a lasting contribution. He provided machinery for the regulation of wages and working conditions. His handling of industrial disputes was unorthodox but effective. When the docks were picketed to prevent the loading of sugar for export Clifford had a labour force recruited from the plantations. The men were transported in closed railway wagons into the port area with sufficient equipment and supplies to be self-supporting, and the strike was broken. 
In 1942 Clifford was appointed governor of Trinidad, a very sensitive area in the U-boat campaign. His principal task was to resolve friction which had arisen between the resident British and American admirals, and this he was able to do with tact and firmness. In appreciation he was awarded the Legion of Merit by the United States government. He was able also to negotiate a most satisfactory agreement with Venezuela over the demarcation of the sea bed of the gulf between the two countries for oil exploration and exploitation. Clifford was most solicitous for the large numbers of survivors from vessels sunk by U-boats and at times up to four and five hundred were in the clearing stations. 
Clifford was appointed GCMG in 1945 and in the next year his medical advisers told him that he should cease to work in the tropics. In his retirement he loved travelling. He enjoyed being his own builder and electrician and designed and partly built the small house in which he and his wife lived. He was an insatiable reader, his favourite author being Herodotus. In 1964 his autobiography 'Proconsul' was published. In addition he advised and edited 'For my Grandchildren' by Princess Alice, countess of Athlone (1966). He was writing a radio play, 'Cyrus the Great', and a history of the Clifford family at the time of his death. He died at Queen Anne Farm, Jacob's Well, Guildford, on 6 October 1969 and was buried in the family vault at Ugbrooke Park, Chudleigh, Devon. 
H. A. Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32449


Clifford, Frederick (1828-1904), journalist and legal writer, was born at Gillingham, Kent, on 22 June 1828, the fifth son of Jesse Clifford and his wife, Mary Pearse. After private schooling he engaged in provincial journalism, but settled in London in 1852, and joined the parliamentary staff of 'The Times', of which his elder brother George was already a member. He retained his connection with the provinces by acting as London correspondent of the 'Sheffield Daily Telegraph', and in 1863 he became its joint proprietor with William Christopher Leng (1825-1902). In 1866 he went to Jamaica to report for 'The Times' on the royal commission of inquiry into the conduct of the governor, Edward Eyre. He helped in 1868 to found the Press Association, an institution formed to supply newspaper proprietors of London and the provinces with home and foreign news, and he acted as chairman of the committee of management during two periods of five years each, finally retiring in 1880. In 1877, owing to the failing health of the editor, John Thaddeus Delane, Clifford was transferred by 'The Times' from the reporters' gallery of the House of Commons to the central offices at Printing House Square, and he acted as assistant editor until his health obliged him to resign in 1883. 
Clifford also pursued a career as a legal writer. He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 3 November 1856, and was called to the bar on 10 June 1859. With Pembroke S. Stephens KC, he published 'The Practice of the Court of Referees on Private Bills in Parliament' (1870), which became the standard textbook on the subject. It also brought him work at the parliamentary bar. The historical aspect of the practice especially interested him, and he later published 'The History of Private Bill Legislation' (2 vols., 1885-7). This was a valuable and painstaking account, which revealed the largely public aims of private bill legislation over the course of more than three centuries. It remained the most significant work in its field until O. C. William's 'Historical Development of Private Bill Procedure' (1948). Clifford took silk in 1894, and was elected a bencher of his inn on 18 May 1900. 
Early in his career Clifford co-operated with Edward Bulwer-Lytton, Charles Dickens, and other men of letters and artists in forming the Guild of Literature and Art, which was incorporated by private act of parliament in 1858. Clifford was a member of the council. The guild did not succeed in its aims, and Clifford and Sir John Richard Robinson, the last surviving members of the council, wound up its affairs in 1897. Clifford was an active member of the Royal Botanic Society, and a student of agricultural questions, publishing 'The Agricultural Lockout of 1874' (1875) and a small treatise on the 'Agricultural Holdings Act' of 1875 (1876). He was also a collector of fans and other works of art. 
Clifford married Caroline (died 1900), third daughter of Thomas Mason of Hull, in 1853. He died at his residence, 24 Collingham Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 30 December 1904; four sons and two daughters survived him. His library formed a three days' sale at Sothebys (5-7 May 1905). 


@@@@@


doc= 32450


Clifford, Sir Hugh Charles (1866-1941), colonial governor and author, was born in London on 5 March 1866, the eldest son of Major-General Sir Henry Hugh Clifford (1826-1883) and grandson of the seventh Baron Clifford of Chudleigh. His mother was Josephine Elizabeth (died 1913), only child of Joseph Anstice, of Madeley Wood, Shropshire, a professor of classics at King's College, London. A member of a west country recusant family, he was educated at Woburn Park under Mgr William Joseph Petre. Although he passed for Sandhurst, reduced family circumstances following the death of his father resulted in his taking immediate employment offered by a kinsman, Sir Frederick Weld, who was governor of the Straits Settlements. 
Clifford arrived in Malaya in 1883 aged seventeen. The British then administered the colony of the Straits Settlements while in the west coast Malay states residents were establishing an 'advisory system' to disguise British control under a cloak of Malay sovereignty. Clifford's first posting outside Singapore was as secretary to Hugh Low, the venerable resident of Perak. In 1887 Weld dispatched Clifford on a mission to the east coast state of Pahang, where he successfully persuaded its ruler to accept British control of external affairs. Clifford was then appointed British agent in Pahang, but his powers were limited and within a year Sir Cecil Clementi-Smith, Weld's successor as governor, compelled the sultan to upgrade the British agent to resident. A senior official, John Rodger, was appointed to this position while Clifford sailed to England with acute dysentery. He returned in 1890 as superintendent of Ulu Pahang (the interior), where between 1891 and 1895 he led the suppression of armed resistance. Once this was settled, Clifford was advanced to resident of Pahang, which in 1896 became part of the Federated Malay States. For Clifford adventure gave way to administration as he moved from the frontier to the secretariat. In 1900 he was seconded to the British North Borneo Company and served as governor of North Borneo until a dispute with the directors led to his resignation. He returned briefly to Malaya, but in September 1901 sickness once again overwhelmed him. Poisoning was suspected and he sailed for England, apparently broken in health. 
During 1901-3 he slowly recuperated in his mother's grace-and-favour apartment in Hampton Court palace and supplemented his half pay by writing. Clifford had become fluent in Malay, recorded his observations, and assiduously collected data on indigenous peoples. He presented papers to learned societies, such as the Royal Geographical Society, and produced 'Further India: being the story of exploration from the earliest times in Burma, Malaya, Siam, and Indo-China' (1904). He also contributed articles on topical subjects to the press and wrote semi-autobiographical short stories, the first collection being published as 'East Coast Etchings' (1896) and in a revised form as 'In Court and Kampong' (1897). Other stories followed in 'Macmillan's Magazine', 'Temple Bar', 'Cornhill Magazine', and 'Blackwood's Magazine'; and further collections appeared: 'Studies in Brown Humanity' (1898), 'In a Corner of Asia' (1899), and 'Bushwhacking and other Sketches' (1901). His first novel, 'Since the Beginning', came out in 1898. Thus, when ill health obliged him to write for a living, he was building on an established reputation and within a literary circle which included Joseph Conrad. His stories cover the poignant interaction of Europe and Asia, illustrated by the predicament of the political officer alone in an alien and potentially hostile environment or the fatal impact of modernization upon Malays. For example, Saleh, the eponymous hero of two novels, is educated in England but rejected by the English when he woos his host's daughter. On his return to his father's court he dies while leading an armed rising. In the foreword to 'Saleh: a Sequel' Clifford spells out the dangers of the British 'endeavouring to impose on their Oriental brethren education of a purely Occidental type', which the fictional British officer endorses with the lament: 'May God forgive us for our sorry deeds and for our glorious intentions!' 
In the autumn of 1903 Clifford was passed fit for tropical service, but was not restored to Malaya. As colonial secretary in Trinidad (1903-7) and Ceylon (1907-12) he managed well-established bureaucracies, but, when he was promoted to governorships in west Africa, he encountered rudimentary ones. As governor of the Gold Coast (1912-19) he overhauled the administration, reformed the legislative council, invested in public works, and vastly improved the living conditions and hence the morale of public servants. In doing so he paved the way for developments under his successor, Sir Gordon Guggisberg. When he was promoted governor of Nigeria (1919-25) Clifford set about rectifying what he condemned as the administrative chaos of Sir Frederick Lugard's amalgamation of Northern and Southern Nigeria. Superhuman stints in the office and extensive tours of the countryside resulted in voluminous dispatches, addresses, and memoranda. He revelled in the written and spoken word, shifted paper at speed, made systems, and made them work. In each territory he was indefatigable, bringing to administration the same vigour that had characterized his youthful exploits on the frontier and usually applying to the problems of 'native administration' the yardsticks of Malaya. But his manic energy and occasional bouts of depression exhausted subordinates and worried superiors. 
Hugh Clifford was twice married: first in 1896 to Mary Ann, or Minna ('b'. 'c'.1870), daughter of Gilbert a Beckett. They had one son and two daughters. Their son was killed on the Somme in 1916, as was Clifford's younger brother. Minna died following an accident in Trinidad in 1907. In 1910 he married Elizabeth Lydia Rosabel (1866-1945), daughter of Edward Bonham and widow of Henry de la Pasture. Writing as Mrs de la Pasture she was a popular novelist; her daughter from her first marriage published under the name of E. M. Delafield. 
In 1925 Clifford was promoted to Ceylon, where he remained just two years until Malaya became vacant, but long enough to set in train a major constitutional review carried out by the Donoughmore commission (1927-8). For Clifford the years spent away from Malaya had been years of exile, but his governorship of Malaya (1927-9) is more remarkable as the last chapter in a personal odyssey than for its impact on the country. Ironically, his greatest administrative achievements had been outside Malaya, particularly in west Africa. By now he was over sixty, exhausted, and on the verge of breakdown. Some say it was the agony of trying to reconcile modern Malaya with the land of his youth that precipitated collapse; but the demands of more than forty years of overseas service had taken their toll, resulting in increasingly eccentric behaviour. Signs of mental imbalance cut short his term, and in October 1929 he departed Malaya for ever. It was a distressing end to a major proconsular career. Instead of enjoying a respected retirement -- it was rumoured that a peerage might have been added to his GCMG (1921) and GBE (1925) -- he was eventually confined to The Priory at Roehampton, where he died of broncho-pneumonia on 18 December 1941, ten days after the start of the Japanese invasion of Malaya. 
Well over 6 feet tall and bald from early adulthood, Clifford was an imposing man with strong emotions and an almost theatrical physicality. His exploits were legendary, while his disputes assumed a magnificence that obscured their frequently petty origins. Personal magnetism and a self-indulgent charm earned him the reputation of a ladies' man and revealed a romanticism touched with tragedy which permeated his life and cast a cruelly pathetic shadow over his last years. 


@@@@@


doc= 32451


Clifford, John (1836-1923), minister of the New Connexion of General Baptists, was born at Sawley, Derbyshire, on 16 October 1836, the eldest of the seven children of Samuel Clifford, a warp-machine worker, and his wife, 'nee' Mary Stenson. His father's family were Methodists and his mother's family were Baptists, three of his uncles being Baptist preachers. He went to Baptist schools in Sawley and Lenton, and Wesleyan and national schools in Beeston. At eleven he started work in a lace factory, with a sixteen-hour working day. By the age of thirteen he could read while working his machine, and first began to absorb Emerson's 'Essays', which was to be in his hands the week he died. He regarded Emerson as 'one of the most potent forces in shaping my life' (Marchant, 12), because he learned from him the value of ideas. 
In November 1850 Clifford experienced conversion in the General Baptist chapel at Beeston, and after being accepted for membership on 29 April 1851 he was baptized on 16 June 1851 by Richard Pike. After two years as a lay preacher in Nottingham, he was recommended by his church to the Midland Baptist College in Leicester, where he began his course in September 1855. Like many other theological students he questioned the historical truth of Christianity, the teaching of Christ, and the place of miracles in the life of the world. Although some of his contemporaries found that they could be more open to biblical criticism as Unitarian ministers, Clifford adopted a broad-based evangelical theology, believing that God's self-revelation was progressive and that geology compelled a reappraisal of 'Genesis'. He became senior student in his third year when the college moved to Nottingham, and accepted an invitation to Praed Street Baptist Church, Paddington, on condition that he could continue his studies at University College, London. He began his ministry on 17 October 1858 and remained there until he retired on 29 August 1915. He married Rebecca (died 1919), daughter of Dr Thomas Carter of Newbury, on 14 January 1862, and they had four sons and two daughters. Clifford took his BA in 1861, BSc in 1862 (with honours in logic, moral philosophy, geology, and palaeontology), MA in 1864 (when he was first in the year), and LLB in 1866 (with honours in the principles of legislation). He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1879. He received an honorary DD from Bates' College, Maine, in 1883 and from the University of Chicago in 1911, and an honorary LLD from McMaster University, Toronto, in 1911. His interest in geology reflected his sense of the urgency of reconciling the claims of religion and science, and his study of the principles of legislation indicated his concern for social reform, to be achieved through parliament. 
When Clifford went to Praed Street the church had just over sixty members; by the turn of the century there were over a thousand. He believed that the church existed 'not only for our spiritual improvement, but also and specially for saving the souls and bodies of the people in the neighbourhood in which we are located' (Marchant, 40), and this characterized his ministry. A Mutual Economical Benefit Society was established in 1861 to provide sickness insurance, and then a Mutual Improvement Society. The growth of the church made it necessary to build a new chapel a mile away in Westbourne Park Place. Built in early Gothic style it cost $15,000 and was opened on 30 September 1877. Charles Spurgeon preached at a special service the following Tuesday (as he had done when the previous chapel was enlarged in 1872). Clifford's work was especially effective among young men, who formed the backbone of the Westbourne Park Institute, which offered such extensive educational and recreational opportunities that it was called a 'people's university'. Some twenty-three of 'Clifford's boys' entered the Baptist ministry. The church also opened a home for young women moving to London in 1885, and Clifford's Inn, a public house without beer, in 1908. There were the usual Sunday schools and children's organizations (such as the Band of Hope, Girls' Life Brigade, and Christian Endeavour) as well as a Pleasant Sunday Afternoon Fellowship inaugurated in 1902. 
Clifford was brought up in the New Connexion of General Baptists, a product of the eighteenth-century evangelical revival centred in the midlands. As a minister in London he became a national leader and was editor of the 'General Baptist Magazine' (1870-84). He was president of the General Baptist Association in 1872 and again in 1891, when the association formally joined with the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland, a moment for which Clifford had worked hard for many years. He was president of the London Baptist Association in 1879, and of the Baptist Union in 1888 and 1899. When the first Baptist World Congress was held in London in 1905, attended by delegates from nearly thirty countries, it was resolved to form the Baptist World Alliance, and Clifford was unanimously elected president. In 1908 he chaired the first European Baptist Congress in Berlin, and in 1911 presided at the second Baptist World Congress in Philadelphia. He spoke at the second European Congress in Stockholm in 1913, and presided over the meeting in London in 1920 to organize assistance for European Baptists who had suffered from the war. 
Clifford was open to new directions in theology, while preserving the centrality of the person of Christ. This is seen in books such as 'The Inspiration and Authority of the Bible' (1892), 'The Christian Certainties' (1894), and 'The Ultimate Problems of Christianity' (1906). As vice-president of the Baptist Union in 1887-8 he found himself involved in the down-grade controversy. Spurgeon (a lifelong friend) had accused members of the Baptist Union of abandoning doctrines which he held dear, and resigned from the union. Clifford was involved in the attempts at reconciliation, but was determined to avoid the pressure for a new credal statement as a basis for membership. Instead he drafted a declaratory statement which was approved by the Baptist Union Assembly in 1888. His presidential address on that occasion, 'The great forty years', set out his own view of primitive Christianity. Clifford's emphasis on the incarnation was characteristic of the period. His twin emphases on a personal relationship to Christ and freedom of conscience have led to criticisms that he had a 'diminished ecclesiology'. He regarded ecclesiology as a branch of sociology, which is why he believed that Christians had to be committed to transforming the whole of society. 
Clifford was therefore inevitably a public figure. His concern for social questions began in his childhood factory and memories of Chartism, but later found theological justification. His autumn address to the Baptist Union in 1888 was on the primitive Christian faith as a social gospel, balancing the doctrinal emphasis of his spring address. Hence he supported the London dock strike of 1889 and the Progressive Party on the London county council. Though a lifelong Liberal he was also a member of the Fabian Society: two of his addresses were published as Fabian pamphlets. Clifford is most widely remembered for his involvement in the education controversy. He successfully opposed the imposition of religious tests on board school teachers in London in 1893-4. His campaign against rate assistance for denominational schools in the 1902 'Education Act' was unsuccessful, and he became leader of the passive resistance movement which refused to pay education rates because they infringed freedom of conscience. 
Clifford's contribution to nonconformist life generally was recognized by his presidency of the National Council of the Evangelical Free Churches (1898-9). Although a keen opponent of the South African War, his influence was important in securing Free Church support for the First World War in 1914. After retirement he was president of the Brotherhood Movement (1916-18) and the World Brotherhood Federation (1919-23). In the new year's honours list of 1921 Clifford was one of the first Free Churchmen to become a Companion of Honour. Though rather short Clifford was of striking appearance, with a full beard (originally red, later grey) and moustache compensating for his bald head, and always a twinkling smile. He died at a meeting of the Baptist Union council at Baptist Church House, Southampton Row, London, on 20 November 1923, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife had died on 23 August 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 32452


Clive, Sir Robert Henry (1877-1948), diplomatist, was born in London on 27 December 1877, the third and youngest surviving son, and fourth of the five surviving children, of Charles Meysey Bolton Clive JP (1842-1883), gentleman, of Whitfield, Herefordshire, and his wife, Lady Katherine Elizabeth Mary Julia, 'nee' Feilding (died 1882), daughter of William Basil Percy Feilding, seventh earl of Denbigh. His father was a first cousin four times removed of Clive of India. A younger brother died in infancy. Educated at Haileybury College and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he graduated with a pass degree in classics in 1899, Clive entered the diplomatic service in January 1902. He was posted to Rome in February 1903 and promoted third secretary in April 1904. He was transferred to Tokyo in June 1905 and promoted second secretary in August 1908. On 10 July 1905 he married Magdalen Agnes Muir Mackenzie (1884-1971), third and youngest daughter of Kenneth Augustus Muir Mackenzie, Baron Muir Mackenzie, permanent secretary to the lord chancellor from 1880 to 1915. They had two sons, Peter Julian ('b'. 1906) and Robert Wilfred Kenneth ('b'. 1909), and a daughter, Amy Catherine ('b'. 1913). 
In April 1909 Clive was posted as second secretary to Cairo. Robert Vansittart, who served with him there, wrote that 'he was a man so modest that he might easily be overlooked', who represented a new type of diplomat without court or political connections (Vansittart, 84). From Cairo, Clive was transferred to Bern in October 1911 and to Stockholm in October 1913, becoming a first secretary in August 1915 and acting on several occasions as charge d'affaires. 
In June 1919 Clive was transferred to the Foreign Office and appointed CMG. In January the following year he became counsellor in Peking (Beijing), remaining there until July 1923, when he was appointed consul-general at Munich. He was sent to inquire into the separatist movement which had succeeded in establishing itself in Bavaria, then under French occupation. His tact and perspicacity in carrying out this mission were an important contributory factor in the eventual restoration of order. He was present in Munich in November 1923 when Adolf Hitler and the nascent Nazi party tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the Bavarian government. He reported to the Foreign Office that 'If Hitler had stayed in power for even one day, I do not believe that there would have been a French officer alive in Munich' (TNA: PRO, FO 371/8818, 9 Nov 1923). It was a tribute to his skill that the French authorities raised no objection when, in October the following year, he was appointed consul-general at Tangier. As the first British representative on the committee of control, he helped substantially to launch the new international regime set up by the convention of 1923 and to harmonize the interests of the signatory powers. Clive's five years as minister at Tehran, from October 1926 to September 1931, covered a period of increasing Persian nationalism and xenophobia, and his efforts to conclude a commercial and a general treaty were frustrated. His patience and the objectivity of his judgement were nevertheless of great value during this difficult period in Anglo-Persian relations. He was promoted KCMG in 1927. 
After a short time as minister to the Holy See from March 1933 to May 1934, Clive was appointed ambassador in Tokyo, and was sworn of the privy council. Japan was no longer the country he had known in the heyday of the Anglo-Japanese alliance. The termination of the alliance in 1922, naval rivalry, Japan's conquest of Manchuria, and her withdrawal from the League of Nations in 1933 had estranged the two countries, while Japanese military ambitions were beginning to threaten British interests in China and the Far East. Clive's task was in the circumstances a difficult one, but he responded with his usual determination. He reduced tension, but he had few illusions about the dangers of the situation and his reports to the government were models of clarity and good sense. He was promoted GCMG in 1936. It was not until after his departure that Japan took the irrevocable step of attacking mainland China. 
When Clive arrived in Brussels as ambassador in July 1937, Great Britain had lately renewed her guarantee to Belgium. That little progress was made towards the more specific understandings desired by his government was not for want of pertinacity on Clive's part, for he again displayed patience and clear-headedness. But he was unable to persuade King Leopold to abandon his 'policy of independence', reporting in January 1939 that the Belgian monarch wanted peace at almost any price, and would not agree to staff talks with the French because he feared that these would provoke the Germans. Clive told the Foreign Office that the Belgians doubted whether France had any spare troops to defend them or wished to make any military commitments to another state. He retired from the diplomatic service at the end of 1939. 
Clive was characteristic of the best in the diplomatic service: reliable, modest, sensitive, but dispassionate. A devoted career diplomat, he was undeterred by the succession of difficult and frustrating posts to which he was assigned. He had many outside interests, had a gift for both drawing and poetry, and was a connoisseur of furniture, oriental porcelain, and rugs, of which he was a keen collector. He was a man of distinguished appearance, faultlessly dressed but lacking in personal vanity. His obvious interest in his fellow human beings made him a stimulating companion and inspired affection in all those who served with him. He died at his home, Cherry Orchard, Forest Row, Sussex, on 13 May 1948. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32453


Clodd, Edward (1840-1930), banker and popular anthropologist, was born at Queen Street, Margate, Kent, on 1 July 1840, the eldest child of Edward Clodd and his wife, Susan Parker. Of his six brothers and sisters four died in infancy and two did not survive childhood. His father was a Trinity House pilot, and in early life was captain and part owner of a brig. Born at Aldeburgh, Suffolk, he had lived for a time at Margate, from where his brig traded with the north, but he returned to Aldeburgh soon after his son's birth. From his mother Clodd early acquired a love of reading. His parents, of Suffolk farming and fishing background, were Baptists, and Edward was intended for the ministry. After receiving instruction at a dame-school, he attended Aldeburgh grammar school, of which Joseph Buck was master. During a visit to London at the age of fourteen, Clodd obtained work as a clerk and settled there. Initially employed in an accountant's office in Cornhill, he subsequently worked for two other firms, one of which was James Coster & Co., Fountain Court, before he became a clerk at the London Joint Stock Bank in 1862; ten years later, he was appointed secretary. On 20 August 1861 he married Eliza Sarah (1836-1911), the daughter of a surgeon, Cornelius Garman, of Bow, London. 
From his early days in London Clodd attended the Birkbeck Institute, read assiduously in the free libraries, and heard lectures. On Sundays he listened to the best-known preachers of every denomination and followed the controversies with lively interest. His Baptist creed was exchanged for Congregationalism and Unitarianism, and he soon became friendly with many of the more liberal leaders of religious thought. The debates generated by biblical criticism and evolutionary theories instilled in him an interest in science. In 1869, with the help of William Huggins, he was admitted to the Royal Astronomical Society. Here he met Richard Anthony Proctor, who invited him to contribute to the weekly scientific periodical 'Knowledge'. During Proctor's lecture tours in the USA and Australia in the 1880s Clodd acted as sub-editor, and he gave occasional lectures on science and literature. 
In 1873 Clodd published his first book, 'The Childhood of the World'. Written as a primer on evolutionary anthropology, it introduced children to the latest information on prehistoric man. It quickly passed through four editions and was translated into six European and two African languages. Two years later he expanded his analysis with the 'Childhood of Religions'. This marked his foray into folklore. His address of the same year to the Sunday Lecture Society, entitled 'The birth and growth of myth, and its survival in folk-lore, legend, and dogma', ultimately culminated in his 'Myths and Dreams' (1885). One of the six men who constituted the 'great team' of British folklorists, Clodd was a self-proclaimed 'anthropological folklorist' (Dorson, 202-65). In 1877 he joined the unconventional Century Club, where he met Samuel Butler, W. K. Clifford, John Tyndall, E. B. Tylor, and many other men of distinction in science and letters. In 1878 he resigned from the Royal Astronomical Society and joined the Folk-Lore Society. Although a departure from his earlier theistic writings, his 'Jesus of Nazareth' (1880) was pronounced 'one of the best of its kind in the language' by the Unitarian 'Inquirer' (McCabe, 47). It won for Clodd the friendship of T. H. Huxley, York Powell, John Collier, Frederick Pollock, Leslie Stephen, Mrs Lynn Linton, and other well-known people. 
Clodd's success had been laboriously won. Long hours of reading, after an average of ten hours a day at work in the bank, resulted in recurrent bouts of insomnia and neuralgia. His 'Story of Creation' (1888), a popular study of evolution, sold five thousand copies in three months, and publishers began to court him. At this time, under the influence of James Cotter Morison, he had leanings towards the Positivist Society, but he found a corrective in his friendship with the novelists Grant Allen and George Meredith. 
Clodd had, as Thomas Hardy (who knew him well) noted in 1915, 'a genius for friendship' (Haddon, 185). From 1878 he used his weekend home in Aldeburgh, Strafford House, for annual Whitsuntide gatherings of eminent intellectuals. In addition to the friends already mentioned, J. B. Bury, Sir Ray Lankester, Sir James Frazer, Sir Alfred Lyall, Sir Mortimer Durand, and George Haven Putnam were often there. In 1900 thirty-four friends, including Herbert Spencer, W. Holman Hunt, Edmund Gosse, and Clement Shorter, presented him with a carved oak table as a sixtieth birthday gift. Historically, Clodd continues to be remembered for his friendships. His letters and diaries have provided insight into the lives and intellectual careers of Thomas Hardy, James Frazer, George Gissing, and W. B. Yeats. Meredith called Clodd 'Sir Reynard', perhaps because of his shrewd expression, but on his native heath he looked like a sailor and radiated a bluff benevolence. According to contemporaries, he was essentially a man of generous and sociable disposition, who devoted unremitting attention to his guests, and showed himself a zealous humanitarian on all public issues. 
In 1881 Clodd was elected to the Savile Club; he was an original member of the Johnson Club and the Omar Khayyam Club, founded in 1884 and 1892 respectively. President of the Omar Khayyam Club in 1895, Clodd adopted the epicurean philosophy of the Persian poet from his fiftieth year onwards. In the true Huxleyan sense of the word, Clodd had become an agnostic. His presidential addresses of 1895 and 1896 to the Folk-Lore Society demonstrated the implications of his agnosticism for the study of folklore and embroiled him in controversy. W. E. Gladstone, an original member of the society, resigned in protest against what he regarded as Clodd's offensive remarks, and the Catholic Truth Society responded with a 24-page pamphlet. Clodd became notorious for his condemnation of the culturally atavistic superstitions behind spiritualism and 'dogmatic' Christian theology and ritual. Through lectures and numerous journal articles and reviews, he established himself as a prolific popularizer of scientific naturalism. From 1906 to 1913 he served as chairman of the Rationalist Press Association, and, upon the founding of the Secular Education League in 1907, he was appointed to its general council. Through the character of Edwin Dodd in 'Boon' (1915), H. G. Wells provided a trenchant satirization of Clodd, the rationalist. According to Boon, Dodd 'looked under his bed for the Deity, and slept with a large revolver under his pillow for fear of a revelation' (Wells, 45). In the early twentieth century, Clodd vociferously objected to another threat to rationalism: psychoanalysis. 
Clodd's first wife, from whom he was separated, died in 1911. He confided in his diary that he was pleased to be a widower. Three years earlier, Arnold, one of their eight children (six sons, two daughters), had died. He, in turn, had been predeceased by two brothers, who died in infancy. On 18 December 1914 Clodd married 27-year-old Phyllis Maud Rope. The daughter of a farmer, Arthur Mingay Rope, of Leiston, Suffolk, she was a student of biology at the Royal College of Science. The following year, on Clodd's seventy-fifth birthday, he retired from the Joint Stock Bank, and proceeded to write his 'Memories' (1916) at his now permanent residence in Aldeburgh. A 'shrewd and excellent handler of credit', the 'Investors' Review' said of him on his retirement. He was still vigorous in mind and body, lecturing at the Royal Institution in 1917 and 1921, and writing much on folklore and occultism. After 1922 he suffered occasional illness, sometimes severe. In May 1928 he had a stroke, and for more than a year he suffered from aphasia, and could not read owing to cataract. He seemed to recover, but in the spring of 1930 he contracted bronchial asthma. 'I die, I die' (McCabe, 215), he murmured minutes before the end. He died fully conscious on 16 March 1930 at Strafford House, 33 Crag Path, Aldeburgh. In accordance with his wishes his body was cremated at Ipswich four days later and the ashes were scattered upon the sea off Aldeburgh. He had no children by his second marriage. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32454


Close, Maxwell Henry (1822-1903), geologist and man of science, born on 23 October 1822 at 7 Merrion Square East, Dublin, the eldest son among the eight sons and three daughters of Henry Samuel Close, later of Newtown Park House, co. Dublin, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Holt Waring of Waringstown, co. Down, the dean of Dromore. His father was a partner in Ball's Bank, Dublin. Major-General Sir Barry Close was his great-uncle, his brother Major George Champagne Close served in the Abyssinian expedition of 1868, and another brother, Captain Arthur Richard Close, was killed in 1865 during the New Zealand wars. 
After education by private tutor and at a school in Weymouth, Dorset, Close entered Trinity College, Dublin, in June 1840; he received his BA in 1846, the divinity testimonium in 1847, and his MA in 1867. In 1847 he took holy orders and he was ordained priest in the Church of England the following year. He served as curate of All Saints, Northampton, from 1847 to 1849, and as rector of Shangton, in Leicestershire, from 1849 to 1857, but he resigned that living on conscientious grounds because he no longer felt able to hold a benefice obtained through lay patronage. He served as curate of Waltham on the Wolds, Leicestershire, from 1857 to 1861, but, as his father had recently died, he returned to Dublin in 1861 to live the life of a gentleman scholar, although he occasionally performed clerical duties. He is not known to have been married. 
Close devoted himself to the affairs of such bodies as the Royal Dublin Society (he long served on the council), the Royal Geological Society of Ireland (president between 1877 and 1879), the Fortnightly Club (council member), and the Royal Irish Academy. He was elected a member of the academy on 13 May 1867 and served as its treasurer from 30 November 1878 until 16 March 1903. It was generally understood that had he not been afflicted by increasing deafness, he would have been elected to the academy's presidency. 
Close contributed to astronomy, Pleistocene geology, mathematics, physics, and the study of the Irish language. The results of his acute geological field investigations were incorporated in three important papers read to the Royal Geological Society of Ireland between May 1864 and May 1870, and in an essay on the glaciation of Iar-Connaught written in collaboration with George Henry Kinahan and published in 1872. His studies demonstrated that Ireland had formerly been covered by an ice-cap centred over co. Fermanagh, that local glaciers had once existed in the Irish uplands, and that many lake-basins in co. Kerry were ice-excavated. 
A gentle, genial, modest, and retiring man, Close published a work on physics (1884, 2nd edn, 1886) and another on astronomy (1894) under the pseudonyms of John O'Toole and Claudius Kennedy respectively, in order to divert attention away from himself. He died on 12 September 1903 in the bachelor apartments which had long been his at a hotel at 38 Lower Baggot Street, Dublin, and was buried in Dean's Grange cemetery. His keen interest in the Irish language is reflected in his will where he left $1000 towards the printing cost of an Irish-language dictionary to be published by the Royal Irish Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32455


Clowes, Sir William Laird (1856-1905), writer on naval issues, born at Hampstead, London, on 1 February 1856, was the eldest son of William Clowes, sometime registrar in chancery and part editor of the fifth edition (1891) of Seton's 'Forms and Judgments'. The younger Clowes was educated at Aldenham School at Elstree in Hertfordshire and at King's College, London, and began studying at Lincoln's Inn, London, on 16 April 1877. He had already, in 1876, published 'Meroe', an Egyptian love tale in verse, and on 11 March 1879 left Lincoln's Inn for journalism. He was employed at first in the provinces but returned to London in 1882, marrying that year Ethel Mary Louise, second daughter of Lewis F. Edwards of Mitcham, Middlesex; they had one son, Geoffrey S. Laird ('b'. 1883). 
In London Clowes gained his first insight into naval affairs on the staff of the 'Army and Navy Gazette'. Concentrating on naval questions, he accompanied the Home Fleets during the manoeuvres as special naval correspondent successively of the 'Daily News' (1885), 'The Standard' (1887-90), and 'The Times' (1890-95). His reputation for expert naval knowledge was soon established. Articles by him, some under the pseudonym Nauticus, on such topics as the role of torpedo boats in war, the gunning of battleships, and the use of the ram, were widely translated and apparently influenced expert opinion in many countries. His anonymous articles on 'The needs of the navy', in the 'Daily Graphic' in 1893, were credited with substantially increasing the naval estimates. 
Naval interests did not monopolize Clowes's attention. In autumn 1890 he paid one of many visits to the USA, commissioned by 'The Times' to study racial difficulties in the southern states. He published articles on this subject in 'The Times' in November and December 1890, and then in 1891 in 'Black America: a Study of the ex-Slave and his Master', foretelling a terrible race war in the USA. An excellent linguist, in his later years he contributed frequently to reviews in England, France, and Germany. Besides historical and technical books he wrote many tales, mainly of the sea, and some verse. He was part author of 'Social England' (6 vols., 1892-7) and founded in 1896, and for some years edited, the 'Naval Pocket Book'. He also edited 'Cassell's Miniature Cyclopaedia' (1898) and did much to promote the issue of cheap reprints of standard literature; he was advisory editor in 1901 of the 'Unit Library'. 
Clowes gradually gave up journalism for research in naval history. Between 1897 and 1903 he compiled 'The Royal Navy: its History from the Earliest Times' (7 vols.) in collaboration with Sir Clements Markham, A. T. Mahan, W. H. Wilson, and others. Its value was generally recognized and it continues in use. He also published other works of naval history. He was knighted in 1902 but because of ill health lived abroad, for some years at Davos, Switzerland. He was granted, in 1904, a civil-list pension of $150. He was awarded the gold medal of the United States Naval Institute in 1892, was an associate of the Institution of Naval Architects, and in 1896 was elected an honorary member of the Royal United Service Institution, where he gave several lectures. In 1895 he was elected a fellow of King's College, London. He died at his home at Eversleigh Gardens, St Leonards, Sussex, on 14 August 1905. A civil-list pension of $100 was granted to his widow on 30 November 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 32456


Clunes, Alexander de Moro Sherriff (1912-1970), actor and theatre manager, was born at 2 Western Road, Brixton, London, on 17 May 1912, the son of Alexander Sherriff Clunes, actor, and his wife, Georgina Ada Sumner, actress. He was educated at Cliftonville, Margate. Although he came of stage stock on both sides, he did not originally intend to adopt his parents' profession, but earned his living in advertising and journalism while keeping his inherited acting talent to enliven his leisure time. He was, however, a natural player and after considerable and valuable experience with leading amateur groups he found the urge to turn professional too strong for him. By 1934 he was touring with Sir P. Ben Greet and later in the same year joined the Old Vic Company. His progress thereafter was steady, and the parts he was called upon to play, both in the classics and in contemporary drama, grew in importance until in 1939 he was one of the leaders of the company at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre at Stratford upon Avon, playing Petruchio, Richmond, Iago, Benedick, and Coriolanus. He was now firmly established and what was more his work during the Malvern festival of 1938 had caught the eye and ear of George Bernard Shaw who in 1940 gave him the part of Godfrey Kneller in 'In Good King Charles's Golden Days' at the New Theatre in London. In 1941 Clunes toured with the Old Vic Company, during its wartime exile, playing Young Marlow, Malvolio, and Taffy in 'Trilby'; but he left them in order to embark, in the following year, upon a project of his own which was to prove his most important contribution to the theatre and carry him to the peak of his career. 
This was the foundation, in May 1942, of the Arts Theatre Group of Actors, a body which Clunes served as leading spirit, manager, director, and actor for the next ten or eleven years. Some movement of the kind was badly needed at the time; for although in a general way the theatre was prosperous during and after the last years of the war, the taste of the emergent new playgoing public was for revivals of established favourite plays rather than for new work. One of Clunes's best claims to respect during his time at the Arts Theatre Club was his readiness to help high-aspiring new dramatists. He subsidized Christopher Fry during the writing of 'The Lady's not for Burning', and then staged the play (1948) with himself in the lead. And he accepted John Whiting's obscure 'Saint's Day' (1951) at a time when it was unlikely that any of the regular theatre managers would have taken the risk. In all, he was responsible for the production of more than 100 plays at this little theatre, and the artistic standard at which he aimed was always impressively high. 
Clunes's work at the Arts Theatre was very much to his credit and might well have carried him to the topmost rank in his profession; but this did not quite happen. The reason was not easy to see, for in every technical respect he was an exceptionally well-graced actor. He had a good stage presence, a fine voice which he knew very well how to use, an impressive sense of character, and a lively intelligence. All these qualities were well in evidence when in 1945 he played Hamlet; while the performance was going on it was possible for a critic to rate it among the best Hamlets of the day. Yet somehow when the final curtain was down there was a feeling that his Hamlet had been addressed to the intellect rather than to the emotion of its audience, and it did not have much hold upon the memory. 
So the later years of Clunes's stage career seemed to be tinged with disappointment: his varied natural talent and intensive experience had not availed to put him among those leaders of his profession whom the public acclaimed. He lacked, perhaps, that personal magnetism popularly known as 'star quality'. For instance, when he succeeded Rex Harrison as Professor Higgins in 'My Fair Lady', his performance was striking; yet it was Harrison's image that lived more vividly in the memory. Luckily for him, Clunes had other interests. He collected prints and drawings and owned and ran a bookshop. In 1964 he published a handsomely produced volume, 'The British Theatre'. 
In 1956 Clunes married Daphne Acott, with whom he had one son and one daughter. An earlier marriage, in 1949, to Stella Richman (1922-2002), had been dissolved in 1954. Clunes died in London on 13 March 1970. His son Martin also became an actor. 
W. A. Darlington', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32457


Ross, George Clunies (1842-1910), unofficial ruler and eventual owner of the Cocos Islands, was born on 20 June 1842 on New Selma (now Home Island), one of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands in the southern Indian Ocean, the eldest of the six sons and three daughters of John George Clunies Ross (died 1871) and his Javanese wife, S'pia (later, on baptism and marriage, Anglicized to Sophia) Dupong. 
The remarkable history of the Clunies Ross family on the Cocos began when John Clunies Ross, a Shetlander of Jacobite ancestry and grandfather of George, visited the then uninhabited islands in December 1825. He decided to settle there with his family and some craftsmen who could double as a ship's crew, and create a trading depot and refitting station. He returned to the islands in February 1827, but unfortunately the eccentric Alexander Hare had preceded him. While Ross wanted publicity, Hare sought seclusion with his entourage of about a hundred, mainly from Java, Borneo, and Malaya. The two men quarrelled, Ross's craftsmen left, and in 1831 Hare also departed. Ross was then responsible for everyone. When neither Hare nor his executors claimed the islands or their people, Ross employed all those who wanted work in collecting and husking the wild coconuts and in making coconut oil. After his death in 1854, his son, John George Clunies Ross, expanded production and paid off his debts. 
The Cocos Islands were annexed by Britain (by mistake) in 1857. In 1859 J. G. Clunies Ross made his only visit to Britain, to inquire into the curious annexation and to ask the government for a land title and administrative authority (both were refused); he also purchased milling machinery. He took with him George and some of the other children, to begin their formal education. George was placed in Elizabeth College, Guernsey, and went on to study mechanical and marine engineering in Glasgow, probably at Anderson's University. In 1862 a severe cyclone struck the Cocos; George was recalled to help run his father's estate. He was invaluable, yet was not allowed full discretion. But, athletic, versatile, articulate, and personable, he won admiration from the islands' people and subsequent visitors for his skills, for confronting a man who had run amok, for his keen observation, and for his courage as a sailor. 
George Clunies Ross married Inin (died 1889) from one of the islands' families in 1868; nine of their children survived to adulthood. In 1871 George's father died, leaving the islands, and their plant and buildings, to him. Like his father and grandfather, George Clunies Ross kept law and order over the population by the force of his personality and the co-operation of the heads of the islands' families. There were no police officers, no gaol, no written laws, and an almost complete absence of serious crime. Work was still offered to all. Clunies Ross sought new markets and products, at first unsuccessfully. He disliked compulsion: unless they wished to stay, he returned to the Dutch East Indies the convict labourers in their last years of servitude with whom his father had augmented the Cocos workforce. Instead he imported contract labourers -- about thirty at a time -- from Bantam, encouraging them to remain and send for their wives (some had married women from the Cocos) when their (at first unwritten) contracts expired. By 1880 Clunies Ross had a new export: copra, the dried and shredded pulp of the coconut. It became the mainstay of the islands' economy. Cocos coconut oil had sold at a premium because of its exceptional sweetness. Cocos copra, sun-dried, did likewise, and copra had an expanding market in Europe. 
An era of great prosperity for the Clunies Ross family began. Clunies Ross built new drying sheds and a light railway and jetty, and Oceania House, made from Glasgow bricks, was started. He organized copra shipment, and supervised production carefully. He completed the schooner whose keel had been laid down by his father, naming her the 'J. G. Clunies Ross'. In 1884, with two brothers and seven of his children, he sailed her to Britain, where she was registered A1 at Lloyd's. The children were put in schools and he then pursued his further goal: to acquire the title to the islands' land and the authority denied his father and grandfather. In particular he wanted these to aid his negotiations for a cable station, for which the mid-ocean position of the Cocos was ideal. An official inspection of the islands and the Clunies Ross regime followed. In most respects the islanders and the Clunies Rosses were found satisfactory, even admirable, and George Clunies Ross was given a grant-in-fee of the islands' land and made a magistrate in 1886. He did not use magistrate's powers, however, since they required written laws. An annual supervisory visit was paid to the Cocos from the Straits Settlements for some time. The cable station was opened in 1901. Good income from copra continued, and Clunies Ross made several visits to Britain, enjoying theatres, Cowes week, and London clubs. 
Misfortunes had also begun, however. Inin, described as a 'good and amiable woman' by a governor of the Straits Settlements at a time when skin colour too often dictated judgement, died in 1889. In 1895 Clunies Ross married Ayesha, also from the islands. They had no children, and she outlived him. Around the time of Inin's death, Clunies Ross's agents failed, wiping out a year's income and a favourable balance; he lost a succession of vessels, only partly insured; and his son and young relatives conducted a harsher regime in his absences, occasionally using corporal punishment to maintain the 'status quo'. This caused unease in Singapore, but was allowed to continue. In contentious rivalry and then in uneasy partnership, and finally as a major shareholder, Clunies Ross benefited from the phosphate mine on the Indian Ocean's Christmas Island. Income from these shares was later essential to the economy of the Cocos. 
In 1909 a devastating hurricane struck the islands, demolishing almost every building except Oceania House. George Clunies Ross, in ill health, was in Britain at the time, and he died at Ventnor on the Isle of Wight on 7 July 1910. He was buried at Bonchurch churchyard there. However, his body was disinterred and reburied on the Cocos in 1915. In the last of numerous wills, he left the islands and everything pertaining to running them to his eldest son, John Sydney, as life tenant; only his personal estate was divided. He did not have dominion to compare with that, say, of Brooke of Borneo, but he was an exemplar of energy and enterprise, with no qualms about his right to govern or his right to personal fortune, and was very much a man of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 32458


Clutton, Henry Hugh (1850-1909), surgeon, born on 12 July 1850 at Saffron Walden, Essex, was the third son of Ralph Clutton (1804/5-1886), vicar of that parish, and his wife, Isabella Ellice. Clutton was educated at Marlborough College from 1864 to 1866, when he left on account of ill health. He entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1869, and graduated BA in 1873, MA and MB in 1879, and MCh in 1897. He commenced clinical studies at St Thomas's Hospital, London, in 1872, and was appointed resident assistant surgeon in 1876, assistant surgeon in 1878, and full surgeon in 1891. While assistant surgeon he took charge of the department for diseases of the ear. Clutton's other appointments in London were as surgeon to the Victoria Hospital for Children at Chelsea from 1887 to 1893, consulting surgeon to Osborne House, and treasurer of the Medical Sickness Annuity and Life Assurance Society and of the Convalescent Homes Association. He was also on the executive committee of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and a visitor for the King Edward's Hospital Fund. 
Clutton was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1875, and a fellow in 1876; he served on the council from 1902 until his death, and sat on the senate of the University of London as the college representative. In 1905 he was president of the Clinical Society of London. He married in 1896 Margaret Alice, third daughter of Canon Young, rector of Whitnash, Warwickshire. 
Clutton was an early supporter of antiseptic and aseptic methods, and of surgery for middle-ear disease. He wrote over sixty-five papers, mainly in the 'Transactions of the Pathological and of the Clinical Society', and in 'St Thomas's Hospital Reports', demonstrating an especial interest in bone and joint diseases. One paper in 'The Lancet' (13 March 1886, 516), described symmetrical swellings of the knees in children with congenital syphilis. This condition became known as 'Clutton's joints'. Clutton wrote on pyaemia in T. Holmes's and J. W. Hulke's 'A System of Surgery' (1883), and on diseases of the bones and the surgery of deformity in F. Treves's 'System of Surgery' (1895); he translated material from the German F. von Esmarch's 'The Surgeon's Handbook on the Treatment of Wounded in War' (1878). He designed urethral sounds and bougies which were known by his name and employed until the 1960s. 
In his younger days, Clutton was a fell walker and fisherman, visiting Scotland and Ireland. He read widely on history, art, and architecture, and enjoyed travel. His remarkable endurance and capacity was sapped twelve years before his death by two episodes of septicaemia due to wound infections. After a long illness, alleviated temporarily by an operation, Clutton died at his house, 2 Portland Place, London, on 9 November 1909, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He was survived by his wife and daughter. An old friend commented: 'He was a patient, careful and skilled observer; no trouble was too great for him, whether it was required in the pursuit of purely scientific knowledge or in sifting the signs and symptoms at the bed-side... He was a clear and admirable teacher... always followed by a keen and appreciative crowd of students. ('St Thomas's Hospital Gazette', 19, 1909, 157-60)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32459


Brock, Arthur Clutton- (1868-1924), essayist and journalist, was born at Weybridge, Surrey, on 23 March 1868, the third son of John Alan Clutton-Brock, a banker, and his wife, Mary Alice, daughter of the Revd H. J. Hill. After attending Summerfields, Oxford, he went to Eton College with a scholarship in 1882; he then proceeded in 1887 to New College, Oxford. At Eton, where he won an English verse prize with an ode in the manner of Shelley, and still more at Oxford, Clutton-Brock developed his love of literature and art, and the wit of his conversation and the brilliance of his circle at the university were acknowledged by all who knew him. He obtained third classes in classical honour moderations (1889) and in 'literae humaniores' (1891). On leaving Oxford he was apprenticed for a short time in a stockbroker's office, but was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1895, and practised for some years. Meanwhile his natural bent for writing revealed itself in a number of early essays and poems, some of which were printed in a posthumous collection, 'The Miracle of Love and other Poems' (1926). 
In 1903 Clutton-Brock married Evelyn Alice, daughter of Leveson Francis Vernon-Harcourt, civil engineer, and settled down to a life of regular literary and critical work. From 1904 to 1906 he was literary editor of 'The Speaker' and a frequent contributor to the 'Times Literary Supplement'. This latter paper, which was founded in 1902, owed to him much of its early success and wide reputation; indeed, its editor went so far as to say that Clutton-Brock 'made it'. After being art critic on 'The Tribune' and the 'Morning Post' for a short time, in 1908 Clutton-Brock joined, as art critic, the staff of 'The Times', for which he wrote on many other subjects as well, ranging from gardening to religion, for the rest of his life. In 1909, at the age of forty-one, he wrote his first important book, which was also considered his best, 'Shelley, the Man and the Poet' (materially revised in 1923). He also contributed an introduction to 'The Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley' (ed. C. D. Locock, 2 vols., 1911). Clutton-Brock combined a serious appreciation of Shelley's poetry with a sober survey of Shelley's life in a way which antagonized the poet's more devoted followers. 
The profound joy which Clutton-Brock took in his own daily work led him to accept William Morris's aesthetic approach to socialism, and in 1909 he joined the Fabian Society. When the First World War broke out he had just completed an appreciation of Morris for the 'Home University Library'. The war wrought a considerable, if not a radical, change in his outlook, making him less of an aesthete and more of a moralist. In a series of articles in the 'Times Literary Supplement' (republished as 'Thoughts on the War', 2 vols., 1914-15; see also 'The Ultimate Belief', 1916) Clutton-Brock preached against turning patriotism into a religion, as he alleged the Germans had done. His outlook became more definitely Christian, and in articles and books from 1917 onwards he professed a religion of love, laughter, and beauty which, had he lived longer, might have established him as a religious philosopher. He continued to produce a series of essays on art, literature, and life, written more for pleasure than for profit, which represent his mature thought and culture. While he repudiated the criticism of art in terms of morals which he found in men like Ruskin and Tolstoy, yet art, literature, religion, and politics were indissolubly linked in his philosophy of life. Thus his earlier interest in Morris's socialism led, in later years, to an active involvement in the Farncombe Labour Party. 
In his 'Studies in Christianity' (1918) religion had given Clutton-Brock 'a buoyantly happy mood', but in 1919 he told his wife that 'he felt he had attained his religious optimism too easily', and at the time of his death he was still seeking a constructive philosophy of life. Hence his 'Essays on Religion', posthumously published in 1926, have been described by B. H. Streeter, in the introduction, as 'an unfinished torso'. But although his work in this field thus remained imperfect, Clutton-Brock was placed by his contemporaries in the group of first-rate essayists which England produced in the first quarter of the twentieth century. 
After three years of intermittent illness Clutton-Brock, died at his home, the Red House, Godalming, on 8 January 1924, leaving his widow and three sons, among them the art critic Alan Francis Clutton-Brock (1904-1976). It was reported that his final act was to direct his physician's attention to the beauty of an iris. 


@@@@@


doc= 32460


Clyde, James Avon, Lord Clyde (1863-1944), judge, was born at Dollar, Clackmannanshire, on 14 November 1863, the second son of James Clyde LLD and his wife, Elizabeth Rigg, of Whitehaven, Cumberland. His father was a distinguished teacher of the classics, first at Dollar Academy and later for many years at the Edinburgh Academy. Young Clyde himself entered the latter school and after being 'dux' of all his classes and of the school proceeded to the University of Edinburgh, where his career was equally brilliant. He graduated with first-class honours in classics in 1884, won the Gray scholarship in that year, and graduated LLB in 1888. During his university days he was a prime mover in the establishment of a students' representative council and a students' union; he learned to debate at the Speculative Society, training ground of many famous lawyers, and was successively librarian and president of that body, of which he became an honorary member in 1921. In 1910 he was made honorary LLD of Edinburgh University, and in 1923 received the same distinction at St Andrews. 
Clyde passed advocate in 1887. He had no influence, but his contemporaries at the 'Spec' and elsewhere were convinced that he would go straight to the top. And this, after one or two lean years, he proceeded to do. In addition to great natural ability he was a tireless worker, and once he had secured a hearing the easy maturity of his style made such a strong impression that work flowed in. Well armed at every point as an advocate, he had established the heaviest junior practice at the bar by 1901, when he became a KC. Thereafter he carried all before him, and the House of Lords reports attest the almost universal sweep of his activities as counsel. He became solicitor-general in 1905 during the closing months of the Unionist government, and later returned to office as lord advocate from 1916 (when he was sworn of the privy council) to 1920. He had become dean of the Faculty of Advocates in 1915, and on his appointment as lord advocate his brethren paid him the unique distinction of asking him to continue in office as dean in spite of his new duties. He resigned the deanship in 1919; he was elected honorary bencher of Gray's Inn in the same year. Of all the many celebrated cases in which Clyde appeared perhaps the most noteworthy was that heard in 1918 by the judicial committee of the privy council regarding the ownership of the unalienated lands of Southern Rhodesia. Clyde led for the British South Africa Company, and in a galaxy of counsel which included many of the leaders of the English bar, among them Sir F. E. Smith, there was general agreement that Clyde's performance was easily the finest. 
A lifelong Unionist in politics, Clyde became member for West (subsequently North) Edinburgh in 1909, and retained his seat until his elevation to the bench in 1920. With one noteworthy exception, his contributions to the work of the House of Commons were almost wholly those of an efficient law officer. The exception occurred in August 1919, when he replied to strictures on the lord advocate and his department for failing to prosecute in a case of fraud at Renfrew aerodrome. A member present wrote that 'Clyde's answer did not contain a violent or a bitter word; but throughout it there ran an undercurrent of mockery, which was gentle and playful -- and deadly' (private information). Hopes that he would thereafter take a more prominent part in the business of the house were ended in 1920 by his appointment, with the judicial title of Lord Clyde, as lord justice-general of Scotland and lord president of the Court of Session in succession to Lord Strathclyde. 
Clyde's fifteen years as head of the court in Scotland constitute the most important chapter in the story of his life. A sound lawyer, he was never afraid to enunciate general principles, and his judgments, ranging over every department of Scots law, increasingly provided material to writers, advocates, and judges in their work. The burden of the court fell heavily on Clyde's shoulders during his period of office, since with some noteworthy exceptions his immediate colleagues were not distinguished for ability or teamwork. His extempore judgments were always impressive, assisted as they were by his fine presence, good voice, and easy flow of English. They were as finished and well expressed as the written judgments of others. In his reserved judgments there was a tendency to over-elaboration, but all were written out first in his own hand, and were therefore free from the verbosity born of dictation. He once deprecated 'unreceptive judicial silence', and certainly did not indulge in it himself. But his interventions made for a high standard of pleading, and he had a stimulating influence on all who appeared before him. He loved battle, and like a good fighter he was always prepared to take as good as he gave. Throughout his career, and into old age, he was always the dominant figure in any gathering. His appearance, his manner, even his walk, suggested, as was the fact, that he was endowed with an immense store of vitality and power. 
No account of Clyde's presidency would be complete without reference to two heavy outside tasks undertaken by him during its currency. In 1926 he became chairman of the royal commission appointed to report on the Court of Session and the office of sheriff-principal. The labour involved was immense, and the report, an exhaustive one, advised drastic reforms in procedure, which were partly carried out by statute in 1933. Clyde deplored the transfer of the Advocates' Library to the nation in 1925, but as an 'ex officio' member of the new board of trustees he played an indefatigable part in seeing the new institution through its teething troubles. From 1936 he was chairman of the board and its main driving force. 
In 1895 Clyde married Anna Margaret McDiarmid (died 1956), daughter of Peter Wallwork Latham, Downing professor of medicine at Cambridge; they had two sons, of whom the elder, James Latham McDiarmid Clyde, became lord justice-general of Scotland and lord president of the Court of Session in 1954. Always a lover of the country, Clyde retired in 1935 to his home at Briglands, Rumbling Bridge, Kinross-shire, literally 'to cultivate his garden', for he was a great rose-grower. He became lord lieutenant of Kinross-shire and when the war came took an active part in organizing the war savings of the county, with results remarkable for an agricultural community. When still lord president, he had found time to publish, in two volumes, his own translation of Sir Thomas Craig's 'Jus feudale' (1934). He followed this up in his retirement by the publication, in two volumes (1937-8) for the Stair Society, of Sir Thomas Hope's 'Major Practicks, 1608-1633'. Finally, again for the Stair Society, he published (1943) an edition of the 'Acta dominorum concilii, 1501-1503'. It may be regretted that to these works of scholarship he did not add his personal reminiscences, for he had, in informal talk, a great gift of vivid and racy characterization. Clyde died in Edinburgh after a short illness on 16 June 1944. 
T. B. Simpson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32461


Clynes, John Robert (1869-1949), trade unionist and politician, was born at Oldham, Lancashire, on 27 March 1869, the elder of two sons, and one of seven children of Patrick Clynes, an illiterate Irish farmworker, and his wife, Bridget Scanlan. His father had been evicted in 1851 and emigrated to Lancashire, where he gained employment as a gravedigger. 
Clynes stated later that he hated his years at the local elementary school, and eagerly became a 'half-timer' at the age of ten, working as a 'little piecer' in a textile mill from six in the morning until noon for half-a-crown a week and continuing at school in the afternoon. At the age of twelve he left school altogether and was earning 10's'. a week at the mill. Out of his early wages he bought a tattered dictionary for 6died and Cobbett's 'Grammar' for 8died He received 3died a week for reading regularly to three blind men, whose discussions of the political news aroused his interest. He paid 8died for tuition on two nights a week from a former schoolmaster. 
By 1883 Clynes was a 'big piecer' earning 17's'. 6died a week, and was reading the works of Carlyle, Ruskin, Mill, Emerson, and Renan. Attracted to the skills of debate, Clynes practised oratory with a workmate in a disused quarry outside the town. He began to contribute to the local press under the pen-name Piecer, describing the conditions of child life in the mill, and writing on trade unionism, socialism, and labour representation. He successfully rebelled against having to clean and oil machinery without pay, and organized a Piecers' Union, for piecers had no direct representation in the Spinners' Union. In 1891, at the invitation of Will Thorne (1857-1946), he left the mill to serve as a district organizer at 30's'. a week for one of the first organizations for unskilled workers, the National Union of Gasworkers and General Labourers, which Thorne had inaugurated in 1889. 
Described in his obituary in 'The Times' as 'short in stature, slight in build, not a powerful voice', and without a forceful personality, Clynes gained respect by the very reasonableness and gentleness of his approach. It was said of him in 1901 that he was a man of peace who thought that what was mostly wanted was a sense of humour. His methods were often seen by contemporaries to have achieved results when the more aggressive tactics of some of his colleagues had failed. On 13 September 1893 he married a cardroom hand, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Owen Harper, watchmaker, of Oldham. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Clynes was president of the Oldham Trades Council in 1892 and its secretary from 1894 to 1912. At this time he also began to be involved in socialist politics on a wider front: he attended the foundation conference of the Independent Labour Party at Bradford in 1893, and in the same year was a delegate to the International Socialist Congress at Zurich. A twenty weeks' lock-out in the cotton trade during this period emphasized in his mind the need for working-class political organization. Representing his union at the Belfast Trades Union Congress in 1893, he supported nationalization as a principle. He was appointed secretary for the Lancashire district of his union in 1896. His union was one of the strongest proponents of independent labour political action and Clynes represented it at the Plymouth Trades Union Congress in 1899 when it was decided to form the Labour Representation Committee, destined from 1906 to become the Labour Party. At the inaugural conference in London in February 1900 he again attended for his union, and in 1904 was elected to represent the affiliated trades councils on the national executive; from 1909 to 1939 he was consistently elected to the trades union section. He was chairman of the party organization in 1908, presiding over the Portsmouth conference in 1909. 
Clynes's parliamentary career began in 1906 when he was returned for the North-Eastern (later Platting) division of Manchester as a member of the first Parliamentary Labour Party, and he lived to be the last survivor of this group. He represented the constituency until defeated in October 1931. He made various journeys abroad, among others to attend the 1909 Toronto convention of the American Federation of Labor as fraternal delegate from the British Trades Union Congress. 
In 1915 Clynes opposed the entry of Labour into the Asquith coalition in which three of his colleagues had appointments; but after the formation of the Lloyd George coalition he served on the food commission in 1917 and in the same year joined David Alfred Thomas, Lord Rhondda, food controller, as parliamentary secretary. A system of rationing was gradually introduced and a consumers' council set up, of which Clynes was chairman. He became a privy councillor in 1918 and succeeded Rhondda as food controller when the latter died in that year. When the war ended Clynes opposed the withdrawal of the Labour Party from the government, sharing the view of his colleague, G. N. Barnes, that Labour should assist in the formulation of the peace treaties; but when the party decided against that policy, Clynes, unlike Barnes, conformed, and resigned his office. 
Clynes was returned unopposed as MP for Platting at the general election in 1918. Elected vice-chairman of the parliamentary party, he became chairman in 1921 after the resignation of William Adamson, and led the party in the general election of 1922. In the election for chairman of the parliamentary party which followed, he was defeated by Ramsay MacDonald by five votes, and accepted the vice-chairmanship. In January 1924 he moved the successful vote of no confidence which brought about the defeat of the Baldwin government and led to MacDonald's first Labour administration in which Clynes himself was lord privy seal and deputy leader of the House of Commons. 
Opposed to the principle of a general strike, in 1926 Clynes and others in the parliamentary party sought to conciliate between the Miners' Federation, the mine owners, and the government. Nevertheless, when the strike took place Clynes supported the miners throughout the dispute, which cost his union $200,000 in strike pay. As home secretary in MacDonald's second government of 1929, Clynes was active in the area of prison reform and took great interest in an inquiry into the cotton trade. He was also responsible for refusing Trotsky permission to settle in England. In 1931 Clynes introduced an electoral reform bill providing for the alternative vote, and also abolishing university representation, a clause which was deleted by four votes in the committee stage in the House of Commons. The bill was drastically amended in the House of Lords and soon afterwards the economic situation brought the Labour government to an end. 
On the formation of Ramsay MacDonald's 'national' government, Clynes refused the party leadership which went to Arthur Henderson. In the ensuing general election Clynes lost his seat and devoted himself to the work of his union, of which he had been president since 1912. The union, which was by then known as the National Union of General and Municipal Workers, had become one of the largest in the country, and when Clynes retired from the presidency in 1937 it covered nearly half a million members in a wide range of industries. Clynes received the honorary degree of DCL from the universities of Oxford and Durham in 1919. 
In 1935 Clynes returned to parliament as MP for Platting and was content to be counted an elder statesman of the labour movement generally. Contemporaries greatly respected his judgement, sincerity, and loyalty. In 1945 he retired on reaching the parliamentary age limit set by his union and lived quietly and frugally, on the pension which it gave him, in his Putney home. In 1947 Clynes wrote to 'The Times' and other journals complaining of his circumstances and the insufficiency of his union pension, and a fund was raised by his parliamentary colleagues and friends. Many close to him were disappointed by these complaints, which they felt to be unjustified, and thought they indicated how his wartime and other trials had affected him (his wife became an invalid after sustaining serious air-raid injuries in the Second World War). Clynes died at his home, 41 St John's Avenue, Putney Hill, London, on 23 October 1949. He was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium on 27 October. His wife survived him, but died shortly afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 32462


Coade, Thorold Francis (1896-1963), headmaster, was born in Dublin on 3 July 1896, the only son of the Revd Charles Edward Coade and his wife, Jessie Wilhelmine Spencer. He was educated at Glebe House School, Hunstanton, and at Harrow School (1910-15), where he became head of the headmaster's house. He then went to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and in 1916 to France with the Loyal North Lancashire regiment. There he was wounded on the Somme, losing an ear-drum when a bomb exploded in the trench; when he left hospital he was transferred to East Anglia. 
On demobilization Coade went up to Christ Church, Oxford, on the shortened degree course in English. In 1921 he passed with distinction. Meanwhile, following in her father's line, his only sister, Eileen, went up to Oxford to read theology, in which she gained a first class in 1924. While at Oxford, Coade rekindled his youthful interest in drama, especially production, and also played golf for the university. In 1922, having been introduced to her by his sister, he married Kathleen Eleanor, daughter of Harold Hugh Hardy, a businessman. They had two daughters. In 1922 he returned as an assistant master to Harrow, for which he always retained a romantic attachment. But his experience there gave insufficient scope for his widening vision. 
In those ten years at Harrow, however, Coade's imagination was released through his wife's affection and rapport. They both loved poetry and the arts, and she was always to share deeply in his thoughts. In 1931 he began residential conferences for schoolmasters at Harrow. 
By 1932 Coade was restive for change and looking for opportunity, and in that year he was appointed to the headship of Bryanston School. The school had been founded only four years before and its founding headmaster had resigned. It was a time of crisis when institutions of all kinds were at grave financial risk. Perhaps only the school's governors detected beneath Coade's shy unpretentious exterior his unswerving determination and purpose, supported by his Christian faith. With him at its centre, often almost hidden, the school passed from its troubled though exciting, seemingly eccentric, beginnings to its acceptance at large as an interesting experiment until, after about twenty years, it became recognized nationally as a remarkable creation. 
Bryanston offered Coade an almost clear field. An appreciable number of ideas he inherited from his predecessor, and some he borrowed from others, but their management and interaction were his creative own. Private study was encouraged as a method of work, after a modified Dalton plan; the competitive spirit was reduced, there was no corporal punishment or private fagging, prefects were given responsibility not privilege. Relationships between masters and boys were less inhibited, more relaxed, than elsewhere. There was much opportunity for self-expression in the visual arts, in music, and for other creative uses of leisure. Estate work replaced the conventional training corps (except during the Second World War), and boys were deliberately given more free time than at other schools. When Coade was taunted as headmaster of a school where 'the boys do what they like', he replied that 'they like what they do'. A merry debunker, capable of witty asides that were often devastating, he could nevertheless be stern, even adamant. Compassion and tenderness were, however, his signal qualities. 
Coade produced many school plays. One of his finest achievements was in the summer of 1954 when he produced the Chester mystery plays in the Greek theatre at Bryanston with over a hundred boys and girls from the sister school of Cranborne Chase taking part. 
Coade shunned the limelight and was rarely prominent, for instance in the Headmasters' Conference. However, he was much in demand at conferences because of his wise and witty interventions. He could seldom meet strangers (or parents) half-way. His personality was complex, yet his presence gave reassurance, inspiring trust and confidence. He drew staff and others to him, leading them into strong partnership. For him wholeness, the balance and harmony of a boy's entire person, was the purpose of education, as is recognized so widely today. Over-specialization and narrowness of any kind was an intrusion into adolescence. Through creative encounters and relationships, a boy's imagination and talent can be captured for life itself. For Coade, therefore, the use of leisure, and through it self-discovery and realization, rang truer than the pursuit of outer objectives. 
A man of ideas but still more of ideals, it was as if they came elusively to use Coade as their interpreter. His sight was more intuitive than observing, and his love of others was grounded in the faith that shaped his personality. The unifying thread was for him the awakening of mind, body, and spirit in each unique adolescent boy and their harnessing to the purposes of God, the Spirit moving where it will. 'You cannot teach boys to be religious', he said, 'for they are religious already.' 'God with Us' by S. L. Frank, translated by N. Duddington (1946), was of central importance to him. 
After twenty-six years the governors of Bryanston invited Coade to remain for a further five, but ill health compelled him to retire a year later, in 1959. Although one of the less well known, he was among the greatest headmasters of his time. He died at his home, Old Bell Cottage, at East Knoyle, Salisbury, not far from the school, on 1 February 1963. 
Coade's published work included 'Education for leisure' in 'Education of Today' (1935, ed. E. D. Laborde), and 'The new term' ('The Spectator', 1937). He edited 'Harrow Lectures in Education' (1931), and 'Manhood in the Making' (1939), to which he contributed an essay entitled 'Maturity'. A posthumous selection of his papers forms 'The Burning Bow' (1966), which includes an epilogue, 'Beneath his skin', contributed by Kathleen Coade. 
A. R. Donald Wright', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32463


Coatalen, Louis Herve (1879-1962), designer of cars and aero-engines, was born on 11 September 1879 at Concarneau, Finistere, the second son of a hotelier and wheelwright, Francois Marie Coatalen, and his wife, Louise Le Bris. From grammar school at Brest, he went to the Ecole des Arts et Metiers at Cluny, then started as a draughtsman with De Dion-Bouton and afterwards with the Clement Company and Panhard and Levassor. Seeing greater opportunities in the motor industry in England, in 1900 he joined the Crowden Motor Car Company at Leamington Spa and then at the age of twenty-one became chief engineer with Humber at Coventry. For them he designed two models which restored the company's fortunes. The 10/12 hp model was so successful that the works had to be expanded and profits attained figures that were not to be equalled for a quarter of a century. He drove a Coventry Humber in the 1906 Tourist Trophy race, finishing sixth. 
In partnership with William Hillman of Coventry from 1907, Coatalen designed the 24 hp Hillman-Coatalen car with which he put up the fastest lap in the 1907 Tourist Trophy race before crashing at Quarter Bridge. 
Thomas Cureton, managing director of the Sunbeam Motor Car Company, Wolverhampton, engaged Coatalen as chief engineer in February 1909 and his first product, the 16/20 hp Sunbeam, distinguished itself in the Scottish Six Days Trial in the same year. Encouraged by this, a smaller 12/16 hp model was produced which proved an even greater success. This model and its subsequent development established Coatalen's reputation as an automobile engineer and put Sunbeam in the forefront of motor manufacturers. During the next twenty-one years Coatalen produced a succession of touring cars, luxury cars, racing cars, record-breaking cars, and aero-engines which won international fame for Sunbeam and its associated marques, Talbot and Darracq. Coatalen was first married in 1902, in Birmingham, to Annie Davis; they had one son. The marriage ended in divorce, and on 3 September 1909 he married Olive Mary, daughter of Henry James Bath, one of Sunbeam's directors; they had two sons. Coatalen acquired British nationality during the First World War. He was divorced in 1922 and on 31 January 1923 married a divorcee, Iris Enid Florence van Raalte ('nee' Graham); they had one daughter. This third marriage lasted until 1935, when he married Emily Bridson, who remained with him until his death. 
Coatalen wrote in 1924: 'Racing car practice accelerates development. Racing stimulates designers and engineers and raises the morale of the factory workpeople.' He drove Sunbeams in races at Brooklands and entered them in the 'voiturette' races run by 'L'Auto' in France. They competed in international grand prix races and set up many world records. They held the Brooklands lap record five times and the land speed record in 1922 and 1924-7. Sunbeam cars won the 'Coupe de L'Auto' in 1912, the Tourist Trophy in 1914 and 1922, the French grand prix in 1923, and the Spanish grand prix in 1924. The 1.5 litre Talbot-Darracqs were invincible in 'voiturette' races from 1921 until 1925. 
Coatalen was not only a competent engineer but also a skilled impresario, quick to spot and use the abilities of others. He engaged the design talents of Ernest Henry, Vincent Bertarione, Captain J. S. Irving, and others. The racing cars were handled by the leading drivers of their time: Sir Henry Segrave, K. Lee Guinness, Sir Algernon Guinness, Dario Resta, Jean Chassagne, Albert Divo, Rene Thomas, Sir Malcolm Campbell, Andre Boillot, J. Moriceau, George Duller, Count Masetti, and Kaye Don. 
The Sunbeam company was among the first to standardize overhead valve engines and four-wheel brakes and in 1925 produced a twin overhead camshaft 3 litre sporting model. The company also played an important role in the development of aero-engines. The Crusader 150 hp V8 was already in production before the outbreak of war in 1914. Lessons learned in racing were applied to meet the ever-increasing demands from the services for more power. Over twenty types of Sunbeam aero-engines were designed and produced and power output rose from 150 to 900 hp. Sunbeam-Coatalen engines were fitted to the British airship R34 which made the first out-and-home flight across the Atlantic in 1919. The French government nominated Coatalen chevalier of the Legion d'honneur for his work on aero-engines for the allies. 
The development of a Sunbeam-Coatalen diesel aero-engine was undertaken in 1930 but economic conditions and Coatalen's ill health held it back. He was then living and working in Paris and Capri. With his stimulating influence removed, the fortunes of the Sunbeam Talbot Darracq Group declined and in 1935 it was taken over by the Rootes Group under W. E. Rootes. Meanwhile Coatalen became chairman and managing director of Lockheed Hydraulic Brakes in Paris and chairman of KLG Sparking Plugs (France). He continued his work on diesel aero-engines using a Hispano-Suiza engine which he converted using very high pressure injection. In 1953 the Societe des Ingenieurs de l'Automobile elected him its president, and in 1954 he was made officier of the Legion d'honneur. He was actively engaged in his work until his death in Paris on 23 May 1962. 
Anthony S. Heal', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32464


Coates, Eric (1886-1957), composer, was born on 27 August 1886 at Watnall Road, Hucknall, Nottinghamshire, the youngest of the three daughters and two sons of William Harrison Coates (died 1935), a surgeon, and his wife, Mary Jane Gwynne, 'nee' Blower, of Usk, Monmouthshire. There was music in the family, for Mary Jane (known as Mi-Jane) was a fine pianist and Dr Coates a flautist and an admired amateur singer. Eric Coates (as he seems always to have been called) never went to school, but in his earliest years shared a governess with his siblings. His innate musicality was awakened on hearing a visiting friend of the family play the violin. He was then six years old, and promptly demanded an instrument for himself. His first lessons came from a local violin teacher, but at the age of thirteen he was sent to the respected Nottingham musician George Ellenberger. Violists were in short supply, so he changed instruments, and soon found himself in demand for chamber music. At the age of eighteen, in 1904, he heard his own 'Ballad for Strings' performed at the Royal Albert Hall, Nottingham. 
Coates's father proposed a banking career for him, but was persuaded to let him attend the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied composition with Frederick Corder and viola with Lionel Tertis. From the start, Coates insisted that he wished only to write light music. Corder's rigorous training laid the foundations for what was to be the most thorough of light music techniques. As a violist, Coates was soon to be in demand in the theatre orchestras, and he became a virtuoso second only to his teacher. In 1908 he toured South Africa as a member of the Hambourg String Quartet. Yet his prospects seemed insecure, which was why he encountered parental opposition when he wished to marry a sixteen-year-old fellow student. Phyllis Marguerite Black ('b'. 1895?) was an actress and the daughter of a former Corder student, Annie Black, and her husband, Francis, principal of the Camden School of Art. To earn a living, Coates concentrated on playing, first for Thomas Beecham and then, from 1911, for Sir Henry Wood's Queen's Hall Orchestra. This security enabled him to marry Phyllis, on 2 February 1913. 
Despite the demands of orchestral playing, Coates had his successes as a composer. Wood's first wife, Olga, sang his 'Four Old English Songs' at the Promenade Concerts in 1909, and Coates's association with the lawyer and poet Fred Weatherly produced in 'Stonecracke John' (1909) the first of a number of huge ballad successes. Wood himself was the dedicatee of the 'Miniature Suite', the last movement of which was encored when he conducted its first performance, at the Proms, on 17 October 1911. 
Coates never enjoyed robust health and suffered from neuritis in his left arm. Since sight-reading came effortlessly to him, he found it difficult to share Wood's dedication to relentless rehearsing. In 1919, after nine years as principal viola, his contract was not renewed. It was an affront but it was also a relief. He never played the instrument again, and thereafter earned his living entirely by composition. A not-too-onerous contract with his publisher required from him annually one orchestral piece of fifteen minutes' duration, one of five minutes, and three ballads. A founder member of the Performing Right Society, he was one of the first composers to derive the bulk of his income from radio and recording. To an extent, the playing time of a 78 r.p.m. record dictated the format of his work, which favoured the suite, the fantasy, the march, the valse, and the ballad. While he was at first influenced by Sullivan and German, Coates had an enviable ability to absorb new trends. Thus such works as 'The Selfish Giant' (1925) and 'The Three Bears' (1926, written to amuse his four-year-old son, Austin) made use of the syncopated and jazz styles of the period. His march 'Knightsbridge' (1932, from the 'London Suite') was used as introductory music for the long-running radio programme 'In Town Tonight' (from 1933), and from 1940 the march 'Calling All Workers' set the pace for the 'Music while you Work' broadcasts. In 1930 he had written a valse serenade, 'By the Sleepy Lagoon'; after the Second World War it found its place as the theme tune for the radio programme 'Desert Island Discs', and it continued to be heard in that context at the end of the century. 
Between the wars Coates's work dominated the repertory of the seaside and spa orchestras. He achieved a final triumph when the film 'The Dambusters' (1954) employed a recently written march to which he gave the same name. It illustrated all the characteristics of his music: strong melody, foot-tapping rhythm, brilliant counterpoints, and colourful orchestration. Coates was an effective conductor of his own work, which he tended to take at a brisk tempo. In 1936 he conducted his work in Scandinavia, making further visits abroad as a representative of the Performing Right Society to the USA (1946) and to South America (1948). He and his wife were enthusiastic dancers, and his rhythmic sense reflected this. Although his music sometimes described rural scenes, he was essentially a city man, happiest in London. Unassuming and quiet, he had a whimsical sense of humour. Modest to a fault, he showed no resentment that he never received the public honours that were surely his due. He died on 21 December 1957 in the Royal West Sussex Hospital, Chichester, having suffered a massive stroke a few days before. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32465


Coates, (Joseph) Gordon (1878-1943), prime minister of New Zealand, was born on 3 February 1878 at Ruatuna, just outside Matakohe in Northland, New Zealand, the son of an English father, Edward Coates (1843-1905), and his northern Irish wife, Eleanor Kathleen Aickin (1851-1935). His family gave qualified support to the New Zealand Liberal Party, which dominated politics in New Zealand between 1891 and 1912. 
Coates grew to maturity on the 2420 acre farm at Ruatuna that was slowly being reclaimed from forest and scrub. The area was isolated and not connected to Auckland by road or rail until the 1920s. It was served by a daily steamer from Helensville across the Kaipara harbour. There were few roads in Northland; contact with neighbours was by horse or punt. Telephones were slow to arrive. Coates had several years' schooling at Matakohe School, but the gentlemanly polish that he displayed in later years came from a governess employed by his mother to help educate her two boys and four girls, and special tutoring. Edward Coates was a manic depressive. His land was owned by his brother-in-law, and money was short. In the 1890s Edward withdrew from the community in which he had been a leading citizen, leaving the farm to his wife and children. By the time he was twelve Gordon carried many responsibilities. He could handle a gun and shot wild pigs, ducks, and pheasants. He played rugby, rode horses at shows, and attended the small local Anglican church. Gordon grew to 6 feet, with broad shoulders and a head of auburn hair. By the time he was elected to the Otamatea county council in 1905 (he was chairman between 1913 and 1916) Coates was a volunteer in the Otamatea mounted rifles and a vigorous supporter of the public works policies of the Liberal premier, Richard John Seddon, and his successor, Sir Joseph Ward. 
In 1911 Coates stood for parliament for Kaipara as an independent Liberal, winning on the second ballot. He held the seat until his death. Believing that he had fulfilled his promise to his electors to support Sir Joseph Ward, he voted in July 1912 with W. F. Massey's Reform Party to topple the Liberal government, and became a Reform Party member before the 1914 election. Coates's early career in the house was undistinguished. He supported public works, particularly in the north, and championed kauri gum diggers who were exhausting their resource and who, after the outbreak of war in 1914, experienced reduced markets. Coates was no orator, but he possessed a genial informality that won him a wide circle of friends. He was best known as a handsome, eligible bachelor; nevertheless, there had been an earlier relationship with a Maori woman, with whom he was said to have had a son and a daughter. On 4 August 1914 he married a recent English immigrant, Marjorie Grace Coles (1891-1973). They had five daughters. 
Coates had acquired a love of the empire at his father's knee. He left for France in November 1916 with the 19th reinforcements to the New Zealand expeditionary force, holding the rank of captain. On 31 July 1917 he won a Military Cross at La Basseville, and a bar to his MC at Mailly-Maillet on 26 March 1918. Promoted to major, and carrying a wound to his leg which in later years gave him a sometimes rolling gait that opponents put down to drink, Coates returned from the front and was soon promoted by W. F. Massey to his cabinet. On 2 September 1919 he became postmaster-general and minister of justice. After Massey's re-election in December 1919 Coates was minister of public works, then minister of railways after 1923. As the youngest minister in an ageing cabinet, and possessing a war record, Coates attracted attention. He prioritized road and rail construction programmes and edged the state into a monopoly position as the producer of hydroelectricity. He was the obvious successor to Prime Minister Massey when he died in May 1925. 
Described as a 'tall, lithe man, erect and soldierly in figure, a stranger to fatigue' ('Evening Post', 21 July 1925), Coates was sworn as prime minister on 30 May 1925. He was to become the first New Zealand born premier to win a general election. His breezy informality became the subject of an extravagant advertising campaign, and in the December election he was returned with the largest majority in Reform's career. However, a lacklustre cabinet, declining commodity prices, and rising unemployment proved beyond Coates's control. A botched effort to fix dairy prices on the London market in 1926 damaged his reputation, even though the idea was not his. Some Reform supporters accused Coates of socialist interventions both in welfare and commerce. After an election in November 1928, when Reform lost its majority, Coates's government was toppled from office on a confidence vote by a resurgent Sir Joseph Ward, now seventy-three, who briefly enjoyed the support of the growing Labour Party. Ironically, Coates had originally entered parliament as a supporter of Ward. Coates led the opposition for three years until a threatened economic collapse forced him into coalition with Ward's successor, George Forbes. Coates served as minister of public works and employment, then, from 1933 to 1935, as minister of finance. 
Coates displayed a degree of unorthodoxy, supporting retrenchment, devaluation of the New Zealand currency, then the establishment of a reserve bank. He promoted legislation to allow farmers to refinance loans at lower interest rates, so as to bring their overheads into line with reduced incomes. This incurred the wrath of those with money, and led to the intervention at the 1935 election of a third party, the Democrats, who split the conservative vote. Nothing, it seemed, could lift Coates's standing with those who had lost jobs or farms as a result of the slump. The national coalition was defeated in November 1935 by the Labour Party. It proceeded to introduce state housing, guaranteed prices for dairy farmers, and social security for all. Coates's readjustments to the economy and better overseas prices made Labour's reforms easier to afford. 
In opposition after 1935, Coates was not chosen to lead the newly formed National Party (formed out of the Reform and United parties in May 1936). He spent more time with his family on the farm at Ruatuna. When war broke out he offered his services to the Labour government. On 16 July 1940 he joined Prime Minister Peter Fraser's war cabinet, becoming minister of armed forces and war co-ordination. Coates became a trusted confidant of Fraser's and a strong advocate of a non-partisan approach to New Zealand's wartime effort, first in the Middle East, Greece, and Crete, then, after December 1941, also in the Pacific theatre of war. Coates's reputation as a depression skinflint was gradually transformed for the better. He got credit towards the end of his life for being a solid, sensible, patriotic New Zealander who put country ahead of party. He has been seen since as a reformer who vigorously pushed the state into public works and banking, and with his rudimentary family allowances of 1926, nudged it into the area of income maintenance. After a lifetime of energetic activity and constant smoking Coates died suddenly on 27 May 1943 in his office in the parliament buildings in Wellington. He was buried at Matakohe church cemetery on 1 June. Appropriately, perhaps, it was Fraser's Labourites, more than his own colleagues, who mourned his passing. He was survived by his wife and daughters. Ownership of his farm subsequently passed to the New Zealand Historic Places Trust. 
Coates moved with the ebbs and flows of New Zealand politics for more than thirty years. A vigorous proponent of state activity, he refused to accept that he was a socialist. Reviled by workers because of his depression policies, he was none the less friends with politicians of all stripes. 


@@@@@


doc= 32466


Cobb, Gerard Francis (1838-1904), composer and writer, was born at Nettlestead, Kent, on 15 October 1838, the younger son of William Francis Cobb, rector of Nettlestead, and his wife, Mary Blackburn. Educated at Marlborough College from 1849 to 1857, he matriculated in 1857 from Trinity College, Cambridge, where he won a scholarship in 1860. He graduated BA in 1861 with first-class honours in both the classical and the moral science tripos. Having been interested in music from an early age, Cobb then went to Dresden for a short time to study music. He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1863, took his MA the next year, and in 1869 was appointed junior bursar, a post which he held with some success for twenty-five years. 
In sympathy with the Tractarian movement, Cobb at one time contemplated, but finally declined, holy orders. He actively advocated reunion between the Roman and Anglican churches, and in 1867 published an elaborate treatise, 'The Kiss of Peace, or, England and Rome at one on the Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist'. Two short tracts, 'A Few Words on Reunion' and 'Separation not Schism', appeared in 1869. 
Cobb was president of the Cambridge University Musical Society from 1874 to 1883, and as chairman of the University Board of Musical Studies from 1877 to 1892 gave Sir George Macfarren valuable help in the reform of that faculty. He married Elizabeth Lucy, daughter of John Welchman Whateley of Birmingham, and widow of Stephen Parkinson, tutor of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1893, and resigned his offices at Trinity College (although he continued to reside in Cambridge) to devote himself mainly to musical composition and the encouragement of musical study, which had already engaged much of his interest. He was a prolific composer of songs, and wrote much church music, including a setting of 'Psalm 42' for the festival of the North Eastern Choir Association at Ripon Cathedral in 1892, seven services (including the morning, communion, and evening service in C major for men's voices, commissioned by St George's Chapel, Windsor), and anthems. His most ambitious work was 'A Song of Trafalgar', a ballad for chorus and orchestra, op. 41 (1900), though his most popular compositions were settings of twenty of Rudyard Kipling's 'Barrack-Room Ballads' (1892-7), which were published collectively in 1904, and the songs 'The Last Salute' (1897), 'Love among the Roses', and 'A Spanish Lament' (1886). He also published a piano quintet in C, op. 22 (1892), and a piano quartet (1898). 
Cobb was an enthusiastic cyclist, and was the first president of the National Cyclists' Union (originally the Bicycle Union) in 1878 and president of the Cambridge University cycling club. For the International Health Exhibition in 1884 he contributed a chapter on cycling to the handbook on athletics. He was active in the municipal life of Cambridge, and addressed to the district council in 1878 a pamphlet on road paving, in which he urged improvement of the roads. 
Cobb died at his home, The Hermitage, Newnham, Cambridgeshire, on 31 March 1904, and was cremated at Woking. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32467


Cobb, John Rhodes (1899-1952), holder of land and water speed records, was born at Hackbridge, Surrey, on 2 December 1899, the youngest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Rhodes Cobb, a fur broker, and his wife, Florence Goad. Educated at Eton College and at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, he joined his father's business. Before the Second World War he was commissioned by the Soviet government to sell the annual Russian pelt stock. In addition to his fur business he was a joint managing director of Anning, Chadwick, and Kiver Ltd, and vice-chairman of the Falkland Islands Company Ltd. 
From an early age Cobb loved to race on the Brooklands track which was near his family's home at Esher, and he became known as a courageous and skilled driver. He competed in his first race at the Brooklands Whitsun meeting of 1925. His early successes took place in the mid-1920s, driving a big 10 litre Fiat which had been made before the First World War. Nevertheless, it was still capable of lap speeds in excess of 110 miles per hour. Subsequently he raced an eight cylinder Leyland-Thomas car and then moved into the front rank of racing motorists with a number of victories driving a 10.5 litre Delage. Driving the Delage he broke the outer circuit lap record at Brooklands in 1929 with an average of 132 m.p.h. 
By the beginning of the 1930s Cobb maintained Brooklands lap speeds of 135 m.p.h. To the design of Reid Railton, Thompson and Taylor manufactured for him the legendary Napier-Railton car, which became the fastest machine ever to race on the Brooklands circuit. Cobb's premier Brooklands record was a lap speed of 143.44 m.p.h., achieved in October 1935, a record that remained unbeaten. In that year he drove the Napier-Railton for the first time on the Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah. On this American visit he set new world land speed endurance records: for one hour at 152.7 m.p.h. and for twenty-four hours at 137.4 m.p.h. for the world's 24-hour record. Later in 1935 he won the 500 mile race at Brooklands, a feat which he repeated in 1937. 
Cobb then set out to beat the world's land speed record, of 345 m.p.h., set at Bonneville by George Eyston in August 1938, and commissioned an entirely new car, built to an ingenious design by Railton. Once again the location was the Bonneville Salt Flats where, on 15 September 1938, Cobb set a new record of 350.2 m.p.h. On the following day, however, his rival Eyston exceeded this with a speed of 357.5. A year later, on 23 August 1939, Cobb returned and increased the world record to 369.74 m.p.h. The Second World War, during which Cobb served in the Royal Air Force and Air Transport Auxiliary, interrupted further attempts on the record. On 16 September 1947 Cobb made his final assault on the world land speed record at Bonneville, again driving the Railton. While his two-run average speed was 394.2 m.p.h., he reached 403.135 m.p.h. on one run, thus becoming the first person to exceed 400 m.p.h. His record, the last to be gained in a piston-engined vehicle, stood for sixteen years. In recognition of this feat he was awarded the 1947 Segrave trophy. Other awards were gold stars from the British Racing Drivers' Club in 1935 and 1937, though he received no official honours. Throughout his racing career he was encouraged by his mother, with whom he lived until his marriage, in 1947, to Elizabeth Mitchell-Smith (died 1948); following the death of his first wife he married Vera Henderson in 1950. There were no children of either marriage. 
In September 1952 Cobb took on a new challenge in an unusual setting. He set out to break the world's water speed record at Loch Ness, Inverness-shire, driving a motor boat powered by a turbo-jet engine. Called 'Crusader', the boat was 31 feet long, weighed 3 tons, and was blasted through the water by a de Havilland Ghost engine, similar to those fitted to the pioneering British Comet airliner. The hull and sponsons were made of birch plywood reinforced with aluminium alloy. The boat, with its torpedo shell and ski-like floats, looked akin to a science fiction creation. Cobb said, 'It's like driving a London omnibus without tyres on' (Emery and Greenberg, 172). On a first run on Loch Ness he exceeded 200 m.p.h. On his second run, on 29 September 1952, when experts gauged his speed to be in excess of 240 m.p.h., 'Crusader' took off, flipped over, and disintegrated. Cobb was killed instantly. His achievements, in terms of world or near world records on land and water, place him as one of the founding fathers of what are now classified as 'extreme' sports. 


@@@@@


doc= 32468


Cobbe, Sir Alexander Stanhope (1870-1931), army officer, was born at Naini Tal, North-Western Provinces, India, on 5 June 1870, the second son of Lieutenant-General Sir Alexander Hugh Cobbe (1825-1899), 17th regiment, and his wife, Emily Barbara (died 1886), daughter of Captain G. Stanhope Jones, 59th regiment. He was educated at Wellington College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Having been commissioned in the South Wales Borderers in 1889, he was promoted lieutenant in 1892 but transferred to the Indian Staff Corps that year, his appointment being confirmed in 1894. He was attached to the 32nd Sikh pioneers, with whom he saw active service in Chitral in 1895, taking part in Colonel F. H. Kelly's great march to the relief of the agency. He subsequently served in Nyasaland in 1898 and 1899 in various minor operations and with the West African regiment in the Asante kingdom in 1900, was wounded, and awarded the DSO. He was again on active service in 1902, in Somaliland, and won the VC at Erego on 6 October for good work with a Maxim gun when left alone in front of the line at a critical moment, while later he went out under heavy fire and brought in a wounded man. He had received his captaincy in 1900 and was promoted major and brevet lieutenant-colonel in 1907. Cobbe married on 1 October 1910 Winifred Ada (died 1956), eldest daughter of Sir Albert Edward Bowen, first baronet, of Colworth Park, Bedfordshire; they had one son and two daughters. 
Between 1902 and 1914 Cobbe held several staff appointments in India and at the War Office and was made aide-de-camp to the king and brevet colonel in 1911. He went to France in October 1914 as general staff officer of the Lahore division, was transferred to the staff of the Indian corps in June 1915, and was later brigadier-general, general staff, 1st corps. Cobbe returned to India in January 1916 as director of staff duties and military training; he took over the Meerut 7th Indian division in Mesopotamia in the following June, becoming major-general, and two months later succeeded General Sir Stanley Maude in the 3rd Indian corps, which he commanded in the operations of December 1916-February 1917 for the recapture of Kut al-Amara, being particularly concerned with the clearance of the Khudhaira bend and the capture of the Sannaiyat position. He was later in charge of the operations which resulted in substantial success at Mashahida (March 1917) and Istabulat and the capture of Samarra (April) and also of the advance to Tikrit in October. In 1918 his corps carried out the advance upon Mosul which culminated after sharp fighting at Sharqat and on the Lesser Zab in the surrender of the main Turkish field force. Difficulties of supply and transport were great but Cobbe's plans resulted in an outstanding success. 
Cobbe was appointed CB in 1915, KCB in 1917, CSI in 1918, and KCSI in 1919, the year in which he also became lieutenant-general. From October 1919 to June 1920 and from 1920 to 1926 he was military secretary at the India Office; he was general officer commanding-in-chief, northern command, in India from 1926 to 1930, and had returned to his old post at the India Office shortly before he died. He had been promoted full general in February 1924, being the youngest holder of that rank in the army, and was made aide-de-camp general to the king and appointed GCB in 1928. To the great pleasure of his old regiment he had been made colonel of the South Wales Borderers in 1922. An accomplished, as well as a gallant and popular, soldier, he had a fine record both as a staff officer and in command in the field and he inspired confidence as well as liking and respect. He died at 7 Portland Place, Marylebone, London, after an operation, on 29 June 1931. His son, an officer in the RAF, was killed in action during the battle of Britain in 1940. His younger daughter became a fellow and tutor in mathematics at Somerville College, Oxford. 
C. T. Atkinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32469


Cobbe, Frances Power (1822-1904), writer and campaigner for women's rights, was born in Dublin on 4 December 1822. She was the fifth child and only daughter of Charles Cobbe (1781-1857), a landowner, of Newbridge House, co. Dublin, and his wife, Frances Conway (1777-1847). Cobbe was educated at home, except for two years (1836-8) at an expensive school in Brighton. Cobbe regarded her schooling, which cost $1000, as an interruption to her education and a complete waste of time. The noise, frivolity, pointless routine, and complete lack of intellectual stimulation contrasted strongly with her pleasurable life at home, spent in close contact with her accomplished and beloved mother. Cobbe was recalled from school when her mother's ill health made it necessary for her to take over the housekeeping. 
Her mother's death in 1847 was a terrible loss to Cobbe and almost immediately brought her into conflict with her stern and forbidding father, whose housekeeper and domestic companion she now became. Their conflict centred on religion. The family was devoutly evangelical and engaged in regular prayers and 'Bible' reading. Although subject to religious doubt before this, Cobbe had continued to participate in the family's religious observance. After her mother's death, however, she refused to do so, taking a certain pride in being the first heretic in a family which numbered five archbishops and a bishop among its members. As a result of this apostasy she was exiled to the home of a brother for ten months. She was recalled when her domestic services were again required, but remained always in a kind of moral quarantine. She accepted that it was her duty to care for her father, but refused ever to submit to his religious or moral views. 
Although she was an agnostic for a short time in adolescence, Cobbe replaced the family religion with a form of deism heavily influenced by that of Theodore Parker, whose writings she subsequently edited in fourteen volumes (1863-71). Her religious beliefs were closely integrated with her feminism, as she replaced the heavily patriarchal Christianity of her father with Parker's idea of a God who was, 'not a king but a Father and Mother, infinite in power, wisdom and love' (T. Parker, 'Discourse on religion', 'The Collected Works of Theodore Parker', ed. F. P. Cobbe, 1863, 1.306). Cobbe later attended the ministry of James Martineau and occasionally conducted services in Unitarian chapels. She combined her domestic duties with private study and literary pursuits. Her reading of Kant's 'Metaphysics of Ethics' suggested the theme for her first book, 'The Theory of Intuitive Morals' (published in two parts, 1855 and 1857), which she wrote late at night and published anonymously to protect her father from annoyance. Throughout her life, Cobbe wrote extensively on religious and ethical subjects, fearing the spread of atheism and the impact of Darwinism on morality. 
The death of her father in 1857 left Frances Cobbe free of familial duties but in drastically reduced financial circumstances. The $200 annuity with which she was left could not sustain the lifestyle to which she was accustomed. Moreover, the house which she had overseen for so many years now passed to her older brother, making it necessary for her to find a new home. Before doing so, she set out on an extended trip to Europe and the East, visiting Egypt, Lebanon, Palestine, and Syria, as well as France, Italy, and Greece. She was delighted to have visited the pyramids before the advent of Cook's tours, but found her greatest pleasure in Rome, where she got to know the large group of expatriate American and English women resident there, including Mary Somerville, Harriet Hosmer, and her subsequent life companion, Mary Lloyd. Cobbe discovered a great love of travel, returning to Italy six times in the next two decades. 
On her return to England in 1858 Cobbe moved to Bristol, where for a short time she lived with Mary Carpenter, the Unitarian social reformer and philanthropist, assisting her with her ragged schools and reformatory work. This arrangement lasted only a few months. Cobbe desired a more intimate form of friendship than Carpenter was able to offer -- and Carpenter's complete lack of interest in creature comforts was intolerable to Cobbe. Within a year, she had moved to Durdham Down, where she engaged in workhouse visiting and in societies devoted to the care and supervision of 'friendless' workhouse girls. 
Shortly after this Cobbe moved to London, where she set up house with Mary Lloyd, a Welsh woman who had been studying sculpture with John Gibson in Italy. Lloyd apparently gave up sculpture, and became involved in a close domestic relationship with Cobbe. In London Cobbe expanded her range of journalism and became a feminist activist and the leading figure in the battle to outlaw vivisection. She contributed articles to most of the major periodicals. In 1867 she became a regular leader writer for 'The Echo', which earned her $300 per annum until she relinquished the position in 1875. She also wrote for 'The Standard' and was for a time the Italian correspondent for the 'Daily News'. In 1862 Cobbe published her articles 'Celibacy vs marriage' ('Fraser's Magazine', vol. 65) and 'What shall we do with our old maids?' (ibid., vol. 66) and delivered a paper to the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science advocating the admission of women to university degrees (later published in her 'Essays on the Pursuits of Women', 1863). Through these activities she became known to the active feminist circle which had set up headquarters at Langham Place in London. She established a wide network of feminist friends, including Emily Davies, the founder of Girton College, John Stuart Mill and his stepdaughter, Helen Taylor, and the suffrage leaders Lydia Becker and Millicent Garrett Fawcett. 
Cobbe was a member of the Married Women's Property Committee and, for a short time in 1867, of the London National Society for Woman's Suffrage. But the campaign to which she was most strongly committed was that for reform of the 'Matrimonial Causes Act' of 1878. Cobbe was a somewhat difficult colleague. One of the few mid-Victorian feminists who came from the Anglo-Irish landed gentry, she carried from childhood a commitment to the Conservative Party, a belief that it was better to work through influential individuals rather than with popular support, and a particular sense of decorum. She was unhappy with committees which did not entirely endorse her views, and ended her association with a number of feminist colleagues when they refused to give wholehearted support to her anti-vivisection campaign. 
Cobbe's greatest contribution to the women's movement came from her writing. She published in almost every major periodical, writing on the problems of marriage and the virtues of celibacy; the need for women to have independent activities; and on the persistent ill health of women, which resulted from fashions which constricted their bodies, from a medical profession which defined women as invalids, and from the fact that, unlike men, women lacked the services of a wife. Her powerful article 'Wife torture in England' ('Contemporary Review', 32, 1878), which illustrated the extent of domestic violence and sought to make 'aggravated assaults' grounds for judicial separation, played a significant part in the passing of the 'Matrimonial Causes Act' of that year. 
The core of Cobbe's feminism lay in her belief in the moral autonomy of women on the one hand, and in her strong sense of sexual difference on the other. Women were rational beings with a primary duty to themselves and to their God, she argued, hence they could not submit themselves absolutely to the demands of either husband or parents. But Cobbe believed emphatically in the importance of sexual difference. She defined women as 'human beings of the mother sex' (F. P. Cobbe, 'The Duties of Women', 1881, 28) and insisted that innate maternal qualities would always determine what women did. Celibacy seemed preferable to marriage, in her view, but she assumed all celibate women would generally exercise their maternal qualities through some form of philanthropy. 
For Cobbe, as for a number of other Victorian feminists, there was a close connection between feminism and the anti-vivisection campaign, in that both were fighting to protect defenceless creatures from the limitless powers of men. Her crusade against vivisection began in 1863. In 1875 she established the Victoria Street Society, and ran it alongside the National Anti-Vivisection Society as well as editing 'The Zoopholist'. Cobbe's battles against vivisection soon encompassed a broader attack on the arrogance, brutality, and atheism of science and of the medical profession. For many, Cobbe personified the anti-vivisection movement, imbuing it with great energy but also with an intransigence that some saw as ultimately harmful to the cause. 
In 1884, exhausted by the anti-vivisection campaign, Cobbe acceded to Lloyd's desire to return to her home, and they moved to Hengwrt, near Dolgellau. This did not mark the end of her interest in the anti-vivisection movement. Feeling that it had lost its force, she left the National Anti-Vivisection Society in 1898 to form a more thoroughgoing body, the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection which, to her great regret, did not succeed in outlawing the practice completely. Nor did she end her active support of the women's movement, and she continued writing pamphlets and essays, and attending and addressing suffrage meetings. It was while she was in retirement that she wrote her autobiography, a work which celebrates the full and active life available to single women, and served as another vehicle for her to expound her feminist beliefs. It also highlighted her wide acquaintance among English literary and intellectual circles: there was, she insisted, scarcely a single notable woman whom she had not met, and only a few men. 
Cobbe's final years were ones of material comfort. She had given up her most lucrative journalism in order to devote herself to the anti-vivisection movement in the 1870s and had consequently been forced to rely on her very small paternal legacy. Immediately after her retirement, however, her colleagues in the Victoria Street Society collected $1000 with which they purchased an annuity of $100 for her. In 1891 she inherited a quite considerable sum as the residuary legatee of the widow of Richard Vaughan Yates, a devoted anti-vivisectionist. Her greatest grief was to have outlived Mary Lloyd, who died in 1896. Cobbe survived her by eight years and died at Hengwrt on 5 April 1904. She was buried in Llanelltyd churchyard, alongside her beloved Mary Lloyd. Fearing premature burial, she left instructions that the arteries of the neck and windpipe be completely severed after her death. 
Cobbe was a person of considerable energy and enthusiasm with a great enjoyment of life. Her concern for animals caused her to refuse to decorate her hats with feathers, but she had no sympathy for vegetarianism or teetotalism, seeing them as an indication of the diminution of the vitality and animal spirits which had characterized the world of her youth. She always relished social occasions, especially dinner parties, she insisted, because even if the company was lacklustre she could entertain herself with her knife and fork. She was a person of considerable charm, but one with a very forceful personality. Convinced of the rightness of all her own causes and beliefs, however, she often pursued her chosen path regardless of the beliefs or feelings of others. Thus, while her participation was welcome to the women's movement, her attempts to harness the suffrage movement to the Primrose League was a source of some embarrassment and difficulty to her colleagues. Ultimately Cobbe's most important contribution to nineteenth-century feminism lay in her attempts to set out a feminist ethic, developed most extensively in 'The Duties of Women' (1881). One reviewer described her as the person who 'excepting John Stuart Mill,... has done more than anyone else to give the dignity of principle to the women's movement' ('Life of Frances Power Cobbe', 'Academy', 46, 1894). 


@@@@@


doc= 32470


Sanderson, Thomas James Cobden- (1840-1922), bookbinder and printer, was born Thomas James Sanderson on 2 December 1840 at Alnwick, Northumberland, the only son of James Sanderson ('c'.1813-1895), a district surveyor of taxes, and his wife, Mary Ann Rutherford How (1800-1891). James Sanderson's career took his family from place to place, and his son was educated in Worcester, Hull, Pocklington, and Rochdale. From 1857 to 1859 he studied at Owens College in Manchester, and in 1860 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge. He lost his Christian belief at Cambridge, and left in 1863 without taking a degree. 
To describe Cobden-Sanderson as a bookbinder and printer is to identify him with the things for which he is known, but it gives a false impression of the man. It would be truer to describe him as 'thinker, bookbinder, and printer', not because his thoughts were original or profound, but because he lived on such a high intellectual plane. As a young man he read Carlyle, Goethe, Spinoza, Wordsworth, and the pioneering geographer and scientist Alexander von Humboldt; these were lifelong intellectual companions. But he was also anguished and lonely, thinking high thoughts to turn away the pain. He limped through the 1860s, not knowing what to do with his life, suffering long periods of depression, sometimes talking of suicide. German idealism and romantic poetry simply magnified his unhappiness, giving it a heroic dimension. 
Towards the end of the decade Sanderson felt stronger and took up the law, practising as a barrister in London from 1871 to 1883. He was involved in making 'a kind of Code of all the powers, rights, and obligations of the London & North-Western Railway Company' (Cobden-Sanderson, 'Cosmic Vision', 114). Shifting this mass of legal details was like mining, he recalled, but at the end there was no gold and his health was broken. He went to Italy to recuperate. 
In the 1860s Sanderson had got to know Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris, perhaps through his Cambridge friend George Howard, later ninth earl of Carlisle. In April 1881, outside the duomo in Siena, he met Morris's wife, Janey, with Annie and Janie Cobden, daughters of the radical MP Richard Cobden. In the following year, on 5 August, he married Julia Sarah Anne (Annie) Cobden (1853-1926), changing his name to Cobden-Sanderson out of respect for her father. He was forty-one and she was twenty-nine. He wrote later that 'her active and practical mind gave to my own that feeling for reality which it had long been in want of' (Cobden-Sanderson, 'Cosmic Vision', 115). This was a turning point. Nearly a year later he was again with Janey Morris. He was eager to do work with his hands, in the spirit of the arts and crafts movement, and she suggested bookbinding. Two days later he went to the bookbinding workshop of Roger de Coverley, and asked to be taught. This was another turning point. 
De Coverley's was one of a number of firms in the London bookbinding trade which bound individual books for customers using traditional methods. Cobden-Sanderson spent about six months there and then set up on his own in 1884, working first in Covent Garden and then from home in Hendon and Hampstead. He also bound individual books, but he chose what he bound, which was not the usual practice in the trade. From 1886 onwards he bought books, rebound them, and took them to the bookseller James Bain in Haymarket, where they sold enough to earn him a modest living. (Annie had brought a small inheritance to the marriage.) From the late 1880s many of his bindings were sold to American customers, and the two principal modern collections of bindings designed by Cobden-Sanderson are American: the Strouse Collection at the University of California at Berkeley and that of J. Paul Getty junior. 
Cobden-Sanderson thought of bookbinding as the clothing of fine literature, and Shakespeare, the English romantic poets, Tennyson, and Morris were the writers whose works he bound most. The more he admired a work the more sumptuously he bound it. He worked in gold on leather, using simple, mainly floral tools of his own design, and his rich effects brought a kind of springtime to the French and English binding traditions on which he drew. He seemed to have found his metier. He worked as a binder for only about ten years, but he started a tradition of fine binding in Britain which continues to the present day. 
Cobden-Sanderson had found his metier late in life, and he had never been strong. By the early 1890s he no longer had the strength for heavy work. In 1893 he took a lease on 15 Upper Mall, Hammersmith, a small house with a garden running down to the Thames, near William Morris's own Kelmscott House. Here he started the Doves Bindery, employing three professional binders and naming it after a nearby pub. At first the bindery worked as he had, binding individual books to his designs, and selling them through Bain. But when he started printing books at the Doves Press in 1900, it began to do more repetitive work, binding whole editions of Doves Press books in plain vellum. 
Four years after starting the Doves Bindery, the Cobden-Sandersons moved with their two children, Richard and Stella, from Hampstead to 7 Hammersmith Terrace, a short walk from Upper Mall, and from this date Cobden-Sanderson lived and worked among the houses, wharves, and workshops that lined the river's edge at this point. Other luminaries of the book arts -- Morris himself, the process engraver Emery Walker, the calligrapher Edward Johnston -- lived near by. 
In 1900 Cobden-Sanderson set up the Doves Press at 1 Hammersmith Terrace, in partnership with Emery Walker. This was as distinct from trade printing as his bookbinding had been, a private press on the lines of Morris's Kelmscott Press. He and Walker wanted to print great literature in monumental form, and to see if they could make a book beautiful with type alone. Goethe, Wordsworth, Milton, and Shakespeare were among the chosen authors and, as their masterpiece, the 'Bible'. Some fifty titles were printed between 1900 and 1917. They are similar in layout and they all employ the Doves type, which Walker derived from a fifteenth-century Venetian model. There are no illustrations and no ornaments, apart from some initials drawn by Edward Johnston and Graily Hewitt; just the words printed with care on handmade paper. As with his sumptuous bindings, this austerity expressed Cobden-Sanderson's reverence for the canon of western literature. In the early twentieth century it was a visual model for the reform of typography in Britain, Europe, and America. 
In photographs of the 1880s Cobden-Sanderson looks much younger than he was, shrimp-like, unformed, clean-shaven. In those of 'c'.1900, on the other hand, he has a fine beard and moustache and looks his sixty years. He sits the very image of the artist-craftsman in an embroidered sky-blue smock, his normal dress at this time. He had come into his own. It was partly that he had married, but perhaps more that he had picked up his binder's tools. After all the 'Weltschmerz' of his early years, it was little humble things, leather and type, that had shown him what to do. He was now a leader of the arts and crafts movement in England. The course of his life ran more smoothly. And his speculative mind came happily into play around the practical world of printing and binding. He saw the history of the world as a God-filled process of physical and spiritual evolution, and the history of man as its dialectical complement. He felt as though the work of his hands kept time with the movement of the universe. Unfortunately this 'cosmic vision', as he called it, was not easy to convey. In lectures he talked persuasively about bookbinding or typography, but as he moved towards his larger theme he became childlike and rhetorical; the words came too easily. When he told his audience that the ideal book was 'a symbol of the infinitely beautiful in which all things of beauty rest and into which all things of beauty do ultimately merge', they were not always sure what he meant (Cobden-Sanderson, 'The Ideal Book', 9). Arts and crafts colleagues admired his work, but did not always understand him. 
Towards the end of his life Cobden-Sanderson did one mean-spirited thing in the name of his cosmic vision. He was restless in partnership with Walker at the Doves Press, because he put more into the work of the press than Walker, who had his own business to run. The partnership was dissolved in 1908, but Walker claimed part-ownership of the Doves type. In 1909 Cobden-Sanderson (the older man) signed an agreement whereby the type would be his for life, and would pass to Walker at his death. But he did not trust Walker to use the type in the spirit of his vision. During the war he brought the printing to an end. On many evenings in the autumn and winter of 1916, under cover of darkness, he took the Doves type and threw it into the Thames off Hammersmith Bridge. It was a dedication (he had been reading the book of 'Leviticus'); a symbolic act (giving his work back to the river of life); an old man's act of folly; and a betrayal. In May 1917 he wrote to Walker's lawyers explaining what he had done, and his letter was published in the 'Times Literary Supplement'. 
The Doves Press closed down in 1917. At this point the Cobden-Sandersons went to live at 15 Upper Mall, where two binders continued working in a small way until 1921. Cobden-Sanderson died at home on 7 September 1922, and following his cremation at Golders Green on 11 September the urn containing his ashes was placed in the garden wall of 15 Upper Mall. Annie Cobden-Sanderson died in 1926 and her urn was placed with his. Two years later there was a severe flood and the Thames overflowed its banks. It seems that both urns were washed away. 


@@@@@


doc= 32471


Cochran, Sir Charles Blake (1872-1951), impresario, was born on 25 September 1872 at 15 Prestonville Road, Brighton, Sussex, the fourth of the nine children of James Elphinstone Cochran (1840-1900), tea and cigar importer, and his wife, Matilda Arnold 'nee' Walton (1838-1929), daughter of a merchant navy officer and the widowed mother of a son by her first marriage. At the age of seven Charles saw the pantomime 'Sindbad the Sailor'. This first unforgettable visit inspired a lifelong passion for the theatre. At Brighton grammar school (1883-8) his best friend was his contemporary Aubrey Beardsley; they shared an enthusiasm for acting and appeared at the Brighton Pavilion in a play written by Beardsley. Having left school and failed as a music-hall performer Cochran 'borrowed' some petty cash from the office where he worked as a reluctant clerk and sailed for America. There he lived precariously on menial jobs and occasional acting engagements, ending up as secretary to the actor-manager Richard Mansfield and gaining experience in running a theatrical company. After a brief disagreement with Mansfield he established an acting school in New York and launched his first theatrical production, Ibsen's 'John Gabriel Borkman' (1897). Following a penniless interlude in London, he returned to Mansfield and organized his nationwide tour of 'Cyrano de Bergerac'. 
Back in London again in 1899 Cochran set up as manager to such figures as Houdini and the wrestler Hackenschmidt. The plays he produced were unsuccessful and resulted in 1903 in his first bankruptcy. Undeterred, he bounced back as a promoter of freak shows at Olympia, of roller-skating, of midgets, and of performing fleas, which, alas, failed to perform. Having paused briefly to elope with Evelyn Alice Dade (1885-1960) and to marry her in Covent Garden register office in 1905, he plunged back into his professional activities; these culminated in Max Reinhardt's spectacular production of 'The Miracle' (1911) at Olympia, with a 200-strong orchestra and a chorus of 500. (Cochran later revived it with Lady Diana Cooper as the Madonna.) The next attraction he presented at Olympia was Carl Hagenbeck's giant zoo. 
In 1914 at the Ambassador's Theatre Cochran took up the newly born genre of revue with 'Odds and Ends', starring his new discovery Alice Delysia. It set the standard of all his subsequent revues: beautiful dresses, taste, wit, elegance, brightness, and colour. This was followed by a series of glamorous entertainments, although he seasoned the mixture with 'problem' plays by Eugene Brieux. His greatest wartime success was 'The Better 'Ole' (1917), based on the cartoonist Bruce Bairnsfather's anti-hero Old Bill. At the London Pavilion, which he had leased and renovated, he mounted 'As you were' (1918), again with Alice Delysia, and the shows that followed confirmed his reputation as a master of revue. He also promoted boxing matches featuring Wells, Beckett, and Carpentier. The murky underworld of boxing drove him into a nervous breakdown, and on recovery he took Suzanne Lenglen under his wing in an attempt to promote the gentler sport of lawn tennis. It failed, as did the sensational rodeo that he staged at Wembley in 1924. In 1925 he went bankrupt again. Such, however, was his persuasive charm that his creditors at the bankruptcy proceedings sang 'For he's a jolly good fellow' and wished him well. In business again, Cochran organized ballroom-dancing displays and midnight cabarets. His partnership with Noel Coward engendered 'On with the Dance' (1925), 'This Year of Grace' (1928), 'Bitter Sweet' (1929), 'Private Lives' (1930), 'Cavalcade' (1931), 'Words and Music' (1932), and 'Conversation Piece' (1934). Eventually, believing he had been denied his fair share of profits, Coward ended the relationship, although his subsequent musical shows never prospered as had those which enjoyed Cochran's magic touch. 
Cochran was a master of publicity, one of his cleverest ideas being Mr Cochran's Young Ladies, a troupe of hand-picked beauties who numbered among them Anna Neagle and Florence Desmond. One of his most talented discoveries was Jessie Matthews ('One Dam' Thing After Another' by Rodgers and Hart, 1927, and 'Ever Green', 1930); another was the German Elisabeth Bergner ('Escape me Never', 1933, and Barrie's last play, 'The Boy David', 1936); yet another was Evelyn Laye, whom he starred in 'Helen!', a lavish reworking of Offenbach's operetta (1932). The Second World War reduced his fortunes, although in 1946 he found renewed prosperity with 'Big Ben', a happy collaboration between A. P. Herbert and the gifted Vivian Ellis. They followed it with the joyous 'Bless the Bride' (1947), the longest run (886 shows) that Cochran ever achieved -- although, quickly bored and ever keen on novelty, he took it off while it was still drawing full houses and replaced it with 'Tough at the Top' (1949), which failed. After more than fifty years in the business he freely avowed that he was still unable to forecast public reaction to a new show. It was enough for him that it reached his own high standards. His optimism remained unquenched to the end. At any given moment he was juggling a half-dozen new productions and running the same number of theatres. He had Diaghilev's rare gift for discerning new talent and for blending authors, artists, designers, composers, and performers in a perfectly harmonious ensemble. 
Although Cochran gloried in the title of showman, he was irritated when critics dismissed him as a commercial producer. He prefigured Peter Daubeny with his remarkable international seasons that brought to London Sarah Bernhardt, Eleonora Duse, the Guitrys, Pitoeff, Pavlova, Chalyapin, the Diaghilev ballets, and the Chauve-Souris. The artists he commissioned included Augustus John, Bakst, Berard, and Messel. His choreographers were Balanchine and Massine; his composers Walton, Sauguet, and Berners. He was also responsible for the London premieres of O'Neill's 'Anna Christie' (1923) and O'Casey's 'The Silver Tassie' (1929). He was knighted in 1948 and elected to the Legion d'honneur in 1950. 
Cochran was short and red-faced, a well-fed country squire in appearance. He wore a bowler hat, a monocle, and elegant double-breasted suits, and leant heavily on a walking stick made necessary by the crippling pain of an arthritic hip. His manner was staid, unlike that of his vivacious wife, who often exercised her notoriously sharp wit in revenge for his many infidelities and arcane sexual pursuits. She sought refuge in alcohol and in sentimental friendships with other, younger women. Cochran's art collection included impressionist paintings acquired long before they became fashionable, many of them gradually sold off to finance new productions. The library that he amassed contained numerous valuable items and first editions. He himself, when temporarily out of funds, wrote in total four volumes of readable memoirs. One day, on taking his bath -- very hot water being the only thing that soothed his agonizing arthritis -- infirmity prevented him from reaching to switch off the hot tap and he was horribly scalded. He died, almost unrecognizable, a week later on 31 January 1951, in Westminster Hospital, and was cremated at Golders Green on 3 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 32472


Cochrane, Douglas Mackinnon Baillie Hamilton, twelfth earl of Dundonald (1852-1935), army officer, was born at Auchentoul House, Banff, on 29 October 1852, the second son (his elder brother died a baby in 1851) of Thomas Barnes Cochrane, eleventh earl of Dundonald (1814-1885), army officer, and his wife, Louisa Harriet (1819/20-1902), daughter of William Alexander Mackinnon (1784-1870) of Mackinnon, tory MP and 33rd chief of clan Mackinnon, who reportedly never wore a greatcoat or flannel. He was a grandson of Thomas Cochrane, tenth earl of Dundonald (1775-1860), and inherited his secret chemical-warfare plans. A naval and military family, the Cochranes were within the peerage relatively poor, owning under 2000 acres in 1883. 
Cochrane (styled Lord Cochrane 1860-85) was educated at a spartan and brutal private school at Walton-on-Thames, where he learned little, and at Eton College (1866-9). He had wanted to join the navy, but his parents dissuaded him as the family had suffered losses of property from Cochranes being so much away at sea. He purchased for $1260 a commission as cornet and sub-lieutenant (July 1870) in the 2nd Life Guards, which his cousin Sir Roger Palmer commanded. On his extensive leaves he visited Germany, to learn the language, and South America. He was promoted lieutenant in October 1871 and captain in April 1878. He studied for Staff College entrance but did not take it because, according to his memoirs, he had to go to Brazil on family business. On 18 September 1878 he married Winifred (1858/9-1924), only surviving child of Robert Bamford Hesketh, formerly 2nd Life Guards, of Gwyrch Castle, Abergele, Denbighshire, and an heiress; they had two sons and three daughters. 
Cochrane wanted to go on the 1882 Egyptian campaign but was refused. In 1884, apparently through the influence of Angela Burdett-Coutts, Baroness Burdett-Coutts, a family connection, on Wolseley, he commanded the 2nd Life Guards contingent, which formed part of the heavy camel regiment, on the Gordon relief expedition. He was helping reload a camel when a heavy box of ammunition fell on him, causing internal injury which troubled him for years. With the desert column in January 1885, he was promoted major and fought at the battles of Abu Klea and Gubat. His desert rides with dispatches on the capture of Gakdul Wells and the death of Gordon brought him fame. He succeeded to the title in January 1885. He was mentioned in dispatches, and promoted lieutenant-colonel in June 1885. In 1889 he became brevet colonel. In 1890 he was captain of the queen's guard. Troops were then intermittently used in support of the civil power, and on 7 July during a police strike Dundonald, at the request of the chief commissioner of police and cheered on by the Drury Lane audience, led the guard in clearing a mob from Bow Street: a bird-cage was thrown at his helmet and dented it. 
From January 1895 to January 1899 Dundonald commanded the 2nd Life Guards. A keen reformer, he concentrated on improving its shooting -- establishing a shooting club -- fieldcraft, entrenching, and other dismounted action. Intelligent and innovative, he invented a light, one-horse machine-gun 'galloping carriage', demonstrated in 1897, for use with cavalry. The War Office rejected it but some, with Colt guns, were used by his brigade in the South African War. His other inventions included a waterproof bag for hauling men across rivers, a pneumatic-tyred light ambulance, the 'Instra' hand-warmer, an improved teapot, and -- on his return from the South African War and responding to the high mortality from water-borne disease there -- an improved military water cart. He inspected yeomanry regiments and became convinced they should train primarily as mounted riflemen. His ceremonial duties included command of the sovereign's escort at the 1897 jubilee procession, for which he was made an MVO. 
Dundonald's only senior command in the field was in the South African War (1899-1902). Despite his aged mother's insistence that the war was unrighteous Dundonald, without an official appointment, on his own initiative went to South Africa, arriving on 14 November 1899. Sir Redvers Buller, whom he knew from the Sudan war, sent him to organize the mounted troops in south Natal. In Natal under Buller he commanded the mounted brigade, then, after reorganization at the end of January 1900, the 2nd cavalry brigade of irregular mounted infantry, and, after the relief of Ladysmith (28 February 1900) and further reorganization, the 3rd mounted brigade. On 15 December 1899 at the battle of Colenso, on the right flank, his brigade attempted to capture Hlangwane Hill, a key position. Historians differ in their versions, but some agree with Dundonald's that they might well have succeeded if Major-General Geoffry Barton had not refused the infantry reinforcement he requested. On 18 January 1900, during Sir Charles Warren's disastrous offensive, Dundonald's brigade defeated a Boer force at Acton Homes and, in 'a situation... capable of being turned to great strategic advantage' (Amery, 3.222) if reinforced, might have turned the Boer flank, possibly resulting in the immediate relief of Ladysmith. However Warren angrily refused reinforcements, had a stormy interview with Dundonald, and detached two regiments from Dundonald's force, preventing him from exploiting the opening his initiative had created. In February Dundonald, whose brigade formed the advance guard, was cautious in his final move towards Ladysmith, arriving after Hubert Gough who had pushed on despite contrary orders. Dundonald continued to serve in Natal and the Transvaal and, like Buller, opposed farm-burning which he believed made inveterate enemies. In October 1900 the army of Natal was broken up and, the war apparently almost over, Buller, Dundonald, and others returned home. Dundonald was promoted major-general (March 1900) and mentioned in dispatches. He later offered to go back to the war but was not asked. 
Nicknamed 'Dundoodle' by his colonial troops, Dundonald was, according to William Birdwood, who served on his staff, 'a curiously sensitive man, living largely on his nerves' (Birdwood, 100). Opinions varied on his military capacity. He was much praised by the British press, and dubbed 'the Stormy Petrel'. However Hubert Gough, who served on his staff, came to despise him. Gough wrote in his diary, 'Dundonald very pleasant. He means very well but has not anything like the steady nerves a soldier wants to do any good' (Farrar-Hockley, 57), and later wrote that he was 'another of Buller's weak subordinates... hesitating, vacillating and vain' (Gough, 70), lacking in dash, and gaining credit for the achievements of his capable subordinates. Historians have differed in their assessments. The marquess of Anglesey concluded that 'on the whole he seems to have done well enough, being quick-moving and clear-headed while not interfering unduly with his subordinates... who were... men of ability' (Anglesey, 4.75). According to his admiring friend Douglas Sladen he was 'a tall, upright man, with an elegant figure and a handsome and very aristocratic face' (Sladen, 204), and according to Basil Collier his 'merits would have been more apparent to his brother-officers if he had looked less like a matinee idol and been less of a favourite with the newspapers' (Collier, 65). The war was an important influence on his military thinking, especially on cavalry and firepower, and he long continued concerned with the war. Birdwood recalled that Dundonald when an old man 'devoured every book... on the South African campaign' (Birdwood, 415) and if he found any passage seeming to reflect on his own work, wanted it amended. 
In the South African War and post-war controversy on the armament and role of cavalry Dundonald was a leading advocate of the 'firepower' school against the 'arme blanche' school, and was castigated by Haig. In December 1900 he became the only regular cavalryman on the War Office committee on the organization, arms, and equipment of the yeomanry. In his minority report he advocated they become rifle-armed mounted infantry and their name be changed from yeomanry cavalry to imperial yeomanry. His recommendations were essentially implemented -- though more because they expressed the perceived lessons of the war and because Roberts favoured them than because Dundonald advocated them -- but by 1914 they had been partly reversed in the cavalry traditionalist reaction: the sword was restored for war mobilization in 1913. Since before the 1884 Sudan war he had been much interested in machine-guns, and after the South African War he advocated their use in large numbers. In public speeches he advocated the auxiliary forces be reorganized into an effective second line of defence, and he privately urged Lord Roberts, the commander-in-chief, to do this. 
In 1902 Dundonald was appointed general officer commanding (GOC) the Canadian militia. As an imperial officer with a statutory quasi-independent role, responsible to the dominion government, and so involved with Canadian politics and with Anglo-Canadian and Canadian-United States relations, Dundonald, like his predecessors, had a difficult task. Like them, and most notably Edward Hutton (GOC, 1898-1900), he aimed to make the militia an efficient fighting force for Canadian and imperial defence. Despite Hutton's efforts, political patronage and interference in the militia continued: an American critic had earlier described the militia as 'a kind of military Tammany' (Penlington, 161). Before Dundonald left, Chamberlain and others warned him of difficulties with politicians. However, he liked Canadians and he arrived in July 1902 determined to reform the militia. Energetic and enthusiastic, he planned reorganization and training, went on inspection tours, initiated affiliation of Canadian with British regiments, and encouraged the formation of cadet units and the adoption of Scottish characteristics by Canadian Scottish regiments. He re-equipped the artillery. He abolished the sword as a cavalry war weapon and wrote 'Cavalry Training, Canada' (1904), stating that the rifle was 'the weapon for cavalry in the future' (Dundonald, 252). He advocated 'an economical Citizen Army', a large militia, compulsory cadet training, and preparation for possible war, and publicly stated his views in speeches at dinners and receptions. He warned Canadians on defence, that they were living in a fool's paradise, and criticized inadequate provision for the militia. There was friction with politicians, especially over their interference in officer appointments. His protests failed, so he decided to 'arouse the nation to the danger of practices which rendered organization useless and efficiency impossible' (ibid., 260). On 4 June 1904, at an officers' banquet in Montreal, he denounced political interference in military appointments, naming the minister of agriculture (acting minister of militia), Sydney Fisher. The 'Dundonald incident' was much reported, and debated in the Canadian and -- following Lloyd George's motion criticizing Dundonald -- British parliaments. On 14 June he was dismissed by the Canadian government, then recalled by the British, leaving at the end of July. He was popular in Canada, and was supported by many Canadians and much applauded at farewell gatherings. He was the last imperial GOC: a new 'Militia Act' stipulated a Canadian. After his departure his infantry and cavalry manuals were cancelled. He much resented Churchill, whom he had helped in South Africa, joining Lloyd George's attack. 
In 1906 Dundonald was a member of the committee on the reorganization of the auxiliary forces appointed by Haldane. He was promoted lieutenant-general in December 1906 and was, to his 'astonishment and dismay' (Dundonald, 309), retired from the army in June 1907. From April 1907 to February 1919 he was colonel of the 2nd Life Guards. He helped the interests of former servicemen and particularly the new National Society of Ex-Naval and Military Men. From 1886 to 1922 Dundonald was, replacing his father, a Scottish representative peer: a Liberal Unionist who sometimes spoke on the Sudan and defence issues. In 1906 he advocated compulsory cadet training for youths. In January 1910 he spoke against Lloyd George's 'people's budget', alleging its land taxes would drive capital out of the country and decrease house building. However, he was not a 'diehard' peer. He lived at Wimbledon Park and, according to Sladen, was a 'lonely man who saw very little of his wife' (Sladen, 205). 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Dundonald offered his services, 'preferably for a command in the Field' (Dundonald, 326), and he hoped to command the Canadian contingent, but was unsuccessful. In 1915 he asked Kitchener for an appointment, but was told 'This is a young man's war' (ibid., 328). According to Sladen, 'Kitchener hated him' (Sladen, 208) and so excluded him. In 1914 he proposed the formation of a West Indian contingent, a proposal initially rejected. He decided to try to apply his grandfather's secret chemical-warfare plans to the war (unknown to Dundonald, and to his later chagrin, the plans had 'thoughtlessly' been published by Sir George Douglas and Sir George Ramsay in their 1908 edition of 'The Panmure Papers'). In September 1914 he proposed to 'drive the enemy from their trenches by the use of asphyxiating vapour under cover of dense smoke clouds' (ibid., 331) but Kitchener rejected this. Dundonald contacted Churchill, first lord of the Admiralty, who had accompanied his brigade in South Africa. Churchill was keen (within the limits of international law), and in January 1915 advised him to confide the plans to Colonel Maurice Hankey, who had been experimenting with secret weapons. Dundonald did so 'under the seal of strictest secrecy' (Hankey, 1.230), and also made private experiments. In March Churchill appointed an Admiralty committee on smoke screens, chaired by Dundonald, which did useful work. Smoke screens were used by British sea and land forces, but Dundonald considered they were insufficiently used and could have changed the Gallipoli campaign. 
Dundonald was appointed CB in May 1896, MVO in June 1897, CVO in June 1907, and KCB in 1913. In 1921 he was special ambassador at the Peruvian centenary. The countess of Dundonald took a great interest in the Anglican church in Wales, especially at the time of the disestablishment controversy. She died on 17 January 1924, and the archbishop of Wales officiated at her funeral (at Llanddulas parish church, north Wales, 19 January). She bequeathed $50,000 and a balance of her Gwyrch Castle estate to George V for establishing a royal residence in Wales. The king declined, so the bequests passed to the order of St John of Jerusalem, from which Dundonald bought the castle and estate. 
Despite his earlier injury, Dundonald remained active into old age. In 1926 he published his memoirs, 'My Army Life' (augmented edition, 1934), which included his criticism of government departments' abuse of the 'Official Secrets Act' to conceal information about themselves unconnected with national security. In 1930, aged seventy-seven he, with a small crew, sailed his 14 ton yawl-rigged yacht, 'Bonnie Joann', to Brazil. He died at his residence, Fernwood, Victoria Road, Wimbledon Park, Surrey, on 12 April 1935; his funeral was at Achnaba church, Argyll, on 16 April. He was succeeded as thirteenth earl by his elder son, Thomas Hesketh Douglas Blair Cochrane (1886-1958). 


@@@@@


doc= 32473


Cockcroft, Sir John Douglas (1897-1967), physicist and engineer, was born on 27 May 1897 at 154 Halifax Road, Langfield, Yorkshire, the first of five sons. The Cockcrofts had been involved in the weaving industry for generations and Cockcroft's father, John Arthur Cockcroft, and mother, Annie Maude Fielden, moved from a mill at Todmorden to Birks Mill, Walsden, in 1899 where a water-wheel and steam engine were used as a source of power for spinning and weaving machinery. The training given by his father in the mill, and the machinery there, gave Cockcroft an interest in technology which affected his whole life. 
Cockcroft was educated at Todmorden secondary school from 1909 and he went with a scholarship to the University of Manchester in 1914 to study mathematics. He was taught by Horace Lamb, a decisive teacher, and attended the first-year lectures in physics by Rutherford, whose dedication to physics greatly impressed him. He volunteered for war service in 1915 and spent three years as a signaller in the Royal Field Artillery, and was twice mentioned in dispatches. This signalling experience prompted his return to Manchester in 1919, this time to the College of Technology, where he gained a first-class BScTechn. in 1920. On Professor Miles Walker's recommendation he was accepted as a college apprentice in engineering by the Metropolitan-Vickers Company. During the two years there he researched with Walker on the harmonic analysis of voltage and current wave forms at frequencies used for commercial power sources. This gained him the MScTech. in 1922, and was the subject of his first joint research paper (1925). Walker suggested that he should try to go to Cambridge and take the mathematical tripos; he won a scholarship at St John's College, and a Manchester College scholarship, and Vickers gave him a grant to encourage him 'to keep in touch' (autobiographical notes). In 1924 he gained a B* in part two of the tripos. 
On 26 August 1925 Cockcroft married (Eunice) Elizabeth, daughter of Herbert Crabtree JP of Stansfield Hall. The Crabtrees were cotton manufacturers and John and Elizabeth had known each other from childhood. Their first child, a boy, died at two years. Subsequently they had four daughters and then a son. 
Miles Walker and the director of research at Vickers recommended Cockcroft to Rutherford, by then at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, and he was accepted as a research student supported by a foundation scholarship of St John's College, a state scholarship, and a further grant from Vickers. For four years he studied the behaviour of metal atoms as they were deposited by condensation on surfaces cooled by liquid air, gaining his PhD in 1928 and experience of new vacuum techniques. It was during this period that Rutherford asked him to help the Russian scientist Peter Kapitza to produce very intense magnetic fields for use at very low temperatures. Cockcroft calculated the forces created in the solenoids used to create the fields, and helped in the design of the helium liquefiers. He also helped Vickers with calculations of the magnetic fields in the huge electric machines used to generate power. 
In 1928 the Russian scientist G. Gamov developed a theory based on the new wave mechanics to explain why Rutherford had been able to disintegrate nitrogen atoms with alpha particles having an energy of only a few million electron volts. Cockcroft saw this calculation in December and calculated that protons of only 300 kV energy bombarding light elements such as lithium might result in disintegration. He spent 1929 building a discharge tube to accelerate protons; he energized this with the Tesla coil, and then with a transformer, but made little progress. E. T. S. Walton worked in the same room and Rutherford asked him to join Cockcroft in 1930. They constructed a higher voltage generator for 600 kV d. c., and a far higher vacuum tube in the new laboratory, and used M. Oliphant's design for the proton source. In April 1932 the proton beam was directed on to a lithium target and bright scintillations were observed. They were shown to be due to helium atoms:



Li+H=He+he


7+1=4+4

By developing a high voltage high energy beam, the atom had been disintegrated, transformed, and the whole scientific world realized that a new era of nuclear physics had arrived. A supply of heavy water from Berkeley in 1933 enabled Cockcroft to use deuterons instead of protons to create even more amazing disintegrations by 1935. Different accelerators had been built elsewhere, and in 1933 Cockcroft began to persuade a somewhat unwilling Rutherford that the Cavendish Laboratory should have a cyclotron. Work started in 1937, based on E. O. Lawrence's 36 inch machine at Berkeley. 
Beyond the laboratory in 1933 he had been appointed junior bursar of St John's College responsible for the buildings, some of which had been neglected for years. The gatehouse of the college was partly taken down to replace roof damage and destruction by death-watch beetles; two new courts were built and rewiring done. In 1935 Kapitza was retained in Russia and Cockcroft took over direction of the Mond Laboratory; a new wing of the Cavendish Laboratory was built with the aid of the great Austin bequest and in this project Cockcroft was indispensable. In 1936 Cockcroft was elected FRS, and in 1939 he was elected to the Jacksonian professorship in natural philosophy just as he was becoming increasingly involved with efforts being made in technical fields to prepare for war with Hitler's Germany. 
Sir H. T. Tizard spoke confidentially to Cockcroft early in 1938 about RDF, the highly secret radio technique for finding aircraft: 'These devices would be troublesome, and would require a team of nurses' (Cockcroft, 1948, in Oliphant and Penney, 155). Cockcroft played a major role in persuading about eighty physicists to spend a month at various coastal radar defence stations, and he also persuaded a number of leading physicists to participate. He personally took colleagues to set up radar stations in the far north, earning great respect from the admiral there who had previously been antagonistic. Some of these scientists made some of the major advances in radar and Cockcroft's part was one of his greatest contributions to the war effort. In August 1940 Cockcroft joined Tizard as his deputy on a mission to the United States to establish an exchange of defence science information. The disclosure to the Americans of the British microwave magnetron was to be of immense importance. Wherever he went in America or Canada he was welcomed by colleagues from the Cavendish Laboratory of old, and all the doors of military secrecy were opened to him. 
Cockcroft became chief superintendent of the Air Defence Research and Development Establishment at Christchurch in late 1940. Radar was then being applied to direct anti-aircraft gunnery upon unseen targets. Coastal defence radar and radar for combat use by the army to detect moving vehicles and tanks in the darkness were other major projects. Attempts to produce a proximity fuse for use against aircraft was nearly successful. The failure was a frustrating experience for Cockcroft. 
A special part of the history of the Second World War relates to a few men at the forefront of the worldwide nuclear physics community who perceived, at the beginning, the possibility of a nuclear explosive device of orders of magnitude greater than any military weapons using conventional high explosives. Cockcroft knew about these ideas and thought that Britain should make an effort to produce a nuclear explosive. However, for most of the war period he was so completely engaged in radar that his contributions were mainly advisory, until late in 1943 when his involvement sharply increased. Cockcroft's assignment was to go to Canada in 1944 and to take charge of the Montreal laboratory, and then to build the NRX heavy water reactor at Chalk River, together with associated facilities. His calm but energetic direction gave the laboratory, with its mixed British, Canadian, and French staff, a firm sense of purpose. The nuclear explosions at Hiroshima and Nagasaki brought the war to an abrupt end, but the nuclear work continued. The Canadians wanted Cockcroft to stay but he was wanted at home to direct the new establishment which was being built at Harwell for atomic energy research. Cockcroft commuted for a while and did both jobs but, as a result of high-level discussions, he moved full-time to Harwell in 1946. By this time the NRX reactor was almost complete, the laboratories were fully occupied, and the new township at Deep River was becoming a settled community. 
Cockcroft's name and the excitement of atomic energy attracted many able people of all ages to work at Harwell, especially the young. Rapid progress was made, in spite of the shortages resulting from the war. The engineering side of atomic energy, under Christopher Hinton, and a little later the weapons side, under W. G. Penney, were also being developed at the greatest possible speed. Among many other activities a great deal of technology and design work on pressurized gas-cooled reactors made it possible in 1953 to base the production of additional plutonium on dual-purpose reactors to be built at Calder Hall. The justification was primarily military, but for the first time the vision of cheap nuclear power, so prominent in Cockcroft's mind, began to have a practical endorsement. The government decided in 1954 to take the responsibility for atomic energy from the Ministry of Supply and create the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA). Cockcroft became the first member for research, while also remaining director of Harwell. Cockcroft foresaw the need to improve British experimental facilities for high energy nuclear physics. His crucial decision and direction of construction at Harwell of the first post-war proton synchrotron by 1949 put Britain in a strong position. It secured Cockcroft and B. Lockspeiser important influence as the Conseil Europeen de Recherches Nucleaires (CERN), the larger European project, was developed between 1954 and 1960. 
Cockcroft always attached great importance to travel and to making personal contacts with scientists in other countries. When President Eisenhower addressed the general assembly of the United Nations in December 1953 he spoke about the 'atomic dilemma'. He suggested forming the International Atomic Energy Agency. The general assembly unanimously resolved in December 1954 to hold a technical conference under the auspices of the United Nations on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. An advisory committee from seven countries was formed to help the secretary-general, Dag Hammarskjold, and Cockcroft was chosen as the British representative. This extraordinary conference, held at Geneva in August 1955, was a political event of outstanding importance which might have heralded the end of the cold war. Scientists from the communist countries fraternized so easily with those from the west, that, just as they shared science, they thought there must be a way to share political philosophies. Scientifically it was an enormous success. Cockcroft was able to invite I. Kurchatov, of the USSR, to give a lecture at Harwell on a subject (fusion research) which only a few months earlier was regarded as extremely secret. The second Geneva conference was held in 1958, and Cockcroft gave what was widely considered to be a masterly summary of the proceedings. 
Meanwhile, at Harwell and elsewhere, ideas about possible new reactor systems were proliferating. Cockcroft persuaded the AEA to set up a site at Winfrith to test experimental or small prototype reactors. He obtained European support for a joint project on a high temperature reactor (HTR) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Dragon project was agreed and put at Winfrith. Technically the helium gas cooling and the coated particle fuel behaved well and internationally the project gained a good reputation. Ultimately, however, the project came to an end because of the great cost of engineering full-scale commercial nuclear power stations. 
One of the special research projects in atomic energy was called CTR (controlled thermonuclear reactions) or, more briefly, fusion research. Cockcroft gathered much of the British work to Harwell and the major project was the torroidal discharge machine called ZETA. The work, and particularly the work with this machine, had its ups and downs but, in retrospect, ZETA was a major step forward in fusion research. Cockcroft was able to give a great deal of help and encouragement to the Medical Research Council in their work on radiological protection. Radioisotopes for biological and industrial uses became an important and profitable part of the work of the research group. His influence led to the creation of the Rutherford High Energy Laboratory. He was also closely concerned with the early years of CERN. 
Cockcroft resigned as a full-time member of the AEA in 1959 but remained a part-time member and moved to Cambridge to become the first master of Churchill College, having been nominated by Sir Winston Churchill himself, who also insisted that the appointment of succeeding masters should be made by the crown. The concept of a new college grew from the concern of some prominent British industrialists that Britain was lagging behind the USA and the USSR in providing excellent technical education, and Lord Cherwell had pressed these views on Sir Winston. In due course Cambridge accepted the offer of finance for a college which would have nearly as many advanced scientists and fellows as undergraduates, all living in college. Churchill was gratified that this college would bear his name, and Cockcroft was about the most famous scientist or engineer in Britain at that time. Industry was completely satisfied with the choice. No better person could have been chosen. The Cockcrofts' hospitality, their international friendships among scientists, and Cockcroft's interests in all sides of industry exactly matched the purposes for which the college was formed. 
Cockcroft was also busy with science policy and education, defence policy, university matters, and international science. He represented Britain in the conference which in due course led to the signing of the test ban treaty relating to atomic weapons; he supported the Pugwash conferences on science and world affairs, and was their president in 1967. 
Cockcroft received many honorary degrees, awards, and honours, the three principal being the Order of Merit (1957), the Nobel prize for physics, jointly with E. T. S. Walton (1951), and the atoms for peace award (1961). He was appointed CBE in 1944, knight bachelor in 1948, and KCB in 1953. Cockcroft wrote few scientific papers, but from 1935 devoted his outstanding ability to organizing and administering research in science and technology. He was always generous in acknowledging colleagues, and appreciating technicians. He was deeply interested in architecture and music. He was a man of few words and his writing was minute; he never lost his temper. He and his family enjoyed relaxing at their holiday home at Cley, walking and sailing in the crisp Norfolk air. Cockcroft died on 18 September 1967 at Churchill College. On 17 October, at noon, a service of memorial and thanksgiving was held in Westminster Abbey. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32474


Cockerell, Douglas Bennett (1870-1945), bookbinder, was born on 5 August 1870 at Clifton Cottage, Sydenham Hill, London, the fourth child of Sydney John Cockerell (1842-1877), coal merchant, and his wife, Alice Elizabeth (died 1900), elder daughter of Sir John Bennett, watchmaker and politician. He came from a middle-class family, but the death of his father threw them on hard times. Douglas was a failure at St Paul's School, Hammersmith -- he could not read until he was twelve -- so he was sent to Canada when he was fifteen, with $5 in his pocket. By the age of twenty he was managing a bank at Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, where 'he liked the cowboys very much indeed' (Rorke, 71). 
After returning to London in 1891, Cockerell got a job as secretary of the Chiswick School of Arts and Crafts in west London. In 1892 his older brother Sydney Carlyle Cockerell began to work for William Morris, and through him Cockerell was drawn to the little workshops of the Arts and Crafts movement. In 1893 he was apprenticed to T. J. Cobden-Sanderson at the Doves Bindery in Hammersmith. Here he learned to bind books in a traditional way, sewing the sections onto cords whose ends were fixed securely to the boards; covering the book, usually in leather; and decorating the binding if required. Firms at the top end of the trade in London, such as Zaehnsdorf and Riviere, still worked in this way in the late nineteenth century, but most books were bound by partly mechanized methods, the sections sewn together, and cloth-covered boards simply glued around them. 
In 1897 Cockerell set up his own bindery at 6 Denmark Street, off Charing Cross Road, London, moving to 29 Gilbert Street (later Gilbert Place), Bloomsbury, in 1899, and to Ewell, on the outskirts of London, in 1902. The bindery usually consisted of three employees, with some help from Florence Arundel ('c'.1870-1912), a craft jeweller whom Cockerell married on 5 August 1898. There were also a number of women pupils, who found opportunities in craft bookbinding denied them in the trade, where women were confined to sewing. 
The construction of Cockerell's bindings followed the standards set by Cobden-Sanderson, but he had his own style of decoration. Whereas Cobden-Sanderson thought of the decoration of books as the embellishment of great literature, Cockerell thought of it more soberly, as the expression or flowering of the book's construction, arranging his simple vocabulary of flowers and leaves and scrolling lines into roundels, panels, and arabesques that echo the proportions and structure of the book. 
If Cobden-Sanderson was the pioneer of craft bookbinding, Cockerell became its acknowledged teacher about 1900. He taught bookbinding at the London county council's new Central School of Arts and Crafts on two evenings a week from 1897 until 1905, and then again until 1935 from 1921. In 1899 his concern over the poor quality of bookbinding leather led to an enquiry by the Society of Arts and a report whose specifications for binding he wrote, or at least inspired. In 1901 he published 'Bookbinding and the Care of Books', in which he set out the principles and methods of craft bookbinding, dismissing ordinary trade bindings as 'casing' rather than binding. 'Bookbinding and the Care of Books' remains the basic handbook of craft bookbinding today. 
But in the early 1900s Cockerell began to build bridges between his high standards and the trade. In 1904 he was appointed 'controller' of a new trade bindery opened by W. H. Smith & Son in Goldsmith Street off Drury Lane. His Ewell bindery became a specialist annexe of W. H. Smith, whose output ranged from top-quality work, based on the specifications of the Society of Arts, to ordinary trade bindings. Between these two extremes stood an improved trade binding devised by Cockerell, with cloth covers and tapes inserted into split boards, which seems to reflect his belief that 'Binding can be, and is, produced that is sound in construction and pleasant to look at, and at the same time is reasonably cheap' (Cockerell, 'Bookbinding: a Lecture', 2). In 1907 the bindery moved to new, model premises in Letchworth Garden City, and Cockerell with it. 
By that date the Cockerell family included two children, Catherine, known as Casty, and Sydney Morris Cockerell, known as Sandy. A third child, Oliver, was born in 1908. Four years later Florence Cockerell died of tuberculosis. Published sources do not tell us much about Cockerell as a person, and we do not know what he felt at this time. He was a kindly, gentle man, who loved to grow flowers, 'to cut with a scythe and give away', as he put it (Rorke, 73). But he remains elusive behind the formal language of obituaries and memoirs. On 14 January 1914 he married (Bessie) Marion Gilford ('c'.1872-1956), a local doctor who had been guardian of his children since their mother's death. 
During the First World War, Cockerell was involved in demanding work for the Ministry of Munitions, for which he was made MBE. Afterwards he was appointed adviser on printing to the Imperial War Graves Commission, and oversaw the massive task of printing and binding the registers of the dead which can be found in each cemetery. 
The spirit of the Arts and Crafts movement lived on in the Cockerell family in the 1920s. Casty Cockerell became a jeweller and in 1924 Sandy went into partnership with his father as Douglas Cockerell & Son. The binding of manuscripts and early printed books with a view to their conservation was increasingly important in this phase of Douglas Cockerell's career. His approach, grounded in traditional structure and materials, lent itself to that kind of work, and in 1935 he rebound the celebrated fourth-century biblical text the 'Codex Sinaiticus' for the British Museum. This approach came to be recognized as the 'Cockerell tradition' in British craft bookbinding. It was born of the romantic enthusiasms of the Arts and Crafts movement at the turn of the century, but it lasted beyond them because Cockerell's insistence on sound workmanship answered the conservation needs of university and cathedral libraries. 
Douglas Cockerell died at his home, 298 Norton Way South, Letchworth, on 25 November 1945. After his death, the Cockerell tradition was carried on principally by Sandy Cockerell at the bindery, and by Roger Powell, who had worked there from 1935 to 1947. The bindery closed down with Sandy's death in 1987, after almost ninety years of work. 


@@@@@


doc= 32475


Cockerell, Sir Sydney Carlyle (1867-1962), museum director and book collector, was born at Brighton on 16 July 1867, the second child (and second son) of the family of four sons and two daughters of Sydney John Cockerell (1842-1877), coal merchant, of London, and his wife, Alice Elizabeth (died 1900), the elder daughter of Sir John Bennett, watchmaker and sheriff of London and Middlesex. His younger brother Douglas Cockerell (1870-1945) became a distinguished bookbinder. 
In May 1882 Cockerell entered St Paul's School, London, as a day-boy scholar but he remained there only until Christmas 1884, when he joined the family business, Geo. J. Cockerell & Co., of Cornhill, as a clerk. His father had died young, an event which had left his widow and six children badly off, and Sydney out of family duty therefore decided against a university course and entered the coal business, which he found uncongenial. He joined his two uncles as a partner in May 1889 but stayed in the firm only until the end of 1891. 
Church architecture in England and on the continent had already engaged his attention. So too had Octavia Hill, a family friend, who temporarily stimulated his involvement in social welfare work. Her friendship with John Ruskin, and Cockerell's absorption in Ruskin's political and artistic writings, emboldened him to begin a correspondence initiated by a gift of shells from his collection. In 1887 he visited Ruskin at Brantwood, his Lake District home, and a friendship developed rapidly, cemented by a chance meeting at Abbeville while on holiday in France in the summer of 1888. Nearly three weeks' exploring Abbeville and Beauvais in Ruskin's company was a formative experience for the young coal merchant. Ruskin was a powerful influence and Cockerell remained in touch throughout his hero's frail and secluded old age. 
In 1886 Cockerell had met William Morris, his other great hero, initially through socialist interests but increasingly through the work of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings: Cockerell joined its committee in 1890. Aesthetically stimulating contacts such as these unsettled him in his business career, and he decided to follow his own strong but still not fully formed inclinations. Morris offered him the educative task of cataloguing his library of manuscripts and early printed books, attractive (if unremunerative) employment to which in 1894 he added the duties of secretary to the Kelmscott Press. 
Cockerell showed himself keen and knowledgeable and became 'de facto' Morris's private secretary, zealously caring for him in his final illness in autumn 1896. Cockerell proved an efficient executor of Morris's will, winding up the press and seeing to the completion of various publishing projects. Literary executorship was a service he would confidently perform for many other literary and artistic friends. At Kelmscott House he had been introduced to the poet and traveller Wilfrid Scawen Blunt. For two years he became Blunt's part-time confidential secretary, working also for the wealthy connoisseur Henry Yates Thompson as adviser on his collection of medieval manuscripts. Seeking more permanent work, he went into partnership with Emery Walker, an agreeable colleague with whom he worked in his rather less congenial process engraving business from 1900 to 1904. In 1903 he found time to visit Tolstoy at Yasnaya Polyana. 
On 4 November 1907, still without settled employment, Cockerell married (Florence) Kate (1872-1949), daughter of Charles Tomson Kingsford of Canterbury; she was a manuscript illuminator and artist. They had two daughters and a son, Sir Christopher Sydney Cockerell, the inventor of the hovercraft. Soon after their marriage his wife developed disseminated sclerosis and eventually became bedridden (she died in 1949). Cockerell did not allow this grievous personal tragedy to interfere with his activities. Their marriage made it necessary for him to find regular work, and an ideal opportunity occurred in 1908, when Montague Rhodes James resigned the directorship of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Although he had no university education, Cockerell was appointed; he was director for twenty-nine years. 
'I found it a pigsty; I turned it into a palace' (Blunt, 135), Cockerell opined in old age. Energetic and purposeful, he rehung its crowded walls and spaced out its jumbled exhibits, adding flowers and rugs and furniture, and by skilled use of light and space he gave the Fitzwilliam a cheerfulness and an accessibility that have been influential on museum display worldwide. The collections and buildings were not just rearranged but much augmented. Cockerell intrepidly pursued benefactors, and though he became notorious for his importunity he was usually successful. The Marlay (1922) and Courtauld (1931) galleries were added during his tenure. His determination made him some enemies in Cambridge, but his success was recognized by the award of an honorary LittD in 1930. He was a (short-term) fellow of Jesus College from 1910 to 1916, and after many years of deeply felt exclusion became a fellow of Downing from 1932 until his retirement in 1937 (when he was elected honorary fellow). He was knighted in 1934. For three years from 1936 Cockerell served as European adviser to the Felton trustees of the National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne. He travelled to Australia to consult his employers, and visited American galleries and libraries on several occasions between the wars. 
Cockerell was proud of his literary friendships and kept them in good repair by conversation and correspondence. Some (such as those with Wilfrid Scawen Blunt and Thomas Hardy) extended into literary executorships, in which his loyal but masterful manner led to difficulties with family representatives, but others were founded on exchanges of letters later anthologized for him by Viola Meynell in 'Friends of a Lifetime' (1940) and 'The Best of Friends' (1956). Unexpectedly for 'a man without any set creed' (Blunt, 226), he formed a close though mainly epistolary friendship with the scholarly Roman Catholic nun Dame Laurentia McLachlan (1866-1953) of Stanbrook Abbey, Worcestershire. He placed his connoisseurship and knowledge of fine book production at the disposal of this learned Benedictine house with its printing press, and his friendship with its abbess withstood even an imprudent introduction to another of his friends, George Bernard Shaw. 
Since childhood Cockerell had been a dedicated collector, and by his early thirties he concentrated his efforts on medieval manuscripts. His means were small but his knowledge was wide and his connoisseur's eye and his instinct for a bargain were both very keen. He was prepared to resell to improve his collection, but the items he retained were closely studied and often carefully annotated on their flyleaves. He showed scholarly (and commercial) prescience in pursuing manuscripts of the humanist scribes of the Renaissance, and for other periods his collection included work by the first identifiable English scribe, the thirteenth-century Oxford artist W. de Brailes. By 1908 Cockerell's collection was strong enough to include no fewer than 17 of the 269 items displayed at the Burlington Fine Arts Club's loan exhibition of illuminated manuscripts, for which Cockerell was chief contributor to the large and important catalogue. The standard listing of his manuscripts shows that no fewer than 126 items had been in his possession during his lifetime, and in old age he shrewdly organized the sale of his remaining treasures both by private treaty and in the saleroom (Sothebys, 1956-9). He was a member of the Roxburghe Club from 1915, and published several fine editions under the aegis of its members. He bullied other collectors to improve their standards until they matched his own, and a characteristically English enthusiasm for the study of Italian humanistic manuscripts is very largely due to his initiative. 
As a young man, Cockerell developed an idiosyncratic, squarely-formed humanist hand. It was fluent and graceful, tiny but (until his old age) easily legible, and consistent throughout the long period covered by his diaries (1886-1962), now in the British Library (Add. MSS 52623-52702). He was a friend of Edward Johnston, whom he encouraged in the revival of pen-formed lettering, and later did much to encourage the use of italic script in education and art work. 
Cockerell settled in retirement at 21 Kew Gardens Road, Richmond, Surrey, where he remained -- except for wartime exile to Gloucestershire and Old Windsor, Berkshire -- virtually confined to his bedroom from 1951, until his death there from heart failure on 1 May 1962. He was an exigent invalid, supported by devoted volunteer attendants and to the end much visited by scholars, calligraphers, and biographers of Victorian eminences about whom (in his tenth decade) he became the sole remaining -- if rather proprietorial -- living authority. Bald, and neatly bearded, he had a brusque manner but a not unkindly glint behind small gold-rimmed spectacles; his legendary astringency overlay a frequently attested genius for friendship. A settled agnostic in his opinions, he had no expectation of a future existence. His remains were cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 32476


Codner, Maurice Frederick (1888-1958), portrait painter, was born in Stoke Newington, London, on 27 September 1888, the third son of William Squires Codner, iron merchant, of Abbotskerswell, Devon, and his wife, Ada Mary Payne. Codner was educated at the Stationers' Company School, but the details of his early career are not recorded. In 1913 he married Eleanor Marion, daughter of Thomas Fairfield, a captain in the mercantile marine, and during the First World War he served in France in the Royal Devon hussars. His parents owned property at Dedham, Essex, where in 1919 he was befriended by Alfred Munnings while out hunting. At some point Codner attended the Colchester School of Art, but is recorded by Munnings as working part-time as assistant curator three days a week at the Iveagh Bequest, Kenwood, London, in the late 1920s. Encouraged by Munnings, he abandoned his employment and soon became widely known for his portraits in oils of distinguished men and women. These were exhibited principally from 1929 at the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, of which he became a member in 1937, and in 1945 the honorary secretary, but also from 1928 at the Royal Academy and in many galleries in Great Britain and elsewhere. His work was always notable for its sincerity. He was singularly modest about its merits and in occasional moods of depression would regard his portraits merely as a way of making a living. 
Codner had several public successes. His portrait of George VI in field marshal's uniform and Garter robes as captain-general of the Honourable Artillery Company (Armoury House, London), executed in 1951, was admired at the time and was the last portrait painted of the king. His portrait of Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother (1952), painted for the twenty-fifth birthday number of 'Woman's Journal', won the silver medal in 1954 at the Paris Salon, where in 1938 his portrait of Sir George Broadbridge, lord mayor of London, in his coronation robes (Guildhall, London) had received an honourable mention. Many of his portraits, however, were pre-eminently what are called good likenesses rather than a penetrating analysis of character. In this he was extremely successful and at his peak in the 1940s and early 1950s was producing ten to fifteen such routine portraits a year, his work being especially in demand for the board-rooms of businessmen and company directors. For these he was often assisted by his only son, John Whitlock Orby Squires Codner, whose own work (under the pseudonym John Whitlock) is virtually indistinguishable from his father's. 
Among Codner's well-known sitters were Field Marshal Lord Alexander of Tunis (1946), Gwilym Lloyd-George (later Viscount Tenby; 1955), and the architect Sir Albert Richardson (1956; Art-Workers' Guild, London), but it was perhaps only with theatrical personalities that his portraits achieved anything like distinction. For the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, he painted Sir George Robey in the role of Falstaff (1935), followed by a further version in the comedian's familiar make-up of bowler hat and red nose. Other portraits of actors and actresses included Athene Seyler, Evelyn Laye (1933), and Leslie Henson (1952). His portrait of the contralto Kathleen Ferrier (1946; National Portrait Gallery, London), with its theatrical lighting, lurid colours, and coarse brushwork, encapsulates both the best and the worst facets of his portrait style. With his occasional landscapes Codner felt that he had more freedom and in this was influenced by the example of Munnings, whose portrait of Codner, 'Sketching at Wiston Bridge' (1935), is a striking tribute to their friendship. Open-air sketching was his great relaxation, as was the pleasure he shared with Munnings in riding and a love of horses. 
In appearance Codner was extremely well groomed; tall, slim, with a neatly trimmed beard and moustache, closely cut hair, and a rather pronounced nose, he had the distinguished and rather theatrical air of the prosperous and successful artist. His studio, which adjoined his small house at 26 Temple Fortune Hill in Hampstead Garden Suburb, Middlesex, where he lived for his entire career, was a comfortable and workmanlike place, well adapted to his various sitters. This and his little garden full of roses and trees were his pride and joy. Maurice Frederick Codner died at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, London, on 10 March 1958 and was buried at Dedham, Essex, in his much beloved Constable country. 


@@@@@


doc= 32477


Coghlan, Sir Charles Patrick John (1863-1927), premier of Southern Rhodesia, was born at King William's Town, Cape Colony, on 24 June 1863, the third son of James Coghlan JP of Cypherfontein and later of Clocolan, Orange Free State, soldier, civil servant, and farmer, and his wife, Isabella Mary MacLaren, of Alice, Cape Colony. His early education was supervised by a 'resident schoolmaster', a rifleman named Broomhall. Subsequently he was educated at the Jesuit-run St Aidan's College, Grahamstown (1875-81), and the South African College, Cape Town. In 1882 he was articled to his brother James, a solicitor in Kimberley, where he remained until 1900, when he moved to Bulawayo in Southern Rhodesia. He was widely regarded as an outstanding lawyer. 
Coghlan's political development was crucially influenced by his Catholicism, inherited from his Irish father and Scottish highland mother, his legal training, and eastern Cape upbringing. In 1891 a St Patrick's day dinner in Kimberley provided him with his first public platform, when he called for vengeance on British politicians for their coercive Irish policy. This fiery and persuasive brand of oratory, together with personal innuendo that was often unscrupulous, proved to be enduring characteristics of his political style. He combined Irish home rule and Gladstonian Liberal sympathies with a deep attachment to the crown and a Burkean reverence for the British constitution. In 1897 he joined the pro-imperial South African League and strengthened his imperial and eastern Cape connections with his marriage in 1899 to Gertrude Mary Schermbrucker, daughter of Colonel Frederick Xavier Schermbrucker, ex-German legionary, MP for King William's Town, sometime eastern Cape separatist, and an avowed imperialist. 
After arriving in Bulawayo he became legal adviser to the municipality and to the Chamber of Mines and junior partner to P. D. Frames, a prominent settler leader. By this time Coghlan's political outlook, based on his experience of the eastern Cape and Kimberley, had become rooted in a deep antipathy to the parliament at Cape Town, and a conviction that no settler community should depend on a monopoly capitalist company. He regarded the western Cape as remote and unsympathetic to the economic, racial, and security anxieties of the 'frontier'. These beliefs were greatly strengthened in Bulawayo. He soon developed a strong provincial loyalty to Matabeleland, regarding Salisbury as neglectful and dominated by civil servants, capitalists, and farmers. Rhodesian politics at this time were highly localized, based on a handful of elected members of the legislative council who were subject to pressure from various interest groups, including miners, farmers, merchants, and artisans. Political debate concentrated on the form of government which might succeed the British South Africa Company. The options included amending or abrogating the company's charter, representative or responsible government, amalgamating with Northern Rhodesia or the Transvaal, and, after 1910, integrating as a fifth province with the Union of South Africa. Coghlan never believed it was his role to guide public opinion. He distrusted grand geopolitical schemes such as those which motivated Cecil Rhodes and, later, General Jan Christian Smuts. Coghlan remained a follower, rather than a leader, of public opinion, reacting quickly to settler anxieties which transcended sectional interests, including the fear of African uprising and of sexual attack by black men on white women -- the so-called 'black peril'. On several occasions he championed the settlers' right to resort to lynch law in such cases, if the government did not make attempted and actual rape capital offences. 
Coghlan entered politics in 1901 in support of the movement for abrogation of the company's charter, and, as an acknowledged settler leader, he attended a conference in Salisbury in 1904 to discuss proposals for a financial settlement with the company. Sensing the public mood, he rejected the scheme, excusing himself from further discussions in London on the pretext of unavoidable professional duties. He also refused offers of the Matabeleland Political Association vice-presidency and nomination as candidate for the legislative council. In 1907, however, he represented Southern Rhodesia in negotiations with the company. A year later he was elected to the legislative council for the western division. His legal expertise and argumentative parliamentary style became highly valued in attacking the company's claim to own all unalienated land. 
Coghlan was one of the Southern Rhodesian delegates to the South African National Convention of 1908-9, where he helped to draw up the clause of the union constitution which provided for the future accession of Southern Rhodesia, but he reluctantly accepted the union's unitary constitution, with Cape Town as its legislative capital. The erosion of provincial powers at the convention's committee stage further weakened his early enthusiasm for union. In 1912 he resisted the campaign of the Rhodesian League for a crown colony form of government as a preliminary to full responsible government. He also strongly opposed amalgamation with Northern Rhodesia as an alternative to the union, proposed by the company in 1916, on the ground that this would frustrate Southern Rhodesian ambitions to remain a 'white man's country'. He soon sensed a change in public opinion after the establishment in 1917 of the Responsible Government Association (RGA) by Mrs Ethel Tawse Jollie and John (Jock) McChlery. Essentially a representative of townsmen and small miners, Coghlan accepted the RGA presidency in 1919, by which time it had become clear that it had outgrown its farming connections. He echoed a widespread settler fear that union might bring a large influx of poor white Afrikaners and thus dilute and destroy the territory's Britishness. Strengthened by the privy council judgment against the company on the question of unalienated land, the RGA was victorious in the 1920 general election, but it still faced a powerful coalition of Rhodesian unionists, including the company and leading mining corporations. The British and South African governments regarded Southern Rhodesian accession as essential to bolster the pro-Commonwealth interest led by Smuts against General Hertzog's nationalists and the emerging power of labour. Coghlan rejected these appeals to a wider patriotism, along with Smuts's offer of cabinet rank in the union, and in 1922, in a campaign marked by widespread anti-Afrikaner xenophobia, the responsible government cause was carried by a majority of three to two. The victory owed much to Coghlan's oratory and the votes of artisans, merchants, and minor civil servants who felt threatened by union. Also crucial was the efficient running of the RGA by Mrs Tawse Jollie, for Coghlan preferred the convivial political atmosphere of the hotel lounge and the clubhouse to the tedium of party organization. 
In 1923 Coghlan became premier, and his Rhodesia Party, formerly the RGA, proved in government to be more conservative and deferential to the administrative and economic inheritance of the British South Africa Company than its earlier populist and anti-capitalist character had suggested. He came to regret his earlier statements on native affairs and sought, in inter-racial cases, to preserve judicial independence against settler prejudice. He neglected his legal career and remained financially, in his own words, a 'poor man'. He had lived all his adult life in hotels, and never owned a house of his own. His political achievements were widely recognized. In 1910 he was created knight bachelor for his services in the South African convention, and in 1925 he was made a KCMG. Trinity College, Dublin, honoured him with an LLD in 1926, by which time he had become disillusioned with Ireland's separatist course. He died suddenly at home in Salisbury on 28 August 1927 and was buried two days later in the Roman Catholic section of the Bulawayo cemetery. In a written request, opened after his death, he asked the legislative assembly to provide for his widow and daughter. In 1930 the legislative assembly decided that he was one who had, in terms of Rhodes's will, 'deserved well of his country', and his remains were reinterred at World's View, in the Matopo Hills, near to the graves of Rhodes and Jameson. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 32478


Cohen, Sir Andrew Benjamin (1909-1968), civil servant and colonial governor, was born on 7 October 1909 at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, the twin son of Walter Samuel Cohen (1870-1960), financier and company director, and his wife, Lucy Margaret Cobb (1877-1942). On his father's side he stemmed from a wealthy Jewish business family, and on his mother's, from a radical Unitarian family; the two strains combined in the son to produce an elitist with a social conscience. His elder sister Ruth Louisa was principal of Newnham College, Cambridge, from 1954 to 1972. He won a scholarship to Malvern College, and another to Trinity College, Cambridge, where, although his spiritual home was King's, he obtained a double first in the classical tripos (1930-31). In 1932 he entered the civil service, where he spent a year as an assistant principal at the Board of Inland Revenue, before transferring to the Colonial Office to join the other classical scholars under Charles Jeffries. 
For the next few years Cohen inhaled trusteeship with the dust on the African files; and he came to sympathize with the black African rather than the white settler. Contemptuous of colour bars, he was shocked by how little the colonial trustees seemed to him to have done for Africans in Rhodesia. For a time he was private secretary to Sir John Maffey, the permanent under-secretary; and he also visited central Africa as secretary to a financial commission. As an acting principal in 1939, he was chosen for a Commonwealth Fund fellowship to visit America, but his schedule was cut short by the outbreak of the Second World War. In 1940 he was sent to organize supplies during the siege of Malta, deputizing at times for the lieutenant-governor. It was his first taste of power (for which he was voracious), in an embattled government organizing a society to meet an emergency; the experience left him with a Fabian socialist's view of the state's duty to reorganize the social order. In 1943 he returned to the Colonial Office as an assistant secretary, to take part in post-war African planning. 
By 1947, when he was appointed assistant under-secretary of state for the Colonial Office's African division, Cohen's vision for Africa was sharply defined. It seemed to him vital, in the interests of both Britain and Africa, to turn the colonies into self-governing nations within 'the next generation'. As head of the division and 'alter ego' of his minister, Arthur Creech Jones, he helped to prepare a report for tropical Africa, in which he was able to give this meaning to the colonial shibboleths of the Labour Party. There were many in the euphoria of peace who wished to make colonies into modern welfare states and bring them into production to repair the ravaged United Kingdom economy. Cohen was one of the few who realized that colonial rule would have to be nationalized if those aims were to be fulfilled. Alien officials could never do so, he insisted, through petty chiefs; to achieve them, the excluded but educated African who understood modern ideas must be brought into partnership, and his price would be the most rapid possible transfer of power. As a realist, Cohen discerned that the age of empire was ended; as a moralist, he resolved to end it constructively. 
African nationalists seemed a derisory band at the time, and some governors objected bitterly to the new course; to educate the colonial civil service there, Creech Jones and Cohen began the 'Journal of African Administration', and the annual conferences at Cambridge. They were prepared to concede power to progressive nationalist movements, but as a result of the Accra riots of 1948, the ballot box and a quasi-ministerial system were introduced in the Gold Coast earlier than intended; the extreme nationalists won the election and Kwame Nkrumah left gaol to become leader of government. What had been conceded in Ghana could not then be denied to Nigeria, and a 'domino effect' spread throughout British west Africa. Thus Cohen's plan, designed to educate the national movements gradually into responsibility, provoked them into swift action. By 1951 west Africa at least was set on course to self-government, although fifteen years later, contemplating the one-party states and military coups, Cohen was depressed by the outcome. Like many of Africa's friends, he had overestimated the power of the nationalists to transcend ethnic divisions and behave democratically in the Westminster tradition. 
For central Africa, Cohen's construct in 1948-51 was more realistic if the outcome was less fortunate. Fearful of a white unilateral declaration of independence, and of apartheid spreading from South Africa, he advocated a confederation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland: power was to be transferred to the white minority on condition that it was shared with the African majority. A version of the plan was carried out in 1953 after he had left the Colonial Office; but the offer of 'half a loaf' so angered Africans that Kenneth Kaunda and Hastings Banda could organize nationalist movements strong enough to break the association ten years later and achieve majority rule, save in Southern Rhodesia. 
In September 1951, after James Griffiths had replaced Creech Jones as colonial secretary following the general election of 1950, Cohen was appointed governor of Uganda and sworn in early in 1952. Although he disliked the ceremonial, he gladly practised in the field what he had preached in Whitehall; Africans and Asians were invited to Government House and advanced in central government; Makerere was developed into a university to strengthen the educated cadre; local authorities were made more democratic, which encouraged political parties and national consciousness. But in underestimating the strength of traditional loyalty and deporting the 'kabaka' of Buganda in 1953, only to restore him later on constitutional conditions, Cohen was strongly criticized on all sides, although when he finally left Uganda early in 1957 the foundations for independence were securely laid, and indeed the Ugandans themselves petitioned for his term of office to be extended. 
Disappointed in his hope of a Labour seat in parliament, and despite being an unlikely choice as a diplomat, Cohen was appointed permanent representative (1957-60) on the Trusteeship Council at the United Nations. But he seemed to have been put on the shelf, and he did not always find it easy to square the representations which the Foreign Office instructed him to make with his personal convictions. In 1959 he published 'British Policy in Changing Africa', and, given his natural affinity with liberal Americans and his candid and widespread working relations with African and Asian leaders, he discovered another way to serve African independence: the idea of international and Commonwealth co-operation in aid of modernizing Africa captured his mind. In helping to link American aid to British schemes for developing east Africa, especially in university education, he took up the concepts of the United Nations 'development decade'. It was fitting, therefore, that he was recalled to Whitehall in 1961 to set up a department of technical co-operation, which took over most of the old Colonial Office's non-political functions. In 1964 the department was transformed into a Ministry of Overseas Development, with Cohen as its permanent secretary; he carried out the organization of first one establishment and then the other with his usual dynamic enthusiasm. 
In 1949 Cohen married Mrs Helen Phoebe Donington (died 1978) JP, commander of the order of St John of Jerusalem, only daughter of George Hope Stevenson, praelector in ancient history at University College, Oxford (1907-49); Cohen was as affectionate towards his three stepchildren as towards their own son (born in 1950). His marriage brought him closer to Bloomsbury and the political left. He was appointed OBE in 1942, CMG in 1948, and was advanced to KCMG in 1952; he was also appointed KCVO (1954), and received the honorary degree of LLD from the Queen's University, Belfast, in 1960. 
Cohen was cut out to be a planner, even a philosopher king, and if reading lyric verse on an antique Mediterranean island may have been his private Elysium, he admired intellect most; arrogantly intellectual, and avid for original ideas, if they were to engage his excellent mind they had to be practical in shaping better things to come. With a heroic image of himself as idea in action -- compounded of Carlyle and Euripides -- Cambridge and Malta combined to make him unflinchingly realistic in finding means to achieve a passionately speculative vision of ultimate ends. Of giant stature, appetite, and energy, boyish in charm and enthusiasm, the intellectual dreamer of the Colonial Office was one of the most anti-colonial and unofficial of the imperial officials who finally dismantled the tropical African empire. In one way or another his measures helped to awaken the slumbering genius of African nationalism, and, wittingly or unwittingly, he did more to bring about the fall of empire and the rise of the nationalists than most African politicians were able to achieve between them. Not for nothing did his biographer dub him 'The proconsul of African nationalism' (Robinson, 'Sir Andrew Cohen'). 
Cohen died suddenly at his home, 44 Blomfield Road, Maida Vale, London, on 17 June 1968. 
R. E. Robinson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32479


Cohen, Arthur (1829-1914), lawyer, was born in Wyndham Place, Bryanston Square, London, on 18 November 1829, the youngest son of Benjamin Cohen (1789-1867), a prosperous bill broker. His grandfather, Levy Barent Cohen (1740-1808), moved to London from Holland about 1770. Through his mother, Justina (1800-1873), the youngest daughter of Joseph Eliahu Montefiore and sister of Sir Moses Montefiore, he was connected with the great Jewish families of Montefiore and Mocatta. At an early age he was reading Newton's 'Principia'; when he was about twelve years old, he was sent to Frankfurt, where he was educated by a tutor and at the 'Gymnasium'. At the age of seventeen he became a student at University College, London. His family wished to send him to Cambridge, but entrance to Trinity and Christ's colleges was found to be impossible for a Jew. His uncle, Sir Moses Montefiore, with the support of the prince consort as chancellor of the university, secured his admission to Magdalene, where he read mathematics, in 1849. Even then he had to undergo an entrance examination on William Paley's 'View of the Evidences of Christianity'. 
Cohen had not had much opportunity to mix with his contemporaries and, supported by a large allowance, he participated enthusiastically in undergraduate life. He was secretary of the Union Society in 1852 and its president in 1853, and he rowed for at least one year in the Magdalene boat. It was probably due to these diversions that his name appeared only as fifth wrangler in 1853, to the disappointment of his family. As a Jew he could not take his degree until after the passing of the 'Cambridge Reform Act' of 1856, which abolished the obligatory Christian oath which had formerly preceded graduation. In 1858 Cohen became the first professing Jew to graduate at Cambridge, taking his MA in 1860. Later on the university made him further amends: from 1879 to 1914 he was counsel to the university, and from 1883 an honorary fellow of Magdalene College. 
In November 1853 Cohen became a member of the Inner Temple. In May 1857 he won the studentship of the inns of court, and in November of the same year he was called to the bar. He practised on the home and, later, the south-east circuits. In his early years he was helped by his uncle, Sir Moses Montefiore, who bought a law library for his nephew, and, as chairman of the Alliance Assurance Company, put work his way. But Cohen, able and ambitious enough to succeed without backing, was soon busy, especially with commercial insurance and Admiralty cases. Commercial law was being adapted to meet the problems of increasing trade, and for many years Cohen appeared in nearly every important case. In 1872 he was selected by the attorney-general, Sir Roundell Palmer (Lord Selborne from October of that year), to be junior counsel for Great Britain in the 'Alabama' arbitration at Geneva. In 1873 he was appointed by Chief Baron Kelly to the ancient post of 'tubman' in the court of exchequer, having previously been 'postman'. In the same year he was a member of the royal commission on unseaworthy ships, the result of the agitation of Samuel Plimsoll. In 1874 he became a queen's counsel, being the junior but one in a batch of fourteen. Thereafter, Cohen appeared frequently before the privy council and in the House of Lords. In 1875 he was appointed judge of the Admiralty court of Cinque Ports, a sinecure which he only resigned in the year of his death. In 1876 he became a bencher of the Inner Temple, and he held the office of treasurer in 1894. He became a member of the senate of the University of London in 1905, as a representative of the Inner Temple; he was reappointed in 1909 and 1913. 
On 23 August 1860 Cohen married Emmeline Micholls (1843-1888) of Manchester, to whom he had become engaged when she was only fifteen. It was a happy marriage which produced three sons and five daughters. One of the sons, Benjamin, became a distinguished barrister. 
In February 1874 Cohen stood unsuccessfully for the borough of Lewes as a Liberal. In April 1880 he headed the poll at Southwark, his fellow member being the political economist J. E. Thorold Rogers. In February 1881 Lord Selborne offered him the senior of two judgeships then vacant. At the request of W. E. Gladstone, who feared a by-election in the borough, Cohen declined. There was, apparently, an understanding that Cohen should be offered a judgeship subsequently, but he never had another chance: and for many years new judges, answering letters of congratulation from Cohen, uniformly assured him that he ought long ago to have been on the bench himself. Cohen sat for Southwark from 1880 to 1888, being re-elected twice, in November 1885 and July 1886. Described in 'Dod's Parliamentary Companion' as a 'sincere and earnest' Liberal he favoured home rule, reform of bankruptcy law, and the establishment of a mercantile code. He was opposed to a hereditary House of Lords. He was not a successful Commons man, but though he spoke seldom, he was heard with respect and he exerted considerable influence behind the scenes. Even in court, Cohen's manner of speaking was somewhat artificial, and it was probably too drily analytical for the House of Commons, despite his employment of an elocution coach. A contemporary described his speech as 'smooth and persuasive', though with a tendency to 'drawl' ('The Times', 4 Nov 1914). In 1888 Cohen resigned his seat, chiefly because of the serious illness of his wife. In the June of that year he suffered a severe blow by her death. 
Between 1893 and 1914 Cohen was standing counsel to the India Office. In 1903 he was counsel for Great Britain in the Venezuela arbitration at The Hague. In the same year he was made a fellow of the British Academy, chairman of the bar council, and a member of the royal commission on trade disputes and trade combinations, which reported in 1906 -- not a bad record for a man of seventy-four. In 1905 he was made a privy councillor by the Conservative government. In 1906 he was appointed chairman of the royal commission on shipping rings. In 1911 he wrote the article on insurance in Lord Halsbury's 'Laws of England'. This was his only published work of any length, and being upon a subject of which he had been long the acknowledged master it was one of the most valuable sections of that encyclopaedia. His lecture entitled 'The Declaration of London' was also published in 1911. 
Cohen continued his practice at the bar until about 1911, appearing at times with a junior who was born after his leader had taken silk. When he died, Halsbury alone was his senior among the benchers of his inn. 
Cohen was a great lawyer, intelligent, industrious, and with a passion for legal principles. In dedicating to Cohen his 'Conflict of Laws' (1896), A. V. Dicey said that his 'mastery of legal principles is surpassed only by the kindness with which his learning and experience are placed at the service of his friends'. He was not a great advocate in open court, but for the argument of a question of law before an appellate tribunal he had few equals. In all probability, up to the time of his death, no advocate had so often addressed the House of Lords and the judicial committee. 
Tall and handsome, with brown eyes and a mass of dark hair which kept its colour until he was well past seventy, Cohen was a kindly man, with the courteous and rather stately manners of a 'grand seigneur'. Although reserved, he had many friends, and was universally esteemed by the members of the bar. His interests included literature and the theatre. Although he gave up playing the cello when he left Cambridge, he maintained his university passion for mathematics: within a few months of his death he was reading works on the differential calculus. Although he had a fine physique, Cohen was not athletic. He did, however, enjoy walking while on holiday in the Alps. He was a heavy smoker of cigars, and had a tendency to gout. He was a slow and conscientious worker; although his income -- even as a junior counsel -- was up to $8000 p.a., he was never a rich man. About the acquisition of money he was as careless as he was lavish in spending it. His daughter recorded that he only once tried the experiment of riding in an omnibus; his brother, who died a millionaire, was never known to ride in anything else. Although Cohen ceased to be an 'observing' Jew when he left his childhood home, he was always a professing Jew, and proud of the traditions of the race. Throughout his life he took an active part in Jewish affairs, especially in the fields of education and charity. For many years president of the Borough Jewish schools, he was vice-president of the Jews' College (1892-1901) and president of the Meshibat Neplish Society (1873-80). He also served on the council of the United Synagogue and the committee of the Jews' Free School. He was for fifteen years (1800-1895) president of the Jewish board of deputies, resigning when the first of his children married outside the Jewish community. He died on 3 November 1914, at his home at 26 Great Cumberland Place, Hyde Park, London, and was buried by the side of his wife in the Jewish cemetery at Willesden. 


@@@@@


doc= 32480


Cohen, Harriet Pearl Alice (1895-1967), pianist, was born on 2 December 1895 at 58 Angell Road, Brixton, London, the eldest daughter of Joseph Woolf Cohen, company secretary, and his wife, Florence White. The soprano (Kathleen Irene) Myra Verney (1905-1993) was her younger sister. An amateur cellist and composer, her father was of Lithuanian extraction. Her mother, a gifted pianist herself, taught Harriet the piano until the child was thirteen. 
Harriet Cohen entered the Royal Academy of Music in 1909, the youngest student to win the Ada Lewis scholarship. She studied with Felix Swinstead and Tobias Matthay for the piano and Frederick Corder for theory and composition. She remained at the academy, and also at the Matthay School, until 1915; during that time she became associated with her piano professor, Tobias Matthay, as a teacher of other students. While at the academy her string of awards included the Sterndale Bennett, Edward Nicholls, and Hine prizes. She was part of a group based on current and former students of the academy -- which included the composer Arnold Edward Trevor Bax (1883-1953) -- who responded to the craze for things Russian when the Diaghilev ballet visited London between 1911 and 1914, and she became known as Tania to her friends. 
During the First World War, Cohen and Bax carried on a love affair. In March 1918, in consequence of the developing relationship, Bax left his wife and children, though he and Cohen never lived together, and she never married. Harriet Cohen's London debut was in a joint recital with the soprano Raymonde Collignon at the Aeolian Hall in June 1919, 'The Times' writing: '... lightest of light sopranos -- delicate and rarified perfection. Miss Harriet Cohen is a pianist something after the same style' ('The Times', 7 June 1919). However, Cohen's pianism was constrained by her small hands and the webbing of her fingers. She was launched on the concert scene in 1920, appearing in the repertory that coloured her career: a combination of the revival of Bach and the keyboard music of the Elizabethans played on the piano, as well as the new music of the day. In Arthur Bliss's 'Storm' for Shakespeare's 'The Tempest', scored for piano, percussion, trumpet, and trombone, in 1921, her part proved so vigorous that she smashed a thumbnail. 
Harriet Cohen appeared at the Queen's Hall, London, in a solo recital in June 1920 with Bax's newly revised piano sonata no. 2, and in November that year reappeared with his enormous 'Symphonic Variations' for piano and orchestra. Arnold Bennett, one of many admirers, noted in his diary, 'Such an ovation I have never before seen at a Prom' ('Journals', 2). She was soon associated with other similar modern works, notably Manuel de Falla's 'Noches en los jardines de Espana' ('Nights in the Gardens of Spain'), and later music by Shostakovich and Kabalevsky. 
Her striking good looks also contributed to Cohen's early success, which placed her at the focus of the London artistic life of the early 1920s. She proved a celebrated organizer of musical parties. Here she integrated the literary and musical worlds, her guests including Bennett and George Bernard Shaw. She promoted the revival of Tudor church music and integrated the world of the Russian ballet into the London scene, particularly being associated with the ballerina Tamara Karsavina, for whom she first played in 1920. In 1924 Harriet Cohen appeared at the Salzburg chamber music festival of the International Society for Contemporary Music. 
Harriet Cohen's early success was interrupted by illness, and in 1925 she spent some time at a TB clinic in Switzerland. By the time of her return to England in 1926 the relationship between her and Bax had somewhat cooled, though they appeared in public together until his death. She toured extensively and tended to be the chosen artist when new British works were played, appearing for example in Germany in July 1930 in an all-British programme playing William Walton's 'Sinfonia concertante', conducted by Constant Lambert. 
Harriet Cohen recorded for Columbia and became well known in the 1930s for her pioneering recordings of Bach's preludes and fugues. Her other recordings included Mozart, Brahms, and Chopin. However, many of the surviving recordings of her playing, including the Bach keyboard concerto in D minor for which she was celebrated in her day, were made in the years immediately after the Second World War and possibly do not find her at her peak. In 1931 a dozen British composers were persuaded to contribute arrangements of various works of Bach for 'A Bach Book for Harriet Cohen', which was published in 1932; the pieces were first heard at the Queen's Hall in October 1932. 
In 1932 Harriet Cohen gave the first performance of Bax's second major work for piano and orchestra, 'Winter Legends', though it was seldom played thereafter. In February 1933 she gave the first performance of the Vaughan Williams piano concerto. This work, too, was little played, and in 1942 Sir Adrian Boult noted in a BBC internal memo: 'It is surely common knowledge that Harriet Cohen's performance of the... Concerto caused it to be completely dropped... the work... was laid out for a pianist of the Busoni calibre, and although she made a very valiant effort, she could get nowhere near the spirit of it, or even the notes in many passages. (facsimile in Foreman, pl. 7)' Harriet Cohen had been associated with Sir Edward Elgar from the time when they both had lived in Hampstead; and in May 1933 she organized a Wigmore Hall concert in which all three of his mature chamber works (the violin sonata, the string quartet, and the piano quintet) were presented. This resulted in her recording the quintet with the Stratton Quartet. In 1936 Cohen published 'Music's Handmaid', in which she discussed the performance of the repertory with which she was principally associated. Two years later she was appointed CBE 'for services to British music'. This was one of many awards from countries as varied as Finland, Belgium, and Brazil. 
At the beginning of the Second World War Harriet Cohen was on tour in the USA, and she did not return until the summer of 1940. She was untiring in what she felt to be positive artistic diplomacy, though the authorities did not always take her at her own valuation. A major shock came with the blitz when her house was bombed and burnt out, causing the loss of not only her piano but also her music. In the UK she undertook extensive provincial tours, but was no longer well thought of by the BBC music staff. Despite extensive lobbying, a succession of accidents and illnesses frustrated her success when dates were offered. In 1944 Bax bought her the flat in Gloucester Place Mews, Portman Square, London, where she lived until her death. 
In 1946 Bax wrote 'Morning Song', a short piece for piano and orchestra to mark the twenty-first birthday of Princess Elizabeth in 1947. Cohen recorded it in February 1947, and it was first performed at a Promenade Concert in August and in the princess's presence in October. 
In 1946 Bax's wife died, but Harriet learned of this only when the will was published in 1948. She imagined Bax would marry her, but on being pressed, he had to disclose the existence of another mistress, Mary Gleaves, whom he had known since 1926. This was in May 1948, when Bax's music for the film 'Oliver Twist' was being recorded. 
Subsequently Harriet suffered a serious accident and cut her right wrist, which stopped her from playing, an incident later marked in a BBC radio feature. Bax wrote a left-hand concerto (he called it 'Concertante') for her, in which she reappeared at Cheltenham in July 1950 and at the Promenade Concerts three weeks later. Her wrist made such a good recovery that in 1954 she was able to broadcast Bax's 'Winter Legends' and also championed Peter Racine Fricker's piano concerto, op. 19, which was written for her. She gave the first performance in March 1954. 
Harriet Cohen formally retired in 1960 and thereafter devoted her time to the Harriet Cohen international awards, which she had started in the early 1950s. She wrote her autobiography, 'A Bundle of Time', though it was unpublished at her unexpected death in the University College Hospital, London, from pneumonia on 13 November 1967. 


@@@@@


doc= 32481


Cohen, Sir Robert Waley (1877-1952), oil industrialist, was born in London on 8 September 1877, the second son of Nathaniel Louis Cohen, a leading figure in the City, and his wife, Julia Matilda Cohen (1853-1917), daughter of Jacob Waley (1818-1873). A sister of Robert, Dorothea ['see 'Singer, Dorothea Waley], married Charles Singer, the historian of medicine and science. The family, who had long been leaders of the Anglo-Jewish community with connections extending from Sir Moses Montefiore to the Rothschilds, traced its origins back to the Netherlands in the seventeenth century. Educated at Clifton College, in the Jewish house, Waley Cohen early showed an interest in chemistry and mathematics. With a science scholarship he proceeded to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he obtained second classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos in 1898 and 1900, with an interlude of a year for a trip round the world. A period in Berlin, between school and university, confirmed his attachment to music and science. One of the leading amateur cellists in the country, he played in the same quartet for forty years. 
Although wealthy, the family believed that everyone should be profitably engaged. After Cambridge, Waley Cohen worked unpaid on research in the Meteorological Office, working under W. N. Shaw, his former tutor and secretary to the Meteorological Office. Aroused by family reproaches and helped by his future wife, he then drafted an advertisement seeking industrial employment. Henri Deterding of the Royal Dutch oil company sent the sole reply, but meanwhile his father had spoken to Sir Marcus Samuel (later Viscount Bearsted), chairman of the Shell Transport and Trading Company. In July 1901 Waley Cohen began work for Shell, reporting directly to Marcus Samuel, and within three months he was given permission to sign company documents. In 1902 Shell and Royal Dutch joined forces against their rival, the Standard Oil Company. While maintaining their autonomy as separate companies, in 1903 they formed a new concern, the Asiatic Petroleum Company, to market oil produced by both parent companies. Deterding of Royal Dutch became managing director of Asiatic, with Waley Cohen as assistant manager at an annual salary of $1000. 
In 1904 Waley Cohen married his kinswoman, Alice Violet (1882-1935), daughter of Henry Edward Beddington, and in the same year he was sent on his first overseas assignment with the Asiatic to examine marketing strategy in India. In 1905 he returned to London and in 1906 was appointed to the boards of Shell Transport and Trading Company and the Asiatic. By this time Shell was in such a weak position that it was forced to discuss amalgamation with Royal Dutch. Waley Cohen negotiated on Shell's behalf with the three Royal Dutch directors. Under the amalgamation two new companies were established: the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company and the Baatafsche Petroleum Maatschappij. Royal Dutch owned 60 per cent of the shares and Shell Transport and Trading owned 40 per cent. The Royal Dutch directors had been so impressed by Waley Cohen that it was they and not Shell who nominated him to the Anglo-Saxon board. He also served on the Baatafsche board until he was forced to resign in 1909 owing to changes in Dutch law. 
Waley Cohen's early career proved his ability and integrity as a negotiator -- a talent which he was to put to considerable use for the rest of his career. In 1908 he began negotiations with the Egyptian government concerning exploration rights, leases for concessions, and the building of a refinery at Suez. When oil was discovered in commercial volumes there, he became a director of Anglo-Egyptian Oilfields (a Shell company). In 1910 he negotiated to purchase the Shanghai-Langkat oil company in the Far East, greatly expanding Shell's influence in that area of the world. 
Also of great benefit to his management of Shell's interests was Waley Cohen's scientific background. In dealing with oil from Borneo, for the first time in the oil industry he had petroleum subjected to scientific analysis, and discovered that what was considered an inferior product had 350 chemical compounds in a single distillate, including toluol, the essential element in TNT. The Admiralty rejected the idea of making use of this process, but a factory was consequently erected in Rotterdam. When the explosives position presented perilous shortages during the First World War, Waley Cohen organized the transport of the complete factory to the United Kingdom. Samuel had made an early attempt to persuade conservative naval experts to transfer from coal to oil. When war came Shell's management ensured that, notwithstanding damage to the company's prosperity, its great and widely distributed oil resources were at the country's disposal. Waley Cohen negotiated with the Admiralty for the chartering of Shell vessels and the supply of oil. The arrangement included a plan by Zulver, Shell's marine superintendent, to carry oil in the double bottoms of vessels. Waley Cohen was also appointed petroleum adviser to the army council; he went to the USA in 1917 to talk to the government and Standard Oil and made numerous journeys to France to examine petroleum supplies. He was appointed KBE in 1920, in recognition of his work during the war. 
In 1924 it was decided that Waley Cohen should visit Shell's marketing organizations around the world, taking in the Middle East, the Far East, and the USA. He concluded that the company's greatest strength was its staff, most of whom he had originally selected to work for Shell. Throughout recruitment, he had interviewed graduate scientists, for whom he saw a great need in the developing oil industry. Many came to Shell through the Cambridge University appointments board, with which Waley Cohen had been involved since 1910. In 1928 he retired from day-to-day management at Shell, but not before realizing his ambition to open a Shell research laboratory, at Emeryville in California, and thus provide for proper scientific research in the oil industry. 
In 1928 Waley Cohen purchased the Exmoor estate of Honeymead, and seemed to be moving towards semi-retirement. However in 1929 he accepted the chairmanship of African and Eastern, an independent concern operating in west Africa with heavy losses. The rival Niger Company, bought by Lord Leverhulme in 1920 and reorganized by D'Arcy Cooper, was also operating at a huge loss. Waley Cohen worked for amalgamation from the first, and the United Africa Company was formed in 1929. In the event, he failed to achieve the success which he had attained in the oil world, and he resigned in 1931. 
Voluntary and charitable activities played a major role in Waley Cohen's life. He was the acknowledged head of Anglo-Jewry and played a leading role in the affairs of the Jewish community in Britain. For nearly forty years he was the chief figure of the United Synagogue and died in office as its president. He helped to found the Council for Christians and Jews, and played a prominent part in its activities. Opposed to Zionism, he nevertheless helped to create the Palestine Corporation (which contributed greatly to the establishment of the state of Israel). Waley Cohen continued to support the educational institutions which he had attended, and he was involved in the Sir William Ramsay centenary appeal at University College, London. 
Of great stature and strong features, Waley Cohen was a formidable person. He and his wife had two sons and one daughter, but their marriage ended tragically when his wife died as a result of a motor accident in Palestine in 1935, in which Waley Cohen himself was seriously injured. Their elder son, Bernard Waley-Cohen, followed the tradition of social service and at an early age became lord mayor of London. Sir Robert Waley Cohen died of heart disease at his London home, Southampton Lodge, Fitzroy Park, on 27 November 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 32482


Coillard, Francois (1834-1904), missionary in Africa, was born at Asnieres-les-Bourges, Cher, France, on 17 July 1834, the youngest of the seven children of Francois Coillard (died 1836), at one time a prosperous yeoman, who also had a considerable dowry from his wife, Madeleine, 'nee' Dautry (died 1875); both parents were of Huguenot descent. He was baptized in the temple at Asnieres on 5 October 1834. Two years later his mother was left a widow, and nearly destitute. 
Coillard worked briefly as a chateau gardener before enrolling in the protestant school at Asnieres at the age of fifteen and later attending Strasbourg University. Inspired by revivalist preaching he offered himself in 1854 to the Societe des Missions Evangeliques de Paris and became one of the first students at the recently opened Maison des Missions in Paris. After training under the veteran southern African missionary Eugene Casalis, he was ordained at the Oratoire in Paris in 1857 and assigned to the independent kingdom of Lesotho (Basutoland), where the society had been established since 1833. Coillard reached Cape Town on 6 November 1857 on the eve of a war between the kingdom and the Orange Free State which left the French stations in ruins. After the war he was assigned the task of opening a new station at Leribe in territory governed by the king's son, Malapo. From the time of his arrival on 12 February 1859 Coillard struggled fruitlessly to reclaim the chief for the Christian religion he had abandoned as a boy. The task was not made any easier by Coillard's intolerant attitude towards deeply rooted local customs and mores. 
Coillard's activities are graphically described in his journal and in letters which he wrote in large characters to his elderly mother, until her death in 1875. In Union Church, Cape Town, on 26 February 1861, he married Christina Mackintosh, whom he had first encountered in 1858 in Paris where she worked as governess to the children of a French protestant family. Five years his senior, she was the daughter of Lachlan Mackintosh, a Scottish Baptist minister, who was a friend and colleague of James Alexander Haldane and of Robert Haldane. At the age of fourteen Christina had become an enthusiast for missions after hearing the southern African missionary Robert Moffat preach in company with a young African girl. She became her husband's co-worker and shared the hardships of his travels throughout their marriage, which was childless. 
By 1865 Basutoland was again embroiled in disputes with Boer farmers, not just in the Orange Free State, but also in Natal. In July Coillard assisted in successful negotiations between local chiefs and Natal's secretary for native affairs, Theophilus Shepstone. When invading forces from the Orange Free State forced the evacuation of the mission in April of the following year, Coillard moved to Natal, where he assisted the American missionaries by occupying one of their vacant stations until the proclamation of the British protectorate over Basutoland in 1868 permitted his return to Leribe. In the same year he was commissioned to assess prospects for reoccupying a station near the headwaters of the Marico River which the French had abandoned twenty years before. He was warmly welcomed by Robert Moffat at Kuruman, who strongly encouraged a move to the north. An impulse in the same direction came from the Basutoland churches: by the mid-1870s they proposed to support a mission by their own evangelists to peoples across the Limpopo River who spoke closely related languages. After two of their expeditions were turned back by the government of the Transvaal Republic, Coillard was chosen to lead the third attempt. 
The new party, which included Christina Coillard, four Sotho evangelists, and a niece, Elise Coillard, arrived in Pretoria in May 1877 to find the Transvaal annexed to the British crown under the governorship of Coillard's old acquaintance Theophilus Shepstone. After a hostile reception by the Shona chiefs in the south central region the party was forcibly conducted to Bulawayo, headquarters of Lobengula, king of the Ndebele (Matabele), who claimed suzerainty over the entire region. Prohibited absolutely from preaching in his domains, Coillard turned south-west to the territory of the Christian Tswana ruler, Khama, who suggested they might try their luck across the Zambezi with the Lozi kingdom, where the seSotho language of Basutoland was understood and spoken. Although they failed in their attempts to arrange a meeting with the recently elected Lozi king, prospects were encouraging enough for Coillard to convince the Paris Missionary Society to support him in an attempt to plant stations in that country. 
Delayed by a trip to Europe (1880-82) and complications in Basutoland, Coillard finally mounted his pioneering expedition to the Lozi kingdom (Barotseland) in 1884. He found the country in turmoil, the former king exiled, and a usurper on the throne. No sooner had he established friendly relations with the ruling party than another revolution brought the former king, Lewanika, back to power. Compromised by his initial diplomacy, it was not until March 1886 that Coillard was received by Lewanika at Lealui; from that time until 1891 he was engaged in establishing strong mission stations at Sesheke, Lealui, and Sefula. Lewanika enlisted the missionary's reluctant assistance in a plan to strengthen his shaky hold on the kingship by negotiating a British protectorate similar to the one which had recently been extended over neighbouring Bechuanaland. Misunderstanding the connections between the British crown and Cecil Rhodes's British South Africa Company, the king and Coillard were gradually entangled in a web of intrigue which resulted in assignment of all the Lozi kingdom to the company's domains on 27 June 1890. For a man of Coillard's limited political abilities the burden of serving as a diplomatic intermediary was severely trying, especially during the first seven years, during which the company failed to make any of its promised annual payments of $2000 or to provide any of the educational assistance which it had pledged to Lewanika. Added to these worries were Christina Coillard's death on 28 October 1891, and a persistent high mortality rate among his staff, due primarily to tropical fevers. However, the lively and moving letters he directed to his society's offices in Paris made him a heroic figure to mission supporters in many countries. A great many of these were published in 1889 as 'Sur le Haut-Zambeze: voyages et travaux de mission'. Updated to 1895 in a second edition of 1898, his letters also appeared in an English translation by his niece, Catherine Winkworth Mackintosh ('On the Threshold of Central Africa', 1897). 
After a serious illness in 1895, Coillard spent 1896-8 in Europe; but by 21 February 1899 he was again at Leribe on his way back to the Zambezi. However, a large number of fatalities ensued among the missionary recruits of 1897 and onwards, eight out of twenty-four dying and eleven returning home. Coillard was further shaken in 1903 by a breakaway movement of his converts, led by Willie Mokalapa. Coillard was still preaching at the upper Zambezi stations when he suffered a fatal attack of haematuric fever, at Lealui, in Rhodesia, on 27 May 1904; he was buried near his wife under 'the great tree' at Sefula. 
Coillard's right to recognition rests not so much on the number of his converts as on his pioneering work and diplomatic activity at crucial junctures in the history of Basutoland and modern Zambia. A short, keen-eyed, white-bearded man, his religious position was not strongly denominational. He acknowledged affinities with many strands of British evangelical nonconformity. As a result he found firm friends among the Congregational, Baptist, Calvinistic, and Methodist missionaries of southern Africa. He attempted in his own work to promote the aims enunciated by his idol, David Livingstone, as 'commerce and civilization'. He pinned his hopes for the future on economic development and education, which he believed would provide the most secure foundation for African Christianity. 


@@@@@


doc= 32483


Cokayne, George Edward (1825-1911), genealogist, born at 64 Russell Square, London, on 29 April 1825, was the fourth son and youngest child (in a family of eight) of William Adams (1772-1851), LLD, of Thorpe, Surrey, advocate in Doctors' Commons, and his wife, the Hon. Mary Anne (died 1873), daughter of William Cockayne and niece and coheir of Borlase Cockayne, sixth and last Viscount Cullen. His mother belonged to the well-known family of Cokayne -- the name was variously spelt Cockayne and Cokayne -- of Rushton Hall, Northamptonshire. On 15 August 1873 Adams assumed the name and arms of Cokayne by royal warrant in accordance with his mother's testamentary directions. After private education owing to delicate health, he went to Oxford, matriculating from Exeter College on 6 June 1844. He graduated BA in 1848 and proceeded MA in 1852. He was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 16 January 1850, and was called to the bar on 30 April 1853. On 2 December 1856 he married Mary Dorothea, third and youngest daughter of George Henry Gibbs of Aldenham Park, Hertfordshire, and sister of Henry Hucks Gibbs (afterwards Lord Aldenham). She predeceased him on 11 March 1906. They had eight children, of whom two sons and two daughters survived them. Entering the College of Arms in 1859, he held successively the offices of Rouge Dragon pursuivant-of-arms (1859-70) and Lancaster herald (1870-82). In his heraldic capacity Cokayne was attached to the Garter missions to Portugal (1865), Russia (1867), Italy (1868), Spain (1881), and Saxony (1882). Appointed Norroy king of arms in 1882, he succeeded to the post of Clarenceux king of arms in 1894. He was an active member of the Society of Antiquaries, being elected fellow on 22 February 1866. He died of a heart attack at his residence, Exeter House, Roehampton, on 6 August 1911, and was buried at Putney Vale. 
Cokayne was modest, industrious, and scholarly, with a great kindness and courtesy of manner. He published much on genealogy and the last part of his life was devoted to his major works, 'The Complete Peerage' (8 vols., 1887-98; 2nd edn, rev. and enlarged by V. Gibbs and others, 13 vols., 1910-59), and 'The Complete Baronetage' (5 vols., 1900-06; index vol., 1909). 'The Complete Peerage' was (and is) unique in that it gave a full historical and genealogical account of all peerages created in the whole of the British Isles (including Ireland) from the conquest to the date of publication. This was unlike earlier peerages, which covered only those titles extant or extinct at the time of writing or dealt only with one country -- England or Ireland, for example -- or both. And whereas earlier works usually gave full (and often inaccurate) accounts of the whole family, 'G.E.C.' described the public life of the holders of the title and their direct heirs only, and, so far as he could, used original sources for his information. 'The Complete Peerage' therefore quickly won the author general recognition as a genealogist of the first authority, and both it and the 'Baronetage' (written on similar principles) have taken their place as primary authorities on their subjects. 


@@@@@


doc= 32484


Coke, Thomas William, second earl of Leicester of Holkham (1822-1909), agriculturist and landowner, was born at Holkham Hall, the family seat in Norfolk, on 26 December 1822, the eldest son of Thomas William Coke, 'Coke of Norfolk', afterwards first earl of Leicester (1754-1842), and his second wife, Lady Anne Amelia (1803-1844), third daughter of William Charles Keppel, fourth earl of Albemarle, whom he married when sixty-eight years old. Educated at Eton College and Winchester College, Coke received the courtesy title of Viscount Coke when his father became earl of Leicester at the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837. He was a minor when his father died on 30 June 1842, when he succeeded to the earldom. 
Leicester did not take a prominent part in politics or public affairs, but followed in his father's footsteps in his interest in agriculture and forestry. He devoted himself to the management and improvement of his vast estate. He continued to improve farm buildings and he rebuilt the estate workshops at Longlands. Model Farm was built to house his prize herd of Devon cattle. Between 1857 and 1859 the sea bank at Wells was constructed, completing the reclamation of the marshes between Wells and Holkham. Leicester was also a major investor in the Wells and Fakenham Railway between 1853 and 1857. A table appended to R. H. Rew's report on the agriculture of Norfolk, made to the second royal commission on agriculture of 1893, gave some instructive details as to the expenditure of money by the earl and his father in keeping up and improving the Holkham agricultural estate of 39,612 acres. The first earl spent in buildings and repairs $536,992, and the second earl spent $575,048 up to 1894 -- in buildings, drainage, and cottages, $377,771, and in the purchase of land for the improvement of the estate, $197,277 -- giving a total by both owners of $1,112,040. The gross rents of the farms, which in 1878 were $52,682, were only $28,701 in 1894: a shrinkage of $23,981 (45.5 per cent). In the year ending Michaelmas 1894 the disbursements on the estate were $12,311, despite the earl's personal supervision over all the details. 
Leicester married twice. First, on 20 April 1843, before he was of age, at Cardington, Bedfordshire, he married Juliana (1825-1870), eldest daughter of Samuel Charles Whitbread (1796-1879), brewer and astronomer, of Southill, Bedfordshire. They had four sons and seven daughters. Then on 26 August 1875, at Latimer, Buckinghamshire, he married Georgiana Caroline (1852-1937), eldest daughter of William George Cavendish, second Baron Chesham, with whom he had six sons and one daughter. In his later years Leicester was thought of as a rather reserved, distant person of simple tastes, living quietly at Holkham. He must have been a striking figure with his flowing beard and wearing a wide-brimmed hat. 
Leicester was a patron of agricultural causes and a member of the Royal Agricultural Society of England. He was responsible for building more than 200 new cottages on the estate from the 1860s onwards, and he was not prepared to join with other landowners against trade unions. Although many were singled out for abuse from union platforms, Lord Leicester escaped. 
In his younger days, Leicester made Holkham a social centre, hosting huge shooting parties at which the prince of Wales was a regular guest after 1865. He was responsible for rebuilding the coach house and stables and for laying out elaborate parterres and terraces around the hall. 
Following a national trend, Leicester was one of a number of great agricultural landowners who began diversifying their assets. Beginning with local investments in the 1850s, by the 1870s he held shares in railways in Britain, Canada, Australia, and Argentina, and also in British companies producing agricultural products such as manure and farm implements. He also invested in companies using the products of British agriculture, such as those involved in brewing (Wade Martins, 62-3). He took little interest in politics, which he left to his younger brother, Edward, who was MP for West Norfolk from 1847 until 1852. At a public meeting in Norwich in 1886, he said, 'I have never been in the habit of taking part in political matters of an entirely party description' ('Norfolk Chronicle', 30 Jan 1909). 
The earl was nevertheless appointed on 1 August 1846 lord lieutenant of the county of Norfolk, and he held this appointment for sixty years, retiring in 1906, when he was succeeded by his eldest son. In 1866 he was made a member of the council of the prince of Wales, and in 1870 he became keeper of the privy seal of the duchy of Cornwall; he retired in 1901 on the accession of King Edward VII. On 30 June 1873 he was made KG on the recommendation of Gladstone. He was in politics a whig of the old school, but rarely attended the House of Lords. 
Leicester maintained his health until 1905. He died at Holkham of heart failure on 24 January 1909, and was buried there on 28 January. His second wife survived him, dying in 1937. The earl was represented as a young man on one of the bas-reliefs ('Granting a lease') of the monument erected in the park by public subscription in 1845-50 as a memorial to his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 32485


Coker, Ernest George (1869-1946), civil and mechanical engineer, was born at Wolverton, Buckinghamshire, on 26 April 1869, the son of George Coker, an engine fitter, and his wife, Sarah Tompkins. Educated at a private school from 1883 until 1887, he was an apprentice and then draughtsman in the London and North Western Railway carriage works at Wolverton. Evening study enabled him to enter the Normal School of Science, London, where he gained a first-class associateship in mechanics. A Whitworth scholarship in 1890 took him to Edinburgh University where he graduated BSc in engineering in 1892. The following year he entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1896 with a first class in part one of the mechanical sciences tripos. In 1897 he took part two with a double distinction in the first class. 
During college vacations Coker spent periods in the railway works at Wolverton and at Crewe where, in the testing house, he carried out experiments which probably aroused his interest in the stress and strain in materials in which he was later to specialize. In 1892 he became an assistant examiner in the Patent Office and retained this post while he was at Cambridge, but in 1898 he resigned to enter upon his career as an engineering educationist. He married in 1899 Alice Mary (died 1941), daughter of Robert King, an engineer, of Wolverton. They then moved to Canada where Coker became assistant professor in civil engineering at McGill University, Montreal. Later he became an associate professor, and during the whole of the period worked as principal assistant to Henry Taylor Bovey, both at the university and in his private practice, testing materials of various kinds and doing experimental work on Canadian water power schemes. 
In 1905 Coker returned to England to become professor of mechanical engineering and head of the department of civil engineering at Finsbury Technical College, London, where he built a new engineering laboratory described in his paper before the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1907. Here he began the experiments for which his name became known on the use of photo-elastic methods for the determination of stress distribution in metals, machines, and structures, devising apparatus and models for this work, publishing in the technical literature, and, from 1910, giving public demonstrations. All this work continued, including consulting engineering, when in 1914 he became professor of civil and mechanical engineering at University College, London. He later became dean of the faculty of engineering and director of the engineering laboratories; he retired in 1934 as professor emeritus. 
Coker's chief work, 'A Treatise on Photo-Elasticity' (1931), was written jointly with L. N. G. Filon. He delivered the thirteenth Thomas Hawksley lecture to the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1926 ('Elasticity and plasticity'), and a lecture given to the Junior Institution of Engineers in 1935, 'The design and equipment of photo-elastic laboratories', summed up much of his life's work, which had an international reputation in its rather limited field. He was elected FRS in 1915, was also FRSE, and a member of the leading engineering societies, from which he received many medals, including the Thomas Hawksley medal (1922) from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, the Telford medal (1921) from the Institution of Civil Engineers, and the gold medal of the Institution of Naval Architects (1911). The Royal Society awarded him the Rumford medal in 1936, and from the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, he received the Howard N. Potts (1922) and Louis E. Levy (1926) medals. He was also an honorary DSc of the universities of Sydney and Louvain. 
In person Coker was rather modest and retiring, and he was happiest when in his laboratory. Coker was living at 3 Farnley Road, Chingford, Essex, at the time of his death, which took place at 13 Miller Road, Ayr, on 9 April 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 32486


Cole, George Douglas Howard (1889-1959), university teacher and political theorist, was born in Cambridge on 25 September 1889, the son of George Cole, a jeweller who later moved to Ealing in west London and became a surveyor, and his wife, Jessie Knowles. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, and Balliol College, Oxford (1908-12), where he studied classical history and philosophy. As a student Cole became heavily involved in political and literary activities, joining both the Fabian Society and the Independent Labour Party, contributing to the Oxford 'Blue Book', agitating for the Workers' Educational Association, and editing the 'Oxford Reformer'. Despite his tutors' concern, his education was unaffected by the extent of this political engagement. He completed his degree with firsts in both classical moderations (1910) and the final honour school of 'literae humaniores' (1912) and was elected to a prize fellowship at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1912. 
On arriving at Magdalen, Cole abandoned the classics and began formally to study economics and political thought. In his initial research he endeavoured to construct a comparative account of the development of trade unionism across the western world. The result, 'The World of Labour' (1913), published when he was still only twenty-four, received astonishing critical acclaim. Although a survey of existing trade unionism, 'The World of Labour' also contained an uncompromising prescriptive message. He insisted that the tendency of the British left to expect that central governmental agencies would play the leading role in constructing a socialist future was essentially misplaced, in terms both of strategy and of principle. British socialists, Cole insisted, should abandon their obsession with parliamentary elections and look instead to the direct action of trade unions. Social, economic, and political improvement could realistically be attained only by a policy of 'encroaching control', whereby trade unions would use strike action to gain an increasing amount of direct responsibility for the conduct of industry. Similarly, he contended, British socialists should strive to create an ideal society that would not require an overbearing state but which would rather ensure that power was radically decentralized and invested in a series of loosely federated industrial and social groups to be known as guilds. 
The decentralizing element of Cole's agenda was widely popular in the first fifteen years of the twentieth century and Cole was one of an exceptionally broad alliance of thinkers advancing it. The argument was particularly closely associated with the London-based weekly newspaper the 'New Age', which drew on the work of a series of iconoclastic literary, cultural, and political figures, including Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton, consistently to outperform and outsell its more renowned counterparts. On publication of 'The World of Labour' Cole rapidly became one of the most prominent figures of the 'New Age' set, publishing an extensive article almost every week and frequently setting the paper's political agenda. Despite the prestige the paper allowed him, however, he was never entirely satisfied with a publication that presented attacks on the state from anarchists, 'laissez-faire' liberals, disgruntled churchmen, medieval revivalists, and arch-conservatives. Such breadth had its limitations even for someone ideologically committed to diversity. Cole thus quickly developed a longing for an organization within which to develop and propagate his own unique message. 
For a period during 1913-14, when he was living in Newcastle upon Tyne, Cole worked closely with the Social Democratic Federation, but the Fabian Society soon became the main focus of his efforts. Elected to the Fabian Society's executive committee in April 1914, he made an audacious attempt to take control of the society. Although he found a number of supporters among the younger members of the Fabian research department, his efforts to persuade the society at large to abandon their founding commitments and accept the guild ideal failed to attract widespread support. On learning of his defeat at the annual Fabian summer school at Keswick in June 1914, he heckled the speakers, organized a walkout, and then led a protest in the village square. His unruly behaviour was widely condemned, and few Fabians mourned his resignation from the society a year later. 
Immediately after the failure of the Fabian take-over, Cole led a breakaway from the society, although he remained a member of the Fabian research department, and became its honorary secretary in 1916. Together with his fellow 'New Age' contributors Ivor Brown, S. G. Hobson, William Mellor, and Maurice Reckitt, Cole formed an alternative political grouping, the National Guilds League (NGL). The NGL adopted its own constitution for the ideal society, known as the 'Storrington Document' after the Sussex village in which it was written, and began to produce a series of journals, all of which were dedicated to shaping and propagating the anti-statist philosophy increasingly known as 'guild socialism'. The NGL also worked tirelessly to forge connections between leading guild socialist intellectuals and the larger trade union movement, managing as it did so to secure Cole appointment in 1915 as an unpaid research officer at the Amalgamated Society of Engineers. Cole advised the union on how to respond to wartime legislation including the 'Munitions Act'. Although the job was relatively undemanding, it none the less enabled him to escape conscription on the grounds that he was conducting work of 'national importance'. 
With exemption from military service secured, Cole spent the war years developing a fully fledged political theory of guild socialism. His work was shaped by a number of influences, including such ever-present socialist founding fathers as Robert Owen, William Morris, Jean-Jacques Rousseau (whose 'Contrat Social' he translated in 1913), and John Ruskin. The most notable and unlikely source of inspiration, however, was the Anglican clergyman John Neville Figgis, the leading light in the English pluralist movement. Figgis had adopted the nineteenth-century idealist philosophy of Thomas Hill Green and transformed it into a plea for extensive decentralization of political, social, and economic power and especially for the effective independence of the church from governmental oversight. Figgis argued that the forms of communal attachment desired by Green could be developed only within small, localized units, and that the late nineteenth-century trend towards increasing the powers of the nation state ran counter to such requirements. In the early war years Cole used Figgis's arguments to attack the statist theories of the Fabian Society and other socialist groups, suggesting that a political system which guaranteed independence to trade unions and other voluntary organizations would realize a socialistic ideal of communal harmony more effectively than any efforts to impose communal attachments from above. 
As the war progressed, however, Cole began to abandon this position and to replace it with a much more individualistic philosophy. By 1917 he had firmly rejected the communitarian assumptions which had underpinned Figgis's arguments. Instead he began to insist that socialists, English pluralists, and other reformers had failed to give enough emphasis to the uniqueness of each and every individual. It was 'of the essence' of each human being, Cole argued, 'that he is individual and cannot be absorbed into anything else'. The result was a political theory which emphasized the priority of individual liberty over all other commitments and which suggested that the only legitimate social, political, and economic obligations were those that the individual chose himself. Despite the far-reaching philosophical transformation, though, the political recommendations which this new theory generated remained very similar to his earlier ideas. The power of the state would have to be limited, if not abolished altogether, and a wide series of guilds should be established to govern each area of life independently. Cole also insisted that such associations should all be radically democratized to ensure that the rules which governed people's lives were subject to the influence of the people themselves. These views were expounded throughout Cole's most accomplished theoretical works, including 'Chaos and Order in Industry', 'Guild Socialism Restated', and 'Social Theory', all of which were published in 1920. 
The zeal and skill with which Cole presented these arguments made him a popular figure on the left. The libertarian underpinnings of his guild socialist message also seemed particularly attractive to reformers still reeling from the authoritarianism of wartime government. Thus in the immediate post-war world even old Fabian adversaries began to respond to his demands. Sidney and Beatrice Webb incorporated a number of guild socialist ideas into their post-war masterpiece 'A Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain', and even nominated Cole, although unsuccessfully, for membership of Lloyd George's royal commission on the coal industry in 1919. Cole's work also found a considerable following overseas. In the United States many progressive and socialist reformers believed that the guild message was the perfect riposte to the centralizing powers adopted by Woodrow Wilson's wartime administration, and a few enthusiasts even opened a bookshop in New York's Greenwich Village dedicated to the guild socialist project. 
Beyond the esteem of intellectuals, there was also a brief moment soon after the war when Cole had reason to believe that concrete political success was beckoning. Many British trade unionists, including Robert Smillie and Frank Hodges of the Miners' Federation, and some leading political figures, including Arthur Henderson, lent the guild socialist movement their explicit support. Cole, who had become the first honorary secretary for research in the Labour Research Department (successor to the Fabian research department), was appointed to represent the Labour interest alongside Henderson at the National Industrial Conference in 1919. The NGL even supported efforts to form guilds for piano workers and clerical officers, and to many people's surprise a short-lived guild was actually established in the building industry. Respected political and economic commentators, from both Britain and abroad, such as the 'New Republic''s Arthur Gleason urged 'industrial leaders' to 'study guild socialism' for 'soon they will be forced to accept it' ('The Survey', 19 May 1917, 159). 
Despite the excitement, however, efforts to build a long-lasting political movement failed. As the parliamentary prospects of the British Labour Party rapidly improved after the adoption of a new party constitution in 1918, the newly elected Labour elite became unwilling to risk the public suspicion that many feared would accompany association with radical movements such as the guild socialists. Nor did many trade unionists remain committed beyond the early 1920s. The sharp rise in unemployment in 1921 combined with the failure of many trade union activities leading to the collapse of the general strike in 1926 rendered most unions either too weak or too preoccupied to direct their energies in the direction of 'encroaching control'. As the guild socialists' political strategy faltered, so too did the apparatus of intellectual support. Although the quality of much of the argument and analysis in the journals Cole edited was high, incorporating contributions from the likes of Bertrand Russell and R. H. Tawney, most of the long list of guild periodicals, including the NGL's 'The Guildsman' and 'Guild Socialist', had collapsed by 1922. All efforts at resurrecting them failed. The last guild journal, 'New Standards', ceased publication in 1924. 
Dismayed by the failure of the guild socialist movement, Cole began in 1924 to reassess both his career and his fundamental theoretical and political commitments. After much deliberation he applied for the newly established position of reader in economics at the University of Oxford, and was appointed in 1925, resigning his position at the Labour Research Department. He also took up a teaching fellowship in University College, Oxford, to supplement his university lecturing duties. He initially found the intensive Oxford tutorial system exceptionally onerous and, although he completed a biography of Robert Owen in 1925, he produced no major theoretical or political works during his first three years as reader. 
Early in 1929, however, Cole finally published a new substantial monograph, 'The Next Ten Years in British Social and Economic Policy', which was intended to produce both ideological principles and concrete guidelines for an incoming Labour government. Cole used this opportunity formally to retract many of his guild socialist commitments, including his dedication to the democratization of industrial associations, which had been at the heart of his earlier political vision. Such ideas, Cole now announced, were the result not of serious research into the demands and requirements of the working population but rather the naive products of a 'politically minded person's utopia'. In their place, he outlined plans which bore more than a passing resemblance to the authoritarian, bureaucratic socialism against which he had previously railed, including an acceptance of planning and of nationalization. He even called for a national labour corps to offer unemployed workmen a place in a 'disciplined force' which would be directed by appointed government officials who would have 'the full power, subject to reasonable provision of appeal, of dismissing any member of it who fails to do satisfactory work' ('The Next Ten Years', 52). It was a far cry from the individualistic, worker-centred programme of the guild age. Although the book was not a great success, Cole was welcomed back into the Fabian Society in 1929, and was rewarded a year later with a place alongside John Maynard Keynes in Ramsay MacDonald's Economic Advisory Council, established at the beginning of the second Labour government. 
The reconciliation did not survive the collapse of MacDonald's government in 1931, after deep splits in the parliamentary Labour Party over the unemployment crisis, and Cole drifted back to the left of the party. In the next ten years he worked hard once again to produce a radically socialist alternative to mainstream labourism. He was convinced that the government's lack of clear principle had been the fundamental cause of its failure. Cole thus became a leading light in a variety of organizations designed to prompt a radical renewal in Labour thinking, including the Society for Socialist Inquiry and Propaganda (SSIP), founded in 1930, the New Fabian Research Bureau (1931), and the Socialist League (1932). As tensions in Europe increased, Cole also made sustained efforts to construct a British popular front against fascism, identifying the nature of the military threat long before many of his colleagues had abandoned their pacifism, and lending strong support to the republican cause in Spain. 
Despite these radicalizing ambitions, though, Cole did not lose touch with more moderate influences in the labour movement; indeed in these years he developed a reputation for tolerance of the diverse forces operating in British left-wing politics. On accepting his readership in Oxford in 1925, he had formed an informal discussion circle known as the 'Cole group', which flourished throughout the 1930s and acted paradoxically as a seedbed for a more revisionist agenda for the party. In addition, he also concentrated throughout the 1930s on writing books about themes of general interest which he hoped would reach a broader audience than either academic texts or socialist polemics. His huge 'History of Socialist Thought' was predated by 'The Intelligent Man's Review of Europe Today' (1933), 'The Condition of Britain' (1937) written with his wife, Margaret Cole, and, most notably of all, 'The Common People' (1938), written with his brother-in-law Raymond William Postgate. All were outstanding successes. For several decades they remained classics in the emerging discipline of labour history, a field of study whose post-war prominence in British universities owed much to his inter-war endeavours. 
In 1940 Cole returned to a position of political prominence when he was asked to assist Sir William Beveridge at the Ministry of Labour in drawing up a plan for the effective use of manpower during war. Early in 1941 he was appointed sub-warden of the newly founded Nuffield College, Oxford, and he combined these two roles in creating the Nuffield College Social Reconstruction Survey, which collated an enormous range of demographic, economic, and social data and employed it, much to government disapproval, to argue for an extensive programme of social reform. Cole's time at Nuffield was, though, cut short both by illness and by the government's withdrawal of funds for the survey. He resigned as sub-warden in September 1943, as director of the survey in January 1944, and as fellow in March. A few months later, however, he was appointed Chichele professor of social and political theory, and took up a fellowship at All Souls College. Claiming to be the only leading academic expert in all three branches of Oxford's final honour school of philosophy, politics, and economics, he continually encouraged the new college's fellowship to broaden their interests and maintain an interdisciplinary approach to a subject matter increasingly prone to narrow academic specialization. He also returned to discuss some of the central philosophical themes that he had touched upon in his youth, including the legitimacy of state power and the place of democratic mechanisms in modern industry. 
During his years at All Souls, and in common with others of his generation, Cole actively returned also to the commitments of earlier days, developing a renewed scepticism of state authority. He accepted the need for economic planning and some form of central control but insisted once again that it 'must be based on a recognition of diversity'. In trying to forward these ideas he stood unsuccessfully for one of the university's two parliamentary seats at the general election of 1945, his candidacy being endorsed by the university constituency Labour Party but not by the national party. He also refused to welcome the social policy reforms of the Attlee administration as warmly as might have been expected, demanding instead that the government take more seriously the need to involve welfare recipients, workers, and consumers directly in decision making at a local level. 
Such continual changes of direction have led some critics to reject Cole as a permanent oppositionist, never able to settle on a conviction for more than a few years, especially if it was to become popular. Such a charge, however, overlooks both the merits of Cole's essential open-mindedness and the many aspects of his professional career which remained constant throughout his life. From his undergraduate days until his death Cole worked for the Workers' Educational Association and was celebrated widely as one of the association's finest tutors and administrators. Although not all the association's students appreciated his lecturing style -- one reported that Cole would uncontrollably stroll up and down the raised dais as he spoke, often appearing as if he was going to fall off the other side -- most praised his energy and his intellectual acumen, and many became active disciples. The association's administration certainly appreciated the continual efforts which he invested in the organization, stretching from his directorship of the association's early classes in London to long-term membership of its general purposes committee. Throughout the turmoil of the inter-war years Cole remained unstintingly committed to offering a broad-based, non-vocational, liberal education to those who had missed out on formal educational opportunities. 
Cole also contributed to an enormous number of learned and popular periodicals throughout his long career, even at times of illness and personal distress. He found writing easy, was confident in his abilities, and rarely, if ever, agreed to alter his text on the basis of editorial advice or peer review. In choosing where to place his work, however, he displayed little intellectual arrogance, believing that he had a duty to promote socialist ideas as broadly as possible. He was thus always willing to write for an exceptionally wide range of audiences. The major outlet for most of his career was the 'New Statesman', for which he often acted as industrial correspondent, and he was considered for the editorship in 1930, but he also contributed regularly to minor professional journals, including the 'Library Assistant', and even to eccentric publications such as the 'Aryan Path', a theosophical journal dedicated to the promotion of Eastern spirituality, a project for which Cole had little but disdain. His articles were almost always lucid, accessible, and engaging, and exhibited neither the self-conscious intellectual complexity that dogged the contributions of many of his colleagues on the left nor the obsession with scientific method and quantification that increasingly characterized the work of his academic colleagues. Cole preserved his articles and pamphlets throughout his life, and they are now in Nuffield College library, Oxford, stretching over eight large volumes, a testament both to his productivity and to his breadth of interest. 
Cole's private life was less fulfilling than his public endeavours. In August 1918 Cole married Margaret Isabel Postgate (1893-1980) ['see 'Cole, Dame Margaret Isabel], daughter of the classical scholar John Percival Postgate and an active volunteer in socialist circles. The couple had one son and two daughters in a marriage that lasted forty-one years. They also jointly wrote a number of books and articles, including twenty-nine detective novels, which although not successful at the time have since become collectors' items. The marriage does not seem, however, to have been particularly happy. Despite his tendency to project a romantic, even sentimental, image in much of his writing, Cole had little interest in actual romantic attachment and even less in sexual relations, admitting openly to a lack of interest in 'passions of the flesh'. Friends also recalled that his emotional attachments, such as they were, tended to be with men rather than women. He was openly fond of some of his male students, including the future leader of the Labour Party Hugh Gaitskell, although there is no evidence of any homosexual encounters either before or during his marriage. After her husband's death Margaret Cole commented on his sexual proclivities and inadequacies, both unkindly and comprehensively, in her popular biography 'The Life of G. D. H. Cole'. 
Marital difficulties were not the only example of Cole's strained personal interactions. Margaret Cole described him as a most 'Unsocial Socialist' who got 'very little out of personal association with outside people except definite pieces of information', while others also dismissed his 'aloof' and 'aristocratic' manner (Cole, 'Growing up into Revolution', 78-9). He was widely accused of holding conservative views on issues stretching from cinemas and the wireless to women's clothes and American phrases, and later in the twentieth century some on the left even dismissed him as more of an old-fashioned tory radical than a real libertarian socialist. At least partly as a result, he appears to have been actively disliked by many of his most natural intellectual allies. Harold J. Laski, who shared many ideas with Cole in his guild socialist years, found him insufferable and rarely associated personally with him. Nor did Cole mellow with years. Indeed, blighted continually with ill health -- diabetes was diagnosed in 1931 -- he exhibited an increasing degree of eccentricity. When he was elected to a research fellowship at Nuffield College after his retirement in 1957, many colleagues found him already surprisingly disconnected from everyday academic life; he reportedly told one research student that he believed he was already dead. 
Despite the lack of close friendships and attachments, Cole was widely celebrated in left-wing intellectual circles throughout his life, and a collection of essays was prepared in his honour, some of which contained warm personal reminiscences, to be presented to him on his seventieth birthday. His death, in the North Western Hospital, Hampstead, London, on 14 January 1959, occurred before either the anniversary or the appearance of the book. At the time he was remembered most frequently for his major contribution to university teaching, to labour history, and to economic research. In subsequent years, however, labour history has declined as a subject of academic enquiry and Cole's own reputation as an economist has seriously diminished. Few, if any, scholars active in the late twentieth century believed that Cole fully understood either socialist economics or the importance of the Keynesian revolution. At the same time, on the other hand, his contributions to political theory increasingly attracted praise and attention. By the mid-1990s a number of political theorists had returned to 'Social Theory' and 'Guild Socialism Restated' to examine Cole's libertarian ideals and democratizing agenda in search of a pluralistic philosophy with which to replace an increasingly discredited statist socialism and social democracy. In this respect Cole's own judgement appears to have been sound, for he often suggested that of all his work it would be his contribution to guild socialism that posterity would treat most favourably. 


@@@@@


doc= 32487


Colebrook, Leonard (1883-1967), bacteriologist, was born in Guildford, Surrey, on 2 March 1883, the fifth child and third son of six children born to May Colebrook, a prosperous farmer and nonconformist preacher, and his second wife, Mary Gower. He was educated from 1891 to 1896 at Guildford grammar school, from 1896 to 1899 at Westbourne high school, Bournemouth, and from then for one year at Christ's College, Blackheath, London. In 1900 he began premedical studies at the London Hospital medical college, from which he won an entrance scholarship at St Mary's Hospital, London, where he graduated MB, BS in 1906. 
Colebrook's decision to go into medicine was apparently prompted by the nonconformist social conscience of the Colebrook family. Indeed, he first intended to become a medical missionary. But he was much impressed by the lectures in pathology and bacteriology of Sir Almroth E. Wright, and one year after graduation he accepted an appointment as assistant in the inoculation department of St Mary's Hospital medical school. There he worked partly on the vaccine therapy pursued by Wright; however, his second publication, in 1911, with Alexander Fleming, was on the treatment of syphilis with Paul Erlich's arsenical, salvarsan. On the outbreak of war in 1914 Colebrook became a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps and worked on wound infections, first at St Mary's Hospital and later in Almroth Wright's laboratory at no. 13 general hospital in Boulogne. 
Also in 1914 Colebrook married Dorothy Scarlett, daughter of John Scarlett Campbell, of the Indian Civil Service and judge of the high court at Lahore. She died in 1941, and in 1946 he married Vera Scovell, daughter of Thomas James Locke, a civil servant. She was a war widow working as a freelance broadcaster. There were no children of either marriage. 
In 1919 Colebrook was appointed a member of the scientific staff of the Medical Research Council and worked on dental caries, but early in 1922 he was seconded to work again with Wright at St Mary's. It was under Wright that he developed his skill as a bacteriologist. Despite the contrast in their personalities and beliefs, the two men became close friends and Colebrook's loyalty and admiration for his old teacher lasted throughout his life. He published a biography of Wright in 1954. 
In the mid 1920s Colebrook began the study of puerperal fever for which he is probably best known. Vera Colebrook has written that he was set on this course by the death of the wife of a close friend from a streptococcal infection in childbirth and by the suffering which followed. Wright's vaccine therapy was ineffective against these dangerous infections, which at that time contributed to many cases of maternal mortality, and treatment with arsenicals was of relatively little value. When, in 1930, Colebrook became honorary director of the research laboratories of Queen Charlotte's Maternity Hospital, he undertook a thorough investigation of the origins of infection in the labour wards and became a vigorous proponent of an aseptic regimen by which it might be reduced. In 1935 his attention was drawn to a German paper by Gerhard Domagk, reporting that a red dye, prontosil, could cure infection with virulent haemolytic streptococci. By the following year Colebrook and his colleagues had confirmed these findings and shown that the drug was effective in a number of cases of puerperal fever. With the subsequent use of sulphanilamide, the active fragment of prontosil which was produced from it 'in vivo', and then of other sulphonamides, the death rate in the isolation block of the hospital fell from 30 to 4 per cent. The life-saving power of the sulphonamides in human medicine was thus established. 
In 1939 Colebrook went to France as a colonel in the Royal Army Medical Corps and bacteriological consultant to the British expeditionary force. There he became aware of the distressing prevalence of infected burns in mechanized warfare. After his return to England in 1940 he began work on the infection and treatment of burns, and showed that infection could be controlled by sulphonamides and, in a later study, by penicillin. He renewed a much earlier interest in skin-grafting and consulted Peter Medawar in Oxford, to whom he introduced the problems of tissue rejection. From 1942 to 1948 he was director of the Burns Investigation Unit of the Medical Research Council, and was first based at Glasgow Royal Infirmary, and then at the Birmingham Accident Hospital. He developed ideas on the airborne transfer of infection and on procedures for asepsis during dressing, and from the start fought doggedly for changes in handling the problems of sepsis and for other causes in which he believed. Many of his patients with burns were young children. For more than ten years after 1946, with the support of his wife Vera, he was a persistent propagandist of measures to prevent burns to both children and old people in the home. His unit had acquired an outstanding reputation when he retired in 1948. 
Colebrook was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 1944 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1945. He received an honorary degree of DSc from the University of Birmingham in 1950 and became an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in the same year. A variety of other honours came to him, including the Blair Bell medal of the Royal Society of Medicine (1954) and the Jenner medal (1962). Nevertheless, he was a man of true modesty. He insisted that he deserved no special recognition and that what had been achieved had come from the work of a team of people, and he made special mention of the contributions of his younger sister, Dora, herself a bacteriologist, and of Ronald Hare. 
Colebrook, known as Coli to his friends and colleagues, was impelled by compassion for the sick. During his working life there were major discoveries in chemotherapy and he dedicated himself to their application in the treatment of life-threatening bacterial infections for which no effective remedy previously had been known. In the last phase of his life he was a supporter of the Euthanasia Society. He felt that there were situations in which people had the right to end their own lives, and also that the first duty of a doctor was to relieve suffering, even if life were thereby curtailed. 
Colebrook was a small slim man, whose outdoor recreations included skiing and gardening. He could sometimes give the impression of severity, but the enduring memories of his friends were of his transparent honesty, his sense of humour, his humanity, and his generosity. He was not outstanding as a scientist or an originator, and certainly never thought of himself in this light, but he was a man who unremittingly used his energy and ability to confer great medical benefits on those of his generation. He died at Farnham Common, Buckinghamshire, on 29 September 1967, survived by his wife. 
E. P. Abraham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32488


Coleman, William Stephen (1829-1904), book illustrator and painter, was born at Horsham, Sussex, and baptized there on 28 August 1836, one of the twelve children of William Thomas Coleman, a surgeon, and his wife, Henrietta Dendy. His sister Helen Angell (1847-1884) became well known as a flower painter. Coleman trained as a surgeon, but never practised. Instead he became interested in natural history and published 'Our Woodlands, Heaths, and Hedges' (1859) and 'British Butterflies' (1860), illustrated by himself. He also helped to illustrate other books, mainly on natural history, assisted by his sister Rebecca Coleman. He provided the illustrations for some of J. G. Wood's natural history books including 'Common Objects of the Country' (1858), 'Our Garden Friends' (1864), and 'Common British Moths' (1870), all published by Routledge in a series of shilling handbooks on natural history which were frequently reprinted. Among other books illustrated by Coleman were J. C. Atkinson's 'Sketches in Natural History' (1861) and 'British Birds' Eggs and Nests' (1861) and T. Moore's 'British Ferns' (1861). He also designed the heading for 'The Field' newspaper. 
Coleman painted many watercolour landscapes, which proved very popular. In the 1860s he began to depict young girls. Two of his paintings are in the Victoria and Albert Museum: 'Girl, with a Basket of Coral, Seated Near the Shore' and 'Girl with Shell'. He also designed Christmas cards. A member of the management committee of the Dudley Gallery from the beginning, he contributed to the first exhibition there in 1865. He continued to exhibit until 1879, and remained on the committee until 1881. In addition he exhibited at the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours from 1866 to 1899. 
In 1869 Coleman entered on a third artistic career: he joined the Copeland factory in the Potteries, and painted china plaques. Later that year he moved to Minton's, in order to work with their famous turquoise colour. Inspired by Japanese prints, his tableware designs included the 'Game Plate' and the 'Naturalist' set of herbs, shellfish, butterflies, birds, and vegetables, and dessert services with maidens in oriental settings. In 1871 he became head of the new Minton's Art Pottery Studio in Kensington Gore, close to the South Kensington Museum, set up by Herbert Minton to enable eminent artists to paint on porcelain and earthenware. This grew out of the South Kensington Museum porcelain-painting class, where from 1867 to 1870 women students painted Minton tile blanks for the decoration of the grill room at the museum. Among Coleman's most successful designs during his two years at the studio were porcelain plaques decorated with scantily clad or nude young girls, women, and children, a fish bowl decorated with fish and aquatic plants, and circular bottles decorated with plants and birds in turquoise and blue. He also attracted designers such as Christopher Dresser. Although he gave up his position as art director in 1873, he continued to paint on Minton blanks and use the studio kilns until it burnt down in 1875, and he exhibited his Minton designs at the Vienna Exhibition in 1873 and the Paris Exhibition of 1878. Examples of his ceramic works are in the Victoria and Albert Museum. After 1873 he worked as a freelance designer, painter, and illustrator. 
Coleman died after a long illness at his home, 11 Hamilton Gardens, St John's Wood, on 22 March 1904, survived by his widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 32489


Coleridge, Bernard John Seymour, second Baron Coleridge (1851-1927), judge, of the distinguished Devon family, was born at the family seat at Ottery St Mary, Devon, on 19 August 1851, the eldest son of John Duke (afterwards first Baron) Coleridge (1820-1894), lord chief justice of England, grandson of Sir John Taylor Coleridge, judge, and great-grandnephew of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the poet and philosopher. His mother was Jane Fortescue, daughter of the Revd George Turner Seymour, of Farringford, Isle of Wight. Coleridge was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1875 with a second class in history and was captain of the college boat club. He was made an honorary fellow of Trinity in 1909. In 1876 Coleridge married Mary Alethea, eldest daughter of John Fielder Mackarness, bishop of Oxford; they had one son, Geoffrey Duke (1877-1955), who succeeded his father as third baron, and two daughters. 
Coleridge read in chambers with the well-known special pleader, Baugh Allen, and was called to the bar in 1877 by the Middle Temple, of which he was bencher in 1894 and treasurer in 1919. He joined the western circuit where he acquired a large local practice, mainly in criminal cases. He was counsel for the defence in the Winford (1883) and Newton St Cyres (1888) murder cases. He shared his father's Liberal political outlook and was elected member of parliament for the Attercliffe division of Sheffield in 1885, holding the seat as a Gladstonian Liberal for nine years. In 1892 he became queen's counsel. 
Coleridge succeeded to the peerage in 1894 but continued to practise at the bar, the first peer of the realm to pursue a regular forensic career. He also spoke in debates in the House of Lords: he strongly attacked Lord Milner's colonial policy and the employment of Chinese indentured labour in the Transvaal, and he supported the 'Trades Disputes Bill' of 1906. The Liberal landslide at the general election of 1906 gave him the opportunity for early promotion, and in 1907 Lord Loreburn appointed him a High Court judge in the King's Bench Division. The Coleridge family was the first to see father, son, and grandson successively appointed judge. 
Coleridge was neither a brilliant nor an erudite judge, but he had bearing, was careful and fair-minded, and his decisions were seldom reversed on appeal. He was at his best in jury cases, both civil and criminal. The prosecution of the famous murderer J. A. Dickman at Newcastle upon Tyne assizes in 1910 was one of his more famous cases (a full report of the proceedings, edited by S. O. Rowan-Hamilton, was published in 1914). Coleridge also presided at the trials of the suffragettes, Mrs Emmeline Pankhurst in 1912 and the Pethick-Lawrences in 1913. In 1917 he and the archbishop of Canterbury together heard the first appeal under the 'Benefices Act' of 1898 ('Rice v. Bishop of Oxford'). 
Coleridge had many outside interests. He was chairman of Devon quarter sessions and served regularly even while he was a judge. From 1912 to 1918 he was chairman of the coal conciliation board of the federated districts. He was a zealous humanitarian, a strong anti-vivisectionist, and an opponent of flogging, although he favoured retention of the death sentence for the most serious crimes. He was founder and first president of the Old Ottregian Society (so called after his family home at Ottery St Mary) and wrote 'The Ottery Song', which was sung at its gatherings. He also published 'Ottery St Mary and its Memories' (1904), 'The Story of a Devonshire House' (1905), and 'This for Remembrance' (1925). 
Coleridge retired from the bench because of illness in 1923. He lived out his retirement at his Devon home, the Chanter's House, Ottery St Mary, where he died on 4 September 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 32490


Coleridge, Mary Elizabeth (1861-1907), poet and writer, was born on 23 September 1861 at Hyde Park Square, London, the elder of the two daughters of Arthur Duke Coleridge and Mary Ann Jameson (died 1898). Her father, the great-nephew of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), was clerk of the assize on the midland circuit; her mother's family came from Dublin. 
Mary's parents were both keen amateur musicians. Her father held musical evenings at their home attended by singers such as Jenny Lind, and also entertained poets and painters. Tennyson, Browning (one of Mary's heroes), and Millais were all frequent visitors to their house at 12 Cromwell Place, London, though shyness often prevented Mary from speaking to them. She was educated largely at home, and at the age of twelve, intrigued by the strange shapes of Hebrew letters, asked her father to teach her the language. By nineteen she had also mastered German, French, and Italian, and had begun to teach herself Greek. Throughout her childhood she wrote verse and stories, revealing early the signs of the unique imagination which shaped her later novels and poetry. 
Mary was tutored by her father's friend William Cory, a scholar and schoolmaster of some repute, whose career at Eton had been cut short after a scandal arose over a letter written to a favourite pupil. Cory moved to Hampstead when Mary was in her early twenties and she began to attend lessons in Greek and Latin at his home, along with a group of friends. He fondly referred to them as his 'Grecian Ladies' (Mackenzie, 129). A poet himself, Cory had a profound influence upon Mary. 
By her early twenties Mary had established a close circle of female friends made up of five women from similarly sheltered backgrounds. She once declared that she found the Elizabethan idea of friendship 'much stronger and more sensitive, and closer to the Victorian, than anything in between' ('Gathered Leaves', 255). When she visited Italy in 1893 she found it to be the 'Motherland... [she] had always longed for and never known' (ibid., 35). Poems such as 'The White Women' and 'A Day-Dream' echo this need for female space, mapping out imaginary or mythic territories inhabited by communities of women. On the smaller scale, other poems ('Gone', 'Friends', 'Mortal Combat') chart the pleasures and pains of friendship. 
At the age of twenty Mary had begun to write articles for periodicals such as the 'Monthly Packet' and 'Merry England'. In 1893 her first novel, 'The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus', a fantastical romance, was published. Although the work earned praise from Robert Louis Stevenson for the 'devilish' ingenuity ('Gathered Leaves', 56) of its plot, it was not a commercial success. Henry Newbolt, the young barrister with literary aspirations whom she had met when he married one of her circle, Margaret Duckworth, had become a close friend by this time. The Newbolts met regularly with Mary and another friend, Ella Coltman, to discuss work in progress. This group, facetiously nicknamed 'The Settee' by excluded friends, witnessed the publication, in 1897, of Mary's second novel, 'The King with Two Faces'. This historical romance, set in eighteenth-century Sweden, ran to several editions, firmly establishing her reputation as a novelist. 
When the poet Robert Bridges came across the manuscript of Mary's poems, which had been purposely left lying on a hall table at his home by Mary's friend (and his wife's cousin) Violet Hodgkin, he expressed a desire to see them published. With his help, her first volume of poems, 'Fancy's Following' (1896), was published, semi-privately, by the Daniel Press in Oxford. Ever aware of the long shadow cast by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, her 'fairy great-great-uncle' ('Gathered Leaves', 11), she refused to publish the poems in her own name, and took her pseudonym, Anodos ('on no road'), from George MacDonald's fairy romance 'Phantastes'. Throughout her life she was to feel the mixed blessings of such a famous ancestor, and some of her best poems, such as 'The Witch' and 'Wilderspin', are haunted by his presence. 
In 1897 another volume, 'Fancy's Guerdon', was published by Elkin Matthews, and throughout the last eight years of Mary's life poems appeared in 'The Spectator' and 'The Pilot'. During the 1890s, influenced by Tolstoy, she began teaching literature to a group of working women, first at her home and later at the Working Women's College in Fitzroy Street, London. However, she remained steadfastly opposed to the condescending attitude behind many Victorian 'good works' and once declared her hatred of philanthropy ('Collected Poems', 71). She continued to contribute articles to the 'Monthly Review' and 'The Guardian' and in 1902 began to write for the 'Times Literary Supplement'. She also published three more novels: 'The Fiery Dawn' (1901), 'The Shadow on the Wall' (1904), and 'The Lady on the Drawing Room Floor' (1906). 
In 1907, on the family's annual visit to Harrogate in Yorkshire, Mary suffered an attack of acute appendicitis. She died a few days later, on 25 August. During her last weeks she had been working on a biography of the Pre-Raphaelite painter Holman Hunt, which was published in 1908. Her best poems include brief, intense lyrics such as 'L'oiseau bleu' and 'The Lady of Trees' which seem effortlessly to convey a mood or spirit of place. Others, such as 'An Insincere Wish Addressed to a Beggar', offer an ironic comment on contemporary society. The late twentieth century witnessed something of a revival of critical interest in her work. 


@@@@@


doc= 32491


Coleridge, Stephen William Buchanan (1854-1936), author and anti-vivisectionist, was born in London on 31 May 1854, the second son of John Duke Coleridge, first Baron Coleridge (1820-1894), lord chief justice of England, and his first wife, Jane Fortescue, daughter of the Revd George Turner Seymour, of Farringford, Isle of Wight. He was brother of the judge Bernard John Seymour Coleridge, second Baron Coleridge, and of Gilbert Coleridge, assistant master of the crown office from 1892 to 1921. 
Stephen Coleridge was sent to school in Brighton and then, aged eleven, 'to a horrible school at Honiton, conducted by a monster of cruelty named Izod' (Coleridge, 4). He then went to Bradfield School, Berkshire, and, in 1874, to Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating in 1877. After a year (1879-80) spent in travel in Latin America, he became private secretary to his father (1884-90). In 1886 he was called to the bar by the Middle Temple. In 1890 the lord chief justice appointed him clerk of assize for the South Wales circuit. His natural kindness and courtesy made him popular with the members of the circuit. 
An inherited rhetorical faculty characterized Coleridge's writings both in prose and in verse. He appreciated good literature, and was an acceptable lecturer. His large output includes 'A Morning in my Library' (1914), 'An Evening in my Library among the English Poets' (1916), and other books of the same kind. He also published four volumes entitled 'Letters to my Grandson' (1921-3), telling him of the world about him, the happy life, and the glory of English prose and poetry. He was a competent amateur artist, especially of landscape, and showed at various exhibitions. 
Coleridge hated cruelty in all its forms and believed in action to reduce it. He was one of the founders, in 1884, of the London Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, renamed in 1889 as the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. Although fond of games and outdoor pursuits, he hated any sport that involved the death of animals, and became president of the League for the Prohibition of Cruel Sports. His chief energy, however, was devoted to the ending of experiments on animals. On this subject he had uncompromising views and was opposed not only to vivisection but to exhibitions of stuffed animals and to posters illustrating vivisection, though intended to demonstrate its cruelty. He was active in the Victoria Street Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to Vivisection and was the protege of Frances Power Cobbe, its leader. The society came to support total abolition. In 1898 Coleridge ousted Cobbe from the society's executive committee; the society was renamed the National Vivisection Society and pursued a step-by-step policy, of which total abolition would be the final achievement rather than the only goal (Cobbe in fury founded a rigidly abolitionist counter-organization). Coleridge attempted to set anti-vivisection in a wider context, as part of a resistance to the onset of science, which he saw as causing moral decline and economic slavery (French, 412). 
Coleridge was twice married: first, in 1879, to Geraldine Beatrix (died 1910), daughter and coheir of Charles Manners Lushington, of Norton Court, Kent, and niece of Stafford Northcote, first earl of Iddesleigh; and second, in 1911, to Susan, second daughter of Allan Duncan Stewart, of Bun Rannoch and Inverhadden, Perthshire, an area that became the subject of many of his paintings. With his first wife he had three sons, the eldest of whom predeceased him. Coleridge died at his home, The Ford, Chobham, Surrey, on 10 April 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 32492


Taylor, Samuel Coleridge- (1875-1912), composer, was born on 15 August 1875 at 15 Theobalds Road, Holborn, London. His parents were registered as Daniel Hugh Taylor, surgeon, and Alice Taylor, 'nee' Holmans. His father was in fact Dr Daniel Peter Hughes Taylor ('c'.1848-1904), who returned to his native Sierra Leone after studying at Taunton and King's College, London, probably unaware that Alice Hare Martin (1856-1953) was pregnant. There is no record of their marriage. Alice raised her son in Croydon, aided by her mother, Emily Ann Martin, and by Sarah and Benjamin Holman or Holmans. This latter may have been Alice Martin's father; he gave Samuel Coleridge Taylor a violin in 1880 and his first violin lessons. Holman's son Benjamin (1839- 'c'.1915) was a professional musician living near Folkestone from the 1870s and had three musical children. The family expanded after Alice Martin married George Evans ('c'.1837- 'c'.1908), a railway storeman. Their three children also had music lessons, and their son, Victor, also became a professional musician, without achieving the fame of his half-brother. 
Coleridge-Taylor (he adopted the hyphen in the 1890s) was a small man, with tiny fingers that would have made a successful instrumental career unlikely. His obvious African descent attracted attention (W. Wallis, a local artist, painted his portrait in 1881), and he was noticed by a silk merchant and army volunteer, Colonel Herbert Walters, who encouraged him in church choral music and in 1890 sponsored him at the Royal College of Music. This patronage (the first biography of the composer was dedicated to Walters, 'to whom the world owes the discovery of Coleridge-Taylor') led commentators to ignore the early music lessons and drew attention away from his unorthodox family. His family had little of the respectability so important in Victorian society, and this, along with his African descent, profoundly affected Coleridge-Taylor. He won a violin scholarship to the Royal College of Music for four years, but changed to study composition under Charles Villiers Stanford. His works were presented at college concerts, attracting the attention of August Jaeger, whose employer, Novello, published Coleridge-Taylor's five anthems in 1892. Jaeger reported his progress in the press, and became a formative influence. Jaeger and Edward Elgar recommended the Three Choirs festival to commission the ballade in A minor, which was performed in September 1898. Two months later 'Hiawatha's Wedding Feast' was premiered in London; these early successes encouraged Coleridge-Taylor to become a professional composer. On 30 December 1899 he married Jessie Sarah Fleetwood Walmisley (1869-1962), daughter of Walter Milbanke Walmisley, stockbroker, and a distant relative of the composer Thomas Attwood Walmisley. They had a son, Hiawatha (1900-1980), and a daughter, Gwendolen (later Avril) ['see 'Taylor, Avril Coleridge-], who were both to have musical careers. 
'The Death of Minnehaha' (October 1899) and 'Hiawatha's Departure' (March 1900), with an overture, completed the cantata 'The Song of Hiawatha'; which for decades was a much beloved and performed staple of choral societies. Having sold the copyright to 'Hiawatha', Coleridge-Taylor derived no lasting financial benefit from the popularity of the work, and financial pressures help explain the volume of his compositions: he poured out incidental music for the theatre (much commissioned by Beerbohm Tree for His Majesty's Theatre), sacred and secular choral works (of which 'A Tale of Old Japan', 1911, is perhaps the best), pieces for strings and for piano, orchestral works, and an unpublished grand opera ('Thelma', 1907-9). His capacity for melodic line was strong: Jaeger observed 'Here is a real melodist at last' and that 'He has a quite Schubertian facility of invention' (Brewer, 94); Elgar wrote 'I have Taylor's theme jogging in the vacuities of my head... the theme remains' (Young, 12). However, apparent haste in orchestration can be heard in some of his instrumental works. 'Hiawatha''s popular success came in part from its secular theme, which meant that performances were not restricted to the church calendar, but also from its musical repetitions and simple developments, which suited its amateur performers. In the 1920s and 1930s thousands attended colourful performances of 'Hiawatha' at the Royal Albert Hall, London. Generations of piano students played 'Demande et reponse' from his 'Petite suite de concert'. 
Invited by the Coleridge-Taylor Choral Society of Washington, DC (founded in 1901 by black choral singers), Coleridge-Taylor three times visited the United States (in 1904, 1906, and 1910). His identity as a black composer was important to him, and provided inspiration for a number of his works: he used themes from spirituals in the overture to 'Hiawatha'; the symphonic poem 'Toussaint l'Ouverture' (1901) was concerned with Haiti; and he wrote the operatic romance 'Dream Lovers' (1898) in co-operation with the African-American poet Paul Dunbar, who had also inspired the songs in his 'African Romances' (1897) and the keyboard 'African Suite' (1898). Seeking melodies in folk music was widespread in the 1890s, and Coleridge-Taylor used African, Caribbean, and American themes in his '24 Negro Melodies' (1905) which was published only in America, with a preface by a leading African-American citizen. He was visited in Britain by leading musical African-Americans, including the baritone Harry Burleigh and violinist Clarence Cameron White, who worked with Coleridge-Taylor in Britain. Back in the United States they encouraged performances of his works in black colleges, developing his identity in that country. 
Coleridge-Taylor taught composition (at Trinity College of Music, London, from 1903, and at the Guildhall School of Music from 1910), judged competitions, and conducted orchestras around Britain. He was improving his German, in anticipation of visiting that country, when he died from pneumonia at his home, Aldwick, St Leonard's Road, Croydon, on 1 September 1912, at the age of thirty-seven. Thousands attended his funeral and interment at Bandon Hill cemetery near Croydon. 
Coleridge-Taylor's music fell out of favour with the decline of the amateur choral societies after the Second World War, and even 'Hiawatha' and 'A Tale of Old Japan' have been seldom performed since the 1960s. A revival of interest in the composer, as a symbol of the achievements of black Britons, took place towards the end of the century. The mixed responses and inconsistencies of his obituarists reveal something of the prejudices against which his work was judged: one paper thought he had brought 'an exotic raciality into English music' ('Manchester Guardian', 2 Sept 1912), while another wrote 'Of African rhythms or folk-music pure and simple there is here no trace' ('Daily Telegraph' 2 Sept 1912). 'The Times' declared that the original features in his music were 'racial characteristics' (2 Sept 1912), and two years later, the African-American composer and conductor James Reese Europe declared that Coleridge-Taylor's was 'not real Negro work' (Badger, 126). Coleridge-Taylor was a man of gentle disposition and great personal dignity; his works enjoyed enormous popularity, and although his significance has come to be seen primarily as that of an icon of black success, his achievements as a composer of light orchestral and choral music were noteworthy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32493


Coles, Charles Edward (1853-1926), prison administrator in Egypt, was born at Buge, India, on 17 November 1853, the only son of Major-General Thomas Gordon Coles of the Indian army, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Colonel Charles D'Oyle Straker, also of the Indian army. After being educated privately at Bath, Coles entered the Indian police department in 1873, serving in the Bombay residency. In 1881 he married Mary Emma Isabella ('nee' Alston) of Odell, Bedfordshire. They had four sons (two of whom died in the First World War) and two daughters. In 1883 his services were lent to the Egyptian government, which in 1884 appointed him deputy inspector-general of police. From 1894 to 1897 he held the post of commandant of the Cairo city police. Upon his promotion in 1897 to the office of director-general of Egyptian prisons, Coles began the most important phase of his career. 
During the sixteen years (1897-1913) of his administration of the prison department Coles transformed the Egyptian prisons, once a source of reproach to the government, into a source of pride. In the period before he began work Egyptian finances had been limited and the prison budget insufficient. Prisoners were lodged in disused barracks, factories, and other inadequate and insanitary buildings, and no regular provision was made either for feeding or for clothing the inmates. Coles took up his duties with energy and enthusiasm, and with plans for large-scale reform. Egypt had recently become more prosperous, and Coles approached the financial authorities with determination, informing them that he should require $E500,000 for the rebuilding of all the prisons, and probably an additional $E150,000 a year for their maintenance. Sixteen years later he was able to boast that he had spent $E473,738 on building, and that the budgetary provision for maintenance in the preceding year had been $E160,000. 
Among other reforms achieved during Coles's administration, arrangements were made for trades to be taught and practised in prisons, and for short-term inmates to work off their sentences in supervised work outside the prison walls. Boys' and girls' reformatories, conducted on contemporary English principles of character training, were established; and a reformatory was created for adults under 'indeterminate sentences', which appears to have been the first institution of its kind in the world. In the course of his service Coles had to deal with two or three serious convict riots and he made a point of relying largely on his personal influence with the prisoners to restore order. When shooting prisoners seemed unavoidable, he shot them himself. 
The development of the Egyptian prison system under Coles's administration was his most important achievement, but he did not spend all his time in official duties. He was a keen sportsman who became a leading figure in Egyptian racing, and was the founder of the Alexandrian Sporting Club and of the Egyptian Jockey Club. In 1900 Coles was created CMG for his services abroad and retired in 1913 to Somerset where he wrote 'Recollections and Reflections', which was published in 1918. In 1921 he moved to Biarritz, France, publishing 'Occupational Franchise' in 1922. He died at his home, the Villa Sans Atout, Biarritz, on 12 November 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 32494


Coles, Vincent Stuckey Stratton (1845-1929), Church of England clergyman and hymn writer, was born on 27 March 1845 at the rectory, Shepton Beauchamp, Somerset, the only son of the Revd James Stratton Coles (1810-1872), rector of Shepton Beauchamp from 1836 and later rural dean and a prebendary of Wells Cathedral. His mother, from whom Coles imbibed the high-church principles which inspired him throughout his life, was Eliza, daughter of Vincent Stuckey ['see under 'Stuckey family] of Langport, banker and shipowner, who had been private secretary at the Treasury to Pitt and Huskisson. The Stuckey and Bagehot families had long dominated Langport; Walter Bagehot, the economist, was Coles's cousin. George Anthony Denison, archdeacon of Taunton, was a neighbour and family friend, and the attack on Denison's exposition of eucharistic doctrine in 1856 made a strong impression on Coles. 
In 1858 Coles went to Eton College, where he boarded with the Revd C. C. James. His closest friends were Digby Mackworth Dolben, Robert Bridges, and Archibald Primrose, Lord Dalmeny (afterwards earl of Rosebery). In 1864 he entered Balliol College, Oxford. His Eton contemporary W. R. Anson urged him to enter for an exhibition, which he won, but resigned from conscientious scruples on gaining only a third class in classical moderations in 1866. He obtained a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1868, and proceeded to Cuddesdon Theological College, of which Edward King (afterwards bishop of Lincoln) was principal. Gerard Manley Hopkins was a close associate, and Coles also came to know Henry Parry Liddon, who heard his first confession and became his greatest friend. 
Coles was ordained deacon at Winchester by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce at Advent 1869, and licensed to a curacy at Wantage under the Revd William John Butler, later dean of Lincoln. He was ordained priest by Bishop Mackarness of Oxford in 1870. On his father's sudden death in 1872 he succeeded him as rector of Shepton Beauchamp. He resigned the living in October 1884 in order to become one of the librarians of Pusey House, Oxford, together with Charles Gore and Frank Edward Brightman. Coles was widely known as a preacher, missioner, and spiritual guide; he had taken part in the second London Mission in 1874, made a preaching tour in the United States in 1876, and had been appointed frequently by Dean Church and Liddon to preach in St Paul's Cathedral. During his incumbency Shepton Beauchamp became a model parish of the Anglo-Catholic revival. 
After King left Oxford for Lincoln in 1885 Coles carried on his apostolate to young men at the university. His keen sense of fun, his discerning sympathy, and his charismatic holiness attracted undergraduates of every type and class, and his great energies were devoted to helping them appreciate the Catholic revival in Anglicanism. He was appointed principal of Pusey House in 1897 and held the position until 1909, when he resigned due to ill health. In 1903, at the request of Bishop Wilkinson of St Andrews, he undertook a missionary tour through South Africa in preparation for the later 'mission of help'. From 1910 to 1920 Coles was warden of the Community of the Epiphany at Truro, and in 1912 Bishop Gore made him honorary canon of Christ Church and his diocesan chaplain, in which capacity Coles worked indefatigably in the Oxford diocese until Gore resigned in 1919. He lived thereafter with one of his sisters at Shepton Beauchamp, where he died on 9 June 1929 and is buried. 
Coles published little: his major works were 'Pastoral Work in Country Districts' (1906, being lectures delivered at Cambridge in Lent 1905), which was full of practical experience, 'Lenten Meditations' (1899), and 'Advent Meditations' (1899). Some of his best hymns, notably 'We pray thee, Heavenly Father', first appeared in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' and the 'English Hymnal'. Possessed of considerable private means, he distributed them generously, living himself in severe simplicity. 


@@@@@


doc= 32495


Collen, Sir Edwin Henry Hayter (1843-1911), army officer, was born on 17 June 1843 at Somerset Street, London, the son of Henry Collen ('b'. 1798), miniature painter, of Holywell Hill, St Albans, and his wife, Helen Dyson. Educated at University College School, London, Collen passed to the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and became lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 1 July 1863. He first served in the Abyssinian expedition (1867-8). After passing through the Staff College at Camberley in 1871-2, with honours, he was transferred to the Indian army in 1873. In the same year he married Blanche Marie Frederika, daughter of Charles Rigby JP, of Soldiers' Point, Anglesey. 
Collen was promoted captain on 1 July 1875. His efficiency as secretary of the Indian ordnance commission of 1874 led to his entering in 1876 the military department of the government of India as assistant secretary. Newly appointed, in June 1876 he submitted at Simla a memorandum proposing the formation of an intelligence branch in the quartermaster-general's department, modelled on that in Britain. Both the Indian commander-in-chief, Sir Frederick Haines, and his quartermaster-general, Roberts -- who wrote that Collen's memorandum was 'singularly able' (Fergusson, 73) -- generally agreed with Collen's proposal, and so for a year (1877-8) he was attached to the intelligence branch at the War Office to study and report on it. His lengthy report (October 1878) described the British branch, and asserted the benefits of an Indian intelligence branch, based on the British model but adapted to Indian requirements. Collen's memorandum and report were instrumental in the establishment of the Indian military intelligence branch. Moreover his report later became an important historical source -- 'a detailed and invaluable inside view of the Intelligence Branch at the War Office during the late 1870s' (Fergusson, 59). 
Collen acted as deputy assistant quartermaster-general at the Delhi durbar of 1 January 1877. In 1878 he was appointed secretary of the Indian army organization commission. His administrative talents were recognized in 1880, in the later phases of the Second Anglo-Afghan War, when as assistant controller-general he was mainly responsible for the relatively smooth and efficient working of the supply and transport system. 
Collen's routine work was interrupted by a short spell of active service. Promoted major on 1 July 1883, he joined the eastern Sudan expedition of 1885, and served with distinction in the intelligence department and as assistant military secretary to Major-General Sir Gerald Graham VC. He served at Tamai (2 April 1885) and Thukul (5 May), was mentioned in dispatches, and received the brevet of lieutenant-colonel (15 June 1885). 
On his return to India, Collen was appointed in 1886 accountant-general, and in 1887 military secretary to the government of India, serving an exceptional nine years in the post. On 15 June 1889 he became full colonel, and in April 1896 military member of the executive council. During his administration many improvements were made in the composition of commands and regiments, in military equipment, and in mobilization. The defects in army administration revealed by the South African War (1899-1902) gave fresh impetus to Collen's activities, but desirable reforms had to be postponed due to financial constraints. In the debate on the budget in the legislative council on 27 March 1901 Collen summarized the army improvements. The Indian army was being rearmed with the latest weapons, the building of factories for the manufacture of war material had already been begun at Wellington, Kirkee, and Jubbulpore, a scheme for decentralization had been drawn up, and a remount commission had been established. Fresh drafts of officers were added to the Indian army and staff corps, and the supply and transport corps were reorganized. Lord Curzon, viceroy from 1899 to 1905, considered Collen inadequate as military member -- 'mentally composed of India-rubber' (Gilmour, 192) -- and his department inefficient. Nevertheless publicly he stated that Collen 'had left an enduring mark on the personnel, the organisation and the equipment of the Indian army' (Curzon, 2.265). Like other Indian army officers, Collen opposed the appointment of Kitchener as commander-in-chief in India, claiming he lacked Indian experience, and would offend people and turn everything upside down. However, reforms inaugurated by Collen were continued by Kitchener. 
Collen was promoted major-general on 18 January 1900 and lieutenant-general on 3 April 1905. He was made CIE in 1889, CB in 1897, and KCIE in 1893. He was made GCIE on his retirement in April 1901, and in May of that year represented India at the opening of the first parliament of the Australian commonwealth. He served on the War Office regulations committee from 1901 to 1904, and as chairman of the Staff College committee of 1904. When the controversy between Curzon and Kitchener on army administration broke out in 1905, Collen actively supported Curzon's views on keeping a military member on the council. A zealous member of the British Empire League, the National Service League, and the Essex Territorial Association, he was a frequent speaker and contributor to the press on military subjects, and published books on the British and Indian armies. He died on 10 July 1911, at his residence, The Cedars, Kelvedon, Essex. He was survived by his wife, three sons, and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 32496


Colles, Henry Cope (1879-1943), music historian and critic, was born at Bridgnorth, Shropshire, on 20 April 1879, the third child and elder son of Abraham Colles MD FRCS (and thus the great-grandson of Abraham Colles), and his wife, Emily Agnes Georgina, daughter of Major Alexander R. Dallas, and granddaughter of A. R. C. Dallas. He was educated privately and at the Royal College of Music (1895-9) where he studied music history under Sir Hubert Parry, the organ under Walter Alcock, and counterpoint under Walford Davies. In 1899 he became organ scholar at Worcester College, Oxford, where he attracted the attention of Henry Hadow, then dean of the college, whose lectures and writings were to have an important influence in shaping Colles's future career and critical thought. 
At Oxford, Colles obtained the degree of BA in 1903 and the additional degree of BMus in 1904, and in 1932 the university awarded him an honorary degree of DMus; he was elected honorary fellow of Worcester in 1936. After leaving Oxford he studied at the Temple Church, London, with Walford Davies, a lifelong friend whose biography he wrote in 1942. As a writer he often stressed the value and importance of English church music and as a practical musician he gave strong support to the School of English Church Music founded by his friend Sir Sydney Nicholson, to the Church Music Society, and to St Michael's College, Tenbury, Worcestershire. 
In 1905, at the instigation of Hadow, Colles began his career as a writer, contributing a weekly article on music to 'The Academy' at the request of H. H. Child. These articles were dominated by discussion of Brahms and Richard Strauss. Colles took Hadow's view that Brahms, in restoring the classical traditions, pointed a way forward that had been eclipsed through the huge expansion of orchestral resources in the late Romantic period. His articles in the more specialist music press were primarily of musicological interest, and many of them dealt with English music from Byrd to Elgar. In 1906 he married Hester Janet (died 1952), daughter of Thomas Matheson, a member of Lloyds. Also in 1906 he began work at 'The Times', becoming assistant to J. A. Fuller-Maitland, whom he succeeded as musical editor in 1911; he retained this post until his death. On his appointment as musical editor he at once inaugurated and maintained the weekly articles on music -- for the most part written by himself, although necessarily anonymous -- which attracted wide attention both in Britain and abroad. In appraising contemporary music Colles continued along similarly conservative lines as his predecessor, dismissing the work of many leading composers including Stravinsky and Schoenberg. 
During the First World War Colles served in Macedonia as a captain in the Royal Artillery, receiving the Greek cross in 1918. On his return he was invited, in 1919, by Hugh Allen to join the staff of the Royal College of Music as lecturer in music history and analysis. In 1923 he accepted an invitation from the 'New York Times' to act as guest music critic, remaining in America for some months. In 1927 he was Cramb lecturer at Glasgow University, taking for his subject the interdependence of the English language and English musical genius, especially as exemplified in Purcell. The substance of these lectures was reproduced in his 'Voice and Verse' (1928). He lectured also at Liverpool University, the Royal Institution, and elsewhere. 
In 1927 appeared the third and revised edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians', the editorship of which had been entrusted to Colles some years before. It was an extensive revision for which his scholarship eminently qualified him. He was also responsible for a further revision and a supplementary volume in 1940 and this, along with the seventh volume of the 'Oxford History of Music', entitled 'Symphony and Drama, 1850-1900' (1934), must be counted as his most substantial and enduring work. His most popular work, 'The Growth of Music' (1912-16), a study of music history designed for use in schools, continued the evolutionary method of documenting music history that characterized the work of Parry. His other works include 'The Chamber Music of Brahms' (1933) and 'On Learning Music, and other Essays' (1940). A collection of his shorter writings was edited by his wife, with a short memoir, and published as 'Essays and Lectures' (1945). Colles died at his home in London, 91 Swan Court, Chelsea, on 4 March 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 32497


Collett, Sir Henry (1836-1901), army officer in the East India Company and botanist, was born on 6 March 1836 at Thetford, Norfolk, the fourth son of the Revd William Collett (1796-1865), perpetual curate of St Mary's, Thetford, and his second wife, Ellen Clarke, daughter of Leonard Shelford Bidwell of Thetford. Educated at Tonbridge School and at Addiscombe College (1853-5), he entered the Bengal army on 8 June 1855, and joined the 51st Bengal native infantry on 6 August 1855 at Peshawar. 
Collett served with the expeditions under Sir Sydney Cotton on the Yusufzai frontier in 1858, being present at the actions at Chingli and Sitana. He served in Oudh during the mutiny campaign of 1858-9, and was at the storm and capture of the fort of Rampur Kussia by Sir Edward Robert Wetherall on 3 November 1858. During the uprising of 1862-3 in the Khasi and Jaintia Hills, Assam, he was present at the capture of Oomkoi, Nungarai, and at Oomkrong, where he was wounded in the ankle. He was mentioned in dispatches. Promoted captain in 1867, he served in the Abyssinian expedition, and was again mentioned in dispatches. He became major in 1875 and lieutenant-colonel in 1879. In the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80) he acted as quartermaster-general on the staff of Sir Frederick (afterwards Lord) Roberts, and was present at the capture of the Paiwar Pass, and in the operations in Khost valley and round Kabul in December 1879. He accompanied Roberts on the march from Kabul to Kandahar (August 1880) and commanded the 23rd pioneers at the battle of Kandahar on 1 September 1880. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was made CB on 22 February 1881. He was promoted colonel in 1884. During 1886-8 he commanded the 3rd brigade in the expedition to Burma. He took part in the Karenni expedition in 1888 and commanded the eastern frontier district during the Chin Lushai expedition in 1889-90, receiving the thanks of the government of India. 
In 1891 Collett was prominent in the expedition to Manipur, and was left in command when the uprising of the Manipuris was suppressed, acting there temporarily but resolutely as chief commissioner of Assam. He received the thanks of the government of India, and was made KCB on 19 November 1891. From 1892 to 1893 he commanded the Peshawar district with the rank of major-general. He was given the reward for distinguished service and was placed by his own wish on the unemployed list on 8 June 1893. His military reputation was high, but increasing deafness unfitted him in his opinion for active duty. 
Collett was a keen student of botany, in which he first became interested in 1878 during the Kurram valley expedition. He collected plants in Afghanistan, Algeria, Burma, the Canaries, Corsica, India, Java, and Spain. He was made a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1879, and published the results of his botanical work in the southern Shan States, Burma, in the society's journal. He was an original member of the Simla Naturalists' Society. In retirement he worked assiduously at the Royal Botanic Gardens herbarium, Kew, and at his death was preparing a handbook of the flora of Simla, which appeared posthumously, edited by W. B. Hemsley FRS, as 'Flora Simlensis' (1902). He died, unmarried, at his residence, 21 Cranley Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 21 December 1901, and was buried in Charlton cemetery, Blackheath. His herbarium was presented by his family to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. 


@@@@@


doc= 32498


Collie, John Norman (1859-1942), organic chemist and mountaineer, was born at Ferns Cottage, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, on 10 September 1859, the second son of John Collie, a businessman, and his wife, Selina Mary (died 1883), daughter of Henry Winkworth, a silk merchant, and sister of Catherine Winkworth and Susanna Winkworth. Collie was educated at Charterhouse (1873-5) and Clifton College (1875-7). He studied chemistry under Edmund Albert Letts (1852-1918) at University College, Bristol (1877-9), where he obtained a chemical scholarship, and at Queen's College, Belfast (1879-83). He decided to pursue a career of teaching and research in chemistry, and became assistant to Letts at Queen's College from 1880 to 1883. In 1883 he went to work with Johannes Wislicenus at Wurzburg University, obtaining the degree of PhD the following year. On his return he became science lecturer at the Ladies' College, Cheltenham (1885-7), and then went on to be: assistant to William Ramsay at University College, London (1887-96); professor of chemistry at the College of the Pharmaceutical Society, London (1896-1902); and professor of organic chemistry in the University of London at University College (1902-28). After his retirement he was elected an honorary fellow and continued scientific work at University College until 1933. 
Collie was a skilful experimenter who could construct his own apparatus, including 'vacuum' tubes in which gases could be exposed to electrical discharges. He collaborated with Ramsay in much work on argon and helium, and he constructed the first neon lamp. Independently of each other, Collie and Hubert Sutton Patterson detected the presence of neon in hydrogen after the passage of an electrical discharge through the latter at low pressure. This apparent 'transmutation' could not be repeated by other skilled investigators, and must have been due to the leakage of minute quantities of air. Collie was responsible in 1896 for the first photograph taken by means of X-rays of a metal object in the human body. His principal scientific activity was in the field of organic chemistry, where he worked, 'inter alia', on phosphonium compounds and phosphines, and on dehydracetic acid, its constitution, reactions, salts, and derivatives. Also of interest was his work on the derivation in practice and theory of many natural systems from the polyacetic acids, and the construction of a possible general relation between all these systems and the carbohydrates. This work was published mainly in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' and the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' over a period of nearly fifty years. 
Collie was elected FRS in 1896 and received the honorary degrees of LLD from the universities of Glasgow and St Andrews, and DSc from Belfast and Liverpool. Besides his eminence as a scientist, he acquired great fame as a climber and explorer of mountains. Beginning with the Cuillin peaks in Skye, where he discovered many new climbs, he climbed with notable success in the Alps, and went in 1895 with A. F. Mummery to the Himalayas, where they attempted the ascent of Nanga Parbat; during this expedition Mummery was killed, an episode which deeply affected Collie. The latter also climbed in the Lofoten islands off the Norwegian coast, but his greatest work was done in his pioneering climbing, mapping, and surveying in the Canadian Rockies. His books, 'Climbing on the Himalaya and other Mountain Ranges' (1902) and (with Hugh E. M. Stutfield) 'Climbs and Exploration in the Canadian Rockies' (1903), are famous records. In Britain, Collie climbed particularly in Skye, Snowdon, and the Lake District. He was elected president of the Alpine Club in 1920 and was an honorary member of many other climbing clubs. 
Collie was also a connoisseur of many fine things, including cigars and French wines, and a great collector, of minerals, books, and pictures, and particularly of antique objects of Japanese and Chinese art. He made an investigation of certain coloured glazes on Chinese porcelain, published in the 'Transactions of the Oriental Ceramic Society' (1921-2). 
Glen Brittle House and the Sligachan Inn became Collie's summer homes on Skye, where he spent his time fishing, shooting, and climbing. He died, unmarried, at Sligachan on 1 November 1942, having suffered complications from neuritis, lumbago, and sciatica. He was buried beside his close friend and climbing companion, John Mackenzie, in the churchyard at Struan on the shore of Loch Harport. To those who knew him he was a great host and a faithful friend. 


@@@@@


doc= 32499


Collier, John (1850-1934), portrait painter, was born at 18 Gloucester Road, Paddington, Middlesex, on 27 January 1850, the second son of Robert Porrett Collier, first Baron Monkswell (1817-1886), a distinguished lawyer and judge, and Isabella Rose (1815-1886), daughter of William Rose Rose of Wolston Heath near Rugby and Daventry. Collier was educated at Eton College (1862-5) and then at Heidelberg. Deciding against his intended career in the diplomatic service, he returned to England, where he worked, temporarily, in the city office of Sir John Pender of the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company. With the encouragement of his father, who himself was a capable amateur artist, Collier then studied at the Slade School of Fine Art, London, under Edward John Poynter. He remained there for three years after which he went to study in Munich and then in Paris under Jean Paul Laurens. His father also introduced him to Lawrence Alma-Tadema and John Everett Millais, from whom he received guidance and encouragement. 
Collier first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1874, sending a study of a head. His portraits of Major and Mrs Forster, exhibited in 1877, attracted attention and helped establish him as a society portrait painter. Thereafter he exhibited annually -- sending a total of 140 pictures -- until his death (though he was never elected a member). He also exhibited 165 works at the Royal Society of Portrait Painters of which he later became vice-president. His output was prolific; over 1100 pictures are recorded in his sitter book and of these over eight hundred are portraits. His sitters included Anthony Ashley-Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury, George Bernard Shaw, Sir Oswald Mosley, Henry Irving, Rudyard Kipling, first Earl Kitchener, and Ellen Terry. 
Collier's methodical and faithful rendering of his subjects has led to comparisons with the work of Frank Holl, but some of his more imposing portraits are clearly reminiscent of Millais's statesmen. Collier's portraits of the naturalist Charles Robert Darwin (1881; Linnean Society, 1883 replica; NPG) and of the biologist Thomas Henry Huxley, whom he painted twice (1883; NPG; and 1890; Royal Society, London), are notable works. Collier also produced dramatic depictions of classical and historical scenes such as 'Priestess of Delphi' (1891; Art Gallery of South Australia, Adelaide) and 'A Glass of Wine with Caesar Borgia' (1893; Ipswich Art Gallery). During his own lifetime Collier's reputation also rested, in part, on his so-called 'problem pictures'. Intended simply to be depictions of moments of domestic tragedy, contrary to his efforts, their interpretation was felt by many to be unclear; conundrums to be unravelled by the viewer. Of these, two examples are 'The Prodigal Daughter' (1903; Usher Gallery, Lincoln) and 'A Confession' (1902). 
Collier married on 30 June 1879 Marian (1859-1887), daughter of Professor Thomas Henry Huxley. She too had studied at the Slade and exhibited three works at the Royal Academy between 1880 and 1884. Having suffered from mental illness since the birth of their daughter Joyce in 1884, she was taken by Collier to Paris in 1887 in the hope of finding a cure. Tragically she died of pneumonia on 18 November 1887. In 1889 Collier married, with Huxley's blessing, Marian's youngest sister, Ethel Gladys. Owing to the rejection of the 'Deceased Wife's Sister Bill' (finally passed in 1907) the marriage took place in Christiania, Norway. Their marriage was not warmly accepted by everyone; Collier's sister-in-law, Lady Monkswell, broke off all contact. With Ethel, Collier moved to North House, Eton Avenue -- a building he had commissioned from his brother-in-law, Frederick Waller. They had two children, Laurence Collier and Joan. 
Collier had various one-man exhibitions during his lifetime: an exhibition of landscapes at the Leicester Galleries in 1915; a retrospective show at the Sunderland Art Gallery in 1922; another at the Museum Galleries, Haymarket, in 1931. He published various treatises on painting: 'A Primer of Art' (1882), 'A Manual of Oil Painting' (1886), and 'The Art of Portrait Painting' (1905). His writings encouraged a strict, practical, accurate approach, thoroughness and attention to detail being rated above artistic flair. 
The obituary in 'The Times' described him as 'a thin, bearded man, he gave the impression of polite independence -- a sort of quiet ruthlessness -- in personal intercourse, a character which was undoubtedly reflected in his painting' ('The Times', 12 April 1934). Collier was one of the few rationalists of the Victorian establishment. He published his views on religion, morality, and citizenship in 'The Religion of an Artist' (1926). During the First World War he was employed by the Foreign Office as a clerk in the deciphering department. He was appointed OBE for his services. 
Collier died on 11 April 1934 at his home, North House, in Eton Avenue. He had suffered from paralysis for years but worked right up until his death installing a lift in North House so that he could get to his studio, from where he worked from his wheelchair using brushes tied to bamboo staves. His second wife survived him. 
Collier, who has no fewer than thirteen works in the National Portrait Gallery, London, is also represented in numerous other collections including the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin, Brighton Art Gallery, Southampton City Art Gallery, the Tate collection, and the Guildhall Art Gallery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32500


Collings, Jesse (1831-1920), politician, youngest son of Thomas Collings, of Littleham, Exmouth, Devon, and his wife, Anne Palmer, was born at Littleham on 9 January 1831. His father was a bricklayer, afterwards proprietor of a small building business; but in later life Jesse Collings was fond of tracing his descent from the Palmers because they had, he believed, been yeoman farmers. He was educated at a dame-school 'for tradesmen's sons', and also spent a year at Church House School, Stoke, Plymouth, which was kept by a cousin. At the age of fifteen he became a shop assistant, later a clerk and commercial traveller in the ironmongery trade. In 1850 he entered, as a clerk, the firm of Booth & Co. of Birmingham, which was renamed Collings and Wallis when he became a partner fourteen years later; he retired in 1879. He married, in 1858, Emily, daughter of Edward Oxenbould, a master at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham. They had one daughter. 
While living at Exeter and representing his firm, Collings obtained much knowledge of rural conditions by his travels through the west of England. His first public work was done when he helped to establish the Devon and Exeter Boys' Industrial School in 1862. Influenced by study of American education, his interest in education developed when he went to live in Birmingham in 1864, and in 1868 he published 'An Outline of the American School System', which was the immediate cause of the formation of the National Education League for the advocacy of free and non-sectarian elementary education. He was elected a town councillor for the Edgbaston division of Birmingham in that year, and thereafter became prominently associated with the programme of municipal reform in the city carried out by Joseph Chamberlain, with whom he developed a close personal and political friendship. He was mayor from 1878 to 1880. 
Outside municipal affairs Collings was becoming widely known as an advocate of free education and of land reform. In the latter connection he, with a number of other radicals, was closely associated with Joseph Arch and the National Agricultural Labourers' Union, and with the Highland Land Law Reform Association. In 1880 he was returned for Ipswich as a Liberal, and in 1882 he secured the passing of the 'Allotments Extension Act'. In January 1886 his smallholdings' amendment to the queen's speech united Liberals and home-rulers and felled Salisbury's government. Gladstone made Collings parliamentary secretary to the Local Government Board, while controversially reducing his salary. Collings was unseated on petition in April 1886, thus missing the home-rule debates; but he followed his friend Chamberlain into Liberal Unionism. In July 1886 he was elected for Bordesley, Birmingham, as a Liberal Unionist, holding the seat until 1918. In the Salisbury administration of 1895 he was under-secretary to the Home department, retaining office until 1902. In 1892 he had been made a privy councillor. A loyal colleague and good party servant, his work in office was mainly administrative, and unconnected with his life interests. He died at Southfield, Church Road, Edgbaston (once Chamberlain's home), on 20 November 1920. 
From the days when he appeared on the platforms of the National Agricultural Labourers' Union until he retired from public life, Collings was an enthusiastic advocate of land reform. It was he who, in 1885, began to use the phrase 'three acres and a cow', which for many years was the war-cry of the land-reformers. The home-rule controversy of 1886 scattered the group of radical land-reformers that had gathered round the agricultural labourers' movement. They were henceforth in opposing political camps. Arch and his associates adhered to the Gladstonian party, Collings and his associates became unionists, and the effectiveness of both groups was destroyed. In 1883 Collings had formed the Allotments Extension Association; and in 1888 he became its president, but was deposed, partly as a result of differences on the question of home rule. He then formed the Rural Labourers' League (afterwards known as the Rural League) with which he was connected until 1919. He supported the tariff-reform campaign on agricultural grounds. He continued his interest in rural affairs, including education, allotments, smallholdings, and the administration of charitable trusts. 
In education Collings was the advocate of a vocational system of elementary education in rural areas, and in land reform the advocate of a system of peasant proprietorship. His views on education were never embodied in legislation, though to a small extent they were adopted in teaching practice and administration. His ideas on land reform were partly embodied in the ineffective 'Small Holdings Act' of 1882, and again in the 'Land Settlement Act' of 1919. He published 'Land Reform' (1906), 'The Colonization of Rural Britain' (1914), and 'The Great War: its Lessons and Warnings' (1915). 


@@@@@


doc= 32501


Collingwood, Cuthbert (1826-1908), naturalist, was born on 25 December 1826, probably at Christchurch, Hampshire, the fifth of six sons of Samuel Collingwood, architect and contractor, of Wellington Grove, Greenwich, and his wife, Frances, daughter of Samuel Collingwood, printer to Oxford University. Educated at King's College School, London, he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 8 April 1845, graduating BA in 1849, MA in 1852, and MB in 1854. He subsequently studied at Edinburgh and Cambridge universities, and at Guy's Hospital, and spent some time in the medical schools of Paris and Vienna. From 1858 to 1866 he held the appointment of lecturer on botany to the Royal Infirmary medical school at Liverpool. Elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 1 November 1853, he served on the council in 1868. He also lectured on biology at the Liverpool School of Science. 
In 1866-7 Collingwood served as surgeon and naturalist on board HMS 'Rifleman' and HMS 'Serpent' on voyages of exploration in the China seas, doing research in marine zoology. 'Rambles of a Naturalist on the Shores and Waters of the China Seas' (1868) -- probably his best-known work -- was the result of this. On his return to Liverpool he became senior physician of the Northern Hospital and took a leading part in the intellectual life of the city. 
Collingwood was through life a prominent member of the Swedenborgian or 'New' Church. Besides some forty papers on natural history in scientific periodicals he published many expositions of his religious beliefs, of which the chief were: 'A Vision of Creation' (1872), a poem with an introduction, critical and geological; 'New Studies in Christian Theology' (published anonymously in 1883); and 'The Bible and the Age, Principles of Consistent Interpretation' (1886). 
Collingwood married Clara (died 1871), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Robert Mowbray of Cockavine; they had no children. In the later years of his life he lived in Paris, but returned to England in 1907. He died in Lewisham on 20 October 1908, aged eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 32502


Collingwood, Sir Edward Foyle (1900-1970), mathematician and medical administrator, was born at Lilburn Tower, near Wooler, Northumberland, on 17 January 1900, the eldest of the four sons of Colonel Cuthbert George Collingwood (1848-1933), landowner, of Glanton Pyke, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of the Revd William Fawcett of Somerford Keynes, Gloucestershire. Fawcett's wife was a coheir of the Foyle estate at Somerford Keynes. Collingwood and his brothers all enjoyed shooting and fishing and the social life of the country. Collingwood's mother, who survived him, was always a strong influence in the family. 
Collingwood went to the Royal Naval College at Osborne in 1913 and Dartmouth in 1914. A year later he joined the Royal Navy as a midshipman in the 'Collingwood' (by special arrangement). Before experiencing any action he fell down a hatchway, sustaining serious injuries, and was in a hospital ship which followed the battle of Jutland. He was invalided out of the navy. After passing twelfth for Woolwich he failed the medical examination, whereupon he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1918 to read mathematics. At Lilburn there were letters of Edward's great-grandfather Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, showing his interest in the teaching of mathematics to the young; Collingwood was much interested in these and other papers, in the small observatory built by his grandfather, and in biology, bacteria, and photographic techniques. 
At Cambridge Collingwood's director of studies, G. H. Hardy, inspired him to aim at mathematical research, to the dismay of his father and uncle. He obtained a third class in part one of the mathematical tripos in 1919 and in political specials one and two in the Michaelmas term of 1920, and then took his degree the following year. This unorthodox course left him free to study those parts of mathematics which interested him at his own pace and omit large parts of the heavy course for part two of the mathematical tripos. As an undergraduate he kept somewhat aloof from his mathematical contemporaries, and had a full, but entirely separate, social life. He used his private means to entertain well, but never ostentatiously. 
When Hardy went to Oxford in 1920, J. E. Littlewood advised Collingwood on research. He obtained a Rayleigh prize in 1923, but failed to obtain a Trinity research fellowship. At the invitation of W. H. Young he went to Aberystwyth in 1922. There Professor G. Valiron of Strasbourg was lecturing in French on integral functions, and Collingwood made translations which eventually formed a book. In 1924-5 he held a Rouse Ball travelling studentship, mainly at the Sorbonne, and thus became the only one of the Hardy-Littlewood school to have close relationships with French mathematicians. 
Collingwood took his MA degree in 1925 and, returning to Cambridge, read for a PhD degree (which he obtained in 1929) for a dissertation which included material from some already published papers on integral and meromorphic functions. He was made a member of the high table at Trinity, and in 1930 steward. Most unusually for a non-fellow, he was elected to the council of Trinity College. He still entertained well. He also regularly gave two advanced courses for the mathematical faculty, but did no regular undergraduate teaching. The six mathematicians Littlewood, Collingwood, Macintyre, Clunie, Rahman, and Joyal constituted a sequence, each the PhD student of the one before. 
In the 1930s Collingwood became interested in pictures, and, when a family trust fell in on the death of an aunt, he bought some fine contemporary and eighteenth-century pictures through Geoffrey Agnew, one of his earlier Cambridge friends. He also made a collection of Chinese porcelain, becoming quite an expert on the subject. 
Collingwood was lieutenant in the Northumberland hussars in 1923-7 and became a JP in 1935. He was chairman of the bench for many years and deputy lieutenant for Northumberland in 1959. He gave much time and thought to the management of the Lilburn estate. When in 1937 he became high sheriff of Northumberland he gave up his Cambridge obligations, but continued to visit, in particular for the college commemoration feast. 
In the Second World War Collingwood joined the Admiralty minesweeping division as an officer of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, reaching the rank of acting captain. He served as director of scientific research with the Admiralty delegation in Washington in 1942, as officer in charge of the sweeping division in 1943, chief scientist, Admiralty mine design department in 1943-5, and as one of a delegation to Moscow on a special scientific mission. His all-round ability and wide experience, backed by his determination, were effective in getting the money needed for the scientists' work; he also impressed the scientists as having a sound grasp of physical principles. In 1946 he was appointed CBE, and became an officer of the American Legion of Merit. 
Collingwood's first paper in 1924 generalized Nevanlinna's second fundamental theorem from 2 to 'p' exceptional values, a result which Littlewood had, independently, stated in a letter to Nevanlinna. Collingwood's second paper, also in 1924, developed the idea of deficient values, questioning whether they were asymptotic. During the war this was proved false. After a gap from 1932 to 1948 Collingwood returned to this subject and discussed the islands in which |'f'('z')- 'a'| [ greekLettersigma and 'f'('z') takes no value more than 'p' times, where greekLettersigma and 'p' may tend to infinity with |'a'|. These later papers seem less effective than the first two but led to fruitful discussions with Weitsman in June 1970. Collingwood's wide knowledge of the literature of mathematics enabled him and the writer to develop the theory of cluster sets in a joint paper in 'Acta Mathematica' (87, 1952) which W. K. Hayman described as the beginning of the modern subject. If 'f'('z') takes values on the Riemann sphere in |'z'| [ greekLetterIota, and there exists a sequence 'zn' &rarr; eigreekLettertheta such that 'f'('zn') &rarr; 'w', then 'w' belongs to the cluster set 'C'('f', e'i'greekLettertheta) of 'f'('z') at e'i'greekLettertheta. Their relationship to the range of values taken by 'f'('z') near e'i'greekLettertheta, and to neighbouring Fatou points, e'i'greekLettertheta'n', greekLettertheta'n' &rarr; greekLettertheta at which 'f'('z') tends to a limit in any angle, and so on, formed the subject matter of the rest of Collingwood's mathematical papers. The standard textbook, written by Collingwood and A. J. Lohwater (1966) includes Collingwood's important applications to prime ends. 
After 1945 Collingwood actively sought mathematical contacts. In particular he attended the new British Mathematical Colloquium, where he helped to organize special sessions on the theory of functions, and thus soon became a well-known figure. In 1959 he obtained a Cambridge ScD, in 1962 he was knighted, and in 1965 he was elected FRS and made an honorary LLD of Glasgow University where in 1961 he had given the seventh Gibson lecture. He joined the council of the London Mathematical Society (LMS) in April 1959 and was treasurer from 1960 to 1969, when he became its president. Collingwood made the fullest use of the benefaction of G. H. Hardy to strengthen and widen the activities of the society -- including the founding of the Applied Probability Trust for the publication of the 'Journal of Applied Probability', edited by J. Gani, which began in 1964. Collingwood took a large part in drafting the petition, draft charter, and statutes for a royal charter (approved by the privy council in 1964) for the LMS to mark its centenary in 1965. 
An interest in bacteria, as well as in local affairs, led Collingwood into medical fields. He was an active supporter of Newcastle hospitals, vice-chairman of the Central Health Services Council (1959-63), vice-president of the International Hospital Federation (1959-67), a member of the Medical Research Council (1960-68) and treasurer (1960-67), and a member of the royal commission on medical education (1965-8). He was made an officer of the French ordre de la Sante Publique, in 1963. He had a great effect on medicine by contributing to the technical development of the use of computers in that area. He spoke at the annual congress of the British Institute of Radiology in 1967 and at that of the British Dental Association in 1970. He also had a strong interest in history, and knowledge of it. 
Collingwood was short and fair and walked with long strides. He early became very bald. He was made an honorary DSc of Durham in 1950, and was active in Durham University affairs until his death at home at Lilburn Tower on 25 October 1970. He never married. His large mathematical library and many manuscripts were left to the department of mathematics at Durham, and a college has been named after him. 
M. L. Cartwright', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32503


Collingwood, Robin George (1889-1943), philosopher and historian, was born on 22 February 1889 at Cartmel Fell, Lancashire, the only son and third of the four children of William Gershom Collingwood (1854-1932) and his wife, Edith Mary (1857-1928), daughter of Thomas Isaac, corn merchant, of Notting Hill, London. W. G. Collingwood, son of the landscape painter William Collingwood, was a writer, painter, and archaeologist, much influenced by John Ruskin, whose secretary (and eventually biographer) he became, while his wife was an accomplished pianist and watercolourist. The family was poor but highly cultivated, and Robin Collingwood was initially educated by his father at home, an education which combined formal instruction with many practical excursions to study and sketch the natural history and archaeology of the area around their home next to Coniston Water in the Lake District. The generosity of a family friend enabled Collingwood to attend preparatory school in Grange for a year when he was thirteen, from where he entered Rugby School in 1903. Collingwood was precocious, with highly developed scholarly and artistic interests and no great enthusiasm for organized games -- not a recipe for happiness as a boarder at one of the leading public schools of the period. Thirty years later he recalled with undiminished aversion 'the pigsty conditions of our daily life' and the fact that team games 'constituted the real religion of the school'. Although by his own account he became 'a rebel, more or less declared, against the whole system of teaching' (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 8-9), he none the less won a classical scholarship to University College, Oxford, in 1908. There he relished the freedom to pursue his reading without interruption; he seems largely to have shunned the social and athletic life of the university, studying with such unchecked appetite that it may even have been during his undergraduate years that he laid the foundations for his later insomnia and ill health. Having obtained a first in classical moderations in 1910, he proceeded to read 'literae humaniores' or Greats, though, unusually, he chose not to specialize but rather to cultivate both the philosophical and the historical sides of the school. None the less, he made a particular mark in the former, and it was to a fellowship and tutorship in philosophy at Pembroke College that he was elected in the summer of 1912, shortly before his first-class degree result was announced. 
During the First World War Collingwood worked in the intelligence department at the Admiralty; among other tasks, he wrote a study of the juridical problems of the navigation of the Scheldt up to Antwerp. In 1918 he married Ethel Winifred, third daughter of Robert Chelles Graham, landowner, of Skipness; they had a son and a daughter. In the decade after the end of the war, Collingwood bore an extremely heavy tutorial burden, for some years undertaking the philosophy teaching for Lincoln College as well as for Pembroke; this burden was somewhat alleviated by his appointment as university lecturer in philosophy and Roman history in 1927. But his always intense inner intellectual life managed to find expression in writing throughout this period. His earliest philosophical publications addressed questions of religion and aesthetics, including a short book entitled 'Religion and Philosophy' (1916) which defended religion as a form of knowledge rather than as a mere expression of need or emotion (he remained a committed if unorthodox Anglican all his life), and an admiring centenary appraisal of Ruskin (published in 1922 as 'Ruskin's Philosophy') in which he endorsed the idea of art as an expression of 'the whole self'. His first substantial book was 'Speculum mentis, or, The Map of Knowledge' (1924), an ambitious attempt, in the manner of philosophical idealism, to chart the 'forms of experience' as an ascending series, moving through art, religion, science, history, and philosophy. A broadly similar point of view informed 'An Essay on Philosophical Method', published in 1933, where the account of the relations between the forms of knowledge is still more emphatically dialectical and historical, so that philosophy becomes consciousness's never-ceasing striving for self-understanding. The work was a thoroughgoing repudiation of the sceptical and nominalist manner of philosophizing favoured among the 'realists' and other analytic schools. As one later commentator summarized the force of Collingwood's case, 'It follows that philosophy studies not an inert object capable of being split into the clean-cut divisions of a classificatory system, but an object which is living and developing, an object at least akin to, if not identical with, history' (Knox, 'PBA', 471). 'An Essay on Philosophical Method' is, in addition, a notably stylish, indeed writerly, book; looking back in 1938, conscious perhaps that his last works would have to be written hurriedly, Collingwood described it as 'my best book in matter; in style, I may call it my only book' (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 118). Its rather lordly deployment of idiosyncratic distinctions and assimilations is not very helpful, but it does contain a brilliant section on philosophical style itself. 
Throughout his time as an Oxford philosophy tutor Collingwood continued to pursue his researches into the history and archaeology of Roman Britain. His master here had been F. J. Haverfield, professor of ancient history in Oxford, and following Haverfield's death in 1919 Collingwood determined to continue the work of describing and cataloguing all the Roman inscriptions in Britain, a subject upon which he became recognized in his lifetime as the leading authority. He was an active and enterprising archaeologist, directing excavations in northern England nearly every year; he published numerous articles and reports in the 'Transactions of the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society' (of which he was for some years joint editor), many of them illustrated by his own sketches. Collingwood insisted that his archaeological work was a practical application of what he was to term the 'logic of question and answer' (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 37), and on occasion his bold hypotheses about the meaning of the archaeological evidence were spectacularly confirmed, as in his reasoning that if Hadrian's Wall comprised a series of signal-stations, then further signal-stations should have existed along the shores of Cumberland, which later excavations proved to be the case. His standing in the field was acknowledged by the invitation to write, with J. N. L. Myres, the opening volume in the 'Oxford History of England' entitled 'Roman Britain and the English Settlements', which was published in 1936. The bibliography of Collingwood's writings in this area contains, in addition to two other more popular books on Roman Britain, more than 120 shorter items, and though his work was often controversial and sometimes overturned by subsequent findings, he made a remarkable contribution to a subject in which original work is necessarily somewhat technical and highly specialized. 
Collingwood identified the attempt 'to bring about a rapprochement between philosophy and history' as his life's work (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 77), and in the course of the 1930s he thought his way ever more deeply into the problems of historical knowledge, often in courses of lectures which remained unpublished at his death. His most famous dictum, which has been taken as something of a motto for his whole approach, was the claim that 'all history is the history of thought... and therefore all history is the re-enactment of past thought in the historian's own mind' (Collingwood, 'Idea of History', 215). In this and many other remarks to the same effect Collingwood was identifying what was involved in understanding an intentional human action. It is important that this was intended not as a prescription for the method of historical enquiry, but a description of its success: only insofar as historians can 're-enact' in their own thought what an act meant to its agent can they explain that act. This insistence on the need for imaginative identification with historical agents can be separated from two other, more extreme, views which Collingwood also held: that only intentional actions provide the material of history, and that because history is concerned with the reasons for actions, it cannot have recourse to causal explanation. One of the characteristic and distinctive features of Collingwood's writing on the philosophy of history was the wide range of actual historical examples on which it drew for illustration, thereby bearing out his larger contention that philosophy was essentially a form of reflection on practice and that it always gained in power when the philosopher had firsthand experience of the relevant practice. He underwent fifty sessions of psychoanalysis before considering himself qualified to comment on it (Collingwood, 'Essays in Political Philosophy', 81). 
By the late 1930s Collingwood had published sketches of these ideas only in a few essays and addresses, though he had devoted several of his Oxford lecture courses to them (further series of lectures on the history of cosmological and scientific thinking were to be published posthumously as 'The Idea of Nature', 1945). Collingwood's polished and provocative lectures won him a considerable local reputation at the time; some of his abler tutorial pupils also found him a stimulating, if somewhat intimidating, teacher. But he was always a rather removed figure, visibly absorbed in his own speculation and scholarship, an impression enhanced by his habit of spending weekends and vacations at his house in North Moreton some miles outside Oxford. He took relatively little part in college and university business, though he was a very active delegate of Oxford University Press between 1928 and 1941. He was elected to the British Academy in 1934, an honour all the more welcome for providing him with what he regarded as 'a more open-minded audience' than he was used to finding in Oxford (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 116). In 1935 he was elected to the Waynflete professorship of metaphysics, in succession to his friend J. A. Smith; his election entailed a move to Magdalen College. Despite his own sense of isolation and neglect, it would seem that his distinction as a philosopher had been recognized even in Oxford. In 1938, the year in which he published 'The Principles of Art', his major work in aesthetics, he was also awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the University of St Andrews. 
The year 1938 was a crisis and turning point in Collingwood's life. In February that year, a few days before his forty-ninth birthday, he suffered a stroke. There had been serious worries about his health for some time: as early as 1932 he had needed a period of recuperation after an earlier breakdown. Now his doctor ordered a complete change of scene. Oxford gave him an entire year's medical leave: Collingwood retired first to his beloved Lake District, where he wrote 'An Autobiography' (1939); then he embarked on a long sea voyage to the East Indies, a journey which occupied the period from October 1938 to April 1939. After his return he resumed his duties at Oxford, but his health continued to deteriorate, and he finally resigned his chair in 1941. It was during these final years that he wrote some of his most important work, though parts of it had a rather complicated publication history. 
Collingwood completed 'An Essay on Metaphysics' (1940) during his voyage to the East Indies (its preface thanks the captain of the ship for providing 'ideal conditions' for the book's composition). After his return he devoted much of his energy to a large, and largely neglected, work of political theory, published in 1942 as 'The New Leviathan'. But during these years he also began a work on the philosophy of history for which he clearly had high ambitions. For example, he wrote to his son on 14 February 1939 from the East Indies: 'I have begun writing ''The Principles of History'', which will go down to posterity as my masterpiece' (Dussen, 61), and to his friend Gerald Simpson, in late spring 1939, he described it as 'the book which my whole life has been spent in preparing to write' (Collingwood, 'Principles', lviii). But he was never to complete it; his former pupil, T. M. Knox, professor of moral philosophy (and later principal) at St Andrews, drew on one chapter for 'The Idea of History', but then the manuscript appeared to have been lost, and it was not published in its entirety (under the title 'The Principles of History') until 1999. 
The books of this last period were more immediately controversial than Collingwood's earlier work had been. He had become acutely conscious of the threat posed by Hitler and Mussolini, and he deplored the apparent unawareness or even indifference to this threat manifested by so many of his countrymen, including the majority of professional philosophers. For this reason he enthusiastically supported A. D. Lindsay who stood, unsuccessfully, as an anti-appeasement candidate in the Oxford by-election of 1938; 'your candidature', he wrote to Lindsay, 'shows the spirit of English democracy is not dead' (D. Scott, 'A. D. Lindsay: a Biography', 1971, 251). These convictions were given forceful expression in some of his later writings. The autobiography, for example, contained not only a swingeing attack on the British government's response to the Spanish Civil War and its policy of appeasement towards Germany, but also a vigorous denunciation of the 'realists' -- notably John Cook Wilson, and in Cambridge G. E. Moore -- for what he saw as their pedantic and uncreative conception of philosophy, and their scepticism about its possible social role. 'The minute philosophers of my youth, for all their profession of a purely scientific detachment from practical affairs', were in fact, Collingwood asserted, 'the propagandists of a coming Fascism' (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 167). The beard he sported on his return from the East Indies was taken by some of his colleagues as confirmation of a lurch to the left in his political views. 'The New Leviathan' was in part Collingwood's attempt, by contrast, to put philosophy at the service of his sense of the gravity of the contemporary political situation and to diagnose the nature of the 'new barbarism' now threatening civilization. 
But perhaps the philosophically most important and original aspect of Collingwood's later work was the elaboration, in 'An Essay on Metaphysics', of his radically historicist notion of metaphysics as the exploration of 'the absolute presuppositions' of different periods. Collingwood thought that any proposition or statement was (implicitly) an answer to a question, and that every question involved a presupposition of that question's being appropriate or, indeed, intelligible. There are some presuppositions that make questions intelligible without themselves being the answer to any question, and these are 'absolute'. It follows that they are not propositions or statements; they are implicit in practice, and not always amenable to being explicitly formulated by those engaged in the practice. It was part of the thorough-going historicism of this final phase of Collingwood's thought that he did not believe, in Kantian manner, that the preconditions of 'our' practices of enquiry were universal and timeless -- absolute presuppositions are always changing. 
Since metaphysics is identified as the study of absolute presuppositions, it seems to be assimilated to the history of ideas. Collingwood was prepared, in a sense, to accept this, both because the study of remoter systems of thought itself involved having those thoughts, and because he saw the present as in effect always 'the recent past'. Reflection on the presuppositions of inquiry in the past, and on our own in the present, equally involves the aim, which can never be completely realized, of making an inchoate set of presuppositions coherent. The questions of relativism that have been much discussed by Collingwood's commentators in this connection are perhaps best directed to the issue of how far criteria of coherence are themselves historically variable. 
Collingwood's final years also saw significant changes in his hitherto settled way of life. He was always a keen sailor, and only a couple of months after returning from his East Indian voyage he set out with a group of Oxford undergraduates to spend the summer sailing round the Aegean; he published the journal of this voyage as 'The First Mate's Log' in 1940. After resigning his chair in 1941, he moved first to Berkshire, and eventually to Lanehead, the family home he had inherited at Coniston. In 1942 his marriage was dissolved on his wife's petition, and in the same year he married Kathleen Frances, daughter of Francis Edgcumbe Edwardes, schoolmaster; they had one daughter. Collingwood died of pneumonia at Coniston on 9 January 1943; he was buried in the local churchyard three days later. 
Though he always repudiated the label of idealist, Collingwood's work recognizably belonged to that style of philosophizing which, broadly speaking, took its inspiration from Hegel's critique of Kant. He claimed that T. H. Green and his followers, though often labelled Hegelians, especially by their opponents, really represented 'a continuation and criticism of the indigenous English and Scottish philosophies of the middle nineteenth century' (Collingwood, 'Autobiography', 15). His work displays particularly close affinities with the philosophy of the Italians Croce and Gentile, though not with the latter's fascist politics; he translated several works by Croce and by his good friend Guido de Ruggiero (Collingwood was an exceptionally accomplished linguist, moving easily in several modern European languages as well as, of course, being proficient in Latin and ancient Greek). But philosophical idealism of any kind was out of favour in Oxford in the 1920s and 1930s, where first the 'realist' school led by Cook Wilson was dominant, until that in turn was challenged by the beginnings of logical positivism and 'ordinary language' philosophy. Collingwood, by nature an intellectual loner and something of a social recluse, resented what he felt to be his philosophical isolation in Oxford, indeed in Britain more generally, and his lack of engagement with the work of his contemporaries may have contributed to the neglect into which his work fell immediately after his death. Such reputation as he did continue to have rested largely on 'The Idea of History', published posthumously in 1946. This work drew on essays, lectures, and drafts mostly written during the 1930s, including some material from the manuscript left incomplete at the end of his East Indian voyage of 1938-9; Knox was responsible for the selection and arrangement of the material (as also of 'The Idea of Nature'), making editorial decisions of which later scholars have not always approved. 

'The Idea of History' has become something of a classic in a field not over-supplied with classics written in English. This standing was to some extent a by-product of a broader development, to which the book in turn contributed, namely, the rise of the philosophy of history as a reputable sub-field in the course of the 1950s and 1960s (more reputable among historians than among philosophers, perhaps). Collingwood's emphasis upon history as the interpretation of purposive action, and hence upon the primacy of the need to recover historical agents' own understanding of their situation, provided a valuable antidote to the aridities of the neo-positivist attempt to reduce historical explanation to the general operation of causal laws. 'If the philosophy of history is now in a flourishing state in English-speaking countries', observed one authority in 1995, 'this is due in no small measure to the stimulus provided by the writings of R. G. Collingwood' (Dray, 1). 
With the revival of interest in Collingwood's work which began in the 1960s and 1970s, several of his other works, particularly 'An Essay on Philosophical Method' and 'The Principles of Art', have won fresh admirers, not least for the elegance of their style. 'An Essay on Metaphysics' contains interesting ideas, some of them related to questions about practice and its reflective description, that are also raised by the later work of Wittgenstein. For most readers, however, it seems likely that the two works by which Collingwood has been best-known since his death -- 'An Autobiography' and 'The Idea of History' -- will remain the most widely read, and with good reason. It was in these two books that he came nearest to realizing his ideal of persuading a wide readership to think seriously about the distinctiveness of history as a form of knowledge. Through these works he almost single-handed kept alive an anti-positivist understanding of history through a dark period largely dominated by the narrow sympathies of analytic philosophers and the brisk empiricism of political historians. Only in the closing decades of the twentieth century was his achievement fully recognized, installing him as the presiding spirit of a remarkable efflorescence in the English-speaking world of enquiries into the nature and scope of historical understanding. 


@@@@@


doc= 32504


Collins, John Churton (1848-1908), university extension teacher and advocate of the academic study of English literature, was born on 26 March 1848 at Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, the eldest of the three sons of Henry Ramsay Collins, physician, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Churton (died 1898), of Chester. His father died of consumption on 6 June 1858 at Melbourne, on a visit to Australia as a ship's doctor, and from this time John Churton (died 1884), his mother's brother, paid for his education. He attended Ellesmere School, from which the headmaster, J. D. Day, wrote to his mother in 1862, suggesting that Collins was 'unfitted for the duties of a clerk in an office.... His mind is, as you say, quite set on literary pursuits' (Collins, 11). He went on to recommend that she send him to a school where more classics were taught, and so Collins entered King Edward's School, Birmingham, in 1863, under the headmaster Charles Evans and, as a potential university candidate, was placed in the classics department. He was entirely self-taught in English literature, through wide and voracious independent reading, in the course of which he committed whole texts to memory. 
Financed by his uncle, allegedly to become a clergyman, Collins entered Balliol College, Oxford, on 20 April 1868, where his fellow students included Andrew Lang, Herbert Asquith, and Alfred Milner. Perhaps Collins felt the need to impress in such company, and so affected the jaunty mannerisms of a promising literary man, flaunting a velvet coat and being accompanied by a deerhound called Prince: an ironic pose for someone later renowned for his antipathy to the aesthetic movement. Collins had no great admiration for the then master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, and on Jowett's death in 1893, Collins wrote that although he was 'kind and good... to others... my experience [was] much otherwise' (Collins, 131). It was his tutor T. H. Green who had the major impact on his development. As Collins later put it: 'For two or three terms he was my College Tutor. No man had greater influence or was so deeply respected by the best men of my time' (ibid., 53). 
Collins's notebooks from his Oxford years indicate that he emulated other self-respecting undergraduates of his day, and simply absorbed English literature as he went along. Thus he read histories of English and European literature, especially the volumes of Thomas Warton's 'History of English Poetry' (1774-8) and Henry Hallam's 'Introduction to the Literature of Europe' (1837-9). It was Collins's overriding interest in literature as a reflection of life that made him the knowledgeable critic and biographer he eventually became. By reading English literature side by side with the classics, he developed an 'obsessive concern with questions of literary influence... [that] led him to insist that, wherever possible, ancient and modern literature must be studied together' (Kearney, 5). Andrew Lang recalled that Collins 'always reminded me outwardly of Will Ladislas ['sic'] in the then new novel ''Middlemarch''. He was slimly built and very active' (Collins, 17). However, in 1872, Collins was awarded only a second-class honours degree, with no chance of pursuing an academic career. Since he no longer wished to enter the church, his uncle withdrew financial support and they never met again. 
Like many before, and since, Collins found himself, in 1872, with an Oxford degree, expensive tastes, empty pockets, and no prospects. Yet he never really left Oxford, returning during most vacations to stay in lodgings. Lacking helpful friends to provide letters of introduction to prominent editors, Collins wrote his first 'turn-over' article, published in 'The Globe' newspaper during December 1878. However, the income from his contributions to the daily press was hardly enough to live on and, at times, Collins was wholly dependent on non-literary pursuits, and chiefly the speed with which he could address envelopes (he received 2's'. 6died per thousand). 
By 1873 Collins was employed by William Baptiste Scoones at his coaching school in Garrick Street as tutor in English literature and classics, preparing students for the civil service. Many of them were Oxford and Cambridge graduates who had never studied English literature formally, but needed it none the less for the Indian Civil Service examinations, originally set in 1855 by a committee which had included both Jowett and T. B. Macaulay. In later life Collins often referred to this when berating universities for neglecting the teaching of English literature. His fourteen years of tutoring for Scoones developed his great talent for teaching, and gave him time and opportunity to ponder educational issues in depth. 
Following Trollope's advice, in 'The Duke's Children', that 'no young man should dare to neglect literature', Collins carried it further than most by his mania for facts and details about famous men, either where they lived or were buried. His curiosity and writing also extended to the criminal element, and led him to interview the claimant in the Tichborne case, and he also became a frequent visitor to police stations and mortuaries (Kearney, 18-19). He also sent flattering letters to literary men and, in this way, he met Thomas Carlyle after writing to him for advice and guidance in 1874. In later life, he followed Carlyle's recommendation to add a knowledge of German to his repertoire of French, Greek, Latin, and Italian. In 1874 Macmillan's commissioned and published Collins's first book, 'Sir Joshua Reynolds as a Portrait Painter', for which he wrote brief commentaries on twenty portraits. 
Another well-known figure to whom Collins wrote was Algernon Swinburne, himself a Balliol man, who was impressed by Collins's plan to edit 'The Plays and Poems of Cyril Tourneur', the Jacobean dramatist, and on the book's publication in 1878 Collins dedicated it to Swinburne. Unfortunately, later editors found it a careless and inadequate edition, although T. S. Eliot was convinced that 'Collins' introduction is by far the most penetrating interpretation of Tourneur that has been written' (Eliot, 'Selected Essays', 1951, 189). 
It was in 1878, however, that Collins truly arrived on the London literary scene. His first periodical article appeared in the March 1878 issue of the 'Cornhill Magazine', and it was followed by pieces in 'Temple Bar' and the 'Quarterly Review'. He also became better acquainted with literary figures, associating with men such as William Rossetti and Mark Pattison, and establishing an extensive social circle that was later to include Arthur Conan Doyle, with whom he was to establish a dining club known as the Murder Club. His improving prospects enabled Collins to marry, on 11 April 1878, Pauline Mary Strangways, the only daughter of the solicitor Thomas Henry Strangways. They had been involved for some time; in the previous January she had given birth to the first of their seven children, Laurence Churton Collins, who was to become his father's first biographer. 
From 1880 onwards Collins found a new outlet for his great energy, lecturing for the London Society for the Extension of University Teaching, one of the most influential creative educational forces in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Collins and such friends as Henry Morley used their teaching as a power base for securing the admission of English literature as a subject for study in the curricula of British universities. Collins also lectured for the Oxford Extension Society and delivered more than 10,000 lectures (Collins, 231) throughout the midlands and southern England, until his last presentation in Kingston, in 1907. This lecturing and teaching (which also included a great deal of marking) provided Collins with his first regular income of $30 per course. In total, he taught at seventy different centres, delivering fifteen weekly lectures, six days a week, in places as far apart as Birmingham and Brighton. A train enthusiast, who often rode on the footplate, he used the railways extensively in the pursuit of this work. On top of all of this, Collins often worked until the early hours of the morning, writing articles for the literary journals -- in total he produced more than fifty substantial articles, often more than fifty printed pages long. These often took him months of concentrated work, and he regularly collected and republished them in book form. 
Between January 1880 and July 1881 Collins published three articles on Tennyson's poetry in the 'Cornhill Magazine', where he continued exploring his theme of the relationship between classical and modern literature and how the study of one must be allied with that of the other. So Collins illustrated 'how [Tennyson's] 'In Memoriam' was suggested by Petrarch; his 'Dream of Fair Women' by Chaucer; his 'Dora' is the versification of a story by Miss Mitford' (J. C. Collins, 'The Study of English Literature: a Plea for its Recognition and Organization at the Universities', 1891, 7-8). Collins went on to state that 'as is usual with him in all cases where he borrows, the details of the work are his own; he has added grace, elaboration, and symmetry. A rough crayon draught has been metamorphosed into a perfect picture' (ibid., 58). Even so, by maintaining that Tennyson's poetry was so directly indebted to the work of earlier authors, Collins opened up the possibility of accusations of plagiarism, or at least of a distinct lack of originality. Tennyson, naturally, was less than pleased, and exercised his anger by referring to Collins as 'the louse on the locks of literature' (Charteris, 197), perhaps echoing Robert Burns's poem 'Ode to a Louse'. Yet, in later editions of his poetry, Tennyson quietly slipped in some of Collins's references (Pattison, 7) and Collins himself later edited selections of Tennyson's poetry, publishing his essays in expanded book form as 'Illustrations of Tennyson' in 1891. 
Collins's notoriety among the British literati increased with the publication of his review of John Addington Symonds's 'Shakespere's Predecessors in English Drama' (1884). Collins began his review in April of that year, but took such care over it that it was not until October 1885 that his fifty-one pages appeared in the 'Quarterly Review'. Collins wrote that: 'what we found was, we regret to say, every indication of precipitous haste, a style which where it differs from the style of extemporary journalism differs for the worse -- florid, yet commonplace; full of impurities; a narrative clogged with endless repetitions, without symmetry, without proportion. ('Quarterly Review', 161, October 1885, 330-31)' This was Collins's way of arguing the case for critical discipline and scholarly rigour in advocating that English literature be made a subject of serious critical study. It was also his way of distancing himself from those, like Swinburne and the aesthetic movement, whom he felt would reduce 'criticism to mere impression and personal caprice' (Kearney, 56). Collins's review helped to establish his credentials as the follower of Thomas Carlyle and Matthew Arnold. 
After the failure of his candidature for the newly established Merton professorship of English literature at Oxford in 1885, Collins wrote an article in the 'Quarterly Review' for October 1886 entitled 'English literature at the universities'. In it he denounced the first Clark lecturer appointed at Cambridge University, Edmund Gosse, whose book 'From Shakespeare to Pope: an inquiry into the causes and phenomena of the rise of classical poetry in England' was based on his lecture series. The historian Joseph Baylen comments how Collins was 'motivated by a blend of envy and contempt for Gosse's pretentious and careless scholarship, [and] was quite right in his criticism of the book as 'a mass of error and inaccuracy'' in which centuries and even poetry and prose were confused and garbled. Gosse, charged Collins, was guilty of 'ephemeral literal journalism' and 'an offence to sound scholarship' (Baylen, 127). As another modern scholar more succinctly observed: 'If Collins was a louse on the locks of literature, Gosse was something of a flea on the skirts of scholarship' (Sutherland, 'Times Literary Supplement', 26 Jan 1973, 75). 
Collins collected the views of leading men on the proposal to include English literature in university curricula, and published them in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (December 1886). Several other articles followed, incorporated into 'The Study of English Literature' (1891), and Collins's modern biographer comments on the volume's significance when he states that: 'when the English tripos was being set up at Cambridge [in 1919], Collins's book was still being used by the English propagandists' (Kearney, 154). Oxford University eventually established a final honours school in English in 1894 and in 1903 set up a chair in English literature. Whatever the squabbles in the London literary world, Collins was viewed as an ideal spokesman for literary education, as well as a powerful propagandist for the extension movement. His audiences in Richmond had included members of the royal family, and, in London, Margot Tennant had attended his classes before marrying his old college friend H. H. Asquith. His reputation spread to the United States and, in 1894, he lectured for the American University Extension Society in New York and Philadelphia, as well as at Harvard and Yale universities. Also in 1894, Collins was appointed to the staff of the 'Saturday Review', alongside H. G. Wells and George Bernard Shaw, under Frank Harris's editorship, and Collins spent most of his 'free' Sundays writing his contributions for the following Saturday's issue of the 'Review'. 
Collins published more than twenty books, edited another twenty textbooks, and served as general editor for the publisher Edward Arnold's 'Shakespeare and British Classics for Schools'. In 1904, after several attempts elsewhere, Collins was finally rewarded with a chair of English literature at the new University of Birmingham, and was awarded an honorary doctorate by Durham University in 1905. Never one to rest on his laurels, nor jealously to guard the provenance of English literature's place, once gained, within the curriculum, from June 1907 he was involved in negotiations with Birmingham journalists on the establishment of a school of journalism in the university, and wrote on the topic in the 'Nineteenth Century' for February 1908. The debate inaugurated by these articles contributed to the decision, in 1910, between London University and the Institute of Journalists, to set up a university course for journalists, which started in 1919 (Hunter, 1982). 
In July 1908 Collins made his usual vacation visit to Oxford and, on a visit to Lowestoft, Suffolk, died in mysterious circumstances on 12 September. His body was found in a shallow dyke at Carlton Colville, Oulton Broad, with a bottle of sedatives lying nearby. An inquest on 18 September 1908 returned a verdict of accidental death and he was buried in Oulton churchyard; his widow was subsequently awarded a civil-list pension of $100 in 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 32505


Collins, Josephine (1887-1958), actress and singer, was born on 23 May 1887 in Whitechapel, London, the illegitimate daughter of Joseph Van den Berg, a professor of music, and Charlotte Louisa (Lottie) Collins (1865-1910), an actress, singer, and dancer. Lottie Collins was a flamboyantly successful music-hall artist who popularized the song 'Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay', which she had heard first in America and then introduced to London at the Tivoli music-hall in the Strand during October 1891, accompanied by her own dance. One of Jose Collins's earliest memories was of imitating this at a tea party at home. 
Jose had successively two stepfathers, the first Stephen Patrick Cooney, and the second James W. Tate (died 1922), a composer of light music. In the haphazard early chapters of her autobiography, 'The Maid of the Mountains: her Story' (1932), she describes herself as having been born Josephine Charlotte Cooney in May 1893 in Salford. 
The facts of Collins's life become clearer after her professional stage debut. She appeared at a Glasgow music-hall with Harry Lauder, illustrating his song 'I Love a Lassie' by doing a toe-dance in a tartan frock and glengarry as the 'little Scottish bluebell'. Soon after this, at the age of seventeen, by then with a contralto voice and already a strikingly confident stage presence, she was engaged in a touring company performing George Dance's 'A Chinese Honeymoon' (music by Howard Talbot) and later took the leading part of Mrs Pineapple: in her book she speaks of herself as 'fourteen and a half and the baby of the company' (Collins, 41). At Christmas 1905 she was back with Lauder in a Glasgow pantomime, 'Aladdin'. She had a variety of work in the years that followed, in the music-halls, in touring companies, and in pantomime; and in 1911, not long after her first marriage, to the actor Leslie Chatfield, she confidently set off to the United States seeking work. There she established herself so well in New York as a singer in operetta and in revue (she was in the 'Ziegfeld Follies' for some time) that she did not return to London until 1916. She returned to appear at Daly's Theatre in a musical comedy, 'The Happy Day', written by Seymour Hicks with music by Sidney Jones and Paul A. Rubens. Although she was not the lead in 'The Happy Day', within a year (1917) she was Teresa in 'The Maid of the Mountains', an operetta with words by Frederick Lonsdale and music by Harold Fraser-Simson and her stepfather J. W. Tate which ran at Daly's for more than three years: 1352 performances in all. It grew quickly into one of the favourite London plays of the war. Soldiers on leave crowded to see Jose Collins, and her song 'Love will Find a Way' was heard everywhere. For nearly a decade Collins was hugely popular with lovers of musical comedy. Invariably an attacking actress, she took to the stage with the same spirit and confidence which her mother had shown in the music-halls. Her strong bravura performances, her looks, the quality of her voice, and her well-known 'forceful personality' ('The Times', 15) were famous far beyond the circle of the West End theatres. She was described as 'the uncrowned queen of the musical comedy kingdom' (ibid.). But her success as Teresa typecast her in the same kind of good-hearted romantic roles, and such parts could not continue indefinitely. 
She followed 'The Maid of the Mountains' with a similar part, that of Dolores in 'The Southern Maid' (1920). Still at Daly's, in 1921 she was Sybil Renaud in 'Sybil'. She left Daly's after a quarrel with James White, the financier from Rochdale who had bought the theatre and who had entered her dressing-room uninvited with a party of friends. Always hot-tempered, she was quick to resent any slight or attempt to lessen her privileges. She moved across, under Robert Evett's management, to the Gaiety Theatre, where for a time she continued her success in such different parts as Vera in 'The Last Waltz' (1922) by R. Evett and R. Arkell (music by Oskar Straus), the name-part in 'Catherine' (1923) by R. Arkell and F. de Gresac, and Nell Gwynne in 'Our Nell' (1924). Although a generous portrait, the last was an undistinguished piece by L. N. Parker and R. Arkell, to music by Harold Fraser-Simson and Ivor Novello. 
In 1925 Collins invested and lost a good deal of her own money through the failure of a production of 'Frasquita' at the Prince's Theatre. She had a nervous breakdown following this episode, and although she toured various variety theatres in Britain and the United States, and took part in a brief and stormy run of George W. Meyer's revue 'Whitebirds' at His Majesty's Theatre in 1927, she 'never regained her commanding position in the theatre' ('The Times', 15). Eventually her intermittent stage work ceased altogether. 
Her first marriage ended in divorce in 1917. On 27 October 1920 she married Lord Robert Edward Innes-Ker (1885-1958), third son of the seventh duke of Roxburghe. They were divorced in 1935. That year she married Dr Gerald Baeyertz Kirkland, who survived her. She had no children. During the Second World War, when her husband served as a major in the Royal Army Medical Corps, she trained as a nurse in order to work voluntarily at the hospitals where he was stationed. During her later years she lived a quiet domestic life in suburban Essex. She died in an Epping hospital on 6 December 1958. 
J. C. Trewin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32506


Collins, Michael (1890-1922), Irish revolutionary and chairman of the provisional government of the Irish Free State, was born on 16 October 1890 at Woodfield, co. Cork, the third son and youngest of eight children of Michael John Collins (1815-1896) and Mary Anne O'Brien (1855-1907), on the farm Michael senior had inherited from his father. Their holding was a substantial one, and his was an established and active family. 
Michael's father's death left his mother in charge of the family, and it was she who set for him the goal of a Post Office position, a common ambition in west co. Cork. Already enrolled at the local national school -- under a determinedly nationalist teacher -- he was dispatched to nearby Clonakilty to be tutored for the Post Office exams. He was duly awarded a temporary boy clerkship in the Savings Bank, which he took up in July 1906. 
Collins spent the next nine and a half years living with his sister Hannie in west London. He was studiously ambitious, and acquired a knowledge of accounting, but failed on several occasions to gain a permanent civil service post. In 1910 he took a job with an accounting firm, moving later to a stockbroker's office. In 1914 he moved on again, to the bills department of an American bank. 
Collins moved in largely Irish circles, first among his fellow employees at the Post Office and then within the patriotic clubs and societies to which many of them belonged. His was a self-educated radicalism, but his political instincts were rooted at home: local policemen described the Collinses of Woodfield as 'brainy', 'disloyal', and 'dangerous' (Stewart, 41-5). He joined the Gaelic League and studied Irish. He played hurling and football with a Gaelic Athletic Association club and became its secretary -- and subsequently the treasurer of the London board. He was a member of Sinn Fein by 1908; in 1909 he was sworn into the clandestine Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB); in 1914 he became an Irish Volunteer. In the same year, he was appointed treasurer of the IRB for southern England, and became privy to its plans for a rising in 1916. He also contemplated joining his brother Pat in Chicago. The introduction of conscription in Britain in January 1916 forced his hand. Although later accused of being merely a draft dodger, it was as a committed republican rebel that he relocated to Dublin in January 1916. 
Collins's reputation was that of a 'wild' Corkman, fiercely attached to his native county and as high-spirited in all his other attachments and relations. Mick was quick-witted, humorous, gregarious, and tall and handsome -- attractive to men and women alike. He formed good friendships easily but was equally liable to fights and fits of temper; he was easy to bait. His relationships with men often had a bantering, competitive edge to them. With women he could sometimes be awkward, but also charming and confiding. His physical exuberance made him a keen sportsman, and occasionally a bully. He was a frequent and serious theatregoer, and had an omnivorous appetite for Irish, English, and American novels and poetry. These he could quote and discuss with relish. 
As he had been in London, Collins was soon an insider in Dublin. He met most of the leaders of the coming insurrection and joined the influential Keating branch of the Gaelic League, already well endowed with Cork people and up-and-coming revolutionaries. When the delayed and crippled Easter rising finally began on 24 April he was an aide to Joseph Plunkett, its chief planner. 
Collins spent the following week in the General Post Office, the nerve-centre of the rebellion, attending the tubercular Plunkett and generally making himself useful. He was cool under fire, but did not take part in the fighting. After the general surrender he was not considered dangerous enough to be court-martialled, and was instead sent to Stafford detention barracks. In late June he was transferred, with hundreds of other rebels, to a makeshift camp at Fron-goch in Wales. 
It was here that Michael Collins began to break out of his orbit as a clerk, secretary, treasurer, and aide. He became a commanding presence, and a key organizer in the wearying struggle to resist British control. He assumed the 'de facto' leadership of his fellow 'refugees' from Britain and was elected head centre of the camp IRB. Other men were beginning to fall into orbit around him. 
The Fron-goch prisoners were released on 23 December 1916 as a conciliatory gesture by the British government, one which they interpreted as a victory. They quickly began to make an enthusiastic impact on Irish politics in a series of successful by-elections, in which Collins took part. He had been dismayed by the 'much, much too careful' opinions prevalent in Cork (Coogan, 59). The 1917 canvasses in Roscommon and Longford showed the unprecedented electoral vulnerability of the dominant Irish party. 
The rebellion had been arranged by IRB activists, prosecuted largely by a radical fraction of the Irish Volunteers, and officially and popularly identified with Sinn Fein. Only the IRB had been officially committed to revolutionary means and republican ends. Sinn Fein -- a tiny party -- was not involved at all, although some of its members were. British repression had dislocated all three organizations, but unexpected popularity now beckoned. 
Collins was a central figure in the ensuing struggle to shape a new movement. He travelled widely, spoke frequently, and became an adept at the back-room arts of committee packing, delegate selection, and election rigging. His power base was his new position as secretary to the Irish National Aid Association, to which he was appointed in February. From here he funnelled American money to former prisoners and their dependants, and built up an unequalled network of contacts. In fact National Aid was an IRB front, and with his new job came a place on its supreme council. Harry Boland, another rising man and expert wire-puller, became his fast friend and partner in intrigue. 
These young militants were working to create a truly revolutionary movement. At first they backed Count Plunkett as a radical alternative to Arthur Griffith's Sinn Fein. But Plunkett was eccentric and incompetent, and the name Sinn Fein now had extraordinary popular resonance, so the faction fighting shifted to the conditions of a proposed merger, culminating in the party's official relaunching at a national convention in October 1917. The brotherhood's preferred candidate, Eamon de Valera, was acclaimed as president but its machinery was overwhelmed by the sheer scale of the fast growing movement. In electoral combat with the forces of moderation Collins barely scraped onto the last available seat on the executive. 
Collins was by this time a familiar figure among activists. He had shown his Fenian colours at the funeral of Thomas Ashe, the president of the IRB, who died on hunger strike in September. This was a paramilitary occasion with a huge public audience, climaxing with Collins's ominous declaration that 'Nothing additional remains to be said' after the graveside volleys (Beaslai, 1.166). His stage management helped make his name among the reorganizing volunteers. When their convention was held on the heels of Sinn Fein's, committed republicans were elected to key positions and Collins himself became director of organization. 
In 1917 Collins was one of many previously unknown people to rise to prominence and responsibility. Although he was unique in being on the national executives of the IRB, the Irish Volunteers, and Sinn Fein, other men held a similar clutch of positions at lower levels. The events of 1918 allowed him to dominate all three. 
The driving force behind Collins's ascendance (and that of his cause) was the threat of conscription, which was given legislative force in April 1918. This united the nationalist population behind Sinn Fein, with the volunteers as the first line of resistance. A headquarters staff had been set up in March, which added the job of adjutant-general to his portfolio. The British government compounded its mishandling of the Irish situation in May by deporting most of the Sinn Fein leadership, while leaving the military and radical wings of the movement intact. Collins had himself been arrested in early April. He was bailed out once the conscription crisis began, and managed to evade the May round-up. From then on he was on the run from the authorities. 
Collins now assumed the role of organizer-in-chief, and quickly became known to militant volunteers as their man in Dublin: the man who could get things done. He covertly encouraged aspiring gunmen and took gun running in hand, using the British IRB as an arms pipeline. Harry Boland simultaneously took over much of the day-to-day control of Sinn Fein. 
Collins also began his intelligence work at this time. Before the May arrests he was approached independently by two detectives -- one a well-placed confidential clerk -- who warned him of the impending round-up. Both continued to pass him information. Collins was able to recruit two more and eventually assembled a remarkable network of agents within Dublin Castle, the Post Office, prisons, and even military headquarters. For all its impressive apparatus of safe houses, codes, and operatives, however, the success of this 'secret service' depended on its opponents' incompetence and lack of resources. Secret policemen and spies rarely posed much threat to Collins or the revolution. 
Conscription was successfully deterred and, in the December 1918 general election, Sinn Fein won 73 of the 105 Irish seats. Collins was elected in South Cork, and he and Boland had personally chosen many of the other candidates. They would prove a reliable caucus for the coming revolution. Those not in prison assembled in Dublin in January 1919, declared themselves a sovereign parliament -- Dail Eireann -- and then declared independence. Collins was in Britain, arranging de Valera's dramatic escape from Lincoln gaol. Before sailing to the United States in May to raise support for the new republic, de Valera was elected president of the Dail and named a cabinet, including Collins as minister of finance. 
It was as a minister that Collins achieved his greatest administrative triumph. The revolutionary government was to be financed by subscriptions to a Dail loan. Collins devised the scheme in the summer of 1919, organized a staff, offices, collection system, and camouflaged bank accounts, and managed the project closely. The fund was heavily oversubscribed and closed in September 1920 at more than $370,000. 
In 1919 Collins officially relinquished his previous volunteer responsibilities and assumed the title of director of intelligence, as well as that of president of the IRB. A group of gunmen under his personal control ('the squad') began to assassinate pursuing detectives in July, in a campaign later extended to include intelligence officers, agents, and miscellaneous enemies of the revolution. Its culminating blow came on 21 November 1920 -- bloody Sunday -- with the massacre of twelve British officers. These killings were as important for their symbolic as their counter-intelligence value, reflecting Collins's role as godfather to the militant underground within the volunteers who sought direct action against the wishes of many senior officers and the moderate majority in Sinn Fein. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) which emerged in 1920 -- a fusion of the IRB and volunteers -- was led by these men. Collins did not plan or direct the subsequent guerrilla warfare, but the creation of this truly revolutionary institution -- for which he laboured so hard -- was one of his chief accomplishments, and his most ambiguous legacy. 
Collins's life on the run became the stuff of legend in 1920 and 1921. His days were filled with work, carried out in numerous smoke-filled offices (he smoked up to fifty cigarettes a day, but was able to quit) secreted in houses and shops around Dublin. He cycled to his endless rendezvous with couriers, agents, guerrillas, and friends without disguises, bodyguards, or a gun. His correspondence, notable for its precision, was vast. Many of his opponents became obsessed with his capture, and several men who shared his name suffered or died as a result. His friends and admirers, to whom he was known as the Big Fellow, came to regard him as indispensable. Numerous newspaper stories depicted him as a figure of glamour and mystery, and his name became internationally well known. 
When the struggle between the IRA and British forces ended in a truce on 11 July 1921 Collins was one of the two most powerful men in republican Ireland. De Valera, who had returned to Dublin in December 1920, was the undisputed leader of the movement, but Collins was the hero of the revolution. He had a wide network of personal loyalists, and both he and de Valera maintained coteries of devoted followers. This court politics grew almost inevitably polarized as Collins's enemies -- including Cathal Brugha, the minister of defence, and Austin Stack, the minister for home affairs -- gravitated together, and de Valera himself became suspicious of Collins's intentions. 
It was thus a matter of great surprise that de Valera chose to send Collins as a member of the Irish delegation to the decisive peace conference in London while staying at home himself. The negotiators were divided from the start. Collins, a reluctant participant, lodged apart from the others, and he and Griffith were at frequent loggerheads with their more intransigent fellow travellers, as well as with de Valera, Brugha, and Stack in Dublin. The weeks of talks that followed their October arrival were often bitterly tense, compounded by Collins's and Griffith's secrecy in meeting separately with their counterparts in the British cabinet. 
The treaty they eventually signed on 6 December, under Lloyd George's threat of immediate war, gave dominion status to southern Ireland, with the promise of boundary revisions to partitioned and protestant-dominated Northern Ireland. It passed the cabinet by one vote, with de Valera opposed, and was accepted by the Dail on 7 January 1922 by an almost equally slim margin. Having led the fight with considerable parliamentary skill, Collins became both chair and finance minister of the transitional provisional government. He would be its dominant personality and charismatic figurehead. 
The treaty debate was also the occasion for Collins to announce his engagement. His fiancee was Kitty Kiernan, whom he had met at the 1917 Longford by-election. Collins in turn found himself pursued by London and Dublin socialites -- most notably Lady Hazel Lavery -- whose attentions he returned with varying degrees of ardour. Whether any were physically consummated is unclear, although his romantic and sexual accomplishments were as subject to rumour and exaggeration as the rest of his career. 
Collins spent the next seven months trying to hold together his new government, its relationship with Britain, and the republican movement. He defended the treaty as a writ of real sovereignty, and was closely involved in the transfer of power to the nascent free state. As always with Collins, however, conspiracies and schemes flowed beneath his official pronouncements and policies, and often in contrary directions. Thus, while he worked those parts of the treaty he liked, he attempted to subvert those he found troublesome. Public co-operation with Sir James Craig, the unionist premier of the separatist northern province, was matched with a covert campaign to make it ungovernable. In this he had the help of his opponents in breakaway IRA units, who otherwise accused him of undermining their own position with a rival army and police force. 
The ultimate sleight of hand would be to give the free state a quasi-republican constitution, thereby assuaging Collins's critics and reassuring his more doctrinaire supporters. His attempt to reunite the sundering movement relied on this promise, and on power sharing deals made with various factions of opponents in May. Under a pact signed with de Valera, Sinn Fein would put forward a single slate of pro- and anti-treaty candidates in the June general election, on a platform of coalition government. Parallel talks within the divided IRA concluded that it would remain independent, with an agreed executive made up largely of IRB men. 
Everything fell apart in June 1922. Collins's northern policy was a failure on all fronts. The British government angrily rejected the draft constitution. All anti-treatyites rejected the revised version. The IRA executive and convention rejected the proposed terms for army unity. His favourite instrument, the IRB, had broken in his hands, and most of his cabinet were hostile to his deal making and intrigues. And finally, the voters rejected the Sinn Fein pact in the 16 June election, and chose an overwhelming pro-treaty majority. Collins had lost his room to manoeuvre, but nevertheless retained his popularity -- 'what's good enough for Mick is good enough for me' was a common refrain. 
Collins played his last card when he agreed to a direct assault on the recalcitrant IRA executive in Dublin on 28 June. Urgency was required to pre-empt a threatened British intervention, and he hoped it would be an isolated action, leading to renewed negotiations. The Dublin fighting was soon over, but it proved to be only the beginning of civil war. Collins took charge as commander-in-chief in July. He sought a quick victory, and never lost hope of a quick peace by agreement. When Cork fell to the national army in August he sensed an opportunity for both, and returned home in triumph. On 22 August his convoy was ambushed as it travelled through Beal na mBlath in west co. Cork. Collins took part in the fighting and was shot dead; despite numerous conspiracy theories, it was just bad luck. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on 28 August, his funeral the occasion for mass grief. 
Collins's reputation has been embalmed by youthful martyrdom. Many biographies and memoirs have been written; none has been seriously critical with the partial exception of Frank O'Connor's brilliant 'The Big Fellow' (1937). Most embrace the theme of indispensability: his genius was necessary to the success of the revolution, and his loss permanently diminished Irish public life thereafter. After the IRA renewed its campaign in 1970 he was used by republicans as a symbol of revolution, and by their nationalist opponents as an exemplar of pragmatism over fanaticism. Neil Jordan's feature film 'Michael Collins' (1996) ensured his status as a contemporary popular icon. 


@@@@@


doc= 32507


Collins, Richard Henn, Baron Collins (1842-1911), judge, was born in Dublin on 1 January 1842, the third son of Stephen Collins QC (died 1843), of the Irish bar, and his wife, Frances (died 1842), daughter of William Henn, a master in chancery. He was educated at Dungannon School, and entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1860, was elected scholar in 1861, and passed his final examinations in 1863 with honours in classics and moral science, but left without graduating. He did, however, receive the honorary degree of LLD from the college in 1902. In 1863 he moved to Downing College, Cambridge, where he came fourth in the classical tripos of 1865, and was elected to a college fellowship the same year. He was made an honorary fellow of Downing College in 1885. He joined the Middle Temple on 8 May 1862, and was pupil in the chambers of John Welch and R. C. Williams. He was called to the bar on 18 November 1867. In September 1868 he married Jane Ogle (died 1934), daughter of Ogle William Moore, dean of Clogher; they had three sons and two daughters. 
Collins joined the northern circuit and made a slow start in practice. He was not showy, and was less successful with juries than some barristers of less ability. His strength lay rather in his industry and knowledge of the common law. In 1876 he was chosen, with G. Arbuthnot, to edit the seventh edition of John William Smith's 'Leading Cases', which had previously been edited by justices Willes and Keating; he was also jointly responsible for the eighth (1879) and ninth (1887) editions of Smith's 'Leading Cases'. This experience helped his reputation as a case lawyer both at the bar and on the bench. He was made queen's counsel on 27 October 1883. Complicated business transactions and litigation between rival municipalities or railway companies were his speciality. 
Collins did not possess the characteristic manner or voice of an advocate, but he excelled in presenting his case and framing his arguments. Lord Esher, master of the rolls, then the dominant force in the Court of Appeal, showed that he was impressed by Collins's arguments, and this enhanced his reputation among solicitors. He was regularly employed in the heaviest cases in the Court of Appeal and in the House of Lords, and he was one of the very few common-law counsel who argued in the chancery courts. He was appointed a judge of the Queen's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice on 11 April 1891, on the resignation of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen. His exceptional learning and acuteness were at once recognized. His judgments combined clear arrangement and logical accuracy with an unusual insight into commerce and business. Expertise in traffic laws led him to be chosen in 1894 to succeed Sir Alfred Wills as judicial member and chairman of the railway and canal commission. 
Collins nevertheless continued with the ordinary routine of 'nisi prius' and circuit work and was an able criminal judge. When the president was absent through ill health, he also sat for two or three months in the divorce court. 
On Lord Esher's retirement in November 1897, Collins was appointed to the Court of Appeal and was sworn of the privy council. In 1901 he succeeded Sir Archibald Levin Smith as master of the rolls, and on the death of Horace, Lord Davey, in 1907 he was made a lord of appeal, and granted a life peerage with the title of Lord Collins of Kensington. In the Court of Appeal he showed no inclination to interpret liberally statutes of which he disapproved, such as the 'Workmen's Compensation Act' of 1897, and his numerous judgments under the act were frequently reversed by the House of Lords. A tendency to undue subtlety and over-refinement brought him more than one rebuff from their lordships. 
Collins took on much external public work. As master of the rolls he was chairman of the Historical Manuscripts Commission from 1901 to 1907. He played a leading part in the management of the Patriotic Fund. In 1899 he represented Great Britain on the tribunal to determine the boundaries between British Guiana and Venezuela. The inquiry, held at Paris, resulted in a unanimous decision in favour of Great Britain. In 1904 Collins was appointed chairman of a commission consisting of himself, Sir Spencer Walpole, and Sir John Edge, set up to investigate the case of Adolf Beck, a Swedish resident in London who had been twice (in 1896 and 1904) wrongfully convicted at the central criminal court on charges of defrauding and robbing prostitutes. Their report helped to bring about the 'Criminal Appeal Act' of 1907. 
Collins's health was already failing during his last years in the Court of Appeal, and he was seriously ill when promoted to the House of Lords. He resigned as lord of appeal on 7 October 1910, and was succeeded by the attorney-general, Sir William (afterwards Lord) Robson. He died at 24 First Avenue, Hove, on 3 January 1911 and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 9 January. He was survived by his wife and five children. 
In private life Collins was unassuming and sympathetic in manner. His sense of humour made him a popular after-dinner speaker. The prose and verse contributions he made as a barrister on the northern circuit won him the honorary title of poet laureate. He was also the first president of the Classical Association (1903). Collins never stood for parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 32508


Collins, William Edward (1867-1911), bishop of Gibraltar, was born in London on 18 February 1867, the second son in a family of five sons and four daughters of Joseph Henry Collins, mining engineer and writer on geology, and his wife, Frances Miriam Denny (died 1888), who was born in Ireland. Collins had his early education at Mr Nuttall's Collegiate School in Lemon Street, Truro, Cornwall, where his family had moved soon after his birth. The family in 1881 relocated to Spain, where his father had taken up a position with Rio Tinto Mines. Collins learned Spanish, of great use in his later career, and enjoyed his period in the country, but returned to England early and lodged with his eldest brother, who had remained there. After a short period as a lawyer's clerk, Collins decided to study with a view to holy orders. He spent some time at the Chancellor's School, Truro, and became reacquainted with Canon Arthur James Mason, whom the family had known earlier in Truro and who later became master of Pembroke College, Cambridge. 
In 1884 Collins was able, through financial support organized by Canon Mason, to proceed to Selwyn College, Cambridge, and graduated BA as junior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1887, proceeding MA in 1891 and DD in 1903. His later studies concentrated upon church history. He was much influenced by the teaching of Mandell Creighton, then Dixie professor of ecclesiastical history. In 1889 Collins won the Lightfoot scholarship in ecclesiastical history, and in 1890 the prince consort's prize. In the same year he was ordained deacon, and priest in 1891, serving his first curacy under Canon Mason, who invited him to become a mission preacher at All Hallows Barking by the Tower. He continued to combine his historical study with the holding of missions and retreats, and in 1891 returned to Cambridge as lecturer at St John's College on international law and at Selwyn on divinity. 
In 1893, at the age of twenty-six, Collins was appointed professor of ecclesiastical history at King's College, London. It was said of his teaching style that, like his method as a preacher, it 'was decidedly sympathetic, if not altogether virile' ('The Times', 25 March 1911, 11). But Collins maintained a high level of publication of historical studies, including 'The Authority of General Councils' (1896), 'The English Reformation and its Consequences' (1898), and 'Church and State in England before the Conquest' (1903). Along with Mandell Creighton he was one of the founders of the Church Historical Society. In 1894 he renewed his connection with All Hallows, where he took part in the celebration of the 250th anniversary of Archbishop Laud's execution (10 January 1895), subsequently editing a commemorative volume of lectures on Laud (published in the same year). His reputation as a student of historical documents steadily grew, and his advice on church questions was frequently sought. In May 1899, when the archbishops heard at Lambeth arguments for and against the liturgical use of incense, Collins was able to draw upon early and medieval authorities in his contribution, which largely settled the question on the side of those opposing its use. 
On 26 January 1904 Collins married Mary Brewin Sterland (died 1909), a governess many years his senior with whom he had had 'a very close and peculiar relation' since his youth (Mason, 65). They had no children. 
His intellectual achievements, and his language skills, made Collins a suitable choice when a new bishop was required to be selected for Gibraltar in 1904. Collins accepted this appointment although his health was already delicate. His physical character was summed up by an early comment on his 'pale face, and his great eyes' (Mason, 9). His duties, which included not only the administration of the diocese of Gibraltar and Malta but also the supervision of the English chaplaincies and congregations in southern Europe, involved constant travelling. In 1907 he visited Persia and Asiatic Turkey for the archbishop of Canterbury's Assyrian Mission, and on his return published his journal, 'Notes of a Journey to Kurdistan' (1908). At the same time he continued to contribute a good deal to the church at home. During the meetings in Britain of the Pan-Anglican Congress in June 1908 his encyclopaedic knowledge was frequently in evidence and much in demand, and he presided successfully over the debates on the Anglican communion. He also assisted Dr Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury, in drafting an encyclical letter which was issued on behalf of the Lambeth conference in August that year. Davidson noted that in the most difficult aspects of that conference Collins 'bore a leading, sometimes even the foremost, part' (Mason, 186-7). 
The strain of travel and work produced a serious health breakdown for Collins in 1909, when he developed lung and throat trouble. His health never fully recovered and he died at sea on 22 March 1911 on his way to Smyrna, Turkey, after falling ill at the British embassy, Constantinople, with pleurisy and congestion of the lungs. He was buried on 27 March at St John's Church, Smyrna. A posthumous collection of his sermons was published in 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 32509


Colnaghi family (per. c.1785-1911), art dealers, were established in England by Paul Colnaghi (1751-1833), who was born in the Brianza region near Milan, the younger son of Martino Colnago (died 1783), a distinguished Milanese lawyer, and his wife, Ippolita Raggi. Having settled his father's encumbered estate, Paul left Italy for France in 1783 and became the Paris agent of Antony Torre to sell English prints from a shop in the Palais Royal in 1784. Antony Torre was the son of Giovanni Battista Torre (died 1780), who had established himself, first in London in 1753, then in Paris in 1760, as a maker of fireworks and instruments (principally barometers and thermometers) and bookseller. Antony ran a London branch at 14 Market Lane, Pall Mall, from 1767. On his father's death, Antony entered briefly (1780-82) into partnership with an optician, Ciceri of Milan (who had employed Paul Colnaghi on his arrival in Paris), before asking Colnaghi, on Ciceri's recommendation, to open his Paris branch. 
Torre and Colnaghi became partners in May 1785, when Colnaghi moved to London (and was naturalized English), and brothers-in-law when Paul married Maria Elizabetha (Elizabeth) Baker, sister to Antony's wife, on 21 March 1787. The Market Lane shop was abandoned in 1786 for grander premises at 132 Pall Mall, and two years later Torre handed the business over to Colnaghi. After a brief partnership with Anthony Molteno, printseller, Colnaghi assumed full control. Thus the firm, which began as instrument makers and booksellers in 1760, only later specializing in printselling, underwent a similar evolution to that of Agnews sixty years later. 
Paul Colnaghi must have been an impressive man, erudite, fluent in several languages, and charming; he attracted Benjamin Franklin's notice in Paris and was almost persuaded by him to emigrate to America. Giovanni Battista Torre's shop in the rue St Honore had become a meeting place for savants, and for collectors of English mezzotints (known as 'maniere anglaise') by William Woollett, William Sharp, and Sir Robert Strange and coloured stipple-prints by Francesco Bartolozzi (1727-1815), a superb engraver with whom the firm dealt for forty years. The flourishing market for English prints collapsed with the outbreak of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars; but Colnaghi survived by shrewdly publishing such popular colour stipple engravings as 'The Cries of London', after Francis Wheatley, in 1792-7, and a portrait of Nelson, after Hoppner, which appeared on the day (7 November 1805) that news came of the battle of Trafalgar. He also supplied the British government with views of besieged towns on the continent, thus providing invaluable information for the attacking allied armies. 
In 1799 Paul Colnaghi moved his London premises to 23 Cockspur Street, where he held monthly 3 o'clock levees attended by the aristocracy and landed gentry. From these sprang a series of engraved portraits entitled 'Royal and Noble Ladies'; Lawrence was paid $700 for permission to engrave his painting of Princess Charlotte (1817; Belgian Royal Collection). Appointed printseller to the prince regent, Colnaghi received further royal warrants from him as George IV, and from William IV; other royal patrons included the duc d'Orleans and the duc d'Aumale. 
Paul and Elizabeth Colnaghi had three sons and two daughters: the elder son, Dominic Charles Colnaghi (1790-1879), was born at 132 Pall Mall, London, on 15 July 1790; another son, Martin Henry Lewis Gaetano, followed, and there was a daughter, Caroline ('b'. 'c'.1786). All three siblings worked in the firm, but Dominic was the most outstanding and joined his father about 1808-10. He travelled to Italy in 1816-17 and collected specimens of armour, thus opening up a new field of connoisseurship. He sold these to Sir Samuel Rush Meyrick (1783-1848) in 1818, and continued to act for this famous antiquarian; much of Sir Richard Wallace's collection (Wallace Collection, London) originally came from Meyrick. 
Martin Colnaghi ('c'.1792-1851) was also active, but showed less judgement and diligence than his brother. In 1821 Paul Colnaghi wished to retire to Italy and settled the business, then worth some $25,000 in stock, on his two sons. Martin quarrelled with his father and brother, and in 1824 sued them in chancery. The suit was settled in April 1825, through the good offices of a family friend, by buying out Martin for $3000. Paul and Dominic Colnaghi then moved to 14 Pall Mall East and began trading as P. and D. Colnaghi & Co., the name by which the firm is still known. Martin remained at Cockspur Street, and the two brothers thereafter ruthlessly bid against each other, to Paul's chagrin. John Constable, with whom the family became intimate, as the correspondence between Dominic and Constable attests, recorded in his journal for 16 June 1824: 'I hear there is quite a bustle at Colnaghi's.... They are all brisking up. Martin seems to be clearing the house of the old man & Dominic -- but he is not quite liked himself -- he is said to make love to all the ladies who look over prints there. ('Constable's Correspondence', 4.154)' Constable had reason to be grateful to Paul, who, vouching for the Paris-based dealer John Arrowsmith, enabled Constable to show 'The Hay Wain' (1821; National Gallery, London) at the Paris Salon in 1824, where it created a sensation and won him a gold medal. Colnaghi's tried, with only moderate success, to sell prints after Constable's work, and acted as his agents for the 1827 Paris Salon exhibition. In November 1829 Paul admitted his daughter, Caroline, into partnership until her son John Anthony Scott (died 1864) came of age. On 30 September 1807 Caroline had married John Scott (1784-1821), editor of 'The Champion', who had died after a duel defending the 'Cockney school' of poetry. A subscription for the widow raised $800, which enabled her to join the firm. After Constable's death in 1837 Dominic Colnaghi helped lead the subscription campaign to purchase 'The Cornfield' (1826) for the National Gallery. 
Dominic Colnaghi married Catherine Pontet (died 1881) on 15 October 1831, and they had two sons, neither of whom entered the firm, but the elder, Sir Dominic Ellis Colnaghi (1834-1908), became a consular official; posted to Florence in 1865, he served as consul-general for northern Italy from 1881 to 1896, and wrote 'A Dictionary of Florentine Painters from the Thirteenth to the Seventeenth Centuries', which was edited by P. G. Konody and Selwyn Brinton and published posthumously in 1928 (reprinted 1986). 
Dominic Colnaghi greatly admired the work of R. P. Bonington, and in 1827 commissioned from him a number of Italian scenes with Shakespearian characters. After the artist's death the following year Dominic organized the two-day sale of his work at Sothebys in July 1829, buying thirty-five lots for himself, and later that year issued thirteen lithographs after Bonington's Scottish views. Some insight into Dominic Colnaghi's activities for special clients such as Sir Robert Peel emerges from his correspondence with Peel in November and December 1842, when he informed him about the availability of a Lawrence portrait of Lord Brougham (presumably the one of 'c'.1825 now in the National Portrait Gallery, London) that the owner was willing to sell; and in March 1844 Colnaghi explained that Lawrence painted two versions of a portrait of Antonio Canova, the sculptor. There is also a contract with Henry Graves & Co. for a joint venture of August 1836 for selling an engraving by James Bromley after Sir George Hayter's portrait of Lord John Russell, then home secretary, in an edition of 750 prints, the proceeds to be evenly divided between Graves and Colnaghi. This continued the tradition, begun by Paul Colnaghi, of selling engraved portraits of prominent personalities of the day. Paul Colnaghi died, after a short illness, at his London home in St George's Place, Hanover Square, on 26 August 1833, aged eighty-two. His son Dominic and his daughter, Caroline Scott, took over the business, with her son John Anthony Scott and his cousin Andrew McKay joining as clerks. Dominic, or Old Dom as he became affectionately known, continued with the firm until about 1865, when he retired. He died at his home, 62 Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, on 19 December 1879, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. 
In 1858 Colnaghis joined with Agnews in publishing 'The Gems of the Art Treasury', two de luxe volumes of photographs by Leonida Caldesi and Montecchi of the exhibition held at Manchester in 1857. The possibilities of this new medium were speedily recognized, and in 1864 Julia Margaret Cameron contracted with Colnaghis for the sale of her photographs; in 1866 she held an exhibition there. Earlier, in 1854, John Anthony Scott had commissioned William Simpson to tour the Crimea to prepare material for an account of the war, illustrated with forty lithographs and published in two folios as 'The Seat of the War in the East' (1855-6), which earned the firm $12,000. After John Anthony Scott's death in 1864, Andrew McKay became sole proprietor, to be joined by his son William as partner in 1879. After his father's retirement William took over, and introduced E. F. Deprez (retired 1907) and Otto Gutekunst (retired 1939) as partners in 1894; but the direct family link with P. and D. Colnaghi & Co. ended with William McKay's retirement in 1911. 
Paul Colnaghi's younger son, Martin, married Fanny Boyce Clarke, and their eldest son, Martin Henry Colnaghi (1821-1908) -- baptized Martino Enrico Luigi Gaetano -- was born at 23 Cockspur Street, London, on 16 November 1821. Although he was educated for the army, his father's bankruptcy in August 1843 thwarted this ambition. The elder Martin Colnaghi traded first as Colnaghi & Co. (from 1825), and from 1840 as Colnaghi and Puckle, the business passing to Edward Puckle in 1845. Martin died in Piccadilly in May 1851. Martin Henry struggled to established himself, and for two or three years organized the system of railway advertising afterwards taken over by W. H. Smith. 
About 1860 Martin Henry Colnaghi turned to art, and for some years travelled as an expert and buyer for his uncle Dominic's firm (although he was never a partner), then for Henry Graves, and then on his own account. He began to specialize in Dutch and Flemish seventeenth-century art, working from his house in Pimlico. He 'discovered' Jan van Goyen, and dealt in many works by Frans Hals, long before these masters became fashionable; among the first important collections he helped to form was that of Albert Levy, dispersed at Christies in March 1876. He took over Flatou's Gallery at 11 Haymarket in 1877, renaming it the Guardi Gallery and remaining there until 1888, when he acquired the galleries of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours at 53 Pall Mall, which he named the Marlborough Gallery. He began buying at auction on a substantial scale from 1875, purchasing Frans van Mieris's 'Enamoured Cavalier' for 4100 guineas ($4305), and from the Lucy sale a Jan Both classical subject for 4500 guineas ($4725). He negotiated several major private purchases, notably the Raphael altarpiece 'Madonna and Child with Saints' (Metropolitan Museum, New York) from the Colonna collection, which he bought from the earl of Ashburnham for $17,000 in June 1896. After unsuccessfully offering it to the National Gallery for $40,000, he sold it to C. Sedelmeyer of Paris, who sold it to J. Pierpont Morgan for $80,000. 
Martin Henry claimed that his wide connoisseurship -- his 'eye' -- was gained, not from academic study, but by practical experience and careful examination of the works of art themselves. He outlived all his brothers and sisters, and was thrice married: first to Sarah Nash, second to Elizabeth Maxwell Howard (died 1888), and third, on 17 October 1889, to Amy Mary, daughter of George Smith, the artist; he left no children. He died at the Marlborough Gallery on 27 June 1908, and after a funeral service at St James's, Piccadilly, on 1 July, was buried in the family grave at Highgate. 
Martin Henry Colnaghi bequeathed four paintings to the National Gallery: Lorenzo Lotto's 'Madonna and Child and Saints', Philips Wouwermans's 'The Gypsies', Aert van der Neer's 'Dawn', and a small landscape by Thomas Gainsborough, 'The Bridge' ('c'.1783). He left the residue of his estate (some $90,532) to his wife, and stipulated that $80,000 should go to the National Gallery, after her death, for the purchase of pictures, these to form the Martin Colnaghi bequest. Colnaghi's picture stock was sold in six groups from 22 October 1908 to 7 January 1909 at Robinson Fisher & Co., realizing some $15,000. 
The firm of Colnaghi continued to flourish after the family's direct links with it ended. In 1911 Otto Gutekunst was joined by Gustavus Mayer (and later by his daughter Katharina), after which the firm moved to sumptuous premises, designed by Lanchester and Rickards, at 144-6 New Bond Street, vacating them in 1940, eventually to settle at 14 Old Bond Street. James Byam Shaw, who had joined in 1934, became a director three years later; after the war Byam Shaw, himself an outstanding scholar, established close links with the museum world, especially the British Museum and the Ashmolean Museum. While their collections benefited greatly from his expertise, Colnaghis gained pre-eminence as dealers in fine prints and drawings. In January 2002 P. and D. Colnaghi & Co. was acquired by Konrad O. Bernheimer and trades now as Bernheimer and Colnaghi. 


@@@@@


doc= 32510


Colomb, Sir John Charles Ready (1838-1909), defence strategist and advocate of imperial federation, second son of Lieutenant-General George Thomas Colomb (1788-1874), colonel of the 97th regiment, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Abraham Bradley King, bt, of Corrard, co. Fermanagh, was born on the Isle of Man on 1 May 1838. Vice-Admiral Philip Howard Colomb was his elder brother. 
Colomb was educated privately and at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth. He entered the Royal Marine Artillery in June 1854; he was promoted lieutenant in 1855 and captain on 3 August 1867, and retired on 20 October 1869. He was subsequently adjutant of the Cork artillery militia until May 1872 but, enjoying a comfortable private income, for the rest of his life devoted most of his energies to advocacy of the causes with which he became so closely associated: imperial federation and imperial defence. 
The Royal Navy's nineteenth-century adoption of steam power necessitated the creation of a worldwide network of coal depots, which had to be defended. Colomb was the first to consider publicly the problems involved. In 1867 he published anonymously 'The Protection of our Commerce and Distribution of our Naval Forces Considered', generally regarded as the first systematic enunciation of imperial defence requirements in the machine age. 
British defence planning was dominated by fears of invasion of the home islands. In 1859 the royal commission on the defence of the United Kingdom had concluded that the country could not depend on the navy alone, and advocated elaborate fortifications to defend major ports and arsenals. Colomb disagreed with this fortress mentality. National security was, he acknowledged, an issue of 'paramount importance'; also crucial was the protection of commerce, and commercial and imperial security required overseas bases from which naval forces could protect commerce, be established and defended. He emphasized the necessity of coal to the steam-powered navy, and advocated stockpiling supplies at the overseas bases and coaling stations. 
So far from perceiving imperial defence to be solely a naval task, as did later and more extreme proponents of the 'blue water school' of strategy, Colomb envisaged two important roles for military forces. First, warships were too valuable as commerce protectors to be used to defend the bases from which they operated; such local defence, he maintained, was best provided by fixed fortifications and either marines (his preference) or soldiers. Second, the bulk of the army should be held in readiness not for home defence but for amphibious operations. The navy, as he said, should be the 'shield' and the army the 'spear' of imperial defence (D'Egville, 15-16). He did not deviate significantly from these fundamental strategic premises for the rest of his life. 
Colomb also devoted much time and energy to pressing two ancillary issues: the essential tasks of securing army-navy co-operation and fostering imperial-colonial defence co-operation. To these ends he frequently addressed the Royal United Service Institution and the Royal Colonial Institute, and his speeches were published as pamphlets. Other speeches were collected in 'The Defence of Great and Greater Britain' (1880). He was one of the founding members of the Imperial Federation League (1884), the chief aims of which were collective security and a preferential imperial tariff policy. He was one of the league's delegation which pressed Lord Salisbury's government to call the first Colonial Conference (1887), the 'raison d'etre' of which was apportioning defence responsibilities between the British government and Canada, South Africa, New Zealand, and the Australian colonies. In recognition of his efforts he was made CMG in 1887 and KCMG in 1888. 
Colomb unsuccessfully contested the Bow and Bromley division of Tower Hamlets, London, at the 1885 general election. He was Conservative MP for Bromley and Bow from 1886 to 1892, and for Great Yarmouth from 1895 until he retired in 1906. He spoke frequently on subjects related to imperial defence. His observations made in a 1901 speech on the navy estimates succinctly summed up his impelling ideology: 'Can we go on indefinitely paying for the defence of an Empire which covers all parts of the world out of the resources of an island in but a corner of it? I am a true imperialist -- I always have been that; but I hate the Imperialism which perorates about the Empire and refuses to face the real question of making the arrangements for its common security a matter of practical and united action of all of its parts' ('Hansard 4', 91, 21 March 1901, col. 783). His expertise prompted appointment to the royal commission on the supply of food and raw material in time of war (1905). After he left parliament he continued a tireless advocate of imperial federation, writing to 'The Times', making speeches, and using every opportunity to press for greater home-colonial co-operation. 
Colomb lived to see one of his great aims achieved with the establishment of the committee of imperial defence to co-ordinate the activities of the services. Sir George Sydenham Clarke attributed much of the credit for Balfour's reconstituting the cabinet defence committee as an imperial defence body proper to Colomb, and Howard D'Egville -- Colomb's parliamentary private secretary and biographer -- claimed that he 'was in constant private communication with the Prime Minister, and was to a large extent responsible for the increasing interest which Mr. Balfour showed in the study of the higher policy of defence' (D'Egville, 59-60). 
Colomb's other public interest -- Ireland -- doubtless resulted from the acquisition of the estate of Dromquinna, Kenmare, co. Kerry, by his marriage. As an Irish landlord he spoke frequently in parliamentary debates on Ireland, and he published numerous essays and letters on various aspects of the Irish situation. He was also active as an Irish JP, served as chairman of appeals under the 'Local Government Act' (1898), became a privy councillor for Ireland (1903), and served on the royal commission on the congestion of Ireland (1906-7). 
Colomb married Emily Anna (died 1907), daughter of Robert Samuel and Anna Maria ('nee' Spread) Palmer, and widow of Charles Augustus Francis Paget, lieutenant RN, on 1 January 1866. According to D'Egville, her 'active sympathy and co-operation with her husband throughout his life was to him a source of perpetual encouragement and inspiration' (D'Egville, xi). They had a son and two daughters. Colomb himself was remembered by his daughter Lady Snagge as a charming and cultivated man, known affectionately to his family as Uncle Johnny. He died on 27 May 1909 at his residence, 75 Belgrave Road, London, ten days after a serious operation. 
Vice-Admiral Philip Howard Colomb credited his younger brother with the leading role 'in laying down and continually differentiating the governing principles of Imperial Defence', calling 'The Protection of our Commerce' 'the key-note to all subsequent discussions', and this assessment captures contemporary perceptions of the man and his life's work (D'Egville, xiv). There can be no disputing his importance as a lobbyist and publicist for imperial defence and federation. How much impact his efforts had on official policy is less clear. Certainly the Admiralty was aware of the importance of stockpiling coal and defending depots by the late 1850s, several years before Colomb's first pamphlet, and the evolution of imperial defence policy during the 1860s, 1870s, and early 1880s owed little to him directly. His star rose with the growth of imperialist sentiment after 1880, and by the beginning of the twentieth century he was widely regarded as an imperial defence pioneer. 'As pioneers of British naval thought and history', Donald Schurman has concluded, the influence of the Colomb brothers 'is hard to exaggerate' (Schurman, 'Education of a Navy', 11). 


@@@@@


doc= 32511


Colquhoun, Robert (1914-1962), painter, was born on 20 December 1914 at Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, the eldest child of Robert Colquhoun, an engineering fitter, and his wife, Janet Candlish. He was educated at Loanhead primary school and then transferred to Kilmarnock Academy in 1926 where his artistic ability was soon observed by James Lyle, his determined and dedicated art teacher. Colquhoun's father, responding to the severe economic pressures of the time, arranged for Robert to leave school at the age of fourteen to begin an engineering apprenticeship. On learning of the boy's departure, Lyle was concerned enough to persuade two wealthy benefactors to fund his return to school and prepare, with eventual success, for a scholarship to the Glasgow School of Art, which he entered possibly in 1932 but most probably in 1933. Here he met Robert MacBryde ['see below'], with whom he formed a tender and ultimately inseparable relationship. 


While at art school Colquhoun and MacBryde were perceived as talented and conscientious students who, nevertheless -- probably to obscure the intensity of their relationship -- distanced themselves from the college's social life. Having taken studio accommodation opposite the school, they settled into a life of hard-working domesticity. Ian Fleming, their tutor and later a close friend, painted a large portrait of the two students in their Renfrew Street digs. He and Hugh Crawford, another influential teacher, directed their attention to French painting from the impressionists onwards. Both of the Roberts, as they became affectionately known, were especially influenced by Degas. Dedication to their work won them prizes for drawing and painting, enabling them to visit France on several college excursions. In 1938, having completed their studies, they were awarded post-diploma scholarships to study at the Patrick Allan Fraser School, near Arbroath, Angus, under the expert, but irritatingly dogmatic, tutelage of James Cowie. 
Facing uncertain futures, both students had applied for Glasgow's much-coveted annual travelling scholarship. Colquhoun was the chosen recipient but, owing to concern that this might separate the unique working relationship, the chairman of the school's governors, Sir John Richmond, personally donated an equal sum to MacBryde, enabling the Roberts to tour Europe together for an indefinite period. They travelled through France, Italy, Belgium, and the Netherlands, visiting museums and galleries and continuing to paint and draw, occasionally under formal tuition such as at the Academie Julian in Paris, where, for a small fee, students attended life-drawing classes. Suddenly, it seemed, they could live together openly without the secrecy and restraint necessitated by Scottish puritanism. Shortly before war with Germany was declared in September 1939, the British government's call for all nationals in Europe to return to the United Kingdom prompted the Roberts' grudging return home. 
Back in Kilmarnock, working from a shed in Colquhoun's grandparents' garden, the Roberts mounted an exhibition of works for sale, which gave them some much needed but short-lived income. Demoralized and in ill health, they maintained a penurious existence while anticipating the inevitable call up. Colquhoun reluctantly trained as an art teacher before being conscripted into the Royal Army Medical Corps in July 1940. MacBryde, however, was exempted from military service when diagnosed as tubercular. 
Distraught at their separation, MacBryde followed Colquhoun to Edinburgh and Leeds, living in lodgings near the military camps and lobbying on Colquhoun's behalf to procure a war artist's commission with the ultimate hope of securing his release. A mutual friend introduced MacBryde to the author and editor Cyril Connolly, and to Peter Watson, the wealthy art patron with whom Connolly was planning to found the magazine 'Horizon'. Proffering help, Watson offered MacBryde accommodation at his luxurious London apartment. Colquhoun, his mental and physical health deteriorating, suffered a collapse in February 1941 and was medically discharged from the army. Pausing only to collect a few belongings from Kilmarnock, he immediately set out to join MacBryde in London during the height of the blitz. 
Initially Watson's influence was considerable. Not only were many established artists friends of his, including Ben Nicholson and Graham Sutherland (several of whose works adorned his walls), but he also introduced them to his younger painter-proteges John Craxton, Lucian Freud, and John Minton, soon to become friends of the Roberts. Following his arrival in London, Colquhoun suffered a creative block, while MacBryde relentlessly attempted to secure a foothold in London's art world. During an autumn sojourn in Worcestershire, a re-energized Colquhoun painted three landscapes influenced by Samuel Palmer, while MacBryde, affronted by English indifference to Scottish culture, began planning a show of work by Scottish artists, including their own. 
The critically successful exhibition 'Six Scottish Artists' opened in May 1942 at the prestigious Lefevre Gallery, and this began a fertile association between the gallery and the two Roberts, who exhibited there together in 1943, 1944, and 1949, with Colquhoun showing separately in 1947 and 1950. In 1943 the critic Robert Melville described Colquhoun as 'the most promising young painter England ['sic'] has produced for a considerable time' ('The Listener', 17 June 1943, 721). In 1947 Wyndham Lewis, reviewing Colquhoun's work, stated that he was 'recognised as one of the best -- perhaps the best -- of the young artists' while maintaining that Colquhoun's and MacBryde's work was 'almost identical' and 'one artistic organism' ('The Listener', 13 Feb 1947). 
After their arrival in London the Roberts' early success afforded them an introduction to a broad spectrum of the capital's artistic community. Both were seen as alluring, charismatic figures whose engaging personalities and physical appearances, though distinctly different, quickly charmed most of those with whom they came into contact. MacBryde, the shorter of the two, exhibited an extrovert, animated, and gregarious personality that perfectly complemented the withdrawn, and occasionally menacing, animus of the tall and saturnine Colquhoun. Their success facilitated a move to 77 Bedford Gardens in Kensington, a studio apartment which rapidly became a noisily boisterous venue for a bohemian coterie. Friends attending their regular weekend soirees included Francis Bacon, Dylan Thomas, and Michael Ayrton. The painter John Minton briefly lived with the Roberts for a time but growing emotional tension forced his departure. 
In 1943 the Polish emigre artist Jankel Adler entered the Roberts' lives, having occupied the studio above theirs. A friend of Picasso and Georges Braque and a teaching colleague of Paul Klee, Adler was a living link with the European cosmopolitanism from which the war had isolated the Roberts. His profoundly metaphysical approach to art endowed him with a guru-like status. He encouraged both men to paint from imagination, not observation, advice heeded especially by Colquhoun. Prior to meeting Adler, their chosen subjects had been landscape and still life, but, in future, MacBryde would introduce figures into his increasingly formal still-life compositions while Colquhoun concentrated almost exclusively on the figure. Although the Roberts were perceived as pivotal to British neo-romanticism, European influences on their work, strengthened by seeing the large post-war Picasso exhibition in London, helped them to avoid some of the mawkish excesses of this style. Braque's growing influence on MacBryde's work can be clearly identified as he gradually moved away from the painterly still lifes of the early 1940s to the formally decorative compositions of later years. 
Oil paint had been the Roberts' preferred medium since art school days and was to remain so throughout their artistic careers, though both drew extensively with pencil and pen. As their creative repertory developed, they began to use other media such as lithography and monoprinting. Colquhoun, always more artistically daring than MacBryde, also worked in watercolours, chalk, and crayon. Both were adept colourists. MacBryde, as befitted his subject matter of still lifes (mostly fruit and vegetables), employed an evocatively Mediterranean palette, counterpoising Hellenic blues with terracottas, lemon yellows, and pimento reds. Colquhoun's colours, though never sombre, were more muted: acidic yellows were contrasted against bottle greens and burgundy reds -- 'the colours of tartan', as they were once described. 
Colquhoun's work particularly, with its stylized figures frozen in hieratic gestures, personified and appealed to the pervasive angst engendered by the war. Wyndham Lewis, his admirer, described it as existential and seemingly to have 'a grave dug behind all... [the] canvasses' ('The Listener', 23 Oct 1947, 736). Two paintings of 1946, 'Woman with a Bird Cage' and 'The Fortune Teller', represent Colquhoun's creative zenith. His artistic influence can be seen in the work of several contemporary artists such as William Scott, Michael Rothenstein, Keith Vaughan, and, more specifically, John Minton. Although some of Colquhoun's subjects, such as 'The Beggar' or 'Grieving Women', might imply sentimentalism, the dry passion and puritanical dignity of his subjects confounds any such criticism. His work was dominated by female figures which were often inspired by family memories, though paintings such as 'The Two Students' and 'The Lovers' are thinly disguised, imaginative portraits of the Roberts themselves. Following a visit to Ireland, Colquhoun experimented with monoprinting, a rarely used medium which he made very much his own. By 1948 successful exhibitions, appearances in fashionable magazines, and the purchase by the Museum of Modern Art in New York of a major work by each of them made the Roberts' success appear boundless. In reality, however, MacBryde's compulsive jealousy was endangering their relationship. Alcohol consumption, initially a convivial pursuit, was now a chronic necessity, and, more ominously, reviews of Colquhoun's work signalled a possible waning of the emotional infusion apparent in earlier, acclaimed works. 
About this time the Roberts were evicted from their studio home. Two eccentric sisters, Frances Byng-Stamper and Caroline Lucas, offered them accommodation at Miller's Press, their print studio in Lewes, Sussex. This initiated for the two men a fruitful period of lithographic printmaking. Colquhoun was commissioned to illustrate a book on Italy to be written by their friend, the poet George Barker; however, the book was never published. While they were abroad, in 1949, Duncan MacDonald, their champion at the Lefevre Gallery, died. When Colquhoun returned he held an exhibition of work of Italian subjects. The show proved a failure and the gallery terminated the relationship. The Roberts never again established a similar partnership with a gallery, though the Redfern spasmodically exhibited their works throughout the 1950s. 
Homeless again, the Roberts were housed by the writer Elizabeth Smart at Tilty Mill, her country home in Essex, where they acted as surrogate parents to her four children. Out of favour and alcoholic, their decline seemed inevitable. At Kenneth Clark's suggestion, however, they were commissioned to design sets and costumes for 'Donald of the Burthens', a ballet based on a Scottish myth and choreographed by Leonide Massine. Their designs were favourably reviewed, but Colquhoun's later attempt at theatrical work for a production of 'King Lear', starring Michael Redgrave, elicited a tepid response. Embittered by the lack of a public commission for the Festival of Britain in 1951, Colquhoun practically forsook painting in favour of works on paper. However, in 1953 he produced 'Figures in a Farmyard' (Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh), possibly his largest and most complex painting, and a work of powerful creativity and intense expressionism. 
In 1954 Smart, unable to continue to fund the Roberts' inebriated lifestyle, abandoned Tilty, rendering the Roberts homeless once more. Adrift, they moved from one cheap lodging to another. An honourable attempt to revive Colquhoun's stagnating talent was made in 1958 by Bryan Robertson, director of the Whitechapel Art Gallery, when he offered to stage a large retrospective. Although the exhibition was respectfully reviewed, Colquhoun's attempt to produce several fashionably large canvases for it was ill received. In 1959 the Roberts again lived in East Anglia, at Kersey in Suffolk, where a short television film was made about them by Ken Russell. Ultimately, the lure of Soho pub life proved irresistible, and they relocated in London, where they were increasingly viewed as two tiresome and occasionally violent alcoholics whose moment of glory was long past. Their last joint exhibition was held in 1959 at the Kaplan Gallery, demonstrating that, given the opportunity, both of them were capable of working assiduously. Colquhoun's health had suffered from years of alcoholic excess and self-neglect, and in the early hours of the morning of 20 September 1962, while working in rooms above the Museum Street Gallery for an exhibition shortly to be held there, he suffered a heart attack and died in MacBryde's arms. MacBryde insisted that the exhibition should be held, and when it opened a fortnight later the work, mostly monotypes, testified to Colquhoun's technical virtuosity and emotional profundity. He was buried in his home town of Kilmarnock. 
Generously funded by Francis Bacon, a distraught MacBryde visited Spain before moving to Ireland, where, drifting aimlessly, he worked briefly as a barman and art teacher, latterly sharing an apartment with the poet Patrick Kavanagh. On the night of 6 May 1966, as he left a Dublin pub, he was knocked down in the street in a road accident and died as a result of his injuries. Like Colquhoun, his body was returned to Scotland and he was buried in his birthplace of Maybole. Their friend George Barker wrote a moving eulogy for MacBryde, as he had done earlier for Colquhoun. 
Works by Colquhoun and MacBryde are included in many public collections throughout Great Britain. In addition to the Museum of Modern Art in New York, Colquhoun is represented in other American galleries, as well as in Canada and Australia. The National Portrait Gallery in London has a self-portrait in pencil of Colquhoun and a portrait of MacBryde. Other self-portraits, and portraits the artists did of each other, are in the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art and the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Edinburgh. Ian Fleming's large double portrait of the Roberts as art students is owned by the Glasgow School of Art. 


@@@@@


doc= 32512


Colton, Sir John (1823-1902), businessman and politician in Australia, one of the five sons of William Colton (1795-1858), a Devon farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth, was born at Harbertonford, Devon, on 23 September 1823. When he was sixteen his family obtained free passage to Australia, and his father took up wine growing as a tenant farmer in McLaren Vale, South Australia. John was apprenticed to an Adelaide saddler. In 1842 he set up his own saddler's shop, which developed into a substantial manufacturing and retail business called Colton & Co. On 4 December 1844 he married Mary, the daughter of Samuel Cutting of London. Of their five children, two sons entered the family business, from which Colton himself retired in 1883. 
Colton entered public life in 1859 as an alderman of the city of Adelaide, and was mayor in 1874-5. He was elected to the South Australian house of assembly in March 1862 as member for Noarlunga, which he represented, with short intervals, throughout his public life. A firm liberal, he served from November 1868 to May 1870 as commissioner of public works in the Strangways ministry. He was out of political life between 1870 and 1872, but was re-elected in the latter year and was briefly treasurer under Sir James Boucaut in 1875-6. As premier and commissioner of public works from June 1876 until October 1877 he had time to persuade parliament to pass a single consolidating 'Land Act' to replace the existing thirty-three. 
Colton resigned his seat for Noarlunga on 29 August 1878 on account of ill health, but re-entered parliament on 6 January 1880, when he sat with the opposition because of his antipathy to the property tax. In June 1884 he again became premier and chief secretary. His government carried a bill which settled the long-disputed details of land and income taxation and instituted progressive legislation on public health and land tenure, encouraging agriculture on the best lands, while giving pastoralists greater security of tenure elsewhere. Defeated in June 1885, Colton led the opposition for a time, but at the close of the parliament he again withdrew from public life owing to ill health, and visited England. 
A staunch Wesleyan, Colton was benefactor and trustee to more than a hundred Wesleyan churches in the colony. He worked enthusiastically for temperance and himself shunned worldly pleasures such as dancing and theatregoing. Severe and rather humourless, he was none the less generous with his time and money in the causes of public health, religion, and education. He was long treasurer and benefactor of Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. 
Colton was made a KCMG on 1 January 1891. His wife died in 1898, and he suffered a stroke shortly afterwards; he died at his home in Hackney, near Adelaide, on 6 February 1902, and was buried on 8 February in the West Terrace cemetery in that city. 


@@@@@


doc= 32513


Colvile, Sir Henry Edward (1852-1907), army officer, born at Kirkby Mallory, Leicestershire, on 10 July 1852, was the only son of Colonel Charles Robert Colvile (1815-1886) of Lullington Hall, near Burton upon Trent, Liberal-Conservative (later Liberal) MP for South Derbyshire 1841-9 and 1865-8, and his wife, the Hon. Katharine Sarah Georgina, eldest daughter of Captain John Russell RN, and Sophia, Baroness de Clifford. His mother's father was grandson of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford. Educated at Eton College, he entered the army as lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards on 1 October 1870, and was promoted captain on 15 March 1872. From 1876 to 1880 he was regimental instructor of musketry, and from 1880 to 1883 aide-de-camp to the Hon. Leicester Smyth, the general commanding at the Cape of Good Hope. 
In 1884 Colvile served in the intelligence department in the Sudan. He was at the battles of al-Teb and Tamai, and was mentioned in dispatches. Later in 1884 he served on the Gordon relief expedition, with the intelligence department, and was at the action of Abu Klea in January 1885. He was made CB on 25 August 1885. From 1885 to 1888 he was on the staff in Egypt, partly with the frontier field force, and was at the battle of Giniss on 30 December 1885. 
Repeatedly mentioned in dispatches, Colvile achieved a reputation as one of the army's best intelligence officers, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel in November 1882 and colonel in January 1886. In 1892 he drew up plans for a military expedition to Abeokuta, capital of Egba, west Africa, whose authorities had been interrupting important trade routes to Lagos; war was averted by the signing of a trade treaty. In 1893 he was sent to the Uganda protectorate as acting commissioner, and in 1894 he commanded the successful expedition against Kabarega, king of Bunyoro. He was awarded the brilliant star of Zanzibar, second class, and was made CMG in January 1895. Forced to retire from Uganda by ill health, he came home; in July 1895 he was promoted to KCMG, and in March 1898 he became major-general. 
After briefly commanding a brigade at Gibraltar, Colvile in 1899 commanded the guards brigade in the South African War. He was with Methuen's force attempting to relieve Kimberley (besieged since 15 October 1899), and took part in the successful actions at Belmont (23 November) and Modder River (28 November), and the defeat of Magersfontein (10-11 December). When the South African field force was reorganized under Lord Roberts (in 1900) Colvile commanded the new 9th division, and marched with the main army to attack General Cronje's force. Colvile's and General Kelly-Kenny's division hemmed in Cronje at Paardeberg after desperate fighting (18 February). Colvile took part with Roberts in the occupation of Bloemfontein (13 March), after engagements at Poplar Grove (7 March) and Driefontein (10 March). 
While at Bloemfontein Colvile became entangled in events which ruined his military career. He failed in his attempt to relieve General Broadwood's column after it had been ambushed by General C. R. De Wet at Sannah's Post (30-31 March 1900), and his failure was unfairly assigned by Roberts to a reprehensible lack of vigour. Roberts had been slow in ordering Colvile to try to rescue Broadwood. A further disaster befell Colvile later. Roberts, on his advance from Bloemfontein to Pretoria in May, left Colvile, still nominally in command of the division, on the line of communication, with orders to press on to Heilbron. At the end of May, Colonel Spragge, in command of 500 men of the 13th battalion imperial yeomanry, which had been directed to join Colvile's division, allowed his force to be surrounded outside Lindley by General P. D. De Wet's force, which was not much larger. Appeals for help reached Colvile, who disregarded them, and arrived at Heilbron, after severe fighting, according to his orders, on 29 May. Spragge's force was captured by the Boers, with heavy casualties, on 31 May. Colvile's position was difficult: he had been led to believe that his presence at Heilbron by a certain date was essential to Robert's plans, but he had also received an appeal for help from a part of the force assigned to him. 
After the Lindley disaster the 9th division was broken up; Colvile was sent home and reverted to the command of a brigade at Gibraltar. But when Roberts became commander-in-chief in November 1900 he insisted that Colvile be recalled. Colvile returned to England, and on landing at Dover on 31 December stated his case to a Reuter's reporter. On 19 January 1901 he was placed on retired pay as a lieutenant-general. He stated his defence and complained of his treatment by Roberts in 'The Work of the Ninth Division' (1901). Colvile published several other books on his experiences as a soldier and traveller, and, for the War Office, 'The History of the Soudan Campaign' (1889). 
Colvile's first marriage was on 6 August 1878, to Alice Rose (died 1882), eldest daughter of Robert Daly and granddaughter of John Daly, second Baron Dunsandle; they had one daughter, who died in 1882. In 1886 he married Zelie Isabelle, daughter of Pierre Richaud de Preville of Chateau des Mondrans, Basses Pyrenees, France. They had one son, and Zelie survived her husband. 
Colvile settled at Bagshot. On 24 November 1907, while riding a motorcycle, he collided at Frimley with a car driven by Colonel Sir H. Rawlinson, and died almost immediately of his injuries at Brompton Sanatorium. He was buried at Lullington, near Burton upon Trent, where his ancestral estates lay. 


@@@@@


doc= 32514


Colville, (David) John, first Baron Clydesmuir (1894-1954), politician and colonial administrator, was born on 13 February 1894 at Motherwell House, Lanarkshire, the only son and younger child of John Colville (1852-1901) ['see under 'Colville family], an industrialist, and his second wife, Christian Downie (died 1936). His paternal grandfather, David Colville (1811/12-1898) ['see under 'Colville family], had pioneered Scottish steel making; his father was Liberal MP for North-East Lanarkshire (1895-1901). 
Born to wealth (unlike his forebears), Colville attended Charterhouse School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a third in part one of the historical tripos in 1914. He was already an officer in the Territorial Force of the 6th battalion, the Cameronians (Scottish Rifles) and, during four years on the western front, he was three times wounded. Colville married Agnes Anne (1890-1970), the daughter of Sir William Bilsland, first baronet, a Glasgow businessman, on 6 October 1915. Their children were Ronald, Mary, and Rosemary. 
Major Colville served on Lanarkshire county council (1919-26) and the board of the family steel firm, David Colville & Sons (managed by Sir John Craig). As a Lloyd George Liberal, he came fourth at Motherwell at the general election of 1922. As a Unionist he narrowly failed to take Midlothian and Peeblesshire North at a by-election in January 1929 before winning it at the general election five months later. He retained the seat until 1943. 
In parliament Colville spoke mainly on economic matters, missing no chance to recommend protective tariffs. The best way to combat unemployment, he said, was to 'safeguard' British iron and steel. He knew a lot about industrial 'rationalization', as mergers and amalgamations gave Colvilles Ltd a near monopoly of steel making in Scotland after it became a public company in 1931. Following two months as parliamentary private secretary to Noel Skelton, under-secretary for Scotland, Colville stopped asking questions about imports and answered them instead, as parliamentary secretary to the overseas trade department from 10 November 1931. He was responsible for export credit guarantees and helped to negotiate reciprocal trading agreements with nineteen countries after Britain abandoned free trade. In 1932 his military rank advanced to lieutenant-colonel in the Territorial Army. 
Colville became under-secretary for Scotland on 28 November 1935 and worked under Sir Godfrey Collins on agricultural initiatives, such as the Scottish raspberry marketing scheme. A privy councillor from June 1936, he impressed his superiors by always mastering his brief and never straying beyond it. His tone was businesslike yet courteous; narrow eyes and a military moustache gave him a determined appearance. Conservatives felt confidence in an officer and a gentleman who also had a head for figures. In London he lived at 56 Eaton Square; his country home was Braidwood House, Braidwood, near Carluke, in Lanarkshire. He enjoyed shooting and fishing, and touring the western isles aboard his yacht, 'Iolanthe'. 
Promotion to financial secretary to the Treasury on 29 October 1936 entailed Colville's working for Neville Chamberlain and Sir John Simon. He ably defended the national defence contribution, a tax on the growth of profits, and had the satisfaction of imposing a tariff on imported beef. In his view, the National Government had inherited the old Liberal motto of 'peace, retrenchment, reform'. 
Chamberlain appointed John Colville to the cabinet as secretary of state for Scotland on 16 May 1938 in the reshuffle caused by the departure of Lord Swinton. In this office much of his time was devoted to developing policies initiated by his predecessor, Walter Elliot, such as larger subsidies for council housing and industrial estates in depressed 'special areas'. In the months preceding the Munich agreement Colville had to busy himself with aid to herring fishermen. He voiced no support in cabinet for Czechoslovakia. 
The 'Reorganization of Offices (Scotland) Act' 1939 was the most comprehensive reform of Scottish administration since 1885. It replaced the system of semi-autonomous boards with four new departments within the Scottish Office -- agriculture, education, health, and home affairs -- directly subject to the secretary of state and all located in Edinburgh at the newly built St Andrew's House on Calton Hill. However, because the legislation followed the recommendations of Sir John Gilmour's committee, published in September 1937, it sounded anticlimactic in Colville's lucid but mundane exposition. 
Plans for air-raid precautions, evacuation, and increased food production were priorities at the Scottish Office in 1939, and civil servants marvelled at Colville's unremitting application. In March he found time to abolish 'irregular' marriages, thus ending the romantic tradition of Gretna Green. Thereafter, non-emergency measures were shelved, including proposals for a highland development commissioner. His expanded department mobilized Scottish civil authorities for war in the autumn. 
When Churchill chose his coalition government in May 1940, there was no place for Colville (who is to be distinguished from Sir John Rupert Colville, later Churchill's principal private secretary); he became a full-time colonel on the staff of the lowland district, raising the Home Guard. In 1941 he warned the Scottish advisory council of ex-secretaries of state on post-war problems ('the council of state') that the policy of industrial concentration threatened to damage Scotland's economy by penalizing light industry in favour of war-producers bound to close down at the end of hostilities. 
In November 1942 Colville replaced Sir John Dill as governor designate of the Bombay province. As his support for Churchill in the censure debate of July 1942 had been grudging, many saw this as the exile of another old Chamberlainite, though Amery, the Indian secretary, and Linlithgow, the viceroy, both judged that Sir John Colville (as he became in February 1943) would make an excellent pro-consul -- and they were right. When he arrived in Bombay on 23 March 1943, the situation remained tense after the suppression of the 'quit India' campaign. With Congress Party leaders imprisoned in the province, the British ran it without cabinet or legislature under Section 93 of the 'Government of India Act' (1935). Colville exercised his broad powers shrewdly in successive crises. In April 1944 the accidental explosion of an ammunition ship in Bombay docks made 20,000 people homeless. In February 1946 sailors of the Indian navy mutinied. Communal violence escalated after an elected provincial government took office in April 1946. 
As the only former secretary of state to hold a governorship in India since crown rule began in 1858, Colville ranked above his colleagues and deputized several times for the viceroys, Wavell and then Mountbatten, during their absences in London (20 March-6 June and 24 August-16 September 1945, 1-23 December 1946, and 19-30 May 1947). He offered his resignation in February 1947, when the British government removed Wavell and set a terminal date for imperial rule that struck him as premature; the offer was not accepted. 
Sir John Colville continued as governor of Bombay for five months after Indian independence and retired on 6 January 1948. As Baron Clydesmuir from March 1948, he addressed the House of Lords on Scottish, industrial, and army matters. A governor of the BBC from 1950 and lord lieutenant of Lanarkshire from 1952, Lord Clydesmuir died at home at Braidwood on 31 October 1954. He was buried on 4 November 1954. 
Colville was a proficient executive politician, safe rather than showy. Historians paid him minimal attention, though he was occasionally mentioned as a representative type of Scottish tory: the Clydeside capitalist in politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 32515


Colville, Sir Stanley Cecil James (1861-1939), naval officer, was born at 42 Eaton Place, London, on 21 February 1861. He was the second son of Charles John Colville, tenth Lord Colville of Culross, later first Viscount Colville of Culross (1818-1903), chamberlain to Queen Alexandra as princess of Wales and queen. His mother was Cecile Katherine Mary (died 1907), daughter of Robert John Carrington, second Baron Carrington. After attending Marlborough College, Colville entered the training ship 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in July 1874. In October 1876 he was appointed as midshipman to the battleship 'Sultan' in the Mediterranean under its captain, Prince Alfred, duke of Edinburgh. He remained with the duke when he transferred to the ironclad 'Black Prince', Channel Fleet, in May 1878. In January 1879 he was appointed as midshipman to the corvette 'Boedicea' commanded by Commodore F. W. Richards at the Cape station. Colville landed with the naval brigade during the Anglo-Zulu War, and took part in subsequent land operations. He was promoted sub-lieutenant in October 1880, and continued training and examinations at Portsmouth. 
In July 1882 Colville joined the battleship 'Alexandra', Mediterranean Fleet, flagship of Admiral Sir F. B. P. Seymour, and was present at the bombardment of Alexandria (11 July) and subsequent land operations. He was promoted lieutenant in November 1882. In May 1883 he joined the corvette 'Canada', North America station, in which Prince George of Wales (the future George V) was midshipman. In September 1884 Colville rejoined the 'Alexandra' in the Mediterranean, and served with the naval brigade attempting to relieve General Gordon at Khartoum. Colville served for three years again under the duke of Edinburgh, now commander-in-chief, Mediterranean Fleet, being appointed to his flagship 'Alexandra' in February 1886. In October 1889 Colville joined the sloop 'Buzzard' under Commander J. A. Baker on the North America and West Indies station. 
In August 1890 Colville was appointed as first lieutenant to the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert'. He served for two years and was promoted commander in August 1892. In May 1893 Colville joined the battleship 'Trafalgar', flagship of Admiral Sir Compton E. Domvile, second in command, Mediterranean Fleet, where he served for three years. In 1896 Colville was seconded to the Egyptian government at the request of the sirdar, General Sir Herbert Kitchener, to command gunboats of the Nile flotilla and support the British army's campaign against the khalifa. Colville was badly wounded but was mentioned in dispatches, promoted captain in October 1896, and appointed CB. 
During 1897-8 Colville held a shore appointment as naval adviser to the inspector-general of fortifications at the War Office, London. In September 1898 he joined the battleship 'Barfleur', China station, as flag captain to Admiral Penrose Fitzgerald for eighteen months. In March 1900 Colville was appointed flag captain to Vice-Admiral Sir Frederick Bedford in the cruiser 'Crescent' on the North America and West Indies station for two years. On 19 December 1902 Colville married Lady Adelaide Jane ('b'. 1876/7), youngest daughter of admiral of the fleet Richard J. Meade, fourth earl of Clanwilliam; they subsequently had four sons. 
In May 1902 Colville was appointed as chief of staff to Admiral Sir Compton E. Domvile, commander-in-chief, Mediterranean Fleet, flying his flag in the battleship 'Bulwark', and served for three years. In December 1905 Colville was appointed captain of the battleship 'Hindustan', Atlantic Fleet, his only independent captain's command. He reached flag rank in November 1906 at the early age of forty-five. In January 1908 Colville hoisted his rear-admiral's flag in the battleship 'Bulwark', Home Fleet, under Admiral Sir Francis Bridgeman. In February 1909 he was appointed rear-admiral, 1st cruiser squadron, Channel Fleet, flying his flag in 'Drake'. In July 1909 he transferred his flag to 'Indomitable', one of the three new battle cruisers of the dreadnought era which now comprised the prestigious 1st cruiser squadron, Home Fleet. Colville was promoted vice-admiral in April 1911. He attended a senior officers' course at Portsmouth and in June 1912 hoisted his flag in the battleship 'Collingwood', 1st squadron, Home Fleet, spending two years in this command. At the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Colville was ashore on half-pay. In early September 1914 he accepted the shore command of vice-admiral, Orkneys and Shetlands, under Admiral Sir John Jellicoe, commander-in-chief, Grand Fleet. Colville was promoted admiral in September 1914. 
Although Colville missed the sea war, this was a vital appointment. He was responsible for the naval establishments and defence of the islands, particularly Scapa Flow, the Grand Fleet's main anchorage. Jellicoe so approved of Colville's competence that in early 1916 the Admiralty officially expressed its appreciation. Colville was also Jellicoe's choice to succeed him and Vice-Admiral Sir Cecil Burney, second in command, Grand Fleet, in the event of any disaster. In February 1916 Colville was appointed as commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, the most important royal dockyard and another vital shore appointment. Colville hauled down his flag in March 1919, and in July was appointed principal aide-de-camp to George V. He was placed on the retired list in April 1922. 
Colville was appointed rear-admiral of the United Kingdom in 1927 and vice-admiral of the United Kingdom and lieutenant of the Admiralty in 1929, ancient offices revived by Edward VII in 1901. Colville was appointed CVO in 1902, KCB in 1912, GCVO in 1915, GCMG in 1919, and GCB in 1921. His foreign decorations included appointment to the Japanese order of the Rising Sun and the Legion d'honneur. He died at his home, Larchwood, Crawley Down, Sussex, on 9 April 1939. Lady Colville survived him. Colville owed much to his royal connections in his fortunate sea and shore appointments. Yet he was a fine seaman and able administrator, who met the challenge of rapid technological change while embodying the virtues of his patrician class: courage, loyalty, honour, a deep responsibility for the men under his command, and complete devotion to the Royal Navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32516


Colvin, Sir Auckland (1838-1908), administrator in India and Egypt, was born at Calcutta on 8 March 1838, the third son of the ten children of John Russell Colvin (1807-1857), lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces, and his wife, Emma Sophia, daughter of Wetenhall Sneyd, vicar of Newchurch, Isle of Wight. Three of his brothers, Bazett Wetenhall Colvin, Elliott Graham Colvin, and Sir Walter Mytton Colvin ['see below'], all had distinguished careers in India, and a fourth, Clement Sneyd CSI, was secretary of the public works department of the India Office in London. His grandfather John Colvin was a merchant in Calcutta. 
Educated at Eton College from 1850, Colvin went to the East India College, Haileybury, in 1854, and returned to India to begin an administrative career on 17 January 1858. He married on 4 August 1859 Charlotte Elizabeth (died 1865), daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles Herbert CB, and had a son, who died in infancy, and three daughters. Initially posted to the North-Western Provinces (later the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh), where his father had been governor, he held administrative posts in various districts until becoming under-secretary in the home department of the government of India in 1864-5. From 1866 to 1870 he was assistant settlement officer in Etawa and Allahabad districts, working on the revision of the land revenue assessment. In 1870 he was appointed secretary to the board of revenue of the government of the North-Western Provinces. From 1875 to 1878 he held various posts in the government of India as commissioner for excise and inland customs, although he was returned briefly to district work as a collector in 1877 following a disagreement with the lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces, Sir George Couper. 
Colvin's career began to take on a wider significance when he was transferred to Egypt in January 1878, initially as head of the cadastral survey. He resigned from this post the next year when Khedive Isma'il, the titular head of the Egyptian government, attempted to exclude all Europeans from his administration, but was appointed commissioner of the debt in May 1879 and succeeded Evelyn Baring (later Lord Cromer) as controller-general in June 1880. These posts gave him responsibility for the management of the Egyptian government's debts to its foreign creditors, payment of which absorbed about two-thirds of government revenues each year. 
Colvin now became identified with the interests of British and French bondholders, and he used his influence through official channels, and through his access to the press as the Egyptian correspondent of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', to stress the responsibilities of the British government to the interests of private investors. In a perceptive memorandum written for the British government in December 1881, for example, Colvin argued that liberal nationalists should be encouraged to take over the internal administration of Egypt, but that the European powers must recognize openly their own material interests in financial administration. During the political upheavals of 1880 to 1882, as the nationalist movement led by Urabi Pasha and backed by the local military and landed elites gathered support for opposition to European financial control, Colvin and Sir Edward Malet, the British consul, saw their position under increasing threat. The reports of these men on the spot helped to fan fears (possibly exaggerated) of anarchy and an anti-European military revolt, which prompted the British occupation of Egypt following riots in Alexandria in June 1882. After the British occupation Colvin became financial adviser to the khedive. He was created KCMG in 1881. 
Colvin returned to India as finance member of the viceroy's council in August 1883, again succeeding Evelyn Baring in office. Here he faced familiar financial problems, as the rising costs of the British military establishment and an unstable and weakening rupee rate of exchange put severe pressure on the revenues of British India. Colvin found that military demands, especially for the strengthening of the defences of the north-west frontier region against a possible invasion by Russia and the pacification of Burma, were hard to control, while the exchange costs of the depreciation of the silver rupee against gold meant that the government of India had to raise increased taxation to meet its fixed sterling expenditure in England on the home charges for military costs, pensions, and debt servicing. Colvin argued strongly for the British government to take action to stabilize the world price of silver, arguing that this posed a bigger threat to the raj than did the Russian army, but with no effect; instead, he was forced to impose politically sensitive new forms of taxation, including a reimposition of income tax and a 25 per cent increase in the salt excise. 
As in Egypt, Colvin's political judgements in India were sophisticated. In 1883 he played a major role in diffusing the 'white mutiny' which broke out over the proposals of the 'Criminal Jurisdiction Bill (Ilbert Bill)' to increase the powers of Indian judges to try European civilians, arranging a compromise that allowed such defendants the right to claim a jury, at least half of whom were to be Europeans. The opposition to the 'Ilbert Bill', often expressed in racist, anti-Indian language, was widely seen as an attack on the liberal policies of the viceroy, Lord Ripon, who was closely identified with political and administrative reforms that increased Indian participation in the machinery of government. On Ripon's retirement in December 1884 Colvin defended his reputation in an article in 'The Pioneer' (an English-language newspaper published in Allahabad) that drew attention to the limited vision and small-mindedness of the bulk of the expatriate community. 
Colvin was appointed lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces in 1887. Here, as at Calcutta, he identified a clear link between the financial stability and political legitimacy of British rule in India. Increased taxation required increased representation, and Colvin urged that what he called 'leading native gentlemen' should be associated with government policy through municipal self-government and provincial legislatures. To this end, he built up links between his administration and the large landowners of Oudh, founding Colvin Talukdars College to educate the sons of landed aristocrats; he also lent his support to the emerging strand of loyalist Muslim opinion centred around Saiyid Ahmad Khan, whom he had first supported as a young district officer in the 1860s. By contrast, Colvin campaigned vigorously, in the press and elsewhere, against the liberal nationalism of the Indian National Congress, and published an open correspondence with one of its founders, A. O. Hume, in 'The Pioneer'. He was particularly critical of the levelling effect of the new franchise rules for local self-government in 1883, which gave access to municipal councils to professional and commercial men whose elevation he thought threatened the position of the established social and political order. 
Colvin was created a CIE in October 1883 and was gazetted a KCSI in May 1892, six months before retirement. In England he settled at Earl Soham Lodge, Framlingham, Suffolk. From 1896 onwards he was chairman of the Burma Railways, the Egyptian Delta Railway, and the Khedival Mail Steamship Company, and was on a number of other company boards. He wrote 'John Russell Colvin' (1895), the life of his father, for the 'Rulers of India' series, and an account of Egyptian affairs in 'The Making of Modern Egypt' (1906), which is not revealing of his own part in events and was quickly overshadowed by the rival polemics of William Scawen Blunt's 'The Secret History of the English Occupation of Egypt' (1907) and Lord Cromer's 'Modern Egypt' (1908). Colvin died at Suffolk House, Maple Road, Surbiton, Surrey, the residence of his eldest daughter, on 24 March 1908, and was buried at Earl Soham. 




@@@@@


doc= 32517


Colvin, Ian Duncan (1877-1938), journalist, was born at Inverness on 29 September 1877, the second son of Duncan Colvin, Free Church minister, and his wife, Grace Macpherson Strother. He was educated at Crieff Academy and at Inverness College, and worked for a short time on the 'Inverness Courier' before going in 1897 to Edinburgh University, where he studied under the professor of rhetoric and English literature, G. E. B. Saintsbury, and won the gold medal for history and literature. 
Having left Edinburgh for London, where he served for a time in the London office of the Allahabad 'Pioneer', Colvin went to India in 1900 to join the staff of that journal. Three years later he moved to South Africa and the 'Cape Times' under Maitland Park. Apart from his leading articles, he became famous there for his political verse and tales signed Rip van Winkle. He returned to London in 1907 and married, in 1909, Sophie, daughter of the Revd George Robson of Edinburgh. They had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1909 Colvin became a leader writer on the 'Morning Post', then edited by Fabian Ware, and, from mid-1911, by H. A. Gwynne. He remained on this ultra right-wing daily for the rest of his, and its, career. He did so, despite approaches from other papers, because, in his words, 'Most newspapers are lost in the pursuit of Mammon, party, etc.' and because 'A paper without a cause is a paper without soul -- and must rot'. Colvin spearheaded many of Gwynne's causes and political campaigns, and was the inspiration behind the one which, begun in 1915, led to the formation of the National Party in 1917, a party which Colvin wished had 'a good Aristocrat' to lead it. During the First World War Colvin was a member of the council and of the executive committee of the Anti-German Union. He saw the war, however, as 'really a spiritual struggle not with Germany only but with what is bad in ourselves. We had sunk into such a horrible slough of corruption, selfishness and false ideas before the war, that if the Germans had been wise enough to keep the peace, they might have conquered us in ten years time without a war. (Colvin to Lady Bathurst, 7 May 1914, 10 July 1915, Glenesk-Bathurst MSS 2948, 2948a)' Colvin espoused protectionism, excoriated free trade, and wished to eliminate all manifestations of socialism and radicalism from the British Isles. Having published 'The Germans in England, 1066-1598' in 1915 and 'The Unseen Hand in English History' in 1917, he went on, noting that Sir Francis Bacon had put 'strangers as foreigners' as one cause of revolutions, to contribute more (36 per cent) than any of the other contributors to 'The Cause of World Unrest' (1920), Gwynne's exegesis of 'The Protocols of the Elders of Zion'. 
In the 1920s Colvin was active in the 'Morning Post''s denunciation of Lloyd George's attempt to settle the Irish question, and its championing of General Dyer's action at Amritsar in 1919, when he ordered British troops to fire into an unarmed crowd. Colvin went on to produce a typically hagiographical 'Life of General Dyer' in 1929, to follow his 'Life of Jameson' of 1922. 
Throughout the 1930s Colvin and the 'Morning Post' steadfastly opposed all moves in the direction of the independence of India, and made clear their sympathies with the cause of General Franco in Spain. 
The satirical style of his political commentaries continued to have many admirers across the political spectrum, but fewer and fewer readers -- if the circulation figures of the 'Morning Post' are anything to go by -- remained of that paper's, and Colvin's, die-hard persuasions. 
Intermittent ill health did not prevent Colvin from publishing, in 1934 and 1936, volumes 2 and 3 of the 'Life of Lord Carson' (Edward Marjoribanks had produced volume 1 in 1932). His satirical verse was collected in 'Party Whips' (1912), 'Intercepted Letters' (1913), and a 'Wreath of Immortelles' (1924). On 10 May 1938 he died at Old Court Clinic, Hangar Lane, Ealing, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32518


Colvin, Sir Sidney (1845-1927), art and literary scholar and museum administrator, was born at Norwood, Surrey, on 18 June 1845, the youngest of the three children (all sons) who survived infancy of Bazett David Colvin (1805-1871), East India merchant, and his wife, Mary Steuart (1821-1902), eldest daughter of William Butterworth Bayley. Both sides of the family had long been connected with India, as either merchants or administrators. Colvin was privately educated at the family home, The Grove, Little Bealings, near Woodbridge, east Suffolk. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1863 and was third in the first class of the classical tripos in 1867; he became a fellow in 1868. 
On leaving university Colvin moved to London and established a reputation as a critic, mainly of the fine arts; he wrote for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', the 'Fortnightly Review', 'The Portfolio', and other journals. In 1872 his 'Portfolio' papers appeared in book form under the title 'Children in Italian and English Design'; this was followed in 1873 by 'A Selection from Occasional Writings on Fine Art' (privately printed). In 1873 Colvin was elected Slade professor of fine art at Cambridge and held the appointment until 1885. A special interest was the sculpture and archaeology of ancient Greece and in 1875 he visited the excavations in progress at Olympia. 
In 1876 Colvin became director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, where he established a gallery of casts from antique sculpture. He left there in 1884 to become keeper of the department of prints and drawings in the British Museum, a post he held until his retirement in 1912. By his thorough scholarship and enthusiasm Colvin made the department more important than it had ever been before; he reorganized the arrangement and mounting of the collection and secured spacious accommodation where exhibitions could be held. A special feature was the excellent guides written by Colvin or under his supervision; the most important was the guide to the exhibition in 1899 of Rembrandt's etchings, arranged for the first time in chronological order. His greatest achievement was to persuade the government to purchase the magnificent John Malcolm of Poltalloch collection of drawings and engravings (1895), which 'almost doubled the importance of the department' (Colvin, 207). Thanks to Colvin's influence many private collectors made important bequests to the museum. Among the most notable were William Mitchell's collection of early woodcuts (1895), Henry Vaughan's collection of drawings by John Flaxman, Thomas Stothard, and others (1900), the second Baron Cheylesmore's collection of mezzotints (1902), and George Salting's drawings and engravings by old masters (1910). An important purchase was James Reeve's collection of drawings by the Norwich school (1902). During the later years of his keepership Colvin took a great interest in Japanese and Chinese art and greatly enriched the museum's holdings by his purchases. 
Colvin had a special interest in early Italian art. In 'A Florentine Picture-Chronicle' (1898) he reproduced in facsimile, with detailed commentary, a book of drawings (purchased from John Ruskin) which he attributed to Maso Finiguerra (1424-1464), the reputed inventor of engraving. In the same field was the official 'Catalogue of Early Italian Engravers' (1910), prepared in collaboration with Arthur Hind. Another major work, also in collaboration with Hind, was 'Early Engraving and Engravers in England' (1905). In 1894 Colvin failed in his bid to become director of the National Gallery and in 1909 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the directorship of the British Museum. He was knighted in 1911. 
Some time in the late 1860s Colvin met and fell in love with Frances Jane Sitwell, 'nee' Fetherstonhaugh (1839-1924), a woman of great beauty, wit, and personality, unhappily married to the Revd Albert Hurt Sitwell. She finally parted from her unsatisfactory husband in 1874 and for the next thirty years she and Colvin lived apart but maintained a close friendship. She acted as visiting hostess at his official residence at the British Museum, and thanks to her influence it became a literary and artistic centre. Although the Revd Sitwell died in 1894 they did not marry until 7 July 1903; apparently Colvin did not feel able to support a wife in addition to his mother (who was financially dependent upon him) and he did not marry until after the latter's death. 
In 1869 Colvin joined the New (soon to become the Savile) Club; he was also from 1879 a member of the Athenaeum and from 1893 of the Burlington Fine Arts Club. In 1871 he joined the Society of Dilettanti and was its honorary secretary from 1891 to 1896. He was elected to the Literary Society in 1886 and became in due course treasurer and then president. 
Colvin was on friendly terms with most of the great literary figures of his day, from Matthew Arnold and Robert Browning to Meredith and Swinburne. As a boy he had worshipped Ruskin, who was a family friend; his next great admiration was for the work of Edward Burne-Jones, who became a close friend. Burne-Jones introduced him to Rossetti and Colvin was a member of his circle from 1868 to 1872. Basil Champneys the architect was his oldest friend and there were close friendships too with Henry James and Joseph Conrad. 
Colvin's most celebrated friendship, shared by his future wife, was with Robert Louis Stevenson. Colvin and Mrs Sitwell met the young Scot in the summer of 1873 at Cockfield rectory in Suffolk, the home of Professor Churchill Babington, whose wife, Maud, was Stevenson's cousin. It was a turning point in Stevenson's life; they helped to steady him through the emotional problems caused by disagreements with his father over religion and by uncertainties about his future as a writer. Colvin recognized Stevenson's genius and helped and encouraged him by introducing him to editors and publishers and tirelessly promoting his interests. Stevenson fell in love with Frances Sitwell and for the next two years poured out letters of love and adoration to her; after the intensity of these feelings had passed the friendship remained. For the rest of his life Stevenson regarded Colvin as his literary mentor and his dearest friend. In a letter from the south seas he made it clear that when he thought of 'home' it was Colvin and his house in the British Museum (jokingly called 'The Monument') that he had in mind. Colvin's own unselfish devotion, both to Stevenson himself and later to his memory, never faltered. To maintain the intimacy of their friendship Stevenson wrote to him the journal-letters from Samoa which Colvin published as 'Vailima Letters' (1895). Colvin edited the Edinburgh edition of Stevenson's works (1894-8). After acrimonious rows with Stevenson's widow and stepson he was forced to relinquish the project of writing the official biography, which he called 'the great hope and interest of my life' (Mehew, 1.53). Instead, he edited Stevenson's 'Letters' (1899, enlarged 1911, and in final form 1924); the texts are now known to be flawed by bowdlerization and expurgation. 
Although art had provided him with his livelihood, Colvin's chief interest was in literature. He had a special regard for Landor and Keats, and wrote short biographies of both for the 'English Men of Letters' series: 'Landor' (1881) and 'Keats' (1887). He edited 'Selections from Landor' (1882), and published editions of the letters of Keats in 1891 (characteristically omitting the letters to Fanny Brawne) and of his poems in 1915. He devoted the early years of his retirement to the completion of his major biography, 'John Keats, his Life and Poetry, his Friends, Critics and after-Fame' (1917). It was followed in 1921 by 'Memories and Notes of Persons and Places', a volume of reminiscences. 
In appearance Colvin was tall and thin with a pointed beard; in 1903 he broke a leg in an accident and thereafter walked with a slight limp. Stevenson described him as having 'the air of a man accustomed to obedience' (Mehew, 1.49) and Laurence Binyon, a museum colleague, recalled that 'under a manner that often seemed stiff and shy he concealed an emotional and excitable temperament, capable of occasional explosions' (Lucas, 182). 
Lady Colvin's death, on 1 August 1924, was a great blow to Colvin; his last years were also marred by deafness and loss of memory. He died on 11 May 1927 at his home, 35 Palace Gardens Terrace, Kensington (to which he had moved on leaving the British Museum). After cremation his ashes were buried in his wife's grave in the cemetery at Church Row, Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 32519


Sir Walter Mytton Colvin (1847-1908), lawyer, Sir Auckland's youngest brother, was born at Moulmein, Burma, on 13 September 1847 and was educated at Rugby School and Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1871, went out to Allahabad the following year, and there built up a large practice as a criminal lawyer. He married in 1873 Annie, daughter of Wigram E. Money, and had a family of three daughters. He served for several terms as a nominated member of the legislative council of the North-Western Provinces, and was a prominent member of the government of India police commission of 1902-3. He was knighted in 1904 and died at Allahabad on 16 December 1908, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 32520


Commerell, Sir John Edmund (1829-1901), naval officer, born in London on 13 January 1829, was the second son of John Williams Commerell of Strood Park, Horsham, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of William Bosanquet. He entered the navy in February 1842 and was at once sent out to China, where he experienced the realities of war. Later he was in the 'Firebrand' with Captain James Hope and took part in the operations in the Parana, including the engagement with the batteries at Obligado on 20 November 1845, when the chain was cut by the boats of the 'Firebrand', a gallant achievement, which passed without official recognition. He was promoted lieutenant on 13 December 1848. Commerell married, in 1853, Mathilda Maria, fourth daughter of Joseph Bushby of Halkin Street, London. 
As lieutenant of the 'Vulture' Commerell was in the Baltic in 1854 and took part in the operations in the Gulf of Bothnia, in 1855 was in the Black Sea and Sea of Azov, and on 29 September was promoted commander of the gun-vessel 'Weser', employed in the Sea of Azov. A few days later, on 11 October, he landed with a small party, made a hazardous march inland, and set fire to a large store of forage and corn. This service was important and dangerous, and the Victoria Cross was awarded to Commerell and two of his seamen. In 1859 he was off China in the 'Fury' and commanded a division of the seamen landed for the unsuccessful attack on the Taku (Dagu) forts. Although repulsed, the determined courage in the face of insurmountable difficulties was recognized, and Commerell was promoted captain on 18 July. In 1866 his services while in command of the 'Terrible', laying the Atlantic cable, were rewarded with a CB civil division. In 1869 he commanded the 'Monarch', which in December carried across the Atlantic the remains of George Peabody, the American philanthropist and founder of the 'Peabody dwellings'. In 1870 Commerell received the military CB, and in February 1871, with a broad pennant in the 'Rattlesnake', was appointed commander-in-chief on the west coast of Africa. In the Second Anglo-Asante War, in August 1873, while reconnoitring up the River Pra, he was dangerously wounded by a musket shot in the lungs, which compelled him to invalid. In March 1874 he was created a KCB, and he attained his flag on 12 November 1876. In the following year he was sent out to the Mediterranean as second in command, at the special request of Sir Geoffrey Hornby, with whom his relations were most cordial and who highly commended his ability and loyalty. In November 1882 he went out as commander-in-chief on the North American station, where he remained nearly three years, returning in autumn 1885. 
In 1880 Commerell had unsuccessfully contested Southampton, but in the 1885 general election, and again in 1886, he was elected Conservative MP for Southampton, and zealously for the next two years endeavoured to awaken the country to the necessity of strengthening the navy. He was thus largely instrumental in bringing about the 'Naval Defence Act' of 1889, though he was not then in parliament, having resigned his seat in July 1888 on being appointed commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. He had already been promoted admiral in April 1886, and had been made a GCB at Queen Victoria's jubilee in June 1887. At Portsmouth in 1889 he commanded at the naval review and received Kaiser Wilhelm II, who afterwards wrote him an autograph letter on presenting him with a sword. 
Commerell was always popular at court; he was naval aide-de-camp to the queen from 1872 to 1877, and was her groom-in-waiting from 1874 to 1879 and again from 1891. On the death of Sir Provo Wallis he was, at the queen's request, promoted on 13 February 1892 admiral of the fleet, though not the senior admiral. In January 1899, at the age of seventy, he was placed on the retired list, and he died at his home, 45 Rutland Gate, London, on 21 May 1901; his wife survived him. An officer of great experience in amphibious and riverine warfare, Commerell was one of the leaders of the intellectual and material renaissance of the Royal Navy that began in the early 1880s. 


@@@@@


doc= 32521


Common, Andrew Ainslie (1841-1903), astronomer and astronomical photographer, was born on 7 August 1841 at Oxford Street, St Andrew, Newcastle upon Tyne, one of two sons of Thomas Common, a surgeon and descendant of the Scottish border family of Comyn, and his wife, Mary Hall. Recollections from his brother indicate that Common had a youthful interest in astronomy: when he was ten his mother borrowed a telescope for him from Dr Bates of Morpeth. Financial constraints during childhood, due to the death of his father, curtailed his education and forced him to seek employment from an early age. In 1864 he fell out with his relatives and left for London, where he considered emigrating to Australia. By chance he met his uncle, Matthew Hall, who gave him a position in his sanitary engineering firm. Through his engineering talent Common made rapid progress in the company of Matthew Hall & Co., allowing him, on 18 July 1867, to marry Anne Matthews (1838x40-1911) of Gayton in Norfolk, daughter of Abraham Matthews, a farmer. After Hall's death in 1878 Common took over the company which he managed until his retirement in 1890. Common's improved position allowed him to move to 63 Eaton Rise, Ealing, in Middlesex, where he lived for the remainder of his life, along with his wife and family of three daughters and one son. 
Common's childhood interest in astronomy was not seriously resumed until 1874, when he established his first observatory, whose dome housed an equatorially mounted 51/2 inch refracting telescope. With this refractor he first attempted celestial photography and in 1876 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. Two years later, after considering making one himself, Common ordered an 18 inch silver-on-glass mirror from George Calver of Chelmsford which he built into an instrument of his own design. He subsequently used that reflecting telescope to observe the faint satellites of the planets Mars and Saturn. Experience with the reflector convinced him of the superiority of glass over speculum (metal) mirrors. Common then ordered a 36 inch mirror from Calver as he wished to resume his work on astronomical photography using the very slow film then available. He applied his extensive engineering skills to devise an unconventional fork mounting for the larger telescope. The design was innovative in that most of the telescope's mass was carried on mercury bearings. He likewise devised an electric clock control to improve the driving of the instrument during the long exposures necessary in celestial photography. To avoid constructing an expensive observatory dome the telescope was housed in a rotating run-off shed, a design prescient of that later used for large reflecting telescopes. Common initially used the instrument to continue his observations of planetary satellites and the nebulosity around the Pleiades star cluster. Yet his main energies were devoted to trying to photograph the bright Orion nebula; a first attempt in January 1880 ended in total failure. The following year he managed to take one of the two first good photographs of a bright comet (1881.b). Common achieved the feat on the same night that his fellow amateur Henry Draper photographed the Great Comet from New York, but their subsequent rivalry was curtailed by Draper's sudden death in 1882. After further improvements to the telescope guiding he managed on 30 January 1883 to expose a plate on the Orion nebula for 37 minutes. The splendid photograph revealed details invisible on the most carefully rendered hand drawings of the nebula. In recognition of Common's pioneering work he was awarded the Royal Astronomical Society's gold medal in 1884. He later obtained 90 minute exposures of the Orion nebula and successfully photographed the planets Jupiter and Saturn. In taking his nebula images, Common pioneered the technique of completing his exposures over several nights. As a photographic innovator, in 1887 he was invited to attend the first international conference on astronomical photography held at the Paris observatory. Although not directly involved in the proposed Carte du Ciel sky survey, he worked with Jules Pierre Janssen of the Meudon observatory on related projects. 
Encouraged by his success Common resolved to build a 60 inch reflecting telescope to continue his work. To make space in his garden for the new reflector, in 1885 he sold the 36 inch reflector to Edward Crossley, a wealthy Halifax merchant. The instrument was little used there, but Crossley virtually gave it to the Lick Observatory in California, where James Keeler modified it and then achieved superb photographs of faint nebulae, thereby opening up a branch of astronomy. In building his largest telescope Common decided to grind and polish the mirror himself and to this end he erected a workshop adjacent to his house. Although the telescope was complete by 1889, the mirror produced unsatisfactory images and, despite several attempts at refiguring, it continued to display oval stars. To rectify the problem Common ordered a new glass disc from France and due to his earlier experience was able to produce an acceptable mirror in a mere three months. The mounting for the larger telescope was similar to the earlier reflector, except that water was employed to float the polar bearings. Apart from photographs of the Orion and Dumbbell nebulae and the Pleiades, Common made little use of the new telescope. It was difficult to use and the encroachment of London had lightened the once dark skies of Ealing. He offered to give the instrument to the Oxford University observatory, but Professor H. H. Turner had no funds to house or operate it. In 1904 the reflector was sold to Harvard College observatory in America, where it proved a failure until it was remounted and moved to their outstation in south Africa. Common's skill in mirror making was next applied to providing 36 and 30 inch mirrors for the Kensington Solar Physics Observatory, along with similar ones for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, and the Helwan observatory in Egypt. Likewise he mastered the difficult art of making optically flat mirrors up to 20 inches in diameter. They were supplied to the Royal Society, the university observatory, Cambridge, and the National Physical Laboratory. The mirrors were mainly incorporated into heliostats and coelostats, new types of instruments that were important on solar eclipse expeditions to observe the sun. Later Common travelled with an official group to Norway to observe the 1896 solar eclipse, but his efforts were thwarted by clouds. 
Common was an active member of the scientific community, acting as treasurer for the Royal Astronomical Society between 1884 and 1895 and as president from 1895 to 1897. For his work on celestial photography he was elected to the Royal Society in 1885 and sat on the council from 1895 to 1897. Until his death he served on the board of visitors for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. During 1891 he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of St Andrews and in 1900 he was elected president of the astronomy section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In later years Common was distracted from his scientific work by his involvement with the British Aluminium Company, being one of its first directors. He subsequently became involved with the Ealing firm of Ottaway & Co. in developing improved optical gunsights for the British army and navy. In 1902 Percy Scott RN described Common's work as having increased the fighting efficiency of the navy's battleships fourfold. On 2 June 1903, while still pursuing this work in his study at home, Common died suddenly of a heart attack and was later cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 32522


Comper, Sir (John) Ninian (1864-1960), architect, was born on 10 June 1864 at 44 Bonaccord Street, Aberdeen, the fourth child and first son of the seven children of the Revd John Comper (1823-1903), rector of St John's Episcopal Church, and his wife, Ellen (1828-1908), the eldest daughter of John Taylor, corn merchant of Hull, and his wife, Anne. Comper's parents were both English, and although he was by birth a Scot and never lost his love of the country his professional life was to be spent in London. 
The Comper family had lived at Pulborough, in Sussex, since the Norman conquest and were yeoman farmers; the Revd John Comper's romantic belief that the family were Bretons, of Huguenot ancestry, has no substance in fact. Comper's father was a schoolmaster who had gone to Scotland in 1848 on the recommendation of Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, to read for holy orders in the episcopal church. Influenced by the Tractarian movement, he became friends with Alexander Penrose Forbes, bishop of Brechin (who ordained him in 1852), the hymnologist John Mason Neale, and other leaders of the Anglo-Catholic revival. He went on to become rector of St Margaret's, Aberdeen, which became the most advanced church within the Scottish Episcopal church. Neale was one of Comper's godfathers and Anglo-Catholicism was the motivation and mainspring of his work as an architect; indeed, it was for this cause that most of it was executed. 
In 1874 Comper went to Trinity College, Glenalmond, where he was brutally bullied. He left in 1880, and in 1882, after drawing for a term at the Ruskin School, Oxford, he became a voluntary assistant to C. E. Kempe, the glass painter and church craftsman, while continuing to draw at the South Kensington School of Art. He was taken to see Bodley and Garner's unfinished St Michael's, Camden Town (1876-81), by Father George Congreve and he claimed that it was to the beauty of proportion and whiteness that he owed his conversion to architecture. In 1883 he was articled to G. F. Bodley, whom he was proud to call his master and whose work made a lasting impression on him. 
In their mature work Bodley and Garner designed in the Decorated Gothic style of the fourteenth century, bringing it to a point of refinement that was in some ways an advance on the original. Comper's early work, notably the vaulted chapel of St Nicholas added to his father's church, St Margaret's, Aberdeen (1888-90), the chapel and extensions for the community of St Margaret, built on the Spital in Aberdeen (1891), and the conventual church of the Holy Name, Malvern Link, Worcestershire (1893), are fluent exercises in his masters' manner. 
In 1888 Comper entered into partnership with William Bucknall, an improver in Bodley and Garner's drawing office who had been articled to E. R. Robson, architect to the Board of Education. The partnership was unequal but balanced: Bucknall was a pedestrian architect, but he was a good draughtsman and constructor, while Comper had the greater artistry, originality, and imagination but lacked constructional skills. He always needed assistants, and after the partnership had been dissolved in 1905, Comper was assisted by his nephew Arthur Bucknall, by Ernest Jago, formerly chief draughtsman to J. F. Bentley, by W. A. Forsyth, later by his eldest son, Sebastian, and finally by his great-nephew John Bucknall. On 6 August 1890 Comper married William Bucknall's sister Grace (1868/9-1933) at an elaborate medievalist ceremony at St Barnabas, Pimlico; they had four sons and two daughters. 
In preparation for his marriage ceremony Comper had studied medieval manuscripts in the British Museum. The illuminations demonstrated to him that the Gothic altars designed by Bodley and Garner, with their overpowering reredoses, were foreign to the essential simplicity of the medieval originals. It was from this time that Comper's work was informed by liturgical principles in which the altar became the determining feature and focus of church planning. But he always insisted that his work was not purely archaeological but was subordinate to a quest for beauty which, at this stage of his development, he found fully embodied in late Gothic art and architecture. 
Comper increasingly came to derive inspiration from English Perpendicular architecture of the fifteenth century. The Perpendicular revival had been started by J. D. Sedding at St Clement, at Boscombe, Hampshire (1873-93). Comper brought to the revival a purist's attention to historical accuracy, modelling his work on the Perpendicular churches of East Anglia, which he visited in 1894-5. His late Gothic preferences were reinforced by studying Flemish primitive panel paintings, initially in the National Gallery, then on a visit to Belgium in 1894. To this was added a study of late Gothic religious art on the Rhine to Mainz in 1896, on a journey which took him to Nuremburg, Rothenburg, Wurzburg, and Xanten, and with which he combined an enthusiasm for Wagner in a season at Bayreuth. 
The first fruits of Comper's research are found in an authentically designed Gothic altar with riddle posts and a hanging pyx for the chapel of St Matthew's clergy house, Westminster (1892), followed by another in the restoration of St Wilfrid's, Cantley, Yorkshire (1892-4). It was in restorations that Comper's early work was most fully expressed: informed by medieval inventories, he changed stripped, barnlike shells into unified works of art, accomplished by furniture, embroidery, and textiles, base and precious metalwork, painted glass, and decoration. Most complete of all his reconstructions was the restoration of St Mary's, Egmanton, Nottinghamshire (1897), for the seventh duke of Newcastle. 
Nineteenth-century churches were remodelled in the same way. Between 1890 and 1900 Comper's work in the lady chapel of Downside Abbey, Somerset (1896-1910), in the crypt of St Mary Magdalene, Paddington (1895), and St Barnabas, Pimlico (1891-1901), introduced an interpretation of English church art and liturgical worship based on scientific principles which had not been attempted since the days of A. W. N. Pugin and George Gilbert Scott the younger (both of whom in terms of authenticity Comper surpassed). Comper's work was intended to fulfil the rubrics of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and apply them to the modern age. What appeared to some to be retrogressive antiquarianism was essentially a radical attempt to restore to the Church of England a continuity with the medieval past and reunite it with the historic Catholic faith. It was Comper's artistry and knowledge which made his experiments acceptable to the educated. 
Comper's brilliance as a church furnisher was recognized from the beginning of his practice. The virtuosity of his restorations and furnishing schemes made many regard him more as a church craftsman than an architect and builder, yet his work was architecturally conceived. As a craftsman he was an innovator. From 1886 he became associated with the school of embroidery of the Sisters of Bethany, Clerkenwell, and under his direction the 'or nue' technique of embroidery was introduced, leading the school to produce the finest church embroidery in northern Europe. His textiles were dyed by Sir Thomas Wardle, of Leek, in Staffordshire, and effected a transformation of ecclesiastical colour. His experiments in painted glass employed glass of strong but delicate tone on white grounds decorated with yellow stain. He revived the medieval practice of making blue glass in clay, rather than iron, pots using sand and seaweed. The result of these experiments may be seen in the series of windows of abbots and kings in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey (1909-61). From 1903 he signed his windows with a wild strawberry. Comper's ecclesiastical design was not influenced as strongly as Bodley's had been by the aesthetic movement; he declined, too, to follow the free expression of the arts and crafts movement and established an independent line of his own founded upon perfected late medieval precedent. 
Comper designed only fifteen churches and his only major secular commission was the Welsh national war memorial, Cardiff (1924-8). His early work came to fulfilment in St Cyprian's, Clarence Gate, St Marylebone (1902-3). Here he built a developed version of the late medieval parish church; but the intention behind it was to build a quintessential Anglican church of the twentieth century. 'Its design', he wrote in a service paper for the consecration, 'neither seeks, nor avoids, originality; still less is its aim to reproduce any period of the past, but only to fulfil these and other needs which are ours today, and to do so in the most beautiful manner of all' ('On the significance of the building', quoted in 'Further thoughts on the English altar, or, Practical considerations on the planning of a modern church', 1933, 32). 
In 1900 Comper read George Gilbert Scott the younger's 'An Essay on the History of English Church Architecture prior to the Separation of England from the Roman Obedience' (1881), which had a far-reaching influence on his work and thought. In that same year he visited Rome, and in 1905 he went on to visit Sicily and the Mediterranean; in 1906 he visited Greece. These journeys made a profound impression on him and encouraged him to develop an inclusive approach to architecture which synthetized many decorative and architectural styles. In particular it was the Sicilian amalgam of Gothic, Greek, and Saracenic discovered in the Palermitan mosaic churches that led to the evolution of his second period, which he described as 'unity by inclusion'. He moved from seeing the late middle ages as a golden age in comparison with which other centuries were either immature or decadent to concluding that both the Christian centuries and their classical inheritance had a valid application to an understanding of tradition as a vital, rather than static, force. Comper had discovered the debt owed by Christian art to Greece, and through travel and an exploration of Platonist philosophy he came to believe that the highest expression of beauty can be achieved only by inclusion, not exclusion. 
No other English church architect of the twentieth century endeavoured to penetrate so deeply to the core of Western civilization by studying the church art and architecture of Europe in order to find there spiritual values for his own time. Comper's conversion to primitive models did not open a new period of mimesis. His understanding of the Christian tradition was accretive and in his fresh and sparkling use of precedent he vitalized tradition and made it distinctive of an English style. The figure of the Pantokrator became a necessary iconographical constituent; but he translated it from a stern, bearded Christ into a Hellenistic, beardless representation inspired by the early Christian images of the Good Shepherd. 
The first expression of the fusion of styles is in Comper's restoration of Wimborne St Giles, Dorset (1908-10). It is indebted to the French Renaissance and has affinities with the English early seventeenth-century amalgam of classical and Gothic. This was followed by St Mary's, Rochdale, Lancashire (1908-12), in which the debt to Greece is more evident and where Comper first designed a figure of the Pantokrator executed in shallow relief above the rood. The altar screen of Wymondham Abbey, Norfolk (1913-33), is the most developed statement of his new synthesis in church furniture. It was in St Mary's, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire (1904-31), that the theory of unity by inclusion was given fullest architectural application. Here he combined English Perpendicular Gothic on a continental scale, using a French plan, with a classical arcade and furniture and Spanish Plateresque 'rejas' of black iron. The altar stands beneath a classical ciborium, and the church is planned around it. The Majestas hangs above the rood screen, suspended from a lierne vault with fan pendants. But the aesthetic success of St Mary's lies in an exquisite use of Mediterranean colour, burnished gilding, and hangings of rose-red silk contained within white walls combined with ochre-coloured Northamptonshire ironstone. It is, perhaps, the most beautiful church built in England in the twentieth century. John Betjeman considered Comper to be the most delicate colourist and daring church planner of his time. What Voysey and Baillie Scott had done for houses, he believed, Comper had achieved for churches and so secured a place among the moderns. Yet Comper was strongly opposed to modernism and claimed for St Mary's, Wellingborough, in a paper, 'Further thoughts on the English altar, or, Practical considerations on the planning of a modern church' (1933), that 'Only to its contemporaries does it owe nothing' (p. 32). 
A journey to Algeria in 1924 took Comper to see the ruined fifth-century church at Tebessa, which persuaded him of the suitability of Constantinian church planning for modern, centrally planned churches. As early as 1912 he had brought forward the high altar of the Grosvenor Chapel, Mayfair, and for the first time opened a direct visual relationship with the worshippers in the nave. He now repudiated the Gothic altar, insisting on a classical ciborium as a necessary part of the Christian altar; he also broke new ground at the conventual church of All Saints, London Colney, Hertfordshire (1924-7), and then in St Philip's, Cosham, Portsmouth, Hampshire (1937), by designing from the altar outwards. Here he anticipated the planning of churches which was brought to fruition on the continent after the Second World War and applied universally since the Second Vatican Council (1962-5). 
Although few and infrequent, Comper's writings had great influence. He published three liturgical papers: 'Practical considerations of the Gothic or English altar and certain dependent ornaments' (1893); 'The reasonableness of the ornaments rubric illustrated by a comparison of the German and English altars' (1897); and 'Further thoughts on the English altar, or, Practical considerations on the planning of a modern church' (1933). These were followed by his mature reflections published in 'Of the Atmosphere of a Church' (1940) and 'Of the Christian Altar and the Buildings which Contain it' (1950). His early papers underpinned the research of Percy Dearmer and his popularizing attempt to establish a medievalist English use for the Church of England, while his later compositions influenced the theory of radical bodies such as the New Churches Research Group. Comper was dismayed by the plagiarism of his early work by Dearmer's Warham Guild and the encouragement of this development by the Central Council for the Care of Churches under the secretary, F. C. Eeles. Comper had become the most influential Anglican church architect of his time. His foremost public commissions were the Warrior's Chapel in Westminster Abbey (1925-31) and the parliamentary war memorial window in Westminster Hall (1952). 
In 1938 Comper met John Betjeman. They formed a firm friendship and from that time until his death Betjeman became his principal advocate. His work was represented through Betjeman's eyes, and it was in reaction that Nikolaus Pevsner adopted an antagonistic stance and consistently dismissed Comper's work in 'The Buildings of England', thereby inflicting lasting damage to his reputation. It was to Betjeman's advocacy that Comper owed his knighthood in 1950. But Betjeman could mock as well as admire, and there was an ambivalence in his regard. It was Comper's personal charm in old age as much as his work that attracted him and others whom Betjeman brought into his life. From youth he had been afflicted by an oversensitive disposition, the result of a sense of frustration combined with a perfectionist sensibility. He was tormented by artistic touchiness and could be a difficult and formidable antagonist with a teasing sense of humour. But in sympathetic company he relaxed: his cultivated manners and exquisitely modulated voice, coupled with his powers as a raconteur of 'la fin de siecle' (he had known Beardsley and his circle, Swinburne's sister Isabel, the aesthetic company of Bodley and his patrons, and had moved in the society of the Souls), enchanted a later generation. With his friend and patron Charles Lindley Wood, second Viscount Halifax, he shared a passionate desire for the reunion of the Church of England with the Roman Catholic church. 
Comper was an aesthete, and he dressed with an understated elegance. In youth he had red hair; but it turned white in middle life and from 1905 he wore a well-trimmed goatee beard and exchanged rimless pince-nez for gold-rimmed spectacles. A portrait of Comper (which he himself disliked) was painted in 1921 by his cousin Beatrice Bright and hangs in the National Portrait Gallery. Although happily married, Comper disliked women and felt carefree and more confident in the company of men. He had a Greek appreciation for the youthful male form, and this was represented by an over-delicacy of expression in his figure work and painted glass. He held that the ideal of male beauty was embodied in the ballet dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, and the oriental colouring of Leon Bakst's costume designs for the Ballets Russes influenced his later textile designs. 
From the start of his marriage in 1890 Comper lived in Norwood, Surrey, first at 5 Chapel Road, then from 1894 at 158 Knight's Hill and from 1905 at 5 Gipsy Road. After the dissolution of his partnership with William Bucknall his drawing office (which he insisted on calling his study) was moved from 35 Old Queen Street, Westminster, to 228 Knight's Hill, where it remained until 1946. In 1912 he finally moved to The Priory, Beulah Hill, a stuccoed late Georgian 'gothick' house with an avenue, large garden, woodland, and a lake; here he lived until his death at the Hostel of God, Clapham Common, on 22 December 1960. His ashes were buried in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey beneath his windows of abbots and kings. 


@@@@@


doc= 32523


Compton, Lord Alwyne (1825-1906), bishop of Ely, born at Castle Ashby on 18 July 1825, was the fourth son of Spencer Joshua Alwyne Compton, second marquess of Northampton (1790-1851), and his wife, Margaret (died 1830), daughter of Major-General Douglas Maclean Clephane of Torloisk. Lady Marian Alford ['see 'Egerton, Marianne Margaret, Viscountess Alford (1817-1888)] was his sister. He was educated at Eton College and matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1844, graduating BA as fourteenth wrangler in 1848. He was ordained deacon in 1850 and priest in 1851. On 28 August 1850 he married Florence Caroline (died 1918), eldest daughter of Robert Anderson, a clergyman in Brighton, and his wife, Caroline Dorothea, daughter of John Shore, first Baron Teignmouth. They had no children. 
After serving as curate of Horsham Compton was appointed in 1852 by his brother, who had recently become third marquess, to the rectory of Castle Ashby, the chief family seat. He held this benefice for twenty-six years. In 1857 Compton was elected one of the proctors in convocation for the diocese of Peterborough, and was re-elected on four successive occasions until he became an 'ex officio' member of the lower house, through his appointment in 1875 by William Connor Magee, bishop of Peterborough, to the archdeaconry of Oakham. From the first he took an active interest in the business of convocation, and became after a few years one of its leading members; he was elected prolocutor on 30 April 1880, and held the office for nearly six years. Meanwhile, in 1879, Compton was nominated by Lord Beaconsfield to the deanery of Worcester. At Worcester he promoted the common good of the city and county, and entered into the friendliest relations with his neighbours of all classes. He also made changes in the arrangements for the triennial musical festivals in the cathedral with a view to securing greater reverence in the performances. After seven years at Worcester he was appointed by Lord Salisbury to the see of Ely on the death of James Russell Woodford, being consecrated on 2 February 1886. In 1882 he had been made lord high almoner, and he retained this office until his death. 
Compton increasingly won the respect and affection both of the clergy and the laity of his diocese during his episcopate of nearly twenty years. Although his sermons made no pretensions to oratory either in form or delivery, or to originality of thought, they were often impressive from their simplicity, directness, and sincerity. 
In his theological views Compton was an old-fashioned high-churchman, but in his practice he was tolerant. He published charges in 1889, 1893, 1897, and 1903. At his primary and second visitations he expressed disapproval of the practice of evening communions on the grounds that it was a departure from the long-received custom of the church. But there was no diminution in the cordiality of his relations with the incumbents, whom he sought vainly to persuade to discontinue the practice. He felt that men of an opposite school, whose views were more advanced than his own, had likewise a place in the Church of England, and he was ready to protect them fearlessly, so far as they seemed to him to be within their rights, at the same time as he discountenanced excesses in ritual. 
Compton's chief intellectual interest outside his clerical duties lay in the study of architecture and archaeology, and he was a good draughtsman, especially of the details of architecture. He rendered a valuable service to historical students by collecting all the documents connected with the see which had been stored in different places, having them arranged and catalogued by an expert, and publishing the catalogue. He finally placed them in a building, once the gaol of the bishops of Ely in the days when they had civil jurisdiction, which he turned into a diocesan registry and muniment rooms. 
In July 1905, on the completion of his eightieth year, Compton resigned his see and settled at St Martin's House, Canterbury. He died there on 4 April 1906, and was buried in the churchyard of St Martin's, which his garden bordered. 


@@@@@


doc= 32524


Burnett, Dame Ivy Compton- (1884-1969), novelist, was born on 5 June 1884 at 2 Onslow Gardens, Pinner, Middlesex, the seventh of the thirteen children of Dr James Compton Burnett (1840-1901), a distinguished and crusading homoeopath, and first child of his second wife, Katharine (1855-1911), daughter of Rowland Rees, civil engineer and mayor of Dover. Until the age of fourteen Ivy Compton-Burnett was educated at home by a governess and tutors, alongside her younger brothers, Guy (1885-1905) and Noel (1887-1916), to whom she was passionately attached. In 1891 her family moved to Hove, then a new and developing suburb of Brighton, and from 1898 to 1901 she was a day pupil at the nearby Addiscombe College, where she took university matriculation. In 1901-2 she spent two terms as a boarder at Howard College, Bedford, in preparation for living away from home; and in 1902 entered Royal Holloway College, Egham, where she studied classics, graduating in 1906. Nothing suggests that she enjoyed school; her university contemporaries recall her only as shy and withdrawn; educational institutions later provided an enclosed setting and hothouse atmosphere for several of her novels. 
Compton-Burnett's father died suddenly in 1901 and there followed a series of misfortunes that brought increasing bleakness to her life. Her mother was already inclined to social posturing -- the hyphenated form of the family name was her invention -- and entered into extravagant mourning, which she sustained for ten years and imposed to the extent that even the baby in her pram was bedecked with black ribbons. In widowhood Compton-Burnett's mother provided her with an early model for the line of outrageous domestic bullies that appear in her novels, anticipating the grief-stricken and over-demanding Sophia Stace ('Brothers and Sisters', 1929) and the more shamelessly lucid Harriet Haslem ('Men and Wives', 1931), who declares candidly: 'I see my children's faces, and am urged by the hurt in them to go further, and driven on to the worse'. 
When her brother Guy died of pneumonia in 1905, Compton-Burnett became indifferent to her studies, and graduated without the first-class degree which had been expected for her. Back in Hove she was set to tutoring her four younger sisters, a duty she conducted lackadaisically. She was, however, observing, and from the mid-1930s her novels would more and more feature groups of put-upon children whose only independence in otherwise miserable confinements is their outspokenness. Intermittently encouraged by her brother Noel -- for whom boarding-school and Cambridge were an escape from the Hove household -- she wrote a novel about self-abnegation, 'Dolores' (published in 1911), a book influenced by the work of George Eliot which she later dismissed as a false start. After her mother's death from protracted cancer in 1911, Compton-Burnett became head of the household, and in taking over her mother's role she took on too its rigour and despotism. She explored domestic tyranny with herself as its practitioner, until in 1915 her sisters mutinied, setting up home in London with the pianist Myra Hess, and leaving her alone and largely friendless. She was not, however, poor: her father had invested extensively in property, and after her mother's death Compton-Burnett managed his estate and trusts, which she administered judiciously and profitably over the next fifty years. 
In 1916 Compton-Burnett's brother Noel was killed on the Somme, and his young wife attempted suicide. Though there was little liking between them, Compton-Burnett grimly set about nursing her brother's widow back to health. Late in 1917 her two youngest sisters were found in a locked bedroom, dead from a self-administered overdose of veronal. Considerably enervated after the inquest into their deaths, she fell victim to the influenza epidemic that swept England in 1918, and was herself for a time near death. Her luck changed in 1919, when the writer Margaret Jourdain (1876-1951) moved into Compton-Burnett's flat in Bayswater, London, beginning a lifelong relationship. Under Margaret's indulgent care Ivy slowly returned to brighter spirits, and in 1925 published 'Pastors and Masters', her second novel, and the first of her nineteen avant-gardist novels composed almost entirely in brisk dialogue. 
These are witty and often demanding novels, peopled with alert sceptics who are devoted to epigrammatic talk and edgily precise analysis of talk. 'Dear, dear, how you overwork your words! I feel quite sorry for them' -- says a governess to her charges in 'The Mighty and their Fall' (1961). Set in the home county residences of a 'fin de siecle' gentry, they are claustrophobic in mood and concerned with the tyranny of family life; they are also often melodramatic. Elizabeth Bowen described the intensity of the characters' lives and the novelist's reliance on dialogue in her analysis of the novels printed in the 'Cornhill Magazine' in 1944: 'In space they move about very little: they go for short walks, which generally have an object, or advance on each other's houses in groups, like bomber formations. They speak of what they will do, and what they have done, but are seldom to be watched actually doing it. (Burkhart, 'Art', 62)' This dialogue method moved against the emphasis on segregated subjectivity favoured by writers such as Virginia Woolf, and instead foregrounded interaction and group dynamics, the territory of W. R. Bion and transactional analysis. Her probing into the springs of utterance is often kindred to the linguistic enquiries of Jacques Lacan's psychoanalytic studies, but is without parallel among her British contemporaries. Moralizing is largely absent, unless to be exposed as a ludicrous cover for low impulses that it could never itself sanction. 
Jourdain was a freelance writer who specialized in the history of Regency furniture. She was vigorous and gregarious, and brought to their household a lively social circle, in which Compton-Burnett was mostly content to play second fiddle and pour tea. Neither woman married, and in 1934 they moved to a flat in 5 Braemar Mansions, Cornwall Gardens, Kensington, London, which remained Compton-Burnett's home until her death. Whether they enjoyed a lesbian partnership is disputed. 'We are neutrals', was how Compton-Burnett described herself and Margaret to one friend, and the biographer Hilary Spurling accepts this as meaning that theirs was not a sexual relationship. However, Herman Schrijver, a close friend who looked after Compton-Burnett on the day of Jourdain's funeral and the last friend to spend time with Compton-Burnett before her own death, had no doubt that in every way 'their relationship was a 'marriage'' (Burkhart, 'Three Lives', 76). A fearless and very positive account of both lesbian and male homosexual relations recurs in Compton-Burnett's novels, as does mockery of conventional marriage. After Jourdain's death Compton-Burnett openly mourned her with an intensity not unlike that of her mother for Dr Burnett. 
Compton-Burnett's persistent habit of setting her novels in an isolated country-house milieu, somewhat like Agatha Christie transposed back to the late years of Queen Victoria, did not, however, make her an anachronism to her younger contemporaries. On the contrary. Elizabeth Bowen, reviewing 'Parents and Children' (1941), wrote that 'to read in these days a page of Compton-Burnett dialogue is to think of the sound of glass being swept up, one of these London mornings after a blitz' (Burkhart, 'Art', 55). In an obituary notice Angus Wilson argued that 'In the age of the concentration camp... no writer did more to illumine the springs of human cruelty, suffering and bravery' (ibid., 192). The French novelist Nathalie Sarraute, writing in the 'Nouvelle Revue Francaise' in 1956, singled out Compton-Burnett as 'one of the greatest novelists that England has ever had', praising especially her location of dialogue 'somewhere on the fluctuating frontier that separates conversation from sub-conversation' (ibid., 154-5). In 1951 Compton-Burnett was appointed CBE, and in 1967 DBE. 
Like Margaret Jourdain, and most of her characters who are not fools or knaves, Ivy Compton-Burnett was a firm atheist, dismissing religion because 'No good can come of it' (Spurling, 'Ivy when Young', 77). She died peacefully, at her home in Kensington, from bronchitis, on 27 August 1969, and was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 32525


Comrie, Leslie John (1893-1950), astronomer and computational mathematician, was born on 15 August 1893 at Pukekohe, near Auckland, New Zealand, the son of John Alexander Comrie and his wife, Helen Lois Smith. His father was a farmer, and both the Comrie and Smith families originally came from Scotland. Comrie never forgot the country of his birth; his hospitality to any New Zealander, particularly a serving member of the forces, was renowned. After attending Pukekohe East School (1900-07) and Auckland grammar school Comrie entered Auckland University College in 1912, where he took his MA degree in 1916 with honours in chemistry. In spite of deafness, which became increasingly acute in later years, he served with the New Zealand expeditionary force in the First World War and was wounded, losing a leg. After the war he took up astronomy and computation, subjects in which he had become interested in Auckland. He went as a research student to St John's College, Cambridge, was elected to an Isaac Newton studentship in 1921, and was awarded his PhD degree in 1924 for a thesis on the occultation of stars by planets. 
From Cambridge Comrie proceeded to the United States, where he taught astronomy and computing, first at Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania, and then at Northwestern University, Illinois. He returned to England in 1925 to enter the nautical almanac office, rising to become deputy superintendent in 1926 and superintendent in 1930. In 1920 he married Noeline Dagger, of New Zealand; the marriage was dissolved in 1933 and in the same year he married Phyllis Betty, daughter of H. D. Kitto, of Stroud, Gloucestershire. There was one surviving son of the first marriage and one of the second. 
Within ten years Comrie revolutionized the work of the nautical almanac office: his greatest achievement was the complete revision, almost single-handed, of the 'Nautical Almanac' for 1931 -- it had been essentially unchanged since 1834. In a paper presented to the Royal Astronomical Society he proposed the use of a fixed frame of reference for the computation of orbits of comets and minor planets and later provided the necessary data in the office's publications; this may well be his most lasting contribution to astronomy. He introduced new methods, computing techniques, and calculating machines, and transformed the office into the most efficient computing organization of its time; he widened its international responsibilities, and laid the foundation for its expansion to fulfil them. 
Comrie left the office in 1936 to found the Scientific Computing Service Ltd, a professional organization catering for large-scale numerical computation, particularly in scientific and mathematical fields. He rapidly built up a powerful team of experienced computers, whose resources were fully stretched by the demands of government departments during the Second World War. During and after the war he worked extremely long hours, and after a strenuous tour of Australia and New Zealand he suffered a stroke, which impaired his speech but left him with an active mind. 
Comrie was the foremost computer and table maker of his day. He entered the field when the large majority of computing was done by the aid of logarithms and lived to see in operation the first of the automatic digital computing machines. Although he played no direct part in the design of these machines, his influence over a period of thirty years prepared the way for this advance. During this period he was the acknowledged leader in all aspects of computing and table making. His application of commercial mechanical calculating machines to scientific work enabled more rapid and accurate computation than was previously possible. He set new standards of precision, of numerical accuracy, and of presentation which are incorporated in a series of mathematical tables of unsurpassed merit. The greatest of these, in which Comrie compressed a lifetime's experience, is 'Chambers's Six-Figure Mathematical Tables' (2 vols., 1948-9). He also compiled 'Hughes' Tables for Sea and Air Navigation' (1938), the finest navigational tables of their type ever produced, together with many other minor tables and descriptions of computational techniques. His work was recognized by his election in 1950 as FRS. 
Proud, sensitive, and inclined to be intolerant and critical of others, Comrie could not understand, or forgive, lack of appreciation of his work by those not possessing his energy, precision, or thoroughness. This personality led to constant friction with administrative authority and his break with the Admiralty in 1936, and the same unduly critical attitude led to some difficult personal relationships. However, he was also extremely generous, particularly in giving his own time and energy to helping others, endured severe physical handicaps with patience, and gave his friendship wholeheartedly. After a second stroke Comrie died, on 11 December 1950, at his home, 131 Maze Hill, Greenwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 32526


Conder, Charles Edward (1868-1909), artist, was born at Holly Cottage, Finsbury Road, Tottenham, London, on 24 October 1868, the son of James Conder, coal and lime merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Ayres. In 1870 James Conder took his family to India, where he had a post as railway engineer. Mary Ann died there in 1873, and Charles, aged five, was returned to England for private schooling. At fifteen he was sent to Sydney, New South Wales, where he entered the lands department of the colonial civil service with a view to the profession of a trigonometrical land surveyor. He disliked the work and soon abandoned it. 
Conder's predilection was for art, and from an early age he drew and painted from nature. He obtained what art education he could by drawing from life at evening classes in Sydney, by study at the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, and by painting in the country with other Australian artists. During August 1889, with Arthur Streeton and Tom Roberts, he contributed to a small exhibition in Melbourne, 'Sketches and impressions'. In 1890, at the Society of Victorian Artists, he showed several paintings, most of which were realistic; but among them was an imaginative work, 'The Hot Wind', which attracted notice: a nude female figure in the foreground of a sun-baked landscape, vigorously blowing into flame the ashes of a fire. Another of those pictures, 'Departure of the SS 'Orient'', was purchased for the National Gallery of New South Wales in Sydney. An uncle thereupon provided the means for studying painting, and in 1890 Conder returned to England, though Paris was his destination. 
In Paris, Conder worked intermittently in the studio of Fernand Cormon and at the Academie Julian, but, always impatient of school routine, followed his own lines and studied the work of artists around him. Louis Anquetin especially influenced him and, to some extent, Honore Daumier and Toulouse-Lautrec. In March 1891 he and William Rothenstein exhibited together at the gallery of the Paris dealer Thomas, at 43 boulevard Malesherbes; their work was reproduced in 'L'Art francais'. In March 1896, at the Paris gallery of Siegfried Bing, noted for the influence of his Japanese collections, Conder exhibited panels on silk for the boudoir and a few designs for fans, which inaugurated his most original contributions to art. His first fan design was in oils on a wooden panel, executed about 1895. Elected an associate member of the Societe Nationale des Beaux Arts in 1893, he quickly won a reputation for the originality and charm of the work which he exhibited at the society's salon. 
In 1899 Conder settled in England. He joined the New English Art Club and contributed to the 'Yellow Book'. From September 1897 he was one of those who exhibited regularly at the Carfax Gallery in Ryder Street, St James's, London. For the first time his art brought a fairly regular income. In Paris in December 1901 he married a Canadian, Stella Maris (1863/4-1912), daughter of Alexander Macadams, and the widow of George Noel Bedford. The Conders settled at 91 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, thereafter their permanent home. Stella created a stable domestic life, but the excesses of Conder's earlier years had undermined his health. 
Conder preferred working chiefly from his exceptionally retentive memory. His paintings seemed to develop without method or scheme, but once an idea gripped him he could not rest until he had carried it through. A number have not survived because he was careless about materials, brushes, and colours. Of a few lithographs, made at Rothenstein's urging, the best are eight dated 1899, six of which are scenes from Balzac and two are fanciful subjects. A single etching by Conder is known, a dry-point, of which Rothenstein owned a print. Conder painted much in oils, his subjects being chiefly landscapes often romantically and imaginatively treated, seashore scenes, modern watering-places with gaily dressed crowds, and an occasional portrait in a decorative style. But his most characteristic works are the dainty watercolour drawings which date between 1895 and 1905, painted after a fashion of his own on panels of white silk, many shaped for fans. The delicate tones of their colour agree perfectly with the frail texture of the material. The subjects are dreamlike fancies which, while far removed from reality, reflect modern life. The colour and general character of his landscape backgrounds were derived entirely from the scenery at Chartamelle on the River Seine, but the scenery of Normandy also influenced his designs. His art has been compared with that of Antoine Watteau, but it is never constructive like that of the French master and is usually more elusive in subject. 
Conder exerted a strong influence on contemporary art. His draughtsmanship was sometimes faulty, but he is appreciated for the Arcadian delicacy of his work and as one of the carriers of French influence to England in the late years of the nineteenth century. Conder died on 9 February 1909 at the Holloway Sanatorium, St Ann's Heath, Virginia Water, Surrey, and was buried in the cemetery in Virginia Water. His widow died on 18 April 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 32527


Conder, Claude Reignier (1848-1910), army officer and explorer of Palestine, born at Cheltenham on 29 December 1848, was the son of Francis Roubiliac Conder (1815-1889), a civil engineer, and his wife, Anne Matilda Colt (1823-1890). Josiah Conder, his grandfather, married a granddaughter of the sculptor Louis Francois Roubiliac. 
After spending eight years of his youth in Italy, Conder passed from University College, London, to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, where he distinguished himself in surveying and drawing. He was commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 8 January 1870, and after two years at the School of Military Engineering at Chatham was selected with the assent of the military authorities to continue a scientific survey of western Palestine, which had been begun by engineer officers under the auspices of the Palestine Exploration Fund some seven years earlier. 
In July 1872 Conder took charge of the survey party at Nablus in Samaria and began by measuring a base line, about 4 miles long, near Ramlah on the road from Jaffa to Jerusalem. The triangulation was carried gradually over the whole country. After three years the greater part of the country west of the Jordan had been surveyed and a mass of information about the topography and archaeology of the country collected, while many places mentioned in the 'Bible' and previously unknown had been identified. Conder also devoted himself to the languages of the country and to the decipherment of ancient inscriptions, to which he brought abundant ingenuity. 
An attack on Conder and his party by the inhabitants of Safed, a town in the hills north-west of the Sea of Galilee (July 1875), in which Conder and others of the party were seriously injured, temporarily suspended the survey. Conder was sufficiently recovered to return to England in October 1875, after having surveyed 4700 square miles of western Palestine. The plotting of the maps from the field survey data and the preparation of the descriptive 'Memoirs' were then started. A map, on a scale of one inch to the mile, was printed at the Ordnance Survey office, Southampton, and, with seven volumes of 'Memoirs', was issued by the committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund in 1880. Conder had been helped in the survey work by C. F. Tyrwhitt-Drake and in both the survey and the subsequent work by H. H. Kitchener, later Earl Kitchener of Khartoum; but it was Conder's name that was chiefly associated with the survey, which won wide acclaim for its contribution to the history, geography, and linguistic understanding of the region. 
On 12 June 1877, at Guildford, Surrey, Conder married Myra Rachel, the eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General Edward Archibald Foord (died 1899) of the Royal (Madras) Engineers. He returned to regimental duty in May 1878, and was employed for three years on the new defences of the Forth and stationed in Edinburgh. He continued his studies of the history and archaeology of the Holy Land and adjacent countries. In 1878 he published his first book, 'Tent Work in Palestine', illustrated with his own drawings. It gives a popular account of the survey operations and of the customs of the Palestinians, of various 'Bible' sites, and of the topography of Jerusalem. In 1879 he published 'Judas Maccabaeus and the Jewish War of Independence' and, in collaboration with his father, 'Handbook to the Bible'. These works were popular, and went through several editions. 
In the spring of 1881 Conder resumed his work for the Palestine Exploration Fund in the country east of the Jordan. Near the lake of Hims in the valley of the Orontes, he discovered the remains of the ancient city of Kadesh; then, going south and crossing the Jordan, a base line was measured between Heshbon and Medeba. Conder devoted special attention to the many prehistoric stone monuments in the district, photographing, describing, and making plans of them. His progress was impeded by the Turks, but he acted with great discretion, and managed to complete the survey of about 500 square miles. 
On 8 January 1882 Conder was promoted captain, and in March and April he conducted princes Albert Victor and George of Wales (later George V) on a tour through Palestine. He wrote a report on the sacred harem at Hebron and another on the princes' Palestine tour ('Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly Statement', 1882). 
After his return home in June 1882, Conder joined the expedition to Egypt, under Sir Garnet Wolseley, to suppress the rebellion of Arabi Pasha. He was appointed a deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general on the staff of the intelligence department. In Egypt his knowledge of Arabic and of Eastern people proved most useful. He was present at the action of Qassasin, the battle of Tell al-Kebir, and the advance to Cairo, but then, suffering from typhoid fever, he was invalided home. For his services he received the war medal with clasp for Tell al-Kebir, the khedive's bronze star, and the fourth class of the order of the Mejidiye. On his return to good health he began plotting the survey and preparing the memoir of eastern Palestine. In 1883 he published 'Heth and Moab', a popular account of his second expedition to Palestine. 
On 10 November 1883 Conder took command of a depot company at Chatham. A year later, as deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general in the intelligence department, he joined the staff of Major-General Sir Charles Warren in the Bechuanaland expedition to South Africa, and the topographical work was entrusted to him. Having declined an offer of a land commissionership in South Africa, he returned to the command of his company at Chatham in October 1885. While there he published some important works: 'Syrian Stone Lore' (1886), 'The Canaanites' (1887), and 'Altaic Hieroglyphs and Hittite Inscriptions' (1887), where he proved his philological acumen and ingenuity. 
On 1 July 1887 Conder went to Plymouth to work at the Ordnance Survey, and from 1888 to 1895 he was at Southampton in charge of the engraving department. He assisted Sir Charles Wilson, then director-general of the Ordnance Survey, with the publications of the Palestine Pilgrims Text Society, of which Sir Charles was the director. In 1891 he published 'Palestine', a resume of the history and geography of the country, and in 1893 he wrote 'The Tell Amarna Tablets', a translation and description of cuneiform characters written about 1480 BC from Palestine and Syria to the king of Egypt; they throw much light on the connection between the countries. 
Conder had been promoted major on 1 July 1888. After superintending the construction of the new defences for the naval base of Berehaven in 1894, in 1895 he directed public works for the relief of distress in Ireland. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 12 August 1895 and appointed commanding royal engineer at Weymouth. In his five years there he wrote some of his most important works, notably 'The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem' (1897) and 'The Hittites and their Language' (1898), while engaged on technical work at the naval base at Portland. He was promoted brevet colonel on 12 August 1899, and a year later was placed on half pay. Until his retirement on 2 November 1904 he was employed with the Ordnance Survey in Ireland. Thereafter he lived at Cheltenham, where he died, at his home, St Oswald's, Tivoli Road, on 16 February 1910, following a stroke a month earlier. He left a widow, a daughter, and a son. 
Conder was a prolific author of both scholarly and popular works. Although his linguistic theories were contested even in his own lifetime, his reputation as a great explorer and surveyor has endured. 


@@@@@


doc= 32528


Congreve, Sir Walter Norris (1862-1927), army officer, was born at Chatham on 20 November 1862, the eldest son of Captain William Congreve JP DL of Congreve Manor, Staffordshire, and his wife, Fanny Porcher Townshend, of Wincham Hall, Cheshire. Congreve's father was a regular soldier in the 9th and 29th foot, who later became chief constable of Staffordshire. Among Congreve's military ancestors were two distinguished eighteenth-century artillerymen, Lieutenant-General Sir William Congreve, and his namesake, who developed the Congreve rocket. 
Walter Congreve was educated at Harrow School and Pembroke College, Oxford, matriculating in 1881 but leaving without graduating after apparently wounding a senior member of the college with an air rifle. Congreve had been commissioned in the North Staffordshire militia and, in 1883, resolved to enter the regular army. Passing through the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he shared rooms with Douglas Haig, Congreve was commissioned into the rifle brigade as lieutenant on 7 February 1885. Congreve served with the 4th battalion in India and, on returning with it to England in 1889, he became assistant adjutant for musketry. On 3 June 1890 he married Cecilia Henrietta Dolores Blount La Touche, the daughter of Charles Blount La Touche, a captain in the Bombay army. Congreve's work on musketry brought him some recognition and he was promoted to captain on 6 December 1893. After further regimental service in India and England, he was appointed district inspector of musketry at Aldershot on 1 January 1898. 
On the outbreak of the South African War, Congreve was appointed to the 4th brigade staff, but was then attached to the headquarters of General Sir Redvers Buller as press censor. On 15 December 1899, during Buller's attempt to force the Tugela River at Colenso, Colonel Charles Long's artillery brigade advanced within close range of Boer riflemen and came under sustained, heavy fire. Buller called for volunteers from his own staff to help rescue the twelve guns abandoned in the open by their surviving crews. Congreve volunteered together with two aides-de-camp, Captain H. N. Schofield and Lieutenant Frederick (Freddy) Roberts, only son of Field Marshal Lord Roberts VC. 
Galloping forward with two limbers over half a mile of open plain, Congreve was hit in his right leg, with other bullets passing through his clothing, and thrown when his horse was killed. After lying in a hollow for several hours without water under a sun 'which I have never felt hotter even in India' (Congreve diary, priv. coll., 15 Dec 1899), Congreve managed to bring in the mortally wounded Roberts. Taken prisoner by the Boers, the wounded were released after their equipment was removed. For his gallantry, Congreve was awarded the Victoria Cross as were three others, including a posthumous award for Freddy Roberts. Subsequently, Congreve's eldest son, William, killed on the Somme in July 1916, was also awarded the VC. There have been only three cases of the VC being awarded to both father and son: Roberts, Congreve, and Sir Charles and John Gough. 
After recovering from his wound, Congreve briefly joined the irregular corps, Kitchener's horse, as adjutant before becoming brigade major of 18th infantry brigade in March 1900 and seeing action at Poplar Grove and Driefontein in the advance upon Bloemfontein. In November 1900 Congreve became, first, deputy assistant adjutant-general and, then, assistant military secretary at headquarters under Roberts and his successor, Lord Kitchener. Promoted to a regimental majority on 12 December 1901, Congreve received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy for his war services in December 1901. In November 1902 he joined the personal staff of the duke of Connaught, commanding in Ireland, receiving the MVO in 1903 and accompanying Connaught as private secretary in May 1904 when the duke was appointed inspector-general to the forces. 
Receiving his brevet colonelcy in June 1905, Congreve returned to regimental duty. Promoted to substantive colonel in July 1908, Congreve remained on half pay until appointed to command the school of musketry at Hythe in September 1909. In December 1911 Congreve, now a CB, took command of 18th infantry brigade with rank of brigadier-general, though troubled by frequent asthma attacks. In March 1914 he was one of many officers who supported Hubert and John Gough at the time of the Curragh incident. With the outbreak of the First World War, Congreve took his brigade to France in September 1914, commanding it on the Aisne and then at First Ypres. Promoted to major-general on 18 February 1915, Congreve remained with his brigade until taking over command of 6th division in May 1915. His division did not see any major action before Congreve was selected to command the new 13th corps in November 1915, receiving the rank of temporary lieutenant-general in June 1917. 
A man of great physical and moral courage, it became quickly apparent that Congreve was supremely a fighting general, incurring great risks in visiting the front line. As a subordinate later put it, Congreve was 'a most adventurous man... and infinitely preferred walking out in full view and quite close to the enemy than anything else. He simply asked for trouble' (Stanley, 112-13). Indeed, Congreve was the only corps commander wounded during the war, having his left hand shattered by a shell while visiting his artillery near Vimy Ridge in June 1917: in his typically laconic style, he simply recorded of the event, 'A shell came down & cut off my left hand all but some bits' (Congreve diary, 12 June 1917). The hand was amputated. 
As a corps commander, however, Congreve had mixed fortunes. With many practical qualities and great personal charm, he was not a deeply read or scientific soldier despite his university education. Allotted to Sir Henry Rawlinson's Fourth Army in the spring of 1916, Congreve was not regarded as 'dashing enough' by Rawlinson (Congreve diary, 5 April 1916) when he objected to the initial operational plan for the Somme. As a result, Sir Henry Horne's 15th corps took the major role on 1 July 1916, with two of Congreve's five divisions taken from his direct control. Ironically, it was 13th corps, operating on the extreme right of the British advance in co-operation with the French, which enjoyed the greatest success on that otherwise disastrous day, reaching the Montauban Ridge. Congreve complained to Haig, in whom he had little confidence, about his treatment. Generally, Congreve found Haig disingenuous in his dealings with him, though the official historian, Sir James Edmonds, later claimed that Haig had always shrunk from dismissing corps commanders like Congreve whom he believed inefficient. Congreve was then entrusted, however, with the innovative night attack by the Fourth Army on 14 July and, indeed, appears to have been the originator of the operational concept. The death of his son William on 20 July was a grievous blow, and Congreve succumbed to cholera nostras on 10 August, returning to his command only in late September. 
Transferred to Hubert Gough's Fifth Army, Congreve commanded 13th corps during the actions around Arras in the spring of 1917. He found Gough more congenial than Rawlinson and, in turn, Gough admired Congreve's qualities: 'Very spare and lightly built, a frame giving evidence of the fragility of his constitution, a firm and very English countenance, with an indomitable and courageous will, a character which could remain outwardly unmoved at times of great personal sorrow or of immense responsibility and danger, an energy which made him active of body in spite of ill-health, there were few generals in the British Army who surpassed him as a commander. (Gough, 151)' Following the loss of his hand, Congreve, who in 1917 was created KCB for his services, returned to the Fifth Army to command 7th corps as a substantive lieutenant-general on 1 January 1918. Congreve's corps took the full brunt of the major German offensive on 21 March 1918. His decision to defend the front line strongly rather than deploy in depth cost 7th corps heavy casualties from the outset. Under mounting German pressure, Congreve's position was further undermined by the withdrawal of the Third Army from the Flesquieres salient on his left, opening a crucial gap between 7th and 5th corps. Under a German aerial bombing attack on his headquarters, Congreve had continued to dine, unmoved by the explosions. Always in fragile health from his frequent bronchial attacks, however, and never having fully recovered from the loss of his son, Congreve was clearly stretched to the limits of his mental and physical endurance during the offensive. The strain was evinced by Congreve's contradictory orders to 16th division on 26 March, which led to its collapse, and the removal of Major-General Franks from command of 35th division on the same day for refusing what would have been a disastrous attempt to reoccupy the line of the Ancre, which had already been abandoned. 
Gough was removed from command of the Fifth Army on 7 April and, on the same day, Congreve was transferred to command 10th corps, then resting behind the lines. Then, on 15 May, he was ordered home, Haig refusing to see him. Subsequently, Congreve was one of the more vociferous of Gough's friends in urging him to defend the reputation of the Fifth Army. 
Congreve remained on half pay until August 1919, when he was sent to command British forces at Haifa, taking over the command of all British forces in Egypt and Palestine on 14 October 1919. It was a period of unrest in the Middle East and, displaying the casual antisemitic views of many of his colleagues, Congreve feared Zionist influence in the region. It might be added that Congreve was also greatly prejudiced against socialists and Irish nationalists and cheerfully professed to disliking Arabs, Jews and Syrian Christians equally: 'they are all alike, a beastly people, the whole lot of them not worth one Englishman' (Congreve to Wilson, 1 April 1920, Wilson MSS, HHW 2/52A/16). None the less, Congreve's command was judged a success and, much as he disliked Palestine, he was sorry to leave an Egyptian climate that suited him. Promoted to general on 25 November 1922, 'Squib' Congreve, as he was known to Henry Wilson, returned to southern command at Salisbury in April 1923 and was appointed aide-de-camp to the king in March 1924. Congreve had also become colonel commandant of the 1st battalion, rifle brigade, in 1922, as well as an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford. A fearless horseman, though he gave up hunting as a result of a growing distaste for blood sports, Congreve was very much a countryman. He derived much pleasure, therefore, from his appointments as both JP and deputy lieutenant of Staffordshire. 
Despite his failing health, Congreve accepted the governorship of Malta in June 1924. He proved a popular governor, dying at the military hospital, Imtarfa, Valletta, on 28 February 1927. He was buried at sea between Malta and Gozo, in what is now called the Congreve Strait. It had been intended to give Congreve a baronetcy at the time of his death, and this was awarded to the second of his three sons, Geoffrey, in 1927. 


@@@@@


doc= 32529


Coningham, Sir Arthur (1895-1948), air force officer, was born in Brisbane, Australia, on 19 January 1895, the eldest of the three children of Arthur Coningham (1863-1939), variously a chemist, tobacconist, bookmaker, and book salesman, who played cricket once for Australia against England, in 1894-5, and his wife, Alice Stamford Dowling (1869-1959), who emigrated to Australia from Devon in 1885. The family fled to New Zealand following two widely publicized trials in Sydney in 1900 and 1901; the first jury failed to agree, but the second acquitted a Catholic priest of the Coninghams' charge that he had fathered Alice's second child. 
After two years at Wellington College, New Zealand (1909-10), where he excelled only at shooting, Coningham worked as a general hand on sheep farms. He enlisted in the 5th Wellington regiment on 10 August 1914 and took part in an expedition that captured German Samoa on the 29th. Following his return to Wellington in April 1915 he joined the Canterbury mounted rifles, sailed with the 4th reinforcements on the 17th, and arrived at Anzac Cove early in June. His health, undermined in Samoa, collapsed: sunstroke, dysentery, and typhoid put him in hospital until September, when he was sent home and discharged, unfit for further service, in March 1916. 
During April, however, Coningham sailed for England at his own expense and in August was admitted to the Royal Flying Corps, commissioned as a second lieutenant, and taught to fly. He graduated from the Central Flying School (CFS) at Upavon on 25 November 1916 and joined 32 squadron on the western front in December. He now became known as Mary, a nickname worn down from the original Maori (then thought suitable for any New Zealander) and made sure his friends used it; except officially, he never again answered to Arthur. 
After seven months of intense activity, earning promotion to captain and two decorations (DSO, MC), Coningham was invalided back to England in August 1917 and spent three months in hospital, suffering from 'stress of service'. He returned to the western front in command of 92 squadron in July 1918. At the armistice he had flown 176 patrols, personally destroyed nine enemy aircraft, shared in the destruction of four, damaged at least four, and driven away scores. 
Coningham was awarded a DFC in June 1919 and granted a permanent commission as a flight lieutenant in August. His flying skills were displayed at the RAF's first aerial pageant at Hendon in July 1920, and in October he returned as an instructor to the CFS, Upavon. He again performed brilliantly at Hendon in 1921. In February 1922 he went to Mosul, Iraq, to join 55 squadron, of which he took command in July 1923, on his promotion to squadron leader. In February 1924 he arrived in Cairo to undertake air staff duties. By 1925 interest was growing in the possibility of opening up Africa to civil aviation. On Air Ministry orders Coningham therefore led three DH 9a two-seater biplanes from Helwan (near Cairo) to Kaduna in Nigeria and back during October and November -- a round trip of about 6500 miles. He was awarded an AFC on 1 January 1926 to mark the first east-west crossing of Africa by air. The value of that route for sending aircraft to Cairo from Britain and the United States would be fully realized during the Second World War. 
In December 1926 Coningham was appointed a squadron commander at the Cadet College, Cranwell. From there he returned again to the CFS (now at Wittering, near Stamford) in July 1930, this time as deputy commandant. Promoted wing commander in July 1931 he was sent to Khartoum as senior airman at Sudan defence force headquarters. He married Nancy (Nan) Muriel Brooks (1903-1985) in Alexandria in July 1932, six months after the death of her first husband, Sir Howard Frank (1872-1932), the head of a famous property-dealing company. She had two sons from her first marriage and one daughter from her second. Coningham returned to England in March 1935 and spent four years in Coastal Area (Command from July 1936) in various appointments around Southampton Water and was promoted to group captain in January 1937. 
In July 1939 Coningham took command as an air commodore in York of 4 group, Bomber Command. He began the task of converting a nominal weapon (five squadrons of men untrained in night operations, flying inadequate Whitley bombers) into one that might become a dangerous weapon. Promoted again, to air vice-marshal in September 1940, his future as a 'bomber baron' seemed assured by July 1941, as his group enlarged and its training and equipment improved. 
At that very moment, Coningham was whisked off to Cairo to command 204 group, at the request of Air Marshal Tedder, the newly appointed head of Middle East air command. Notice of his appointment as CB (for Bomber Command service) followed him, and in September he set up his first joint headquarters when the Eighth Army was formed. In October 204 group became the western desert air force, to match that army's status. 
Coningham came to be regarded by Tedder (in Liddell Hart's words) as 'the real hero' of the desert war. His powers of inspiration, his tactical awareness (emphasizing the need to win air superiority before attempting close co-operation with ground forces), and his ability to act sensibly in numerous crises also attracted the admiration of senior American airmen, especially during the Tunisian campaign (November 1942 - May 1943). But he had no grasp of logistics -- the science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance of forces -- so Tedder provided him in February 1942 with an able assistant in Air Commodore Thomas Elmhirst. Supported in Cairo by experts handling specific problems, the whole organization was presided over by Tedder, who had the ear in London of two officers whom Churchill respected: Sir Charles Portal (chief of the air staff) and Sir Wilfrid Freeman (his vice-chief). 
Unfortunately, Coningham and General Montgomery (appointed to command the Eighth Army in August 1942) became estranged in November over what seemed to airmen the army's tardy pursuit of Rommel after the battle of El Alamein. Personal relations between Coningham (supported by Tedder) and Montgomery worsened, but all three usually agreed on the basic issue that air power must be independent of army (or navy) control -- an issue that divided commanders in all services and on all sides throughout the war. 
Coningham was knighted (KCB) in November 1942. Having been promoted air marshal in February 1943 he was appointed to command British and American tactical air forces in Tunisia under the direction of an American airman (General Spaatz), who was, in turn, directed by Tedder as head of Mediterranean air command; all of them were subordinate to General Eisenhower as supreme allied commander. During 1943 he established himself as a key member of the Anglo-American team which achieved victory in Tunisia, conquered Sicily, and successfully invaded Italy. He returned to England in January 1944. 
As head of the 2nd Tactical Air Force, Coningham was part of an even larger allied team, led by Eisenhower with Tedder as his deputy, charged to liberate occupied Europe and destroy Nazi Germany. The stakes were high, the options various, the enemy cunning, and the commanders forceful men, used to obedience. Among the ensuing quarrels, that which caused Coningham's exclusion from the planning and execution of the Arnhem operation (September 1944) led to an avoidable disaster. Although the allied commanders co-operated more than they quarrelled, notably during Hitler's Ardennes offensive (December 1944), which caught them all off guard, it may have been as well that their resources were abundant and that by 1944 the Soviet Union had gravely weakened German power. 
Away from the debating table, Coningham recognized that the fight for air superiority, his first priority, was in fact his least worry. He had many experienced combat pilots, but few who were skilled in ground attack. That role, he foresaw, would become a constant task all the way from Normandy to Berlin, and squadrons must be equipped and trained -- as in his earlier campaigns -- to move forward rapidly. 
In July 1945 Coningham received the DSM, an American decoration, was appointed head of Flying Training Command, and elected commodore of the RAF yacht club. He spent three weeks in the United States in September as guest of the United States Army Air Forces. He was knighted again (KBE) in January 1946 and granted the freedom of Brussels, his favourite city, in April. Although he was required to retire in August 1947, the Air Ministry accepted his plea that it be officially recorded that he left the RAF at his own request. Coningham died early on 30 January 1948, when an Avro Tudor IV airliner named 'Star Tiger', in which he was travelling as a passenger to Havana, Cuba, crashed into the sea north-east of Bermuda. 
A big, handsome man, Coningham loved company, gossip, dancing, and parties that went on until morning, although he never smoked and drank little. An outstanding pilot and navigator, he also excelled at polo, sailing, and shooting, though never at cricket. A superb combat record enhanced a natural talent for leadership, never more evident than when danger threatened; his determination to reach high rank was less evident. 


@@@@@


doc= 32530


Connard, Philip (1875-1958), painter, was born in Southport, Lancashire, on 24 March 1875, the son of David Connard, house painter, and his wife, Ellen Lunt. After elementary school he was briefly apprenticed to his father, but, having wider ambitions, he attended evening classes and eventually won a national school scholarship in textile designing which took him to the National Art Training School, South Kensington, in 1896. With a prize of $100 from the British Institute he went next to Paris where he spent a few months studying under Jean-Paul Laurens and Benjamin Constant. On his return to London he found small jobs as an illustrator and soon afterwards became a master at the Lambeth School of Art. 
Meanwhile Connard had begun to submit work to open exhibitions. His debut at the New English Art Club caught the attention of Henry Tonks and P. Wilson Steer who proposed him for membership in 1909. He staged his first solo exhibition at the Baillie Gallery, London, in 1904 and this was generally praised. That year he married Mary (died 1927), daughter of Archdeacon Collyer, with whom he had two daughters. A further solo exhibition of Connard's work was held at the Leicester Galleries, London. His next line of work was portraiture, and he joined the National Portrait Society. His portraits, though sound, were not especially distinguished; until the thirties his chief reputation derived from Romantic and decorative landscapes in oils. Throughout this period Connard's work was compared with that of his mentors. Marion Hepworth Dixon observed for instance that in decorative pictures of picnics and masquerades Connard adopted costumes of the mid-Victorian era, 'like many of his Chelsea brethren' (Dixon, 276). In these stylized compositions, harlequins, pierrettes, and exotic birds appear, the last being derived from careful sketches which he produced at London Zoo. Important decorative commissions included murals in the royal doll's house room at Windsor Castle. He painted two panels for the main ballroom at Delhi, and for the liner 'Queen Mary' he executed a decorative panel 26 feet by 14 feet on the subject of England. Examples of his work were acquired by many public galleries including the Tate Gallery, London, and the Luxembourg Gallery, Paris. 
During the First World War, Connard served in the Royal Field Artillery as a captain, but was invalided out after the battle of the Somme in 1916 and at the end of the war became an official artist to the Royal Navy. There are more than forty of his works in the Imperial War Museum. 
Between the wars Connard developed new strands in his work, painting a series of monumental river scenes with semi-classical nude bathers of which 'Summer' (1922; Tate collection) was purchased under the terms of the Chantrey Bequest. A further example of this type, 'Apollo and Daphne' (RA), was accepted as his diploma picture in 1925 when he was elected Royal Academician. Jessica Walker Stephens, referring to his work at this time, described Connard's attempt to revive the era of Watteau as a 'forceful aesthetic' (Stephens, 308). 
Painting expeditions with Steer encouraged Connard to take up watercolour and he was elected to the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1934. Though perhaps more highly appreciated in his lifetime than now, his watercolours form an elegant and lyrical contribution to the English watercolour tradition. By this time he had purchased Cholmondeley Lodge, overlooking the Thames at Richmond, Surrey, and there he painted many riverside scenes which were unlike his earlier works, being far more realistic in style. His evocative landscape 'Winter at Richmond' (Tate collection) was the subject of another Chantrey purchase in 1939. He became keeper of the Royal Academy Schools in 1945, a post he held until 1949, and he was made CVO in 1950. In 1933 he had married secondly Georgina York, of Twickenham, who figured in many of his later interior paintings. 
Connard was a man of equable and pleasant disposition though on certain issues his friends were apt to find him obstinate and pig-headed. He was a faithful member of the New English Arts Club, where he often met friends such as Sir William Orpen and F. Derwent Wood. An excellent raconteur, he could set the table in a roar with his Lancashire stories. 
Connard continued to paint silvery grey landscapes of the river at Richmond up until his death at the Nightingale Nursing Home, Twickenham, on 8 December 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 32531


Connor, Sir William Neil (1909-1967), journalist, was born in London on 26 April 1909, a twin son of William Henry Connor, a protestant Ulsterman and Admiralty clerk, and his wife, Isobella Littlejohn, a telegraphist, from Aberdeenshire. Connor went to a primary board school, then to a local private school, and finally to Glendale grammar school in Wood Green. He left at sixteen and attended a crammer in the hope of getting into the navy, only to be rejected because his eyesight was not good enough. He then did one or two clerical jobs which did not appear to be leading him anywhere until he became bookkeeper at Arks Publicity, a small firm which helped to nourish the talent of the actor Alec Guinness and the cartoonist Philip Zec. There Connor found himself writing odd bits of advertising copy and discovered that he had some gift for the pen. 
At the age of twenty-three Connor got a job as a copywriter with a leading advertising agency, J. Walter Thompson, where he met Basil Nicholson, inventor of the remarkable concept of 'night starvation' and the strip cartoon used to advertise Horlicks, the particular milky beverage which would relieve it. Connor and Zec then collaborated with Nicholson on a general-knowledge strip plagiarizing Ripley's eternal 'Believe it or not?' series. All three eventually found their way to employment on the 'Daily Mirror'. 
At that time H. G. Bartholomew had begun to convert the 'Mirror' from a respectful servants'-hall picture paper to a brash, demagogic tabloid. Hugh Cudlipp, who was also to play a leading part in the revolution, joined the paper on the same day as Connor in August 1935. In 1936 Connor married Gwynfil Mair Morgan; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Bartholomew asked Connor to try his hand at a column. When the pen-name Cassandra was suggested, Connor looked it up, and he later wrote: 'I was a bit surprised to discover that I had changed my sex; was the daughter of the King of Troy; that I could foretell in the stars when the news was going to be bad;... and that I was going to come to a sticky end by being efficiently murdered by Clytaemnestra. (Connor, 35)' The column appeared two or three times a week as and when there was room. Connor soon showed a talent for robust invective and his column became what has been called 'the whipping post, stocks and ducking stool for jacks-in-office, muddling magistrates, indiscreet politicians and erring judges' ('The Times', 7 April 1967). The column varied. It could contain hard-hitting political comment, attacks on government departments and individuals, lavish praise of individuals, and dithyrambic essays on cats or on homely dishes such as cabbage and herring cooked in a particular way. Whatever it was, it was always Connor and it had a tremendous audience. 
In Connor's denunciation of the wicked and praise of the virtuous, it was often possible to catch echoes of the Presbyterian pulpit beneath which Connor had regularly sat throughout his youth. About his religion he was publicly ambiguous although he was a deeply spiritual man and regularly read his 'Bible' and prayer book. Matthew Arnold's 'Dover Beach' was never far from his thoughts. 
The youthful Connor, a tall, slender young man, was effaced by the later man, who was plump and red-faced, with thinning hair. It was remarked that he belonged to a bohemian race of journalists which had almost disappeared, a generation which read prodigiously, drank heartily, and argued endless hours away at the bar counter. Connor at this period did not suffer fools gladly either in his column or in his personal encounters. He participated in a brief revival in London of a fashion for contrived rudeness as an antidote to the smoothness and alleged effeteness of the establishment. It was all pose. Connor was basically a kindly man, as his colleagues with troubles found out. 
Cassandra was an early critic of Nazism and was convinced that Hitler meant war. But when war came he and the 'Mirror' aroused Churchill's anger. In a letter to Cecil King, already a director of the 'Mirror', the prime minister complained of the work of a writer 'dominated by malevolence' ('The Times', 7 April 1967). Cassandra had in fact described a government reshuffle as a game of musical chairs 'being played to a funeral march... Ours' (ibid.). King replied that Cassandra was not malevolent but was known as 'a hard hitting journalist with a vitriolic style' (ibid.). Throwing vitriol, Churchill observed, was one of the worst of crimes. 
Churchill expressed an opinion that the 'Mirror' papers generally were written in a spirit of hatred and malice against the national government. Then Zec did a cartoon showing a torpedoed sailor, his face blackened with oil, lying on a raft in an empty ocean. The draft caption had been 'Petrol is dearer now'. Connor said it could be better dramatized by bringing in the penny rise. The caption as printed on 6 March 1942 was: ''The price of petrol has been increased by one penny' -- Official' (Connor, 61). 
This aroused more wrath. The 'Mirror' argued that the object of the cartoon was to show that petrol cost lives as well as money and should not be wasted. The government's interpretation was that it suggested the sailor's life had been put at risk to raise the profits of the oil companies. There was a serious threat from Herbert Morrison to close the 'Mirror' down, even an investigation of its ownership. The paper weathered the storm but tempered its criticism. 
On 27 March 1942 Connor wrote: 'This is the last wartime column you will read by Cassandra... I campaigned for Churchill and my support was early and violent. But since he came to power I have distrusted many of his lieutenants -- and I have said so with scant respect for either their position or their feelings... [The government] are far too glib with the shameful rejoinder that those who do not agree with them are subversive -- and even traitors.... I cannot and will not change my policy.' Connor concluded grandiloquently: 'I propose to see whether the rifle is a better weapon than the printed word. Mr. Morrison can have my pen -- but not my conscience. Mr. Morrison can have my silence -- but not my self-respect' (Connor, 63-5). Connor then joined the army. He spent a good deal of the war with Cudlipp in Italy producing the forces paper 'Union Jack', in spirit not unlike a miniature 'Daily Mirror'. 
On his return to the 'Mirror' in September 1946 Connor's journalism became deeper and more mature. He drove himself hard, travelled widely, went regularly to the United States, and covered in his highly personal style some historic events: the trials of Eichmann, General Salan, and Jack Ruby, who shot J. F. Kennedy's assassin; the enthronement of Pope John; Churchill's funeral; the Korean War. He interviewed, among many others, President Kennedy, Senator McCarthy, Billy Graham, Charlie Chaplin, Adlai Stevenson, Ben-Gurion, Archbishop Makarios, and Marilyn Monroe. Of course the writing had to have more splashes of melodrama and sentiment than the fastidious writer of later years would have wished. But that was the limitation of popular journalism. He only once ran into serious trouble, when he was successfully sued for libel by Liberace in 1959. 
In his last years Connor, who had developed diabetes, suffered much ill health. His knighthood in 1966, an inspiration of Harold Wilson, gave him and all his friends great delight; and he enjoyed the irony of its bestowal on a lifelong professional critic of the establishment. He died in London on 6 April 1967, at St Bartholomew's Hospital. 
John Beavan', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32532


Conquest, George Augustus (1837-1901), actor and playwright, was born at a house adjoining the old Garrick Theatre, Leman Street, Goodman's Fields, London, on 8 May 1837. He was the eldest son of Benjamin Oliver (1805-1872), an actor and theatre manager, and his wife, Clarissa Ann, 'nee' Bennett, a dancer and ballet mistress. Benjamin Oliver, who used professionally the surname Conquest (which George adopted formally by deed poll in 1883), was manager of the Garrick Theatre, where in 1837, as a child in arms, George made his first appearance on the stage, in the farce 'Mr and Mrs White'. He played there, while a child, in such pieces as 'Peter the Waggoner', 'Isabella, or, The Fatal Marriage', and 'The Stranger'. He was educated at the 'college communal', Boulogne, where he was a contemporary of the eminent French actor Benoit Coquelin, and learned to speak fluent French. He was intended to be a violinist, but from his earliest years he resolved on the profession of acrobatic pantomimist. Before he left school he made numerous adaptations from the French for his father, who in 1851 became manager of the Grecian Theatre in City Road. His first play, 'Woman's Secret, or, Richelieu's Wager', was produced at the Grecian on 17 October 1853. 
At Christmas 1855 Conquest appeared as a pantomimist for the first time, in his own pantomime 'Harlequin Sun, Moon, and the Seven Sisters', and at Easter 1857 he made his first notable success in this class of work as Hassarac, in Henry Spry's 'The Forty Thieves'. In the same year he married Elizabeth Ozmond, and at Christmas he appeared as Pastrano Nonsuch, a 'flying pantomimist', in 'Peter Wilkins and the Flying Indians', which he wrote in collaboration with Spry. Conquest later effectively adapted Charles Reade's novel 'It is Never too Late to Mend', which ran for six months at his father's theatre, and in which he appeared as Peter Crawley. In 1861 he distinguished himself as Prince Pigmy in 'The Blue Bird in Paradise'. 
On his father's death in 1872 Conquest became manager of the Grecian and continued to fill leading parts there. In 1881 he joined Paul Merritt as co-lessee and manager of the Surrey Theatre, of which he was sole lessee and manager from 1885. His only appearances in the West End of London were at the Gaiety Theatre, in 1873, in 'Snaefell', and at the Globe, in 1882, in 'Mankind', where he showed his melodramatic power to good effect in the part of Daniel Groodge. Off the stage, he suffered from an impediment of speech, which disappeared when he was acting. He visited America in 1880, and opened his tour with 'The Grim Goblin' at Wallack's Theatre, New York, on 5 August. While performing there in 'Flying Fairy and Phantom Flight' he sustained severe injuries through the breaking of trapeze ropes, caused, it was stated, through the treachery of a rival. 
Conquest was best known as an acrobatic pantomimist. He produced no fewer than forty-five pantomimes, and played in as many as twenty-seven. He impersonated animals with much popular approval, his most famous part being that of Zacky Pastrana, the man-monkey, in 'For Ever'. He is said to have invented the method of 'flying' by means of 'invisible' wires. It was his boast that as a pantomimist he had broken every bone in his face and body. In his performance of the title role in 'The Devil on Two Sticks' he employed no fewer than twenty-nine 'traps' -- one 'vampire' and twenty-eight ordinary. He retired from the stage in 1894, but his three sons, George, Fred, and Arthur, all successfully adopted their father's calling, both as actors and acrobatic pantomimists. 
Of the hundred and more plays, for the most part original melodramas or adaptations from the French, of which Conquest was the author, several were written in collaboration, and of these the more successful were 'Velvet and Rags' (1874), 'Mankind' (1881), and 'For Ever' (1882), written with Merritt, and 'Sentenced to Death' (1875), 'Queen's Evidence' (1876), and 'The Green Lanes of England' (1878), written with Henry Pettitt. His last play, 'The Fighting Fifth', written with Herbert Leonard, was produced at the Surrey Theatre in October 1900. 
Conquest died from heart disease at his home, 'Hillsboro', 49 Brixton Hill, London, on 14 May 1901, leaving a fortune of over $70,000, and was buried at Norwood cemetery on 17 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 32533


Conrad, Joseph (1857-1924), master mariner and author, was born on 3 December 1857 at Berdyczow in Ukraine. 
Conrad was the only child of Apollo Korzeniowski (1820-1869); named on Conrad's marriage certificate as 'Joseph Theodore Apollonius Korzeniowski', writer and patriot, and his wife, Ewelina 
(or Ewa, 'nee' Bobrowska; 1832-1865)
: members of the Polish 'szlachta', a fusion of gentry and nobility. NaLecz was the heraldic name of the Korzeniowski coat of arms. In a series of partitions (1772, 1793, and 1795) Poland had been annexed by Prussia and Austria-Hungary to the west and by Russia to the east, so that, by the time of Conrad's birth, the country had virtually disappeared from the map of Europe. His father and mother, dedicated Polish patriots, conspired against the oppressive Russian authorities. Apollo, who advocated the liberation of the serfs as well as national independence, was arrested; and in 1862 he and his wife were sentenced to exile in the remote Russian province of Vologda; their four-year-old son accompanied them. Ewa died of tuberculosis within three years. Apollo, who himself was suffering from this disease, died after four years as a widower; and his funeral, on 26 May 1869, became a huge patriotic demonstration: the Poles had not forgotten the ruthless suppression of the 1863 uprising. Conrad's uncle, Tadeusz Bobrowski, an astute landowner, became the orphan's guardian, and sustained him morally and financially for many years. To this Polish upbringing may be traced Conrad's later preoccupation with the themes of isolation, embattled honour, and political disillusionment. 
Conrad's education, of which the record remains incomplete, was irregular. His father had given him lessons; he apparently attended a preparatory school in Krakow and (briefly) a 'Gymnasium' in Lwow (Lemberg); and private tuition was provided by Izydor Kopernicki and Adam Pulman. He certainly loved literature of travel and exploration, and this encouraged him to dream of becoming a seaman. 
In 1874 the sixteen-year-old Conrad left Poland for Marseilles in France. There, for several years, he gained maritime experience, sailing the Atlantic as a passenger in the 'Mont-Blanc' and as a steward in another barque, the 'Saint-Antoine'. He later intimated that during this period he participated in a gun-running expedition for Colombian conservatives, and he also claimed to have smuggled arms in the two-masted 'Tremolino' to Spanish legitimists. In 1878 Conrad attempted suicide with a pistol, wounding himself in the chest, for he was in debt after gambling at Monte Carlo. A related factor may have been the recognition that, as a Russian subject, he could legally serve on French vessels only with the permission of the Russian consul; and, since he was liable for imperial military service, such permission was unlikely to be granted. Subsequently in that year, therefore, he travelled to England and entered the British mercantile marine. Initially employed humbly on a coasting vessel, the 'Skimmer of the Sea', he next found a berth on the wool clipper 'Duke of Sutherland', which plied between London and Sydney. During the following sixteen years, making numerous voyages on ships ranging from elegant three-masters to rusty steamers, he rose in rank: third mate, second mate, master. In 1886 he not only gained his master's certificate but also took British nationality. His voyages and the landfalls (in Bombay, Singapore, Celebes, Borneo, Mauritius, and other locations) were often to be commemorated in his eventual works, which pay tribute to maritime heroism in an era when deaths at sea were an everyday occurrence. He was shipwrecked when the decrepit barque 'Palestine' caught fire and sank near Sumatra, an event to be romantically recalled in the tale 'Youth'; and his experiences as captain of the sailing ship 'Otago', plying between Bangkok, Melbourne, and Mauritius, provided bases for 'The Secret Sharer', 'A Smile of Fortune', and 'The Shadow-Line'. A depressing African journey into the Congo Free State in 1890, when he travelled overland and in a paddle-steamer, would be recollected and powerfully transformed in his masterpiece 'Heart of Darkness'. (Having witnessed colonialist corruption, he later aided Roger Casement and E. D. Morel in their international campaign against the cruelty of the Belgian regime to Africans.) Increasingly, as steam superseded sail and as vessels became larger and more efficient, Conrad encountered difficulty in finding employment commensurate with his qualifications, and his maritime career petered out in 1894. Subsequent attempts to return to sea proved unavailing. A large bequest from Tadeusz Bobrowski, however, facilitated his change of career. 
In his spare time Conrad had been working on his first novel, 'Almayer's Folly'. On the advice of W. H. Chesson and Edward Garnett, this was accepted by the publisher T. Fisher Unwin and published in 1895. Reviews were numerous, often lengthy; and, though they were mixed, praise predominated. 'The Spectator', noting the atmospheric power of this work set in Borneo, prophesied that Conrad might become 'the Kipling of the Malay Archipelago' (19 Oct 1895, p. 530). Before that first publication, Conrad had begun 'An Outcast of the Islands', which appeared in 1896; again, the reviews included sufficient high praise to confirm him in the choice of the literary career. He had established a strong identity as a writer of exotic, adventurous fiction who brought to the material a sophisticated, ironic, sceptically reflective mind, acute political awareness, and distinctive stylistic virtuosity. His recurrent themes were human isolation, beleaguered solidarity, the vanity of romantic aspirations, the myopia of racial prejudice, and the recognition that loyalty to one principle may entail treachery to another. 
Then came several false starts. Conrad began 'The Sisters', of which only the opening was ever finished, and 'The Rescuer' (later 'The Rescue'), a novel which proved so difficult that he took more than twenty years to complete it. In 1896-7 he published in magazines the highly uneven quartet of tales ('Karain', 'The Lagoon', 'The Idiots', and the satiric masterpiece 'An Outpost of Progress') which, with the cumbrously analytic story 'The Return', comprises the volume 'Tales of Unrest' (issued in 1898). 
On 24 March 1896 Conrad married Jessie Emmeline George (1873-1936), a typist, daughter of Alfred Henry George, bookseller. Their two sons, Borys and John, were born in 1898 and 1906, during the period when Conrad was the tenant of Pent Farm, near Hythe in Kent. Jessie proved to be resourcefully supportive to her highly strung and temperamental husband, although her subsequent memoirs gave telling glimpses of his sometimes neurotic, irascible, and demanding conduct. Conrad's friends and acquaintances during the first decade of his literary career included Edward Garnett (the most perceptive and persuasively enthusiastic of his reviewers), Edward Sanderson, H. G. Wells, Stephen Crane, John Galsworthy, and Ford Madox Hueffer (who changed his surname to Ford in 1919). A particularly sustaining friendship was with R. B. Cunninghame Graham, the aristocratic socialist and adventurer. William Blackwood, the proprietor of 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', proved to be a crucially generous publisher. 
Garnett describes thus the Conrad of this time: 'My memory is of seeing a dark-haired man, short but extremely graceful in his nervous gestures, with brilliant eyes, now narrowed and penetrating, now soft and warm, with a manner alert yet caressing, whose speech was ingratiating, guarded, and brusque turn by turn. I had never seen before a man so masculinely keen yet so femininely sensitive. (Garnett, vii)' 

Conrad's major phase as a writer extends from 1897 to 1911. It includes 'The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'' (serialized and published as a book in 1897), 'Youth' (serial, 1898), 'Lord Jim' (serial, 1898-9; book, 1899), 'Heart of Darkness' (serialized 1899), 'Youth' (a volume containing 'Youth', 'Heart of Darkness', and 'The End of the Tether', 1902), 'Typhoon' (serial and book, 1902), 'Nostromo' (serial and book, 1904), 'The Secret Agent' (serial and book, 1907), 'The Secret Sharer' (serial, 1910), and 'Under Western Eyes' (serial and book, 1911). This is a period of astonishing range and richness. With 'Under Western Eyes' he even dared to challenge (and arguably surpassed) Dostoyevsky's 'Crime and Punishment'. 'Heart of Darkness' or 'Nostromo' alone would have sufficed to earn Conrad an enduring reputation; but this immense sequence of works (so richly descriptive and morally complex) confirms his stature as one of the greatest fiction-writers -- and probably the greatest political novelist -- in English. 
Although Conrad's prose was occasionally marred by grammatical or idiomatic lapses (particularly into inadvertent Gallicisms), generally his command of styles ranging from the colloquial to the lyrical was audaciously effective. A colourful passage of rhythmic, assonantal and alliterative 'prose poetry' that became renowned (and would be parodied by E. M. Forster) was the description of the burning ship in 'Youth': 'Between the darkness of earth and heaven she was burning fiercely upon a disc of purple sea shot by the blood-red play of gleams; upon a disc of water glittering and sinister. A high, clear flame, an immense and lonely flame, ascended from the ocean, and from its summit the black smoke poured continuously at the sky. She burned furiously; mournful and imposing like a funeral pile kindled in the night, surrounded by the sea, watched over by the stars. A magnificent death had come like a grace, like a gift, like a reward to that old ship at the end of her laborious days. (''Heart of Darkness' and other Tales', 124-5)' More to the taste of comparatively recent readers were the sardonic anti-imperialistic descriptions in 'Heart of Darkness'; for example: 'Once, I remember, we came upon a man-of-war anchored off the coast. There wasn't even a shed there, and she was shelling the bush. It appears the French had one of their wars going on thereabouts. Her ensign drooped limp like a rag; the muzzles of the long six-inch guns stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, slimy swell swung her up lazily and let her down, swaying her thin masts. In the empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent. (ibid., 151-2)' Conrad learned to combine sharp realism with calculated ambiguity and thematic orchestration. His mastery of perspectives enabled him to present a suffering individual now as the vital centre of the universe and now as of no more value than a drop of water in the ocean. Repeatedly the tensions in his own nature found expression in renderings of a close interaction between a central character and a subversive figure, as in the relationships between Marlow and Jim, Marlow and Kurtz, the captain and Leggatt, or Razumov and Haldin. He relished the 'psychopolitical', portraying events which were simultaneously psychological and political, illustrated by the derangement of Kurtz or the subtle corruption of Gould. Traditional values suffered trial by ordeal, and sometimes failed their tests. If his originality delighted such connoisseurs as Wells (for a while), Garnett, Cunninghame Graham, and Arnold Bennett, it sometimes baffled other early readers and reviewers. Nevertheless, Conrad was fortunate in the timing of his literary career. 
The fact that so many of Conrad's works were serialized is a reminder that, in various respects, this was a golden age for story-tellers. The expansion of education in Victorian England had created a vast literate public; and numerous periodicals, many of them publishing or reviewing fiction, came into existence to meet the needs of this enlarged readership. Technological advances made books cheaper to produce; commercial advertising and publicity became widespread; and international copyright agreements (notably the 'Chace Act' of 1891) guaranteed payment for works published abroad. Frequently, Conrad was paid several times for a single item. (Even the complex and technically challenging novel 'Nostromo' first appeared in a popular magazine, 'T. P.'s Weekly'.) Yet, although Conrad's reputation steadily burgeoned, so did his debts. His chronic prodigality was aided by loans from friends (notably John Galsworthy and William Rothenstein); donations came from the Royal Literary Fund ($300 in 1902, $200 in 1908) and from the Royal Bounty Special Service Fund ($500 in 1904); and in 1910 he was awarded a civil-list pension of $100 per annum. Above all, James Brand Pinker, his literary agent from 1900, advanced huge sums in the hope that the author would one day be financially prosperous. By 1909 Conrad's debts totalled $2250, at a time when the average annual earnings of a doctor were about $400. Not surprisingly, his letters are often jeremiads: he complains about his physical ailments (notably gout), his mental state (he was long afflicted by depression), and the daily struggle to wring from his imagination works of integrity while the debts mount. 'I had to work like a coalminer in his pit quarrying all my English sentences out of a black night', he told Garnett ('Collected Letters', 4.112). The completion of 'Under Western Eyes' was marked by a breakdown in which for days he lay in bed conversing with the imaginary characters. 
To accelerate the flow of marketable writing, Conrad had collaborated with Ford Madox Hueffer on some inferior works: 'The Inheritors' (1901), 'Romance' (1903), and 'The Nature of a Crime' (first published in Hueffer's 'English Review' in 1909). This collaborator and amanuensis was also paid for his contribution to Conrad's largely autobiographical 'The Mirror of the Sea' (variously serialized; book, 1906), although only Conrad's name appeared on the title-page. The relationship between the two writers deteriorated and became recriminatory in 1909. Eventually Ford, who gained renown with 'The Good Soldier', would commemorate the collaboration in lively but unreliable volumes of reminiscence. 
Remarkable non-fictional work of this period includes Conrad's letters to Cunninghame Graham, a sequence in which he expresses, often with fine rhetorical panache, his most pessimistic views of human nature and the human situation. For instance, in a letter of 1898, he declares: 'The mysteries of a universe made of drops of fire and clods of mud do not concern us in the least. The fate of a humanity condemned ultimately to perish from cold is not worth troubling about. If you take it to heart it becomes an unendurable tragedy. If you believe in improvement you must weep... Life knows us not and we do not know life -- we don't even know our own thoughts. ('Collected Letters', 2.16-17)' A letter to the 'New York Times', published in 1901, has a quotably contrasting emphasis: 'The only legitimate basis of creative work lies in the courageous recognition of all the irreconcilable antagonisms that make our life so enigmatic, so burdensome, so fascinating, so dangerous -- so full of hope' (ibid., 2.348-9). An important essay is 'Autocracy and war' (first published in two periodicals in July 1905, later included in 'Notes on Life and Letters'). Here Conrad predicts not only the First World War (as an outcome of aggressive Prussian militarism) but also the Russian Revolution, which, he says, will result only in a new tyranny that will endure for many years. He expresses, furthermore, a bleak recognition that democracy is dominated by commercialism. 'And democracy', he declares, 'which has elected to pin its faith to the supremacy of material interests, will have to fight their battles to the bitter end' ('Notes', 107). 
The period from 1911 to 1919 was in two senses a period of transition for Conrad. First, while some of its novels and tales are impressive, others indicate a marked decline in his powers. Second, sales of his work increased sufficiently to end his struggles with debt and ensure his prosperity. 
In order, the main publications of this phase of Conrad's artistic life are: 'A Personal Record' (1912, originally 'Some Reminiscences'), by far the more interesting of his two books of autobiographical reflections; ''Twixt Land and Sea' (1912, three previously published tales, including 'The Secret Sharer'); 'Chance' (serialized in the 'New York Herald' in 1912 and published as a book early in 1914); 'Victory' (serial and book, 1915); 'Within the Tides' (1915, four of his more trivial previously published tales); and 'The Shadow-Line' (serial, 1916-17; book, 1917). 
The short stories in the collections are remarkably uneven in quality, ranging from 'The Secret Sharer', a vivid and enigmatic tale which has elicited a wealth of interpretation, to 'The Inn of the Two Witches', a trite piece reminiscent of Wilkie Collins's 'A Terribly Strange Bed'. Of the novels, numerous critics concur in regarding 'The Shadow-Line' as one of Conrad's best: echoing Coleridge's 'Rime of the Ancyent Marinere', this is a subtly allegoric depiction of the stresses on a young captain whose first command is a disease-ridden and apparently accursed sailing-ship. 'Victory' is much more problematic for the critics, some seeing it as one of the Conradian masterpieces, others seeing it as a flawed and embarrassingly melodramatic work. It employs a remarkable range of source materials: notably the 'Bible', Shakespeare's 'The Tempest', Milton's 'Comus', Schopenhauer's bleak doctrines, A. R. Wallace's 'Malay Archipelago', Anatole France's 'Le lys rouge', Villiers de l'Isle Adam's 'Axel', H. G. Wells's 'The Island of Doctor Moreau', Stefan Zeromski's 'Dzieje grzechu', and particularly 'The Ebb-Tide' by Robert Louis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne. Conrad had always been resourceful in assimilating heterogeneous materials; but, in this case, arguably, the materials do not effectively cohere, and the paradoxical themes lack persuasive embodiment. 
In this transitional phase, the publication which most deeply affected Conrad's fortunes was 'Chance'. Aided by a substantial publicity campaign for the serial in the 'New York Herald' (which insisted that Conrad was now writing with women in mind) and by zealous marketing by Alfred Knopf in the USA, this novel sold well: surprisingly so, in view of its technical intricacy, which caused even Henry James to complain of the excessive elaboration. One explanation of 'Chance''s success is that the feminist debate was then highly topical. During this novel, though Marlow makes various misogynistic comments, modes of male chauvinism are sardonically depicted, and centrality is given to a young woman's struggles through oppression to maturity. (Incidentally, in 1910 Conrad had signed an open letter to the prime minister, Herbert Asquith, advocating female suffrage.) 
In January 1914 'Chance' was published in book form; within two years there were numerous reprints. In the same month 'Lord Jim' was reissued in a large popular edition: 15,000 copies at a shilling each. Soon, almost all of Conrad's earlier works were being reprinted. Pinker was able to obtain advances for 'Victory' of $1000 for the serial rights (in 'Munsey's Magazine') and $850 for the book. Even a short, occasional essay, 'Tradition' (a tribute to British merchant seamen in time of war), earned $250 in 1918 when published in Lord Northcliffe's 'Daily Mail'. Since 1912 John Quinn, a manuscript collector based in New York, had been purchasing Conrad's manuscripts on a regular basis: an astute investment. T. J. Wise, a diligent bibliographer and alleged forger, was another eager purchaser. Hollywood film producers recognized that within the stylistic and thematic subtleties of the novels lay popular cinematic materials: dramas of violence and sexual intrigue set in exotic locations. In 1919 motion picture rights to four Conrad works would be bought for over $3000 (at a time when an attractive four-bedroom house in London might cost $1000). At last Conrad was amply wealthy, and his debts to the ever-generous Pinker were cleared. 
In the closing years of Conrad's life, as collected editions were issued by Doubleday in New York, by Heinemann, Gresham, and Dent in London, and by Grant in Edinburgh, Conrad's main publications were: 'The Arrow of Gold' (serial, 1918-20; book, 1919); 'The Rescue' (serial, 1919-20; book, 1920); 'Notes on Life and Letters' (1921, a collection of essays and occasional pieces); and 'The Rover' (serial and book, 1923). Posthumously published volumes were 'Suspense' (unfinished, but both serialized and issued as a book in 1925); 'Tales of Hearsay' (an uneven collection, 1925); and 'Last Essays' (1926). All four novels of this late phase are disappointing. 'The Rover' is relatively concise, but in the others the narrative too often meanders, romantic values are too largely endorsed, and there is too little of the salt of scepticism. Understandably, the author's energies were flagging. As 'modernism' emerged strongly in the works of James Joyce, Virginia Woolf, and D. H. Lawrence, so Conrad, who had once been boldly innovative, was now regressing. While his writing lost its bite, however, public adulation increased. In 1919 Conrad had moved into Oswalds, a large and elegant Georgian house at Bishopsbourne, near Canterbury. On a visit to the United States, where he lectured and gave a reading in 1923, he was lionized: 'To be aimed at by forty cameras held by forty men that look as if they came out of the slums is a nerve-shattering experience', he wrote to his wife (Najder, 'Joseph Conrad', 475-6). Later, he courteously declined a knighthood offered by Britain's first Labour prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald. His health deteriorated, and on 3 August 1924 he died of a heart attack at his home. 
After a service in Canterbury at the Roman Catholic church, St Thomas's, Conrad was buried in the public cemetery on Westgate Court Avenue. The gravestone bears the words which he had chosen as the epigraph for 'The Rover': '
Sleep after toyle, port after stormie seas, 

Ease after warre, death after life, does greatly please. 

' These are the words uttered in Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' by 'a man of hell, that cals himself Despaire'. Though Conrad was buried with Catholic obsequies, the inscription is a reminder of the radical scepticism which gives so much power to his writings; and, furthermore, by providing a reminder of Peyrol in 'The Rover', who lives and dies by his work as a seaman, the words appropriately recall the dual career of Conrad, the seaman turned writer, who was still toiling at his creative writing in the season of his death. 
Although Conrad's literary reputation seemed to flag in the 1930s, after the Second World War interest in his work surged. The praise given by F. R. Leavis in 'The Great Tradition' (1948) heralded a diversity of academic studies, critical, biographical, and scholarly, while numerous paperback editions extended his popular readership. The formerly widespread notion that Conrad was primarily a nostalgic writer of the age of sail (a notion based largely on 'The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'', 'Youth', and 'The Mirror of the Sea') was superseded by recognition of his moral sophistication and of his proleptic power: repeatedly, it appeared, he had anticipated subsequent psychological, political, and philosophical findings. Critics found Freudian, Jungian, existentialist, and 'absurdist' features; the texts seemed to solicit and reward a diversity of critical approaches. Appropriately, given the international topics of his novels, his fame grew internationally. By the 1990s, for example, he was served by the Joseph Conrad societies of the United States, the UK, France, Italy, Scandinavia, and Poland; intensive scholarly work (accelerated by electronic communications) proceeded in locations as diverse as Lubbock (Texas), Amsterdam, Cape Town, and Tokyo; and his writings had been translated into more than forty languages, from Albanian and Korean to Swahili and Yiddish. While his texts were studied in schools and universities, film adaptations had brought his works to audiences of millions. Gene M. Moore (in 'Conrad on Film', 1997) listed eighty-six versions on film, television, and video. Of these, the most spectacular was Francis Ford Coppola's 'Apocalypse Now' (1979), a lavishly free adaptation of 'Heart of Darkness' to the Vietnam War. The same novella was adapted several times for the theatre. Operas inspired by Conrad's texts have been composed by Tadeusz Baird, John Joubert, Richard Rodney Bennett, and Romuald Twardowski. 
Conrad's cultural influence can be detected in the works of numerous eminent figures. BronisLaw Malinowski declared: 'Rivers is the Rider Haggard of anthropology; I shall be the Conrad' (Firth, 6); indeed, he almost became the Kurtz of anthropology when, working among the Papuans, he ominously echoed Kurtz's 'Exterminate all the brutes!' (This became 'Exterminate the brutes!' in Malinowski's 'Diary', 69.) Bertrand Russell, whose friendship with Joseph Conrad was so intense that he gave the name Conrad to his elder and younger sons, recorded in his 'Portraits from Memory' the recognition that the novelist had proved politically wiser than the philosopher. T. S. Eliot's 'The Waste Land', which originally took its epigraph from 'Heart of Darkness', contains some Conradian themes and details, while 'The Hollow Men' takes its title, its epigraph, and its subject from that African tale. Graham Greene regretted that some of his early work, particularly 'Rumour at Nightfall', had been deleteriously influenced by 'The Arrow of Gold'; but Greene's greatest debt is probably to 'The Secret Agent', for 'Greeneland' (that seedy, corrupt terrain) has clear affinities with the murky, debased city of Conrad's novel; and indubitably 'The Secret Agent' has contributed many features to 'It's a Battlefield'. Probably Conrad's peripatetic life helped to shape Greene's. When Greene voyaged up a Congo tributary to research 'A Burnt-Out Case', 'Heart of Darkness' was in his hand. 
Conrad's range is indicated by the diversity of other writers influenced by him: among them Virginia Woolf, Malcolm Lowry, Jorge Luis Borges, John le Carre, Siegfried Lenz, William Golding, V. S. Naipaul, George Steiner, Howard Brenton, and Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Thomas Mann and Andre Gide paid him handsome tribute. 'L'etranger', by Albert Camus, offered a 'reprise' of the central paradox of 'Lord Jim', the contrast between the subjective view and the judicial view of a scandalous action; and Camus remarked that Clamence in 'La chute' was 'a less brilliant Lord Jim' ('New York Times Book Review', 24 Feb 1957, 36). In the United States, numerous major writers, including Eugene O'Neill, Ernest Hemingway, Scott Fitzgerald, William Faulkner, and even William S. Burroughs, admired and learned from his writings. Another American admirer was Orson Welles, who planned films of 'Heart of Darkness' and 'Lord Jim', and twice adapted 'Heart of Darkness' for radio. His cinematic masterpiece, 'Citizen Kane', has various Conradian affinities. 'I think I'm made for Conrad', he declared; 'I think every Conrad story is a movie' (Welles and Bogdanovich, 320). Among African writers (though Chinua Achebe vehemently denounced Conrad as a racist), the acclaimed novelist Ngugi wa Thiong'o based his vivid novel, 'A Grain of Wheat', largely on the plot and themes of 'Under Western Eyes'; and Conradian elements have been traced in Tayeb Salih's 'Season of Migration to the North'. In the late twentieth century, Conrad was criticized by various feminists, Marxists, and post-colonial writers; and the ensuing controversies naturally tended to enliven and increase his readership. While cultural changes seemed to reveal some ideological flaws in his works, his moral intensity exposed by contrast posterity's capacity for decadence and ideological hypocrisy. ZdzisLaw Najder wrote in 1997: 'Conrad identified problems and perils which are still with us today. We need him' ('Conrad in Perspective', 187). 
Conrad was a versatile intermediary between the Romantic and Victorian traditions and the innovations of modernism. He was romantic in his interest in adventurous individuals and in his keenly sensuous responsiveness to the beauty, power, and immensity of the natural environment. He was Victorian in his registration of the burdens of thought in an era when science offered bleak vistas; Victorian, too, in his recognition of the magnitude of imperial enterprises, and in his high valuation of an ethic of work and duty. Poland had nourished his concern with the claims of honour and of fidelity to causes which might seem lost, while his favoured French authors (Flaubert, Maupassant, Anatole France) had strengthened his habits of sceptical and ironic analysis. His sense of individualism sometimes modulated towards a modernistic relativism or even, occasionally, solipsism; and modernistic, too, were his sense of the absurdity of moral beings in a non-moral universe, his profound scepticism about the value of industrial society and its acquisitive imperialisms, and his belief that many people were myopic participants in destructive processes. Frequently, his works enact the difficulties of maintaining a humane morality when that morality lacks supernatural or environmental support. The passage of time, while predictably revealing various limitations, has largely vindicated his technical audacity and his political pessimism. 'Heart of Darkness', which offered a forewarning of the Hitlerian demagogue, seems virtually inexhaustible in its recessive ambiguities and paradoxes. 'Nostromo', in its epic scale and panoramic scope, has proved to be an audaciously penetrating study of economic imperialism. Its view of history, Albert Guerard once remarked, is 'skeptical and disillusioned, which for us today must mean true' (Guerard, 177). Technically, Conrad was resourceful in applying such devices as the time-shift, delayed decoding, covert plotting, symbolic imagery, transtextual narratives, and the unreliable intermediary narrator; he submitted dramatic and sometimes even melodramatic topics to sophisticated reflective scrutiny. The effect of the technical devices was usually to multiply ironies and, broadly, to accentuate possible divisions between appearance and reality. 
Conrad found that when he adapted 'The Secret Agent' for the stage, removing the narrative flesh to expose the underlying plot, what emerged was a rather grisly skeleton; similarly, many of the film adaptations of his texts have tended to make prominent the melodramatic incidents while silencing the voices of eloquent and sophisticated narrators. Lord Jim, after all, is significant less by virtue of his own character than by the kaleidoscopic multiplicity of the comments that he provokes from other characters and particularly from Marlow; while the technique of delayed decoding (which depicts an effect while delaying or withholding its cause) involves us intimately with Jim's fate. In 'Heart of Darkness', Kurtz's last words ('The horror! the horror!') have their strange ambiguity amplified by Marlow's commentary, so that they seem to sum up, without resolving, major paradoxes of the tale. Perhaps 'the horror' is Kurtz's own corruption; perhaps it is death; perhaps it is the irrational universe; but no interpretation is certain. In 'Nostromo', the suicide of Martin Decoud is described with resonant power. When he shoots himself, he sinks into the Placid Gulf, 'whose glittering surface remained untroubled by the fall of his body'; and the death of this sceptic bears critical reflections which themselves are memorably sceptical: 'In our activity alone do we find the sustaining illusion of an independent existence as against the whole scheme of things of which we form a helpless part' ('Nostromo', 361). Certainly, Conrad carried a large freight of pessimism which sometimes invited parody (and, in 'A Christmas Garland', Max Beerbohm wittily accepted the invitation); but it was counterbalanced by the author's creative energy and adventurous range, and even by that guarded love of life which was implicit in his love of searchingly crafted prose. 
Through Conrad's 'Author's notes' and other non-fictional (or purportedly non-fictional) writings, as well as through his posed photographs in which he generally appears gravely dignified, he projected the image of Joseph Conrad as patrician weathered sage, as the much-travelled mariner-turned-author who had earned his right to comment wryly, ironically, sceptically, but yet humanely, on human endeavours. At his best, he was a vivid, eloquent, and wise writer who, arguably, provided both warnings and guidance for posterity, and who, indisputably, produced powerfully evocative renderings of individuals enmeshed in historical toils. His long odyssey, as a Polish exile and mariner who eventually gained eminence as a British novelist, displayed exemplary courage, fortitude, and nobility. He is one of those authors who can provide sustenance for a lifetime. We may recall Bertrand Russell's words in 'Portraits from Memory', which, though a little too plaintive, offer an appropriate emphasis: 'Conrad, I suppose, is in process of being forgotten. But his intense and passionate nobility shines in my memory like a star seen from the bottom of a well. I wish I could make his light shine for others as it shone for me. (Russell, 85)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32534


Constant, Hayne (1904-1968), mechanical and aeronautical engineer, was born at Gravesend, Kent, on 26 September 1904, the second son of the family of six children of Frederick Charles Constant, dental surgeon, of Gravesend and later Folkestone, and his wife, (Mary) Theresa Hayne, of Northfleet, Kent. Educated at King's College choir school, Cambridge, King's School, Canterbury, the Technical Institute in Folkestone, and Sir Roger Manwood's School in Sandwich, he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1924 as an open exhibitioner where he took a second class in part one of the mathematical tripos (1925) followed by a first class in the mechanical sciences tripos (1927). He was awarded a college scholarship. After taking his degree in 1927 Constant stayed in Cambridge for a postgraduate year to work on the torsional vibration of crankshafts which he reported in his first publication. For the next six years he was a member of the engine department of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), Farnborough, working on carburettors, dynamometers, and the effects of vibration on aircraft. A paper to the Royal Aeronautical Society describing and analysing tests on a biplane suspended upside down and vibrated by rotating masses mounted on the aircraft won him the Busk memorial prize in 1932. 
From 1934 to 1936 Constant held the post of lecturer at Imperial College, but found it not to his liking and returned to RAE where, in July 1936, he was put in charge of the supercharger section under Dr A. A. Griffith, head of the engine department. After a few months, in March 1937, Constant presented a case to the Aeronautical Research Council for the development of the aircraft gas turbine engine. Working almost alone he had designed a small axial flow compressor and various gas turbine engine schemes which were described in his report. The report was well received and authority was given to start a programme, mainly in collaboration with Metropolitan-Vickers, for the development of gas turbine engines, involving the design, building, and testing of some six axial flow compressors and several parts of gas turbine engines. 
Meanwhile a prototype of Frank Whittle's turbojet engine, made by Power Jets Ltd, was tested in 1937 and from then on its further development was supported by the Air Ministry. Constant saw the Whittle scheme as applicable only to short-range high altitude fighter aircraft, but with the outbreak of war in 1939 he suggested to Power Jets that a jet engine with the flow passing straight through an axial compressor, an annular combustion chamber, and axial flow turbine should be jointly developed. In the event Constant's scheme was developed and built by Metropolitan-Vickers. It was flight-tested in 1943 and became the prototype of the modern jet engine. It was Constant's most important individual contribution to aircraft propulsion. His other contributions ranged from his rule for determining the flow angle leaving a cascade of compressor blades, the specification and layout of other axial flow jet engines, and his leadership of the research and development programme which continued at RAE after he became head of the engine department in 1941, and then later at Pyestock near Farnborough after the end of the war. 
From 1941 the team in the turbine division of the RAE engine department grew in numbers and facilities, but in 1944, much to Constant's dismay, the division was transferred from RAE to merge with Power Jets Ltd as a nationalized company: Power Jets (Research and Development) Ltd. Two years later this became the National Gas Turbine Establishment based at Pyestock with Constant as deputy, then director. In 1948 Constant was elected fellow of the Royal Society and won the James Clayton prize of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. In 1951 he was appointed CBE and in 1958 CB. In 1963 he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society. He published twenty-three papers, ten patent specifications, and an unpretentious book, 'Gas Turbines and their Problems' (1948), revised and enlarged in 1953. 
In 1960 Constant reluctantly left Pyestock to become scientific adviser to the Air Ministry and then chief scientist (RAF), Ministry of Defence (1964). His friends thought he was not very happy in Whitehall and that he obviously would have preferred to remain in research and inventive activities. 
Constant was a man of austere habit and thought with a self-contained reserve, but with a keen mind delighting in logical argument about technical matters. He would question the facts and objectives, almost arrogantly, behind any proposed design or development, sharpening each point of decision by arguments based on facts and fundamental physical principles, an approach which did not always endear him to his superiors, but greatly encouraged the younger engineers on his staff. In committee his speech was precise and economical. He was not only concerned about the professional development and rewards of his staff, but also their housing and sports. He was unmarried and his relaxations included tennis, skiing, amateur dramatics, motorcycles, sailing and boat building, and light music. It was typical of him to tackle each of them with zest and enjoy them with others and then to proceed to the next interest. He retired in 1962 to live in the bungalow of his own design, Ripelhyrst, Kiln Way, Grayshott, Hindhead, Surrey, where he died on 12 January 1968. 
William Hawthorne', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32535


Conway, Robert Seymour (1864-1933), classical scholar and philologist, was born at Stoke Newington, London, on 20 September 1864, the eldest son of Samuel Conway, Congregational minister, and his wife, Amy Curling. He was educated at the City of London School under Edwin Abbott, from whom he learned accuracy in detail, an interest in comparative philology, and a broad outlook on literature. After proceeding to Cambridge as a scholar of Gonville and Caius College, he obtained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1885, 1887). He was distinguished in part two for an essay, later published as 'Verner's Law in Italy' (1887). 
In 1887 Conway was appointed classical lecturer at Newnham College, Cambridge, where he met Margaret Mary, daughter of William Hall, an ironmaster in the midlands, whom he married in 1891. They had one son and four daughters. Shortly after this appointment he was elected a fellow of Gonville and Caius. In 1893 he became professor of Latin at University College, Cardiff, and in 1903 Hulme professor of Latin in the University of Manchester, where he remained until his resignation in 1929. He improved the teaching of Latin and established a final honours examination in Latin alone. 
In 1897 Conway published 'The Italic Dialects' (2 vols.), which was followed after many years by 'The Prae-Italic Dialects of Italy' (with Joshua Whatmough and Elizabeth Johnson, 3 vols., 1933). While at Manchester he undertook an edition of Livy. He set about his task with enthusiasm and examined many manuscripts, especially in Italy. Three successive volumes were published (books i-v, 1914; vi-x, 1919; xxi-xxv, 1929) in collaboration with William Charles Flamstead Walters, after whose death he produced a fourth volume (books xxvi-xxx, published posthumously, 1935), with the help of Stephen Keymer Johnson. The work is very thorough, providing copious information about variant readings in the manuscripts. 
Conway's other great interest was in Virgil: or, as he always insisted on spelling it, 'Vergil'. In 1907 he published in collaboration with J. B. Mayor and William Warde Fowler a small but important book, 'The Messianic Eclogue'; and many papers on Virgilian subjects followed, including an attempt to find a new site for Virgil's farm ('Where was Vergil's Farm?', 1923). The edition of the 'Aeneid', book i, published in 1935 after his death by his son Geoffrey Seymour Conway is perhaps his happiest piece of work, for it combines all his main interests. 
Conway was an accurate scholar in his own fields, but they were somewhat limited. He never lectured or wrote on a Greek author, and outside Livy, Virgil, and Cicero his acquaintance with Latin authors was not comprehensive. But he had great enthusiasms and a power of instigating his pupils to research on their own account. His frequent visits to Italy gave him a deep love of the country, and it was a high pleasure to him when in 1929 he was made commander of the order of the Crown of Italy. Among other distinctions he received honorary degrees from the universities of Dublin (1921), Padua (1922), and Oxford (1928); and he was elected an honorary fellow of Gonville and Caius College in 1920 and a fellow of the British Academy in 1918. He was a founder of the Classical Association, and its president in 1927. He died at 4 Dorset Square, London, on 28 September 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 32536


Conway, (William) Martin, Baron Conway of Allington (1856-1937), art historian and mountaineer, was born on 12 April 1856 at Rochester, Kent, the only son of William Conway, a low-church evangelical vicar of St Nicholas's Church, Rochester, afterwards rector of St Margaret's Church, Westminster, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Adam Martin MD of Rochester. He had two sisters. Martin Conway was educated at Repton School and from 1875 at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied history, graduating BA in 1879 and MA in 1882. He was a Cambridge University extension lecturer from 1882 to 1885. Conway climbed extensively in the Alps as an undergraduate, and was elected to the Alpine Club in 1877. In 1881 he published the 'Zermatt Pocketbook', the model for a series of 'Conway and Coolidge's Climbers' Guides', edited with W. A. B. Coolidge. Conway was responsible for many beautiful mountain names, such as Wellenkuppe, Windjoch, and Dent du Requin. 
Another of Conway's interests was woodcuts and early printed books. This was encouraged by the university librarian, Henry Bradshaw, who financed the journeys on which Conway collected the material for 'Woodcutters of the Netherlands in the Fifteenth Century' (1884), the most learned of his thirty books. While touring art galleries in Italy in 1883, Conway met Katrina, the only child of Charles Lambard, of Augusta, Maine, builder of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, and stepdaughter of Manton Marble, an investor and former editor and owner of the 'New York World'. Conway was already engaged to Rose Shakespear, but he broke this engagement, ostensibly on religious grounds, and married Katrina at Marble's home, 532 Fifth Avenue, New York, on 10 June 1884. Supported by Katrina's family, the couple moved to Park Street, London, where their only child, Agnes, was born on 2 May 1885. 
Conway became Roscoe professor of art at University College, Liverpool, in 1885. He published books on Reynolds, Gainsborough, early Flemish artists, and Albrecht Durer, and organized congresses in Liverpool, Edinburgh, and Birmingham on the relationship between art and industry. Conway resigned from his Liverpool position in 1888 and moved to London, where he frequented the Savile Club, gave lectures, and published a book on the art of the ancient world, which was the result of nine months' travel with his family in the Near East. Conway and his wife bought paintings as her income increased, and Conway later recounted his experiences in this area in 'The Sport of Collecting' (1914). 
In 1892 Conway led a large-scale mountaineering expedition to the Karakoram Himalayas with the financial support of scientific societies and his father-in-law, Manton Marble. Marble was not sure about Conway's motives: 'Tis not quite relevant to your art-career to be climbing mountains, but I perceive that Alpine, Caucasian, or Himalayan supereminence may be the corner-stone of artistic eminence' (Evans, 134). Conway's large party surveyed the Baltoro glacier and the region around K2, and ascended Pioneer Peak on Baltoro Kangri, which at 6890 metres may have constituted an altitude record at the time. 
Conway returned to acclaim in England, but he did not rest on his laurels. After publishing a book about the Karakoram in 1894, he walked the length of the Alps with two Gurkha soldiers in a gruelling publicity stunt that formed the basis of a popular book, 'The Alps from End to End' (1895). He received a knighthood in 1895 and shortly afterwards made an unsuccessful bid to win a seat in parliament as a Liberal. In 1896 Conway surveyed in Spitsbergen, an island in the Arctic circle about which he wrote several books. According to Arnold Lunn, Conway's experiments with skis while crossing Spitsbergen made him one of the pioneers of British skiing. In 1898 Conway travelled south to climb Illimani in Bolivia and Aconcagua in Argentina with two alpine guides. Before leaving Bolivia, Conway accepted an unsolicited offer from the Bolivian president of a mining concession for the Acre territory, a vast region at the headwaters of the Amazon. In 1902 Conway sold his original South American syndicate at a profit of $20,000, although he remained a director of other ventures and, for the next thirty years, actively invested in South American rubber, railroad, and gold companies. 
Conway also enjoyed the non-pecuniary rewards of his fame. Marble's prediction that Conway's climbing would add to his reputation as an art historian was ultimately vindicated. In 1901 he was offered a term as the Slade professor of fine arts at Cambridge. He resumed writing art history, including works on Tuscan art, the great masters, the Van Eycks, and Giorgione. After he resigned the Slade professorship in 1904, he and his wife bought and restored Allington Castle, near Maidstone. He served as president of the Alpine Club from 1902 to 1904 and was first president of the Alpine Ski Club in 1908. He was awarded the Founders Medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1905. As a celebrity, Conway later received free passes to Swiss resorts in winter and summer from Henry Lunn and other travel agents and hoteliers. 
The First World War rekindled Conway's interest in politics. His conservative political views were expressed in 'The Crowd in Peace and War' (1915), which he considered his best book. In 1917 Conway was appointed director-general of the Imperial War Museum, an honorary post which he retained until his death. In 1917-18 he toured the Western Front for the museum; his daughter, Agnes, played a central role in collecting material on women's war work. Conway was almost non-partisan in his politics. On 14 August 1918 he asked the Conservative central office for a constituency; the next day he asked the Liberal whip for their nomination. He was later nominated and duly elected as a Unionist, representing the combined English universities from 1918 to 1931, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Conway of Allington. He received an honorary LittD from both Durham and Manchester in 1919. After the war he undertook two important journeys, one to Morocco and Palestine and the other to Soviet Russia, researching material for lectures on Zionism which he gave in Britain and the United States. These two journeys formed the basis of two further books: 'Palestine and Morocco: Lands of the Overlap' (1923) and 'Art Treasures in Soviet Russia' (1925). The first allowed him to compare the effects of French and British rule, while for the second he was granted access to the art collections confiscated by the Bolsheviks. 
Conway served as a trustee of the Wallace Collection and the National Portrait Gallery and was active in the Society of Authors and the Society of Antiquaries. He was one of the first to realize the value of the systematic and comprehensive collection of photographic records of architecture and art and he presented his own collection of 100,000 photographs to the Courtauld Institute of Art. In later years he published several autobiographical works: 'Mountain Memories' (1920), 'Episodes of a Varied Life' (1932), and 'A Pilgrim's Quest for the Divine' (1936). Satirical cartoons emphasized his bushy eyebrows, wire glasses, plump jowls, and pug nose. A portrait executed in 1934 by Augustus John shows him with long, flowing white hair. 
In 1924 Conway began a love affair with Mrs Monica Hadow, a divorcee forty-four years his junior with whom he worked, but this ended when she remarried in 1930. When his wife, Katrina, died on 22 November 1933, she left her estate, including Allington Castle, to their daughter, although Conway continued to live there and at Westminster. On 17 November 1934, he married Iva, daughter of Daniel Christian and widow of Reginald Lawson, of Saltwood Castle, Kent. He died at the Empire Nursing Home, Vincent Square, London, on 19 April 1937, and a memorial service was held on 23 April at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 32537


Conybeare, Frederick Cornwallis (1856-1924), biblical and Armenian scholar, was born at Coulsdon, Surrey, on 14 September 1856, the third son of John Charles Conybeare (1818/19-1884), barrister, of Coulsdon, and his wife, Mary Catharine, 'nee' Vansittart. He was educated at Tonbridge School from 1868 to 1876 (his father having moved to Tonbridge), and in January 1876 he proceeded with a scholarship to University College, Oxford; he obtained a first class in classical moderations (1877), and in 'literae humaniores' (1879), and graduated BA (1880) and MA (1882). He was elected fellow of his college in 1880 and was made praelector in philosophy and, for one year only, in ancient history. On 12 December 1883 he married Mary Emily (1862-1886), second daughter of Friedrich Max Muller, the philologist; she accompanied him on his travels and assisted him in translating R. H. Lotze's 'Outlines of a Philosophy of Religion' (1892). He married secondly, in Nice on 22 January 1888, Jane (1859/60-1934), daughter of Edward Macdowell of Belfast; they had one son and one daughter. 
Possessing a private income Conybeare was able to resign his college appointments in 1887 and to devote himself to research, studying, at the suggestion of a friend, the Armenian language (and later also Georgian). At first he gathered material for the textual criticism of Greek classics from ancient Armenian versions, and he published 'Collation with the Ancient Armenian Versions of the Greek Text of Aristotle's Categories' (1892) along with various articles, mainly in the American 'Journal of Philology' (1889-1924), dealing with the text of Plato. He also produced comments on and translations of other Greek authors. Conybeare also travelled to various places where there were collections of Armenian manuscripts, and this literature being mainly religious he became interested in church history and in the textual criticism of the 'Septuagint' and 'New Testament'. The former study was one in which members of his family -- notably Bishop John Conybeare and William John Conybeare -- had previously won distinction. He made numerous discoveries, of which the most notable was the ascription to the 'Presbyter Aristion' of the last twelve verses of 'St Mark's gospel' in a manuscript in the monastery library at Echmiadzin, Transcaucasia. In a Viennese manuscript he discovered a translation of textual importance of the commentary of Ephrem of Syria on 'Acts'. In the library of the holy synod in Moscow he unearthed 'The Key of Truth', the sole surviving monument of the Eastern Paulicians, in whose doctrines he became interested. He also brought to light from Armenian and Georgian printed books and manuscripts numerous documents bearing on the history of early Christianity and its sects, and on general biblical and patristic literature. He was employed to catalogue the Armenian manuscripts in the British Museum (the catalogue was published in 1913) and the Bodleian Library, Oxford (catalogue published in 1918). He became FBA (1903) and honorary LLD of St Andrews (1913). 
The frankness with which Conybeare expressed his opinions endeared him to his friends but involved him in controversies. Having obtained private information about the Dreyfus affair Conybeare published in 1898 his much noticed pro-Dreyfus book, 'The Dreyfus Case'. In 1904 he joined the Rationalist Press Association, which published his 'Myth, Magic, and Morals, a Study of Christian Origins' (1909); its somewhat cynical scepticism elicited a rejoinder from William Sanday in 'A New Marcion' (1909). But Conybeare also attacked the rationalist school, which denied the historicity of Jesus Christ, in 'The Historical Christ', published by the same association in 1914. John MacKinnon Robertson, a leading writer of that school, was also a prominent member of the association, which Conybeare left in 1915, presumably because of the controversy evoked by his book. 
Soon after the outbreak of war in 1914 Conybeare, against the advice of friends, wrote a letter in reply to Professor Kuno Meyer in which he blamed the outbreak of war on Sir Edward Grey and H. H. Asquith. Meyer, then in New York, published it in 1915, despite a request from Conybeare not to do so. The affair brought on Conybeare criticism from the British press and alienated many of his friends. In 1917 he sold his Oxford house, and in 1921 he took one at Folkestone, though still spending much time overseas. In 1919 he visited the United States to deliver the Lowell lectures at Harvard. He died at his home, 21 Trinity Gardens, Folkestone, Kent, on 9 January 1924, and was buried four days later at Golders Green. His valuable collection of Armenian books was given after his death to the London Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 32538


Cook, Arthur Bernard (1868-1952), classical scholar and archaeologist, was born in Hampstead, London, on 22 October 1868, the son of William Henry Cook MD (1825-1882) and his wife, Harriet Bickersteth (1830-1918), of a family which produced several noted evangelical figures, including her brother, Edward Henry Bickersteth, who became bishop of Exeter. Cook was a scholar of St Paul's School in a brilliant period. He matriculated in 1887, holding a major scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He obtained first classes in both parts of the classical tripos (1889, 1891), won the Craven scholarship (1889), the chancellor's medal for English verse (1889), the chancellor's first medal for classics (1891), and the members' prize for Latin essay (1892). His older brother, Edward Bickersteth Cook, had died in 1881, but his younger brother Albert Ruskin Cook (1870-1951) followed him to Trinity, also holding a major scholarship, to read natural sciences before becoming a physician and medical missionary. 
Henry Jackson, praelector in ancient philosophy and later regius professor of Greek, exercised a remarkable and richly merited influence on men reading classics at Trinity in Cook's time, and it was no accident that Cook's first book was 'The Metaphysical Basis of Plato's 'Ethics'' (1895). But there were other forces to influence him in his formative years. In his inaugural lecture Cook paid tribute to John Henry Middleton, the Slade professor of art, and Charles Waldstein (later Sir Charles Walston), the first reader in classical archaeology and director of the Fitzwilliam Museum. The former he recalled as 'a realist with a grasp of facts' but the latter as 'prolix, polysyllabic, on occasion plethoric, but always persuasive and not seldom convincing' (A. B. Cook, 'The Rise and Progress of Classical Archaeology', 1931, 51-2). Comparative philology as part of the classical tripos had been an important influence on Cook. James Frazer was also a Cambridge presence, not teaching but working in the full enthusiasm of the movement of thought to which E. B. Tylor and William Robertson Smith had given so powerful an impulse. In England as elsewhere the history of religion then excited interest as perhaps never before or since. Cook's deep and continuing evangelical convictions predisposed him towards thought on these things, without alienating him from those who shared his interest but not his beliefs. 
Cook applied for the chair of Greek at University College, London, in 1892 at the time that A. E. Housman was elected to the chair of Latin. Although the application failed, perhaps because of Cook's youth and inexperience, he was appointed professor of Greek at Bedford College, London, in 1893, a post he held until 1907. At the same time he was elected to a fellowship at Trinity, which he held until 1899. He led a dual life, commuting by train to London, where he taught, and returning to Cambridge for research and writing. London also gave him access to the riches of the collections in the British Museum which were to stimulate his writing. In 1894 he married Emily (died 1943), daughter of George Thomas Maddox, of Hampstead. They had one daughter, Phyllis, and a son who died in infancy. 
Cook was influenced by other students of Greek religion in Cambridge, notably by Jane Harrison, Gilbert Murray, and Francis Cornford. Some have seen Cook as a marginal member of this group, and Murray recalled that Cook 'was a great help to us, but not one of us' (letter to Jessie Stewart, 26 Oct 1953: Beard, 116). At one point he formed part of a select class with Frazer, Jane Harrison, and Francis Cornford, learning Hebrew at the feet of Robert Hatch Kennett, the regius professor of Hebrew. Cook's interest in Greek religion was developed in a series of articles -- for example, 'Animal worship in the Mycenaean age' (1894) and 'The bee in Greek mythology' (1895), both in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies', and the noteworthy 'Greek votive offerings' in 'Folk-Lore' (1903). The 'Classical Review' contains his highly original and stimulating papers 'Associated reminiscences' (1901) and 'Unconscious iterations' (1902). He also started work on an edition of Theocritus. Cook was to supply the commentary on the historical and archaeological material, and Peter Giles, master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge from 1911 to 1935, the compilation of a critical text. The study was never published, though the manuscript was presented, after Cook's death, to the Cambridge University Library. 
Following the expiry of his fellowship at Trinity, Cook was elected lecturer in classics at Queens' College in 1900, and a fellow in 1903. In 1907 he resigned the chair at Bedford College and became reader in classical archaeology at Cambridge. This was the period when his focus started to turn to Zeus. A series of papers in the 'Classical Review' between 1902 and 1906, and another in 'Folk-Lore' between 1903 and 1907, were the forerunners of his monumental 'Zeus: a Study in Ancient Religion' (3 vols. in 5, 1914, 1925, and 1940), which the Revd C. T. Wood, the senior fellow of Queens' College, described as 'an incredibly rich mine of information on most forms of religion' (Wood, 'Queens' College Record', 5). This study shows a fabulous command of every kind of material which could be brought to bear on the subject -- ancient literature, monumental evidence, the Near Eastern background, and folklore and folk-ways from all parts, all presented with supreme accuracy and so indexed as to be instantly available. 'Zeus' would be indispensable to students in many fields, even if every single conclusion of its author were rejected. Perhaps no one has equalled Cook in his ability to present the views of others with generous fairness and to state objections to his own; no one has surpassed him in awareness of the fact that the ancients took their gods seriously. He constantly brought forth new data and parallels and suggestive ideas, and his sheer knowledge of the works of ancient art was so wide and thorough that his lack of aesthetic taste hardly affected his powers of interpreting and illustrating them. His sense of historical criticism and chronological stratification was weak: he drew confident inferences for early times from very late writers, and he never appreciated Wissowa's fundamental discovery of the contrast between the religious heritages of Rome and Greece. Nevertheless, recognition of Cook's research came in 1941 with his election as a fellow of the British Academy, following the publication of the third volume of 'Zeus' (1940). Cook was also a foreign member of the American Philosophical Society and the German Archaeological Institute, as well as a member of the Folklore Society. 
In Cambridge Cook's responsibilities included the curatorship of the Museum of Classical Archaeology in Little St Mary's Lane, which housed the cast collection. He also brought order to the library. Women were permitted to attend his lectures on Greek sculpture, although in 1920 Cook voted against awarding degrees to women, much to the annoyance of his friend Jane Harrison. He proceeded LittD in 1926. In 1928 he became general editor for Methuen's 'Handbooks of Archaeology', a role he retained until 1949. Former pupils wrote volumes for the series, such as Winifred Lamb of the Fitzwilliam Museum with 'Greek and Roman Bronzes' (1929), and Charles T. Seltman with 'Greek Coins' (1933). In 1931 Cook became the first holder of the Laurence chair of classical archaeology, from which he retired in 1934 to be succeeded by Alan J. B. Wace. In the following year Cook was elected vice-president of Queens' College. 
Cook travelled widely in the Mediterranean to pursue his research -- to Italy, Sicily, Greece, and Turkey. He formed his own collection of antiquities, including Greek and Roman coins, to support his studies; most were dispersed before his death. For example, some items were presented to the Liverpool Museum, which had been badly damaged during the Second World War. A head of Aphrodite, allegedly collected on the Athenian acropolis in 1890, was presented to Queens' College and was placed in the library. A twelfth-century manuscript of the Pauline epistles and a thirteenth-century manuscript of the 'Bible' were presented to Ridley Hall in 1947. A small selection of items was bequeathed to the Fitzwilliam Museum by his daughter. A further selection of antiquities was purchased by the Otago Museum in Dunedin, New Zealand, after Cook's death, in part through the good offices of A. D. Trendall. 
Unlike his friend Frazer, Cook could not live a life of pure research, and he probably would not have wished to do so. He was an admirable lecturer, always clear, thorough, and entertaining; he was supremely helpful to younger men, whether undergraduates or colleagues. Anyone who came to consult him was sure to go away with 'a pocket of references' and a sense of encouragement. His weight of learning was never oppressive and was accompanied by a warm friendliness, a joy in living, and a puckish humour which went with the twinkle of his keen eyes. His natural instinct for collecting extended to the maintenance of a scrapbook, entitled 'Explicanda', for first-hand accounts of the unexplained and of extrasensory perception. He never seemed pressed for time and knew how to relax in talk or tennis or travel; his spare, wiry physique appeared to sustain his long labours with ease. Cook's favourite poet was Robert Browning, and he also composed poetry. His satirical 'Criticism criticised' was published in the 'Cambridge Review' (1892). In later years he avoided academic reviewing, quoting 'judge not that ye be not judged'. Cook retained his evangelical faith, serving on the council of Ridley Hall, the evangelical Anglican theological college in Cambridge, from 1906. He also served as a Sunday school teacher. He regularly attended evensong at Queens' College, his position next to the preacher enabling him to insert 'sotto voce' comments during the delivery, such as 'Come to the point', or 'You have said that already', or even 'Bravo, that's got them'. 
In 1943 Cook's wife, Emily, died. One of Cook's last public appearances was in 1948 at the quincentenary celebrations of Queens' College during the visit of the then Queen Elizabeth. Cook bore ill health in his closing years with serene courage and without losing his old gaiety. There are two accounts of deathbed conversations that reflect his continuing mischievous sense of humour. His niece, on a final visit, was talking to a comatose Cook and mentioned that she had just visited the British Museum with her son. Cook opened one eye and asked, 'What did you go to see?', and received the reply, 'Well, we had two hours to spare, so we did the lot!' With the words 'May you be forgiven', Cook sank back on his pillow. In another instance the Revd Henry Chadwick, then dean of Queens' College, was reading the opening verses of the 121st psalm to Cook, only to receive the comment, 'that is a mistranslation' (Seltman, 300-01). Cook died at his home, 19 Cranmer Road, Cambridge, on 26 April 1952 and was buried on 2 May following a funeral at Queens' College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32539


Cook, Arthur James (1883-1931), trade unionist, was born on 22 November 1883 in Wookey, Somerset, the oldest of ten children of Thomas Cook, a soldier, and his wife, Selina. Selina's religious convictions were a formative influence on Cook's early life. At the age of twelve he began work near Cheddar as a labourer on the farm of Caleb Durbin, whose radical politics also influenced his development. Cook became a boy preacher, and was offered a place at Baptist college to train for the ministry. Instead, in 1901, he joined the exodus of agricultural workers from the west country attracted by high wages in the south Wales coalfield. 
Moving to Porth, in the Rhondda, Cook began work in the Trefor colliery in Trehafod. On his first day underground, a miner working nearby was killed in a roof fall, and Cook helped carry him home to his family, experiences which left a lasting impression. As a Baptist preacher he was active in the religious revival of 1904-5, but shortly afterwards began to take an interest in trade union and political matters. Apparently around late 1905 or early 1906 he came into contact with the Independent Labour Party (ILP), which he joined. His politics were ill-received by his chapel, from which he had to resign, along with his wife Annie ('nee' Edwards), whom he married in 1906. He became active in the union at the Coedcae colliery, where he now worked, and quickly became a lodge official. He claimed that he had held every official lodge position before 1914. 
The south Wales coalfield was experiencing explosive growth, and the Rhondda, the heart of the coalfield, grew by over a third between 1901 and 1911. In this frontier society, signs of a new militancy appeared, especially around the Cambrian combine dispute of 1910-11. In its aftermath some younger miners formed the Unofficial Reform Committee, with which Cook was associated, and produced the famous pamphlet entitled 'The Miners' Next Step' (1912). Its central themes of a class struggle, an industrial union, and the need for rank-and-file control reflected Cook's own beliefs, and shaped his actions for the next decade. 
Cook was awarded a two-year scholarship by the Pontypridd and Rhondda district of the South Wales Miners' Federation (SWMF) to the Central Labour College (CLC) in 1911, where he absorbed the college's Marxist teachings. He did not return for his second year, instead becoming actively involved once more in the labour movement. Elected as chairman of Coedcae lodge in 1913 and of the Lewis Merthyr joint committee of lodges in January 1914, he was also influential in establishing the Industrial Democracy League and agitated for independent working-class education. 
Cook openly opposed the First World War in April 1916, after which time he was under persistent police surveillance. Arrested and charged with sedition in March 1918 under the 'Defence of the Realm Act', he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment, of which he served two. After his release from prison, he became increasingly seen as a leader of the left in the Rhondda. 
Against a background of industrial turmoil, Cook, a committed revolutionary, was elected in November 1919 as miners' agent for the Rhondda no. 1 district, a full-time post through which he automatically became a member of the SWMF executive. In January 1921 his meteoric rise continued when he became a member of the executive of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain (MFGB). A month later the decontrol of the mining industry was announced, with a consequent end to a national wages agreement and wage reductions. A three-month lock-out from April 1921 ended in defeat for the miners; at its end Cook was again gaoled for two months' hard labour for incitement and unlawful assembly. 
Cook was a member of the South Wales Socialist Society, and a foundation member of the Communist Party, from which he resigned in 1921, although he remained close to it. In 1923 Cook and others launched the miners' minority movement in south Wales, which gave him important backing the following year when he won the south Wales nomination in his bid for general secretaryship of the MFGB. He won the national ballot and assumed office on 14 April 1924. Committed to ending private ownership in the coal industry, and the overthrow of capitalism, in office Cook also displayed a capacity for innovation. He worked to build the 'triple alliance' with rail and transport unions, and, through regular campaigning visits to the coalfields, stayed close to his membership. 
When further wage cuts were demanded in 1925, Cook mobilized the MFGB to resist and, with the support of the Trades Union Congress (TUC), won a nine-month subsidy from the Baldwin government. When the subsidy ended in 1926 conflict was inevitable, although Cook, sensing the weakness in the union's situation, sought to avoid it. The TUC called a general strike in support of the locked out miners, but after nine days it was called off. When negotiations failed, Cook threw himself into the dispute, touring coalfields. He was a magnetic orator with an emotional style. He was revered by the miners for his unstinting commitment to their cause and for his public defence of 'Not a Penny off the Pay, Not a Second on the Day.' Such public obduracy masked a desire to negotiate a settlement which would stop the suffering in the coalfield and the undermining of the union through a drift back to work. The strain of his work as the only full-time national official and his tireless efforts during the lock-out led to his physical and mental exhaustion. After seven months the miners were completely defeated, membership fell markedly, and rival unions were set up in various coalfields. 
Cook was vilified in the press and in sections of the labour movement for what was perceived as poor leadership (a criticism which has been effectively rebutted by his biographer Paul Davies). He became isolated within the MFGB and the TUC, where he opposed the trend towards 'Mondism' and reaffirmed his belief in class struggle. In 1929 Cook broke with his erstwhile allies in the Communist Party as they adopted the policy of 'class against class', including the formation of a breakaway United Mineworkers of Scotland. In his last years Cook, realizing the weakness of the MFGB, followed a pragmatic line within the industry. Although he gave general support to the second Labour government, his concern at high unemployment in the coalfields led to his signing the 'Mosley manifesto' in December 1930 which made radical recommendations for economic recovery, involving state intervention and a public works programme. He never publicly supported Sir Oswald Mosley's New Party when it was launched in March 1931, although he may have made supportive comments privately before its fascist nature became apparent. 
Cook's health had been a concern since the 1926 lock-out. Ignoring all advice he refused to reduce his workload, and continuously drove himself to the point of breakdown. His failure to seek medical attention for an injury to his leg, aggravated by a kick from a demonstrator in 1926, resulted in its amputation in January 1931. He suffered further ill health, and was then found to have cancer. He died on 2 November 1931 at Manor House Hospital in Golders Green and was cremated at the Golders Green crematorium. He was survived by his wife, a son, and two daughters. Cook retained the loyalty and affection of the miners long after his death. A levy of a halfpenny per miner raised $1032 for his dependants. 


@@@@@


doc= 32540


Cook, Sir Edward Tyas (1857-1919), journalist, born on 12 May 1857, at Brighton, was the youngest son of Silas Kemball Cook, secretary of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and his wife, Emily Archer, proprietor of a preparatory school. He was educated at Winchester, of which college he was elected a fellow in 1903, and New College, Oxford. He was president of the Oxford Union (1879), and graduated with a double first in 1880. In 1881 he joined the Inner Temple, but he never took his bar finals. University contemporaries admired Cook's abilities and character and it was assumed that he would enjoy a brilliant career in politics. Immediately upon leaving Oxford he acted as secretary of the London Society for Extension of University Teaching (1882-5). He unsuccessfully applied for a number of appointments but turned down an offer to enter the civil service. His long-held ambition was to become a journalist, and he made occasional contributions to a variety of journals, including 'Truth', the 'Oxford Chronicle', and the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. In August 1888 Cook accepted a part-time editorial post on the 'Pall Mall Gazette', later succeeding Alfred Milner, a lifelong friend, as W. T. Stead's assistant editor. Cook always acknowledged the debt he owed to Stead, and in his turn as editor applied some of Stead's ideas. But as a writer his methods were the opposite of Stead's; he relied upon quiet, incisive argument, not emphatic assertion and remonstrance. Cook was always a copious writer. His approach to any subject was cool, methodical, and cautious; his style, crisp and analytical. Those who engaged him in controversy rapidly discovered the rich variety of polemical weapons he effortlessly commanded, and the deadly accuracy of his tenacious memory for recondite facts. 
In 1889, when Stead resigned as editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette', Cook was appointed his successor. Although his rule was to last scarcely twenty-one months, Cook made his mark as a conscientious editor. In Henry Massingham's informed opinion, Cook made the 'Gazette' a 'young man's paper' (Massingham, 188); certainly most of the leading contributors were under the age of forty. On social issues the paper took a more advanced line than the 'Daily News', but Cook maintained Stead's enthusiastic support for a 'big' navy and Liberal Imperialist measures. W. W. Astor's purchase of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in the tory interest obliged Cook and his political staff to resign. With the financial backing of George Newnes, they were able to launch the 'Westminster Gazette' in January 1893. It was intended to carry on the journalistic and political traditions of the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. Again Cook's tenancy as editor was short-lived, for in 1895 he was offered and accepted the editorship of the 'Daily News', a newspaper that earlier, in conversation with Newnes, he had disdained as a mere party mouthpiece. The veteran manager and effective political editor of the 'Daily News', Sir John Robinson, was amazed by Cook's appointment and acquiesced in it only grudgingly. Under Cook's stewardship, sales of the 'Daily News' continued to fall. Cook declared that as editor it was his duty to keep 'steadily in view the larger interests and duties of the country', and to ignore 'mere party considerations in the face of national emergency' (Koss, 1.399). By this he meant that, despite war in South Africa, he would continue to express his strong imperialist sympathies. This brought him into direct conflict with the radical, Little Englander wing of the Liberal Party. The consequence was inevitable. In January 1901, when the 'Daily News' was sold to new proprietors, including George Cadbury, the Quaker, Cook was abruptly dismissed. Effectively he was banished to the political wilderness for remaining attached to a philosophy -- imperialism -- that had become thoroughly discredited. Cook was unrepentant and remained an unreformed Roseberyite Liberal. Nor did he make any secret of his continued admiration for Alfred Milner. When he departed from the 'Daily News', he was offered refuge as a leader writer by the 'Daily Chronicle', an undistinguished, halfpenny newspaper. He stayed there until 1910, but his heart was never in the task. He gave the best of himself in those years before the outbreak of the First World War to the editing of Ruskin's writings. Cook's admiration for Ruskin had begun in boyhood and never wavered; he was assisted in his monumental enterprise by Alexander Wedderburn. The 'Works' (1903-11), in thirty-nine substantial volumes, remain the definitive edition of Ruskin's writings. As J. A. Spender noted, it was Ruskin's 'great good fortune' that he, 'the most copious and unrestrained of English writers', should enjoy as his editor and biographer 'the coolest, most cautious, most critical of writers' ('Westminster Gazette', 2 Oct 1919). Cook's 'Ruskin' (1911) was followed by other successful biographies, 'Florence Nightingale' (1913) and 'Delane of The Times' (1915). 
Soon after the outbreak of the First World War, Cook was recruited to play a part in Britain's propaganda campaign. To the Oxford series he contributed a pamphlet, 'How Britain Strove for Peace' (1914), designed to demonstrate Germany's war guilt. On 6 August 1914, Winston Churchill announced the setting up of a press bureau, a hasty improvisation. In 1915, with Sir Frank Swettenham, Cook was appointed joint director. It was no sinecure. The original aim of the bureau had been to guide rather than restrict newspaper coverage of the war, but the Admiralty and War Office proved stubborn and recalcitrant partners in an enterprise that, in Cook's own words, 'was never constituted at all -- 'it growed' -- left to work out its scope and methods as experience might suggest' (Cook, introduction). The respect in which Cook was held by fellow journalists, his wisdom, and his untiring energy allowed a difficult task to be performed with the minimum of friction. The unremitting industry of the war years undoubtedly undermined his health. He left a dispassionate and balanced essay, 'The Press in War-Time: with some Account of the Official Press Bureau' (1920), which was published posthumously. 
In 1884 Cook married Emily Constance Baird; theirs was a happy marriage, but there were no children. Emily died in 1903. Cook was knighted in 1912, and made a KBE in 1917. In 1918 he suffered a stroke. The following year he developed pleurisy and then pneumonia. He died at his much-loved country home, Rose Cottage in South Stoke, Oxfordshire, on 30 September 1919. 
In late Victorian and Edwardian London, Cook was one of the most influential journalists. He took a high view of journalism as a profession, although his claim to exercise complete independence as an editor was exaggerated. Though a convinced Liberal he was never afraid to criticize his party. A reserved, shy, silent man, he was a most generous and loyal friend. 


