@@@@@


doc= 32541


Cook, Sir Francis, first baronet (1817-1901), merchant and art collector, was born at Clapham, Surrey, on 3 January 1817, the second son of the seven children of William Cook (1784-1869) of Roydon Hall, Kent, and his wife, Mary Ann (died 1862), the daughter of John Lainson. William Cook, whose family came from Wymondham in Norfolk, had established a business as a retail linen draper in Clerkenwell which was later moved to Fish Street Hill. By 1819 he had opened a wholesale warehouse at 89 Cheapside, taking into partnership his brother James in 1822 and a Mr Gladstones in 1825. In 1834 the firm moved to 21-3 St Paul's Churchyard, becoming Cook, Son, and Gladstones, and, in 1843, Cook & Son. The concern became one of the largest of its kind in the country, both as a manufacturing and distributing house, conducting a large trade in Great Britain and the colonies in all kinds of silk, linen, woollen, and cotton goods. When William Cook died in 1869 he left a fortune of over $2 million. 
Francis Cook was educated at Totteridge and at Frankfurt and started work in the print department of his father's firm in 1833, becoming a partner in 1843. On the death of Francis's eldest brother, William, in 1852, the firm assumed the style of Cook, Son & Co. On his father's death Francis Cook became its head. Despite other interests, he actively superintended his business and when in England continued his almost daily attendance in the City until within ten days of his death. He encouraged the employment of commercial representatives who travelled to the localities with samples of the firm's goods, using the extended railway networks. The firm became essentially a distributing, rather than a manufacturing house, and imported increasing quantities of ready-made garments from Germany. 
In 1841 Cook made his first visit to Portugal, where Robert Lucas, the father of his first wife, Emily Martha (died 1884), lived in Lisbon; he married Emily on 1 August 1841. He subsequently spent parts of each spring and autumn in Portugal, and in 1856 bought the palace of Monserrate at Cintra, a place redolent with romantic associations. He had the building completely restored and embarked on the development of its magnificent gardens. He gradually acquired vast areas of land near Cintra and renewed the prosperity of the district. In recognition of his services to the area and his benevolence to the poor, in 1864 Cook was created visconde de Monserrate by the king of Portugal. 
About 1860 Cook acquired Doughty House in Richmond Hill, Surrey, and began to assemble one of the most important collections of pictures formed in England during this period. Although he had acquired some pictures prior to this, the 100 paintings which formed the nucleus of his collection were purchased in 1860 from John Charles Robinson, who continued to advise him on his collection, and who provided him with many of his further acquisitions. Cook purchased works of all the major schools of European painting. He and Robinson shared an enthusiasm for Spanish art, and one of the pictures Cook received in 1860 was 'Christ Driving the Money-Changers from the Temple' by El Greco (National Gallery of Art, Washington), which was followed in 1863 by 'The Old Woman Cooking Eggs' (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh). The collection included the 'Madonna and Child' by Lorenzo Monaco (Toledo Museum, Ohio), works by Filippo Lippi, Sodoma, Parmigianino, Sebastiano del Piombo, and Titian, the 'Three Maries at the Sepulchre' by Jan van Eyck (Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, Rotterdam), and works by Durer, Rogier van der Weyden, Berckheyde, Rubens, Rembrandt, and Metsu. The French pictures at Doughty House included the 'Landscape with Lightning' by Francisque Millet (National Gallery, London) and the 'Portrait of Diane of Poitiers' by Clouet. Although there were not many English paintings, Cook owned works by Gainsborough, Hogarth, and Turner. Italian maiolica, bronzes, ivories, tapestries, and antique statuary also formed part of the collection, which was vast in its scope. 
Cook tried to make his private collection accessible to students. On 16 January 1873 he was elected FSA. His first wife died on 12 August 1884, and on 1 October 1885 he married Tennessee Celeste (1845-1923), daughter of Reuben Buckman (Buck) Claflin of New York, who had established her own career as a writer and banker; she was a prominent advocate of women's rights, a cause with which her sister Victoria Claflin Woodhull, the first female presidential candidate in the United States, was also identified. In 1885 he established Alexandra House as a home for women students of music and other branches of the arts and as a tribute to the Princess of Wales (later Queen Alexandra), at a cost of $80,000. He was created a baronet on 10 March 1886. Sir Francis died at Doughty House, Richmond Hill, on 17 February 1901, and was buried at Norwood cemetery. He had two sons and a daughter, all children of his first marriage. The main portion of his estate went to his elder son, Frederick Lucas, who succeeded to the baronetcy, part of his collection of works of art going to his younger son, Wyndham Francis. 


@@@@@


doc= 32542


Cook, Sir Joseph (1860-1947), prime minister of Australia, was born on 7 December 1860 at Silverdale, near Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, the eldest son of William Cooke, coalminer, and his wife, Margaret Fletcher. His childhood was spent in poverty and hard work. He first worked as a pit boy at the age of nine, and after his father died in 1873, he became the principal wage-earner of the family. Devoted to self-improvement, he studied during his lunch breaks and at night, developing the discipline, self-confidence, and endurance that were to last throughout his life. He became a lay preacher in the Primitive Methodist church and only his family obligations prevented his training for the ministry. Cook dropped the 'e' from his surname and rejected gambling, alcohol, and tobacco, preferring to read the 'Bible' and the works of Ralph Waldo Emerson. 
Cook was soon a passionate trade unionist, holding all the principal positions in his local miners' lodge by the age of twenty-three. He was an uncompromising advocate of his cause, and remained all his life a ruthless political debater with few skills in negotiation. On 8 August 1885 at the Wolstanton Primitive Methodist Chapel he married Mary, the schoolteacher daughter of George Turner, of Chesterton, Staffordshire. Her brother was one of several Silverdale miners who had migrated to the New South Wales coal town of Lithgow, west of Sydney. In December 1885 Cook departed for Lithgow, to be joined in January 1887 by his wife and baby son, the first of the six sons and three daughters of the marriage. He was soon involved in preaching and trade union activity, becoming a leading spokesman for the Lithgow miners. In June 1891 he entered the New South Wales legislative assembly representing the newly formed Labor Party and in October 1893 was elected leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party. The party was deeply divided, however, both over the tariff issue and over the willingness of the parliamentarians to accept the 'pledge', the commitment to vote together to follow policies determined by the party's extra-parliamentary conference. Although a protectionist in Silverdale and at first in Lithgow, Cook had been converted by the single-tax arguments of Henry George to free trade. He rejected the pledge and his rigidity in negotiation contributed to a disastrous split in the Labor Party. Cook was re-elected in 1894 as an independent Labor candidate, but soon afterwards accepted the offer of the post of postmaster-general in the Free Trade government led by George Reid, with an annual salary of $1500. For decades afterwards, this decision led Cook to be seen by the Labor Party as the first of a long line of 'rats', who gained political and personal advantage by betraying Labor principles and the people who had put them into parliament. For his part, Cook was beginning his lifelong change from Labor to conservative, from working class to middle class, from republican to imperialist, from free trade back to protectionism, always with complete confidence in the correctness of his current position. 
As postmaster-general and later as minister for mines and agriculture, Cook was energetic, adopting ideas such as putting postmen on bicycles and extending the telephone network. He appointed William Farrer to the position of government wheat experimentalist. His early views were reflected in his unsuccessful attempts to introduce local option for public house licences and to prevent lottery tickets being sent through the mail, but his support of retrenchment in the public service and balanced budgets reflected his new political alliance rather than his working-class upbringing. Above all, he loyally supported the more colourful Reid, under whose influence his abhorrence of tobacco was replaced by a taste for cigars. 
A man of limited vision, Cook was initially reluctant to enter the new commonwealth parliament, but was persuaded to contest the seat of Parramatta, which included Lithgow and his former New South Wales electorate, for Reid's Free Trade Party in the first federal election in March 1901. He won easily, but spent most of the next several years in opposition, savagely attacking the Protectionist governments of Edmund Barton and Alfred Deakin. In the unstable politics of three-party competition, Cook became Reid's principal supporter in the move to unite the Protectionists and Free-Traders in an anti-socialist alliance. He was now uncompromisingly committed to defending the interests of the rich and successful. Having moved from Lithgow to the middle-class Sydney suburb of Marrickville in 1901, he moved again in 1908 to Baulkham Hills, the most exclusive part of his electorate. Cook had left the Primitive Methodists for the mainstream Methodists in 1902. 
In 1905 Cook became deputy leader of the Free Trade Party and in 1908 succeeded Reid as leader. In 1909, despite Cook's rigidity in negotiations, a 'Fusion' ministry united the non-Labor parties, with Deakin as prime minister and Cook as his loyal deputy and minister for defence. The government lasted less than a year, but saw Cook's most significant ministerial achievements. Closely following British advice, especially that given by Lord Kitchener, he laid down the basis for compulsory military training, established the Royal Military College, and agreed that the new Australian navy would be constituted to act as part of the empire's Pacific Fleet, rather than comprising coastal vessels as Labor preferred. He took firm decisions to start or to expedite munitions factories (including the small arms factory at Lithgow), initiated contracts for military supplies, and even offered a prize for the design of a fighter plane. 
In 1910 Labor defeated the Fusion ministry in a landslide. As Deakin's deputy in the leadership of what was now called the Liberal Party, Cook vehemently denounced the Labor Party and its works. In January 1913 Deakin unexpectedly resigned and Cook was elected leader by twenty votes to nineteen over Sir John Forrest. In elections in May, the Liberals won a narrow majority in the house of representatives, while Labor retained control of the senate. Cook thus became prime minister, in office but not in power. His principal achievement was tactical, creating the circumstances to permit a double dissolution to resolve the conflict between the two houses. To widespread surprise, Labor won the subsequent election in September 1914, with majorities in both houses. 
The European crisis and outbreak of the First World War came during the election campaign. Cook, always more concerned with domestic than imperial or international politics, was slow to respond, and the governor-general, Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson, had to initiate Australian mobilization. Cook pledged full support for Britain, transferring control of the Royal Australian Navy to the Admiralty and offering a contingent of 20,000 troops. In opposition once more, he supported the Labor government's war policies, but soon felt the need to introduce conscription. This view was supported by the new Labor prime minister, W. M. Hughes, but only a minority of his party. After defeat in a national referendum in 1916, Hughes and his followers left the Labor Party to form a minority government. In 1917 they formed a coalition with the Liberals. Outmanoeuvred in negotiation, Cook was relegated to minister for the navy while Hughes remained prime minister, although his former Labor supporters were outnumbered by the Liberals. After the 1917 election, the two elements merged to form the Nationalist Party. Once more, Cook served as loyal deputy to a more skilful and quick-witted leader. 
In 1918 Cook accompanied Hughes to London for the Imperial Conference, but only attended the powerless war conference while Hughes represented Australia in the more significant war cabinet. Cook's self-esteem was assuaged by the award of the GCMG and a busy social round. The following year Cook supported Hughes at Versailles, but again he was usually relegated to relatively unimportant discussions, apart from sitting on the commission which drew the boundaries for Czechoslovakia, where he dutifully followed Foreign Office advice. In 1920-21 Cook was treasurer in the Nationalist government, applying strictly conservative approaches to the difficult problems of inflation, unemployment, and low wages. He was rewarded with a five-year term as high commissioner in London, a position he thoroughly enjoyed. He promoted migration to and investment in Australia and established good relations with the higher strata of London society, including the king, to whom, with his sharply pointed beard, he bore a passing resemblance; but the prime minister, S. M. Bruce, created a separate channel for Anglo-Australian communications on important political matters. Cook's wife was appointed DBE in 1925 for her services to the Red Cross Society. After his return to Australia in 1927, Cook was chairman of a royal commission into the finances of South Australia, but otherwise left public life. He built a large block of flats in the exclusive Sydney suburb of Bellevue Hill, at Trahlee Road, living in one, Silchester, until his death there on 30 July 1947. He was survived by his wife, five sons, and three daughters. He was cremated in Sydney after a state funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 32543


Cook, Stanley Arthur (1873-1949), biblical scholar and Semitist, was born on 12 April 1873 at St John's Terrace, King's Lynn, Norfolk, the son of John Thomas Cook, coal merchant, and his wife, Frances Sarah Else. He was educated at Wyggeston School, Leicester, and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar. He was placed in the first class of the Semitic languages tripos in 1894, was Tyrwhitt Hebrew scholar and Mason Hebrew prizeman in 1895, and in 1896 won the Jeremie 'Septuagint' prize. Cook married on 16 April 1898 Annette (1873/4-1942), daughter of William Thomas Bell, lithographic printer's manager; they had no children. From 1904 to 1932 he was lecturer in Hebrew at his old college of which he became a fellow in 1900, and from 1912 to 1920 was also lecturer in comparative religion. In 1931 he was appointed university lecturer in Aramaic, and in 1932 he was the first layman to be elected to the regius professorship of Hebrew, a post he held until his retirement in 1938. 
Cook grew up in the days of William Robertson Smith, T. K. Cheyne, A. B. Davidson, S. R. Driver, and other pioneers in 'Old Testament' research, and he belongs with them to the history of biblical scholarship. His association as a young man (1896-1903) with the 'Encyclopaedia Biblica' was the beginning of a long period of editorial work, which included the editorship for thirty years (1902-32) of the 'Quarterly Statement' of the Palestine Exploration Fund. He was on the editorial staff of the eleventh and fourteenth editions of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. For more than fifty years he produced original work which in extent and variety was astonishing. Up to 1910 his interest was centred on Semitic languages, inscriptions, history, 'Old Testament' analysis, and archaeology. After 1910 he was drawn to the study of psychology, philosophy, sociology, and religion in all its aspects. The publication of 'The Study of Religions' (1914) marks the transition from his earlier to his later interests. Henceforward his life's work was directed towards the relating of his vast knowledge of Semitic antiquity to all problems of human existence. In the views he held he was bold but not rash, and his writings, although difficult to read, were always stimulating and often challenging. Some of his work was soon superseded, but his more solid contributions, such as his fine chapters in the 'Cambridge Ancient History', of which he was a joint editor, and his monumental Schweich lectures (1925, published 1930) had more lasting value. Cook was elected president of the Society for Old Testament Study in 1925, an honorary member of the Society of Biblical Literature (USA) in 1931, and FBA in 1933. He took the degree of LittD at Cambridge in 1920 and received the honorary degrees of DD from the University of Aberdeen (1937) and DLitt from Oxford (1938). In 1948, on the occasion of his seventy-fifth birthday, he was presented with a volume entitled 'Essays and Studies' which contained a select bibliography of his writings. Cook died after a short illness at the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 26 September 1949. 
D. W. Thomas', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32544


Cooke, George Albert (1865-1939), biblical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born in London on 26 November 1865, the eldest son of George Isaac Foster Cooke, a barrister of Lincoln's Inn, and his wife, Agnes Marian, daughter of Stephen Mackenzie, a surgeon, and sister of Sir Morell Mackenzie (1837-1892) and Sir Stephen Mackenzie (1844-1909). He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School (where Hebrew was still taught) and in 1884 gained a Hebrew scholarship to Wadham College, Oxford. He was awarded a second class BA degree in theology in 1888 and won various prizes for Hebrew in 1886 and 1888 and the Houghton Syriac prize in 1889. Also in 1889 he was ordained and became curate of Headington; in the same year St John's College appointed him senior scholar and Hebrew lecturer. He became chaplain (1890) and fellow (1892-9) of Magdalen College, and also held the cure of the university church (1894-6) and the rectorship of Beaconsfield (1896-9). While there he married in 1897 Frances Helen (died 1932), daughter of Patrick Anderson, a man of business in Dundee; they had four daughters. From 1899 to 1908 Cooke was private chaplain to the duke of Buccleuch at Dalkeith, Midlothian, from 1904 to 1908 he was warden of the Community of St Andrew of Scotland, and from 1907 to 1908 was canon of St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh. In 1903 he published his most important work, a 'Textbook of North-Semitic Inscriptions', which for the first time presented Hebrew and Aramaic epigraphy to English speaking students. He received an honorary degree of DD from Edinburgh University in 1911. 
In 1908 Cooke returned to Oxford, where he succeeded T. K. Cheyne as Oriel professor of the interpretation of holy scripture, canon of Rochester Cathedral, and fellow of Oriel College. While in Oxford he undertook short commentaries for the Cambridge 'Bible' on the books of 'Judges' and 'Ruth' (1913), and 'Joshua' (1918). In 1914 he was appointed regius professor of Hebrew and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, a position which he resigned in 1936 in order to become rector of a parish of only ninety-five persons at Bettiscombe-with-Pilsdon, near Bridport, Dorset. It was here that he wrote his most ambitious works, the large-scale 'Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Book of Ezekiel' (1937) and 'The Prayer Book Psalter Revised' (1939), which attempted to preserve Coverdale's prose style within a more accurate biblical translation. Cooke died suddenly at the Imperial Nursing Home, Cheltenham, on 9 September 1939, following an operation. 


@@@@@


doc= 32545


Coolidge, William Augustus Brevoort (1850-1926), mountaineer, was born in New York on 28 August 1850, the son of Frederick William Skinner Coolidge, a merchant, of Boston, Massachusetts, and his wife, Elisabeth Neville Brevoort, a New Yorker whose family had made a fortune in the fur trade. Coolidge and his sister were raised by their mother and their aunt, Marguerite Claudia (Meta) Breevort (1825-1876). He was educated at St Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire, privately in Paris, and at Elizabeth College, Guernsey, before entering Exeter College, Oxford, in 1869. There he won the university Taylorian French scholarship in 1871, and obtained a first class in modern history in 1873 and a second class in jurisprudence in 1874. In 1875 he was elected to a fellowship of Magdalen College, Oxford, which he held until his death. Coolidge taught history at Magdalen and lived in Oxford until 1896, except for a year (1880/81) as professor of English history at St David's College, Lampeter. He was ordained deacon in 1882 and priest in 1883, holding decidedly high-church theological opinions. When at Oxford he regularly acted as honorary curate at South Hinksey between 1883 and 1896. But 'he chose a manner of life which made it for long periods difficult to perform clerical functions' ('DNB'). 
Coolidge's principal devotions were climbing in and writing about the Alps. He first climbed there in 1865 with his aunt Meta Brevoort, one of the first female mountaineers. The two were well known for their climbs in the Dauphine and in the Alps in winter. Coolidge gained a reputation as the 'young American who climbs with his aunt and his dog' after Christian Almer, his Swiss guide, gave him Tschingel, a beagle, in 1868. At the age of seventy Coolidge published a list of some 1750 of his own climbing expeditions between 1865 and 1900, including some 900 high ascents. He was equally scrupulous in recording each of Tschingel's sixty-six major peaks and passes, nearly all of which were canine first ascents. He employed this same obsession with accuracy of detail as an editor and author of guidebooks and reference works. He edited the 'Alpine Journal' from 1880 to 1889 and, with William Martin Conway, a series of climbing guidebooks to the Alps. He also edited or revised several other alpine guidebooks and contributed thousands of articles to encyclopaedias and journals throughout Europe. 
But Coolidge was meticulous to a fault. His self-righteousness, pugnacity, and impatience in correcting the mistakes of others led to numerous public quarrels with other members of the Alpine Club, such as William Edward Davidson and Edward Whymper. These pedantic disputes often degenerated into bitter internecine rivalries. Coolidge's vanity was also remarkable: one of his Christmas cards consisted in its entirety of his 'Who's Who' entry within a border of edelweiss. 
Although he did not wear his learning lightly, Coolidge's historical writing is of a high quality. His works are erudite but bibliographical in focus. 'Swiss Travel and Swiss Guidebooks' (1889) is a solid study of the subject, with a separate section on the history of Zermatt. Often considered his major work, 'Josias Simler et les origines de l'alpinisme jusqu'en 1600' (1904) reprints Josias Simler's 'De altibus commentarius' (1574), in the original Latin and in French translation, with additional sources and editorial commentary. The introduction to Simler contains Coolidge's historical sketch on mountaineering before 1600. 'The Alps in Nature and History' (1908) discusses the topography and peoples of the Alps, and the political and mountaineering histories of the region. 'Alpine Studies' (1912) collects some of his essays, including one on Tschingel. 
In 1896 Coolidge moved permanently to Grindelwald, where he lived first at Am Sandigenstutz with the family of Christian Almer and later at Chalet Montana with a servant and a library of over 26,000 volumes. He never married. He died of a heart attack at Grindelwald on 8 May 1926; a memorial service was held for him there three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 32546


Cooper, Sir Alfred (1838-1908), surgeon, born at Norwich on 28 December 1838, was the son of William Cooper, at one time recorder of Ipswich, and his wife, Anna Marsh. In April 1850 Cooper entered Merchant Taylors' School, then in Suffolk Lane, London. He was later apprenticed to W. Peter Nichols, surgeon to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, and sometime mayor of Norwich. In 1858 Cooper became a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. He gained his MRCS on 29 June 1861, and in the same year he passed the licence of the Society of Apothecaries. These two qualifications formed the usual route to practice at this time. He then went to Paris with Thomas Smith (1833-1909), to improve his anatomical knowledge. He was appointed a prosector to the examiners at the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Cooper started practice in Jermyn Street, London, eventually establishing a fashionable private practice. He remained an enthusiastic operator, serving several voluntary hospitals. He was surgeon to St Mark's Hospital for Fistula, City Road, from April 1864 until 1897, to the West London Hospital from 1867 to 1884, to the Royal Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, City Road, and to the Lock Hospital, Soho. At this hospital he gained a broad knowledge of syphilis. On 4 July 1882 he married Lady Agnes Cecil Emmeline Duff (died 1925), third daughter of James, fifth earl of Fife, and sister of Alexander, the first duke of Fife; Lady Agnes had been married first to Viscount Dupplin (they divorced in 1876), and secondly to Herbert Flower (died 1880); Cooper and Lady Agnes had three daughters and a son, the politician (Alfred) Duff Cooper (1890-1954). 
In 1884 Cooper published 'Syphilis and Pseudosyphilis', which was revised in a second edition in 1895. He also wrote 'A Practical Treatise on Disease of the Rectum' (1887), which he revised with F. Swinford Edwards as 'Diseases of the Rectum and Anus' (1892). Cooper was admitted FRCS Edinburgh in 1868, and FRCS England on 9 June 1870. He became a close friend of William Alexander, twelfth duke of Hamilton, and the duke presented him with Cooper Angus Lodge, Whiting Bay, in the Isle of Arran, which he made his home when he retired from London. 
In 1874 Cooper travelled to St Petersburg with the prince of Wales, later Edward VII, on the marriage of Alfred Ernest Albert, duke of Edinburgh. In recognition of his services he was appointed by the tsar a chevalier of the order of St Stanislas. In 1893 he was appointed surgeon-in-ordinary to the duke of Edinburgh when he became duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Cooper was knighted at Edward VII's coronation in 1902. 
Cooper gained a wide knowledge of the world, partly as surgeon to kings and princes, partly in the out-patient rooms of hospitals, and partly through his expertise in syphilis. He was highly regarded by the profession and was trusted as a broadminded confidant by his patients. He was elected twice to the council of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, serving from 1895 to 1905. On one occasion his name was at the top of the poll, and he was consequently co-opted as vice-president. 
From early in his career Cooper served as surgeon to the Inns of Court rifle volunteers, 'The devil's own', and he retained a deep interest in the reserve forces throughout his life. He obtained the volunteer decoration for long service and eventually served as surgeon-colonel to the Duke of York's Loyal Suffolk hussars. Cooper was also an active freemason. He held high office in the United Grand Lodge of England and was instrumental in founding the Rahere Lodge, which was the first masonic body to be associated with a hospital. 
Cooper died at Villa St Jacques, Menton, France, on 3 March 1908, and was buried in the English cemetery there. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32547


Cooper, (Alfred) Duff, first Viscount Norwich (1890-1954), diplomatist and politician, was born at 9 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 22 February 1890. His father, Sir Alfred Cooper (1838-1908), was a fashionable London surgeon who specialized in the sexual problems of the upper classes and was celebrated for his skill, discretion, and conviviality. Dr Cooper in 1882 married Lady Agnes Cecil Emmeline Flower (1852-1925), sister of the first duke of Fife. Lady Agnes was an adventurous lady who had already eloped with two husbands; one of them she deserted, the other died. The marriage produced four children who survived to maturity, three girls and finally Duff (as he was always known: the name Alfred was never used). 
After unhappy passages at two preparatory schools Duff Cooper went to Eton College, where he enjoyed himself greatly without achieving any particular distinction. His prodigious memory and precocious literary skills enabled him to gain respectable academic results without too much hard work, and the same proved true at New College, Oxford, where he got a second-class degree in history (1911) and narrowly missed a first. More importantly, to his mind at least, at Eton and Oxford he made close friends among a group of young men who were intelligent, cultivated, notably self-indulgent, and for the most part high-born. With them he learned to drink too much, gamble for stakes higher than he could afford, and pursue beautiful women -- tastes which he cherished throughout his life and which brought him vast pleasure. Almost all these friends were to die in the First World War. 
After two abortive efforts, Cooper passed into the Foreign Office in October 1913. When war was declared he was working in the commercial department; neither this, nor the contraband department in which he also served, entertained or stimulated him. He did not actively seek to escape from the Foreign Office to do military service, but when in June 1917 he was released to join the army he welcomed the opportunity. 'I am not afraid of death', he wrote in his diary at the time, 'though I love life and should hate to lose it' (Duff Cooper, 'Old Men Forget', 61). 
This nevertheless seemed the most probable outcome, for the life expectancy of a subaltern in the Grenadier Guards was short indeed. Cooper spent only six months at the front, but this was long enough for him to prove himself exceptionally courageous, resourceful, and a natural leader of men. In the allied advance on the Albert Canal in August 1918 he acquired both a minor wound and, most unusually for a second lieutenant, the DSO. He left the army with relief but also with great distinction. 
Cooper returned to the Foreign Office, shone, and after a period in the Egyptian department became private secretary to the parliamentary under-secretary. Far from satisfying him, this promotion merely fed the appetite he had been nurturing ever since he became a diplomatist: to leave the Foreign Office and enter politics. Only a lack of money held him back. Salvation came through his wife. On 2 June 1919, in spite of much initial opposition from her family, he had married Lady Diana Manners ['see 'Cooper, Diana Olivia Winifred Maud (1892-1986)], formally daughter of the eighth duke of Rutland but in the view of most people, including herself, child of the notorious philanderer and literary eminence Harry Cust. Lady Diana was one of the great beauties of the age and a woman of striking intelligence and wit. Their marriage was sublimely happy if by conventional standards irregular. Duff Cooper was endlessly promiscuous, and his wife endlessly tolerant, secure in her certainty that, however often he might stray, she was unchallenged as the most important woman in his life. 
Lady Diana was eager to see her husband launched on a political career, but her financial resources were equally limited. Then, in 1923, she was engaged to play the part of the Madonna in Max Reinhardt's extravagant pantomime 'The Miracle'. The rewards for her work were substantial, sufficient to embolden Cooper to leave the Foreign Office. In July 1924 he resigned; within three months he had been adopted as Conservative candidate for the two-member constituency of Oldham and returned triumphantly with a majority of several hundred over the Liberal candidate, Edward Grigg, and of 13,000 over the sitting Labour member. 
It was quickly clear that Cooper was not for long to remain a humble back-bencher. His maiden speech -- on the Egyptian question -- was a spectacular success; 'Brilliant' said H. A. L. Fisher, who followed him in the debate, 'perfect in form and distinguished by a liberality and generosity of spirit' (Charmley, 46). He was soon accepted as one of the more formidable debaters and orators among the younger Conservatives and was mentioned with such figures as Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan as a coming man on the liberal wing of the party. In January 1928 he was appointed financial secretary to the War Office -- not the job he would have chosen, but fortunate for him in that his easy-going secretary of state, Sir Laming Worthington-Evans, was happy to allow him a considerable degree of independence. If the Conservatives had remained in power he would probably soon have won promotion, but he was to enjoy little more than a year in office; at the general election in the spring of 1929 Labour became the largest party and Cooper was one of the many Conservatives who lost their seats. 
Defeat had its consolations. Duff Cooper had long been attracted by the personality and career of Talleyrand, and resolved to devote some of his newly gained leisure to writing a biography of the French statesman. Rarely can subject and author have been more satisfactorily matched: Cooper shared Talleyrand's scepticism, his broadness of vision, his intelligence, his dislike of cant, and, above all, the pleasure he got from the more civilized features of social life. Cooper wrote slowly, but with considerable panache and elegance, and rarely needed substantially to revise his earliest draft. It was 1932 before the book was published, but it was then received with great enthusiasm, has been constantly reprinted, and, though not the fruit of prolonged historical research, is still considered one of the most illuminating and enjoyable of twentieth-century biographies. 
Success carried its own hazards. The executors of Earl Haig's estate were inspired by it to invite Cooper to take on the official biography of the field marshal. The assignment was financially rewarding but not suited to Cooper's talents; when it appeared in two volumes in 1935 and 1936 it was widely criticized for being inadequately considered and being biased in favour of its subject. The years in opposition, however, bore other fruits; in September 1929, after ten years of marriage, Diana Cooper produced a son, John Julius. He was the only child. 
In March 1931 Cooper returned to the House of Commons after a by-election in the St George's division of Westminster. No one doubted that a Conservative would be returned for this seat, but the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, had many enemies in the party, notably the empire free traders backed by the press barons, lords Beaverbrook and Rothermere, and these were running an 'independent Conservative' candidate, Ernest Petter. It was a bitter campaign, marked by Baldwin's denunciation of the press barons as wanting 'power without responsibility, the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages'. At the end of it Cooper emerged triumphant with a majority of nearly 6000. 
Within a few months Cooper was back in office, once again at the War Office, as under-secretary to the aged and faineant Lord Crewe. He shone sufficiently to earn a transfer in June 1934 to the Treasury as financial secretary, traditionally accepted as a staging post on the way to the cabinet. This brought him into close contact with the then chancellor, Neville Chamberlain, who, according to Sidney Herbert, 'valued your judgment and wise reticence' and was 'full of optimism about your future' (Charmley, 77). But Chamberlain also saw reason to warn him to be less vehement in his denunciations of Nazi Germany. Cooper had recently visited Germany, had attended a Nuremberg rally, and had been appalled and alarmed by what he saw. He warned Churchill that Hitler was preparing for war and continually urged the need for rearmament at a time when this was unfashionable if not politically incorrect. 
After the general election of November 1935 Cooper was appointed to the cabinet as secretary of state for war and was sworn of the privy council. He was one of the few cabinet ministers who Edward VIII felt was sympathetic to his cause in the abdication crisis of 1936. Cooper urged the king to avoid a confrontation with the government until after his coronation and was prepared to contemplate the possibility of a morganatic marriage, ideas which held no appeal for Baldwin and Chamberlain. Both temperamentally and politically Cooper felt himself increasingly at odds with the Conservative leadership, and he was pleasantly surprised when in May 1937 Chamberlain became prime minister and invited him to become first lord of the Admiralty. In this post he proved an unequivocal success: he relished the opportunities it afforded for high living aboard the official yacht 'Enchantress' but also worked hard on the nuts and bolts of naval affairs and fought the navy's corner against the parsimonious chancellor of the exchequer, John Simon. Chamberlain increasingly viewed him as an indiscreet and belligerent firebrand, and Cooper was already largely isolated in the cabinet before the Munich crisis brought matters to a head. 
In autumn 1938 Chamberlain returned from a meeting with Hitler bearing 'peace with honour' at the price of the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. In Cooper's view the peace would be only transitory and the dishonour so gross that he could not bear to be associated with it. On 3 October he denounced the Munich agreement in the House of Commons and resigned from the government. Arguments over the merits and demerits of appeasement continue to rage, but no one has ever disputed that Cooper's action was high-principled and courageous and involved great personal sacrifices, both political and financial. 
On the back benches once more, Cooper joined the Conservative dissidents who were grouped loosely around the former foreign secretary, Anthony Eden. His opposition to the government was muted, and his weekly articles for the 'Evening Standard' -- his main source of income during this period -- were more concerned with the need for a strong Anglo-French alliance at the heart of a united western Europe than with such issues as appeasement. When war broke out and Churchill joined the government, Cooper was offered no job; instead he left for the United States on an extensive lecture tour in which he propagandized vigorously for the cause of the democratic powers. 
Among other things Cooper predicted that Hitler would attack through Belgium in 1940 and that Churchill would subsequently become prime minister. At the time the prophecy seemed far-fetched, but when it was fulfilled in May he found himself recalled to power as minister of information. It was not a task that he relished, and his discomfiture was made worse by the hostility of the press, who portrayed him as the enemy of free speech and an arch -- if ineffective -- spin-doctor. When he tried to establish the state of popular morale his investigators were called 'Cooper's snoopers' and the enterprise was generally derided; his term in office is best remembered for his outspoken arraignment of P. G. Wodehouse, who had made some singularly ill-advised but essentially harmless broadcasts on the German radio from Berlin. It was a great relief to Cooper when, in July 1941, he was appointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, traditionally the odd-job man of the cabinet. 
Cooper's odd job took him to Singapore on an ill-defined mission which led to his appointment, after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, as resident cabinet minister with responsibility for Far Eastern affairs. He was authorized to form a war cabinet but found neither the civil nor the military authorities disposed to accept his leadership and was pleased when Wavell's appointment as supreme commander made his continued presence in Singapore unnecessary. He had been given neither the powers nor the time to affect the situation but returned to Britain to find himself unfairly associated in the public mind with the defeats in south-east Asia and the abject surrender of Singapore. For the next eighteen months he was under-employed, serving as chairman of the cabinet committee on security but free to devote much time to his writing and to weekends at Bognor, where his wife busied herself with the running of a smallholding. 
From this relative inactivity Cooper was rescued by an invitation to take on a task which was close to his heart and which was to occupy him for the rest of his professional career. In December 1943 he was appointed British representative to the French committee of national liberation in Algiers, on the understanding that he would be the first post-war ambassador in Paris as soon as events made this possible. His most urgent and enduring responsibility was to maintain a working partnership with the Free French leader, General de Gaulle, and in particular to patch up the often turbulent relations between de Gaulle and Churchill. Cooper found de Gaulle exceedingly difficult to deal with but considered Churchill almost equally impossible; it is greatly to his credit that at the operating level the relationship between the two governments remained more or less satisfactory. 
In September 1944 Cooper moved to Paris, and on 18 November he presented his letters of credence as British ambassador. For the next three years, thanks in large part to the maverick brilliance of his wife, the entree to the British embassy was one of the most sought-after privileges in the social and political world in Paris. It was complained, with some justice, that Lady Diana's glittering gatherings contained too few worthy trade unionists and civil servants and too many people who, because of their wartime record, should not have been received in an official residence. The fact remained that parties at the embassy were tremendous fun and that Cooper's obvious love of Paris and the French made him as popular as any British ambassador has ever been. 
Cooper's views on global affairs were resolutely Euro-centric, and he was passionately convinced that a Franco-British alliance should be the corner-stone of British foreign policy. He did not find it easy to convince Churchill's government of this priority. When Labour won the general election of July 1945 Cooper thought it probable that he would swiftly be replaced, but the new foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, liked Cooper and thought that he was doing a good job. His work as ambassador was actually made easier by the change of administration. On 4 March 1947 his efforts were crowned by the signature of a treaty of alliance between Britain and France at Dunkirk. At the end of the same year he left the embassy, his passage being made less painful by the award of the GCMG (1948) and, in July 1952, his elevation to the peerage as Viscount Norwich, of Aldwick, Sussex, a choice of title which caused some adverse comment among the dignitaries of the East Anglian capital. He bequeathed to the embassy a large part of his extensive library, housed in a handsome room which he had persuaded the office of works to install. 
The Coopers' choice of a retirement home -- to the dismay of the new ambassador, who would have preferred not to have had his predecessor so close to Paris -- was the Chateau de St Firmin in the park at Chantilly. Cooper took on several business assignments, notably on the board of the International Wagons-Lits, but his main occupation was writing. During the war he had found the time to write the life of the 'Old Testament' hero King David; now, in 1949, he added an imaginative and entertaining study of Shakespeare's early life, 'Sergeant Shakespeare'. In the same year he published a selection of his own poems. His only novel, 'Operation Heartbreak' (1950), was based on a real-life incident in the Second World War and was viewed unenthusiastically by the cabinet office, who tried to stop its publication on the ground that it breached security. Finally, in 1953, his autobiography, 'Old Men Forget', appeared, an eloquent, stylish, and in many ways revealing account of a life that was not totally successful in worldly terms but was never dull. By now his health was faltering. He had already suffered a dangerous haemorrhage in May 1953. At the very end of that year he embarked with his wife on the French liner 'Colombie' on a cruise to Jamaica. On new year's eve he had another haemorrhage, and he died on board at 3.30 p.m. on 1 January 1954. He was buried five days later at Belvoir Castle, Leicestershire, the home of his wife's family. His son, John Julius, the writer and broadcaster, succeeded him. 
'I love the sunlight but I cannot fear the coming of the dark' Cooper wrote in his autobiography (Duff Cooper, 'Old Men Forget', 384). Courage and joy in living were the most conspicuous features of his personality; if he had had less of either he might have achieved higher office but his life would have been far less fulfilled. He can fairly be accused of an extravagantly short temper, self-indulgence, and an inordinate appetite for wine, women, and gambling, but he was never mean or in the least ignoble; at times, indeed, he showed true nobility. He was a great-spirited patriot, too proud to court popularity, too reserved to command it readily, but a man whose honesty, generosity, and public spirit were never put in question. 


@@@@@


doc= 32548


Sir Daniel Cooper, first baronet (1821-1902), merchant and philanthropist. The younger Daniel Cooper was also born at Bolton, Lancashire, on 1 July 1821, and he was the second son in the family of five sons and four daughters of his uncle's brother, Thomas Cooper, merchant, and his wife, Jane Ramsden. He emigrated to Sydney with his parents and then returned to London in 1835 to complete his education at University College School. Although he intended to become a lawyer, he abandoned his studies in 1841 as a result of ill health. 


@@@@@


doc= 32549


Cooper, Edward Herbert (1867-1910), novelist, born at Trentham, Staffordshire, on 6 October 1867, was the eldest son of Samuel Herbert Cooper of New Park, Trentham, later of Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, and his wife, Katharine, daughter of the Revd Edward James Justinian George Edwards and granddaughter of the bibliographer James Edwards. While at a preparatory school at Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire, Cooper contracted a chill, which caused an illness that lasted seven years and left him partially disabled. Prepared for Oxford by a private tutor, he matriculated at University College on 18 October 1886, took third-class honours in history in 1889, and graduated BA in 1890. 
After a false start in chartered accountancy in London, and in politics as secretary of the Suffolk Liberal Unionist Association at the general election of 1892, Cooper found his feet as a writer. His first novel, 'Geoffrey Hamilton', a rather plotless work but with some good Oxford autobiographical tales, was published in 1893. It was followed in the same year by 'Richard Escott', and then by the stronger work 'The Enemies' (1896), about Ireland after the Parnell affair. Later that year Cooper joined in Paris the staff of 'Galignani's Messenger', and acted as Paris correspondent for the 'New York World'. 'Mr Blake of Newmarket', an excellent sporting story, and 'The Marchioness Against the County', a social satire, were both published the following year, in 1897. 'Mr Blake' drew a letter of praise from Lord Rosebery, and 'The Sportsman' called it 'the best exposition of turf life that we know'. 
But although Cooper dabbled in a variety of genres, producing twenty-three works, he found his greatest success as a children's writer. In 1899 he began a series of imaginative stories for the young, told by a pretty little rich girl, Wyemarke. They were: 'Wyemarke and the Sea Fairies' (1899); 'Wyemarke and the Mountain Fairies' (1900); 'Wyemarke's Mother' and 'Sent to the Rescue, or, Wyemarke's Adventures in South America' (1903); and 'My Brother the King' (1910). The tales owed much to the suggestion of Lewis Carroll, but there was originality in their execution. Cooper also aided the philanthropist Benjamin Waugh in practical efforts to protect children from cruelty. 
Meanwhile, Cooper travelled a great deal in search of better health. In 1898, supported by two sticks, he made the ascent of Mont Blanc as far as the Col du Gouter, and in 1901 he visited Finland. He afterwards wrote in the London press on Finland's constitutional struggle, and the following year assisted in the preparation of the English version of N. C. Fredericksen's 'Finland: its Public and Private Economy'. In 1903 he returned to London, and was for three years special reporter on the 'Daily Mail'. 
Cooper, whose features were marked by a rare refinement, bore his physical disabilities with courage and cheerfulness. He had an inveterate addiction to gambling: while cheering on his favourite horse at the Newmarket racecourse on 26 April 1910 he suffered an apoplectic seizure and died. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 32550


Cooper, Sir (Francis) D'Arcy, baronet (1882-1941), industrialist, was born in London on 17 November 1882, the only son of Francis Cooper (1845/6-1893), chartered accountant ['see under 'Cooper family (per. 1854-1994)], and his wife, Ada Frances, daughter of Henry Power, surgeon. Educated at Wellington College and on the continent, he was articled in the family firm, Cooper Brothers & Co., becoming a partner in 1910. On 3 June 1913 he married Evelyn Hilda Mary, daughter of Arthur Locke Radford, of Bovey House, Beer, Devon. Cooper enlisted in the army in 1915, received a commission in the Royal Field Artillery, and was badly wounded on the Somme. Later he served at the War Office before returning to his firm, where he rapidly established a reputation as one of the ablest members of his profession. 
For many years Cooper Brothers & Co. had been auditors for Lever Brothers, which by 1920 was the largest company manufacturing oils and fats in the British empire, with extensive interests in many parts of the world. During the post-war boom, Lord Leverhulme had enormously expanded his business, not least by the purchase of other concerns, notably the Niger Company, and the slump of 1920 brought serious financial difficulties. Finding himself in 1921 under pressure from the banks, who were his principal creditors, Leverhulme called in Cooper who was able to retrieve a desperate situation. From then onwards Cooper's prestige in the Lever business steadily increased: in 1923 he became a director and joint vice-chairman, and within a week of Leverhulme's death in 1925 he was appointed chairman. 
Cooper shirked no measures, however unpopular, which he deemed necessary to restore stability and confidence, and by 1929 he had achieved a large measure of success. In that year he completed complicated negotiations with the Margarine Union, the largest continental manufacturers of oils and fats. The business that emerged, under the name of Unilever, was one of the largest in the world. Much of the credit for its creation must go to Cooper's patient and resolute diplomacy. No less remarkable was his success in reorganizing the new concern and guiding it through the economic troubles of the thirties. To weld into a unity a number of former competitors of several different nationalities was an arduous process, but he would allow no personal considerations or old affiliations to stand in the way of complete unification. Beginning with little technical knowledge he showed a swift mastery of detail and a genius for shaping and executing policy, which earned him the respect of his new colleagues. 
Had it not been for Cooper, the Lever business might well have shared a fate that has often befallen the creations of dynamic personalities who have failed to provide against their own decline or economic changes. Cooper's qualities, notably of judgement and foresight, became increasingly indispensable to business enterprise during the twenties. By substituting an orderly system of management for personal autocracy, Cooper proved himself a leading member of the rising class of professional managers of large-scale business. 
Tall and powerfully built, Cooper possessed a natural habit of command which compelled respect. But he had also an unaffected humanity and a simple hatred of anything savouring of dishonesty, which endeared him to those who worked with him. He was, said Leverhulme, one of those men who 'most resemble a warm fire and people naturally come up to him for warmth', and he had a gift for developing a sense of responsibility in subordinates. As Cooper overcame his natural shyness, his humour and a sense of style, derived from a love of good literature, made him an effective and engaging speaker. Believing that the conduct of modern business called for the best talent available, he gave valuable service as a member of the Cambridge University appointments board (1929-40) and did much to strengthen ties between the universities and industry. He received honours from Norway and Belgium, countries with which the Lever business had important connections, and also from Bulgaria. In the years immediately before the Second World War his services were increasingly in demand in connection with government economic policy and from 1940 he was principally occupied as chairman of the executive committee of the Export Council of the Board of Trade. He paid a useful visit to the United States in the autumn and was created a baronet in 1941. The Coopers had no children and the baronetcy became extinct when Cooper died at his home, Westridge, Coppice Lane, Reigate, on 18 December 1941. 
Charles Wilson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32551


Cooper, James (1846-1922), Church of Scotland minister and ecclesiastical historian, was born at Elgin, Moray, on 13 February 1846, the eldest son of John Alexander Cooper, a merchant, afterwards a farmer at Spynie, Elgin. His mother, Ann, daughter of James Stephen of Old Keith, was descended from the Gordons and Stuarts of Birkenburn. Educated at Elgin Academy and at Aberdeen University (1863-70), where he graduated MA in 1867, Cooper was licensed to preach in 1871. In 1873 he was ordained at St Stephen's Church, Broughty Ferry, and in 1881 was translated to the East Church of St Nicholas, Aberdeen; in 1898 he became regius professor of church history at Glasgow University. 
Cooper was an energetic pastor and a faithful preacher. He introduced Holy Week services at St Stephen's, revived the daily service at Aberdeen, and was the first to institute a women's guild. Shortly after his induction to the East Church in Aberdeen his 'high church' doctrine and practices were challenged by some of the elders. The final verdict of the presbytery in the 'East Church case', however, represented a vindication of Cooper's position as belonging within the reformed tradition of the kirk. Passionately interested in church architecture and antiquities, he founded the Aberdeen Ecclesiological Society and later served four times as president of the Scottish Ecclesiological Society. He was also an active member of the Church Service Society, for which he produced an edition of 'Laud's liturgy' in 1904. He had previously edited the chartulary of the East Church, Aberdeen, for the New Spalding Club (1888-92). 
Cooper reflected his upbringing in the episcopalian north-east of Scotland by being a lifelong advocate of the union of the Church of Scotland and the Church of England, a 'United Church for the British Empire'. He was the first secretary of the Scottish Church Society, founded in 1892 to advance Catholic doctrine, and he became one of the leaders of the 'Scoto-Catholic' party in the kirk. He took a prominent part in the negotiations for presbyterian reunion in Scotland, and secured what he considered to be an adequate safeguard for the Catholic faith in the new constitution of the kirk set out in the 'articles declaratory' of 1921. He was elected moderator of the general assembly in 1917, a tribute to the high regard in which he was held in the Church of Scotland. 
As professor Cooper exercised a strong personal influence over students by his sincerity and piety; his cultured mind, varied interests, and generous hospitality also brought him a large circle of friends. He published a large number of sermons, addresses, and pamphlets, and in 1907 brought out 'Confessions of Faith and Formulas of Subscription'. On 4 January 1912 he married Margaret (died 1947), eldest daughter of George Williamson, a farmer at Shempston in Moray; they had no children. He received the freedom of Elgin (1917) and honorary degrees from the universities of Aberdeen (1892), Dublin (1909), Durham (1910), Oxford (1920), and Glasgow (1922). He died at Braemoriston, Elgin, on 27 December 1922, and was buried in Urquhart churchyard on 30 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 32552


Cooper, James Davis (1823-1904), wood-engraver, was born on 18 November 1823 at Pratt's Place, Lambeth, London, the second son of George Cooper (died 1843). His father was a church organist in London at St Sepulchre's, Snow Hill, and an assistant organist at St Paul's Cathedral. James was a pupil at the City of London School in 1837 and then, at the age of fourteen, left to train as a wood-engraver in the studio of Josiah Whymper in Canterbury Road, Lambeth. As an apprentice he showed considerable talent and quickly became skilled as a wood-engraver, eventually becoming one of the leading engravers of the sixties, a period when book and periodical illustration flourished. Cooper made engravings of the work of many of the prominent artists of the time, including Miles Birket Foster, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and Arthur Hughes, and provided illustrations for books by such notable figures as Darwin, Huxley, Livingstone, and Stanley. He also had the distinction of engraving illustrations for books by Queen Victoria, among them 'Our Life in the Highlands' (1868). On 20 July 1848 he married Jane Eleanor, the daughter of Benjamin Ovington, a clerk in the Bank of England. They had three sons and four daughters. From 1848 Cooper lived at 10 Ely Place, Holborn, and by the following year he had established his own wood-engraving business. He later moved to Camberwell, and by 1855 he was working at 26 Great James Street, Bedford Row. Finally, by 1860 he had established a workshop at 188 Strand, where he worked until retirement. 
Among Cooper's early works were engravings for an edition of 'Robinson Crusoe' (1847) after drawings by Charles Keene (who was also trained by Whymper) and thought to be Keene's first published illustrations. Cooper often pursued his own ideas for books, finding a publisher and commissioning artists; in this way he was able to encourage and forward the careers of a number of talented illustrators, such as Robert Barnes, E. M. Wimperis, and William Small. During the 1850s and 1860s he provided wood-engravings for books produced in association with the printer Richard Clay, including a number of fine engravings for 'The Farmer's Boy' (1858), after drawings by Birket Foster. His reputation was such that H. G. Bohn included him in his supplement to W. A. Chatto and J. Jackson's 'Treatise on Wood-Engraving' (2nd edn, 1861) and featured examples of his engraving from 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage' (1859), after drawings by Percival Skelton, and 'Select Poems and Songs of Robert Burns' (1858), after drawings by Birket Foster and Harrison Weir. Cooper produced engravings for many other notable books, among them 'Favourite English Poems' (1859), Mrs Barbauld's 'Hymns in Prose' (1863), 'Pictures of English Life' (1865), and 'Gulliver's Travels' (1865), after drawings by T. Morten. In particular he is known for his collaboration with Randolph Caldecott, who had his first success in book illustration with an edition of Washington Irving's 'Old Christmas' (1876) followed by 'Bracebridge Hall' (1877), both projects initiated by Cooper and published by Macmillan. Much of the success of these books was due to the excellent craftsmanship Cooper showed in his faithful interpretation of Caldecott's drawing and his skill in achieving the integration of text and image in the design of the page. In 1883 the two men collaborated on an edition of 'Aesop's Fables'. 
In 1857 Cooper took out a patent (no. 710) for his invention of an engraving technique which, through a reversal of the usual process, produced a relief printing surface by cutting out the areas to print black and then making an electrotype, filling in the recessed areas. This produced raised lines which, when ground, formed an even printing surface. However this 'improvement' never came into general use. 
Cooper was also in demand as an engraver for magazines and periodicals, and contributed to the 'Illustrated London News' and magazines such as the 'British Workman', 'The Quiver', 'London Society', 'Friendly Visitor', and 'The Builder', in which he showed his ability for engraving architectural subjects. His work appeared in the 'Art Journal' from about 1863 and the 'English Illustrated Magazine' in the 1880s. A most prestigious commission was for engravings of cloud effects from drawings by Ruskin which appeared in the 'Art Journal' in 1884. Cooper is especially named in the text for having executed them to Mr Ruskin's satisfaction. 
Towards the end of his life Cooper complained of being 'half-blind', as he suffered from cataracts, which forced him into retirement some years before his death, at the age of eighty. By all accounts he was a kind and genial man, 'jovial and breezy in manner' ('DNB'), with a lively intelligence to his last days. He died at Rothesay, his final home, in North Road, Highgate, Middlesex, on 27 February 1904, and was buried in March in the Great Northern London cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32553


Cooper, Sir (Thomas) Edwin (1874-1942), architect, was born at 44 Nelson Street, Scarborough, on 21 October 1874, the eldest child of Samuel Cooper, carriage proprietor, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Pickering, an agricultural labourer. Cooper's father died during his childhood, and his mother, recognizing his talent for drawing, encouraged him towards his future career. Cooper was articled to the architectural firm Hall and Tugwell in Scarborough from 1885 to 1889, and after further experience with W. Penty and Walter Brierley in York he went to London to Goldie, Child, and Goldie for a further two years. Cooper returned to Scarborough in 1893 with his friend and fellow pupil Herbert Davis to found a practice as Hall, Cooper, and Davis with John Hall, an older architect in the town. On 14 July 1898 Cooper married Mary Emily ('b'. 1873/4), the daughter of Henry Wellburn, merchant of Scarborough; they had a son and a daughter. Hall, Cooper, and Davis opened a London office in 1895, but local commissions in the north gave Cooper a good start, and included in Scarborough Westwood higher grade school (1897) and Scarborough College, Filey Road (1898). These were eclectic brick buildings, showing signs of Brierley's controlled Romanticism. Cooper travelled in France and Italy, and expressed admiration for the works of Baldassare Peruzzi and Michele Sanmicheli, both of whom were generally admired by Edwardian leaders of revived classicism. 
In 1903 Cooper became a fellow of the RIBA, and became a partner of Samuel Bridgeman Russell until 1910, when he set up on his own. By then Cooper had consolidated his technique for competition designs for large public buildings. In 1905 John Belcher selected his design for the rebuilding of Hull Guildhall, on an awkward narrow site, and the building was constructed, faced in Portland stone, between 1906 and 1914. Its emphatic horizontals of cornice and basement enclose an engaged Corinthian colonnade, which became one of Cooper's hallmarks. The terminal piers of the building are crowned with baroque sculptural groups by Albert Hemstock Hodge. Russell and Cooper's design for the County Hall competition in London was similar in mood, and Cooper was among a small group of architects who formed the Classical Society, chiefly in protest against the assessors' selection of Ralph Knott. The centrepiece from this design reappeared in the winning scheme by Cooper for the Port of London Authority's new headquarters on Tower Hill in 1912. His elevational style had by then turned towards the currently fashionable American-influenced Beaux-Arts movement, with 'neo-Grec' detailing. Cooper became the favourite architect of Hudson Kearley, first Viscount Devonport, the chairman of the authority, who brought him many later commissions, including the port facilities at Tilbury, where Cooper designed the fine baggage hall (1921-2), whose simple interior achieved a genuine Roman grandeur. 
On the completion of the Port of London Authority building, Cooper was knighted in 1923. Contemporaries praised the efficiency of his planning, the tight control of the construction, and the rich ornamental detail of the main rooms. Sir Aston Webb, who had assessed the competition, wrote that it 'contains many novel features of plan which will make it a model for buildings of this class in the future' (Webb to Lord Devonport, 17 Sept 1917, RIBA BAL, Cooper MSS, CoE 1/3). C. H. Reilly described it as 'a very bold attempt by a brave man to use Roman baroque architecture to express the majesty of our present day commerce' ('Country Life', 14 Oct 1922, 465). That such an attempt had not fully succeeded was tacitly admitted even by one of Cooper's greatest admirers, A. E. Richardson, in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', where he wrote: 'Had the Edwardian period been truly receptive of the classic point of view, it is possible that a return to the qualities of eighteenth-century architecture would have followed. Scholarship, grace, and general culture, however, were lacking, and no individual architect, however earnest, could hope to make up for these deficiencies in his own work.' Cooper's Marylebone town hall, also won in competition in 1911, was joined in 1937 by the public library next door, in a slightly simplified style. In the City of London, Cooper designed offices for the Banque Belge, Bishopsgate (1919; now dem.) and for Spillers Ltd in St Mary Axe (1922-3). In 1925 Cooper was commissioned by Lloyds of London to build their new headquarters in Leadenhall Street (completed 1928). The design problem involved planning on an awkward site to an unusual brief. Lloyds itself occupied the back part of the site, with only a small frontage on Leadenhall Street, although the remainder of the street elevation was soon redeveloped by Cooper as Royal Mail House. He composed an entrance front with a pediment and clever use of relief planes and sculpture, which led down a long corridor to the 'Room', the large open floor space where the business of Lloyds is traditionally transacted, around the central feature of the Lutine bell, which Cooper housed in a wooden Greek revival structure. This, together with the original Leadenhall Street facade, is the only piece of Cooper's work to have survived the redevelopment of the site 1981-5. Lloyds was decorated with ceiling paintings by William Walcot (who also drew many perspectives of Cooper's buildings) and Fred Taylor. Cooper's last major City building, on a prominent corner site facing the Mansion House, was the National and Provincial Bank, Princes Street, a Renaissance-style palazzo building with a grand Corinthian order. 
After an initial design by Giles Gilbert Scott had been rejected as impractical, Cooper offered his services free for the Star and Garter Home (for war veterans) on Richmond Hill (1921-5), conceived in a Wren-like mixture of red brick and Portland stone. His obituarist in 'The Times' complained that it 'comes perilously near to a vulgarisation of the tradition of Wren. There is a relationship between style and scale to which Cooper appeared to be insensible' ('The Times', 25 June 1942). Cooper became a specialist in medical and hospital buildings, several of which were funded by his big business patrons, such as Lord Devonport. He worked at St Thomas's Hospital, St Mary's, and the Dreadnought Seamen's Hospital. He also designed buildings at Cranleigh School, Bryanston, and Bedales. Cooper's small domestic 'oeuvre' is understated and cold in character. 
Cooper was elected ARA in 1930 and RA in 1937. He was treasurer of the Royal Academy and in this role succeeded in attracting financial support. He also participated in the formation of the Royal Academy plan for London during the war, and succeeded Sir Edwin Lutyens as president of the Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors, a rival body to the RIBA, in 1937. He refused to pay the standard fee to the Architects' Registration Council, on its establishment in 1933, and was therefore technically not legally entitled to the designation of architect. 
A. E. Richardson wrote in appreciation that 'From the three-dimensional standpoint, Cooper's buildings are models of ingenuity. Everything seems to be combined within a small compass; both deep below ground and soaring skywards. The aim was to produce comprehensive perspective effects internally and rigid academic symmetry externally. ('DNB')' Cooper's reputation did not last well in the post-war climate of modernism, and his work has none of the appeal which led to a revival of interest in Lutyens, even though most of his buildings survive and give good service. His chief assistant, Terence Heysham, continued the practice and built a new 'Room' for Lloyds in Lime Street (1950-57). 
Details of Cooper's personal character and private life are hard to find. His 'Times' obituary described him as 'a pink-faced, silver-haired man of episcopal appearance' ('The Times', 25 June 1942). When receiving the royal gold medal for architecture in 1931, Cooper said, 'I oftimes think that the less an architect has to say on any matter where he is concerned personally the better' ('The Builder', 6 March 1931, 440). His friends often urged him to work less hard for the sake of his health. He died of a heart attack while at work at 4 Verulam Buildings, Gray's Inn, London, on 24 June 1942. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32554


Cooper, Thomas Mackay, Baron Cooper of Culross (1892-1955), judge, was born in Edinburgh on 24 September 1892, the elder son by a second marriage of John Aitken Cooper, burgh engineer of Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret Mackay, from Dunnet. His father, who came from Culross, died when Tom Cooper was eight. At nine he entered George Watson's College and left at sixteen, 'dux' of the school, medallist in English, Latin, and Greek, with second place in mathematics and winner of the North American prize for dynamics and chemistry. He passed to Edinburgh University, taking first place in its open bursary list, and graduated MA with first-class honours in classics (1912) and LLB with distinction (1914). For a time during the war he worked in the war trade department in London and for his services was appointed OBE in 1920. 
Cooper had passed advocate in 1915 and on returning to the bar in 1919 made rapid progress. He had the advantage, through a maternal uncle, of valuable legal connections, but he had also gifts of advocacy and a knowledge of many technical subjects which pointed to an assured forensic career. He took silk in 1927. After eight years of large senior practice he was elected Conservative member for West Edinburgh in May 1935 and appointed solicitor-general for Scotland. In October of the same year he became lord advocate and was sworn of the privy council. He proved himself to be one of the most efficient and popular lord advocates that Scotland had ever had. In June 1941 he succeeded Lord Aitchison as lord justice-clerk with the judicial title of Lord Cooper, and in January 1947 he became lord justice-general and lord president of the Court of Session. Serious illness overtook him in the late summer of 1954 and he resigned office in December. He had received his barony in June 1954, but, because of illness, he was never able to take part in the business of the upper house: his sole appearance there was the occasion of his introduction, undertaken with great difficulty in March 1955. 
Cooper had a well-equipped legal mind. His judgments were vigorous, penetrating, and lucid. As a lawyer he will stand favourable comparison with the most eminent of his predecessors. He was a steadfast supporter of the principles of Scots law, and frequently commented on the unfortunate intrusion into these principles of English legal conceptions and precedents. Perhaps the most publicized of his judgments was that given shortly before he retired, in an action challenging the adoption for Scotland of the numeral II in the title of Queen Elizabeth ('MacCormick v. HM Advocate', 1953). Though the action failed on certain preliminary pleas, Lord Cooper took occasion to criticize the English principle of the sovereignty of parliament in relation to the treaty of union between Scotland and England. He was active in the formation in 1934 of the Stair Society to study and advance the history of Scots law, and made a number of contributions to its publications, the chief being 'Regiam majestatem' (1947). Independently of the society he published in 1944 'Select Scottish Cases of the Thirteenth Century'. A member of the Scottish History Society from 1934, he gave, as its president (1946-9), four addresses which he published under the title of 'Supra crepidam' (1951), and which he claimed to be merely addresses by an amateur to specialists on their own subject. It has been said that his keen perception as a historian is best seen in these addresses. Numerous other addresses and contributions to periodicals, collected in 'Selected Papers, 1922-1954', published by his brother in 1957, after his death, show his breadth of view and width of learning, as also the spirit of a reformer. He was an original member of the Scottish committee on the 'History of Parliament' and latterly chairman of its executive committee until his death. When a judge, he was called on to be chairman of a number of government committees on Scottish problems; the most important, on hydroelectric development in Scotland (1941-2), resulted in the setting up of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board. He was a trustee of the National Galleries of Scotland from 1947, for a short time (1946-9) chairman of the Ancient Monuments Board for Scotland, and, as lord president, a trustee 'ex officio' of the National Library of Scotland. 
Cooper was a man of restless energy, great industry, keen intellect, and a rapid worker. He had a scientific bent of mind, with the genius for the practical application of his knowledge. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and its vice-president (1945-8), a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (Scotland), a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, and a member of the Astronomical Society of Edinburgh, which lent him a telescope which he had erected in his garden. Essentially a friendly man, Cooper was nevertheless shy, not a man of the world or socially inclined, although drawn to men with whom he could talk on a basis of common understanding. He was happy with very young children, whom he would amuse with drawings and stories, but his interest in them evaporated when they left childhood. He loved animals and never failed to hold converse with a cat. He had some interest in music and art, taught himself to play the piano and organ, and engaged in sketching. He was devoted to his mother, with whom he made his home for substantially the whole of his life, and whom he survived by less than four years. He died in Edinburgh, unmarried, on 15 July 1955. 
Cooper was an honorary LLD of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and St Andrews, and received an honorary doctorate of Paris University, a signal honour for a Scottish judge. He was an honorary master of the bench of the Middle Temple and honorary member of the Society of Public Teachers of Law, of the Institution of Municipal Engineers, and of the Edinburgh Merchant Company. 
Keith of Avonholm', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32555


Cooper, Thomas Sidney (1803-1902), animal painter, was born on 26 September 1803 in St Peter's Street, Canterbury, Kent, the second of two sons and three daughters. Of his parents nothing is known except that his father abandoned the family when Cooper was about five. Cooper had an early and continuing devotion to drawing, and one of his first memories was sketching the cathedral bell-tower. He could not afford pencils and paper for sketching, so he used his school slate until George Cattermole happened to see him drawing and gave him a large quantity of paper and a dozen pencils. Having no knife, Cooper asked passers-by to help sharpen his pencils and thus met Manners Sutton, archbishop of Canterbury, who promised 5's'. for a copy of one of his drawings of Canterbury Cathedral, but actually paid $5. By the age of twelve Cooper was apprenticed to paint coaches for the uncle of his schoolfriend William Burgess. When he was sixteen a Mr Doyle, a scene-painter for a travelling theatre, taught him scene painting and perspective. In 1823 Cooper's maternal uncle, a minister named Elvey, invited him to London, where he studied at the British Museum and in the Royal Academy Schools, which he entered in 1824. After nine months, Cooper was back in Canterbury, where he established himself as a drawing-master. 
In the summer of 1827 Cooper and his friend Burgess sailed from Dover to Calais. They visited Gravelines, Dunkirk, Bruges, Ghent, and finally Brussels, painting signboards and portraits in exchange for their lodging. Cooper worked in pencil, watercolour, and lithography. The backgrounds of Cooper's portraits drew attention, and he began to concentrate on the study of landscape and animals. He became acquainted with the Flemish animal painter Eugene Verboeckhoven, who introduced him to the great seventeenth-century Dutch animal paintings of Paulus Potter and Aelbert Cuyp. Thereafter Cooper was sometimes referred to as an 'English Cuyp' or a 'British Paulus Potter'. Verboeckhoven was also responsible for encouraging Cooper to paint in oils. 
While in Brussels, from 1827 to 1831, Cooper met Charlotte Pearson (1810-1842), the daughter of one of the most respectable of its English residents. They married on 1 October 1829 and had four children: Maria Charlotte (1830-1859), Lucy Elizabeth, later Mrs Coxon (1831-1904), Georgina Mary (1833-1868), and Thomas George (1836-1901). The revolution of 1830 made life in Belgium difficult and Cooper, his pregnant wife, and first daughter returned to England in spring 1831, landing at Dover with $13. 
Drawing on his continental success, Cooper produced some topographical views of London, which were bought by Ackermann's in the Strand, as well as some of his lithographs. Having previously exhibited on the continent, in 1833 Cooper showed his first pictures in London, with the Society of Artists in Suffolk Street and at the Royal Academy, where his only entry was entitled 'Landscape with Cattle'. Cooper faithfully portrayed various breeds of cattle, and the Victorian public loved his pictures of unspoiled countryside populated by placid cows and sheep. He became known as 'Cow' Cooper to distinguish him from Abraham 'Horse' Cooper. One of the great Victorian art patrons, Robert Vernon, commissioned 'Farmyard with Cattle' from Cooper, which, together with another example of his work, is now in the Vernon collection at the Tate Britain, London. 
Cooper was a prolific exhibitor and also showed at the New Watercolour Society and the British Institution. He exhibited many paintings at the Royal Academy, where he showed 266 pictures in an unprecedented and unbroken record from 1833 until 1902, when four landscapes with cattle appeared in the spring exhibition following his death. Cooper also showed paintings at international exhibitions, notably the Manchester Art Treasures of 1857, the Paris International of 1878, and the Manchester Jubilee of 1887. He enjoyed bountiful success and was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1845 and a Royal Academician in 1867. In 1861 a reviewer wrote that he was 'the painter of bucolics, and reigns supreme in the farm-yard, the sheep-fold, and the pasture' ('Art Journal', 1861, 133). 
In 1847 Frederick Richard Lee invited Cooper to visit him in Devon and the two decided to paint in collaboration, with Lee painting the landscape and Cooper adding the flocks and herds. From 1848 to 1856 their paintings appeared under both their names at the Royal Academy exhibitions. Cooper also worked in conjunction with other landscape painters, including Thomas Creswick and James Baker Pyne. 
Cooper always maintained a home and a studio in London, and in 1848 purchased land at Harbledown, near Canterbury, where he built a house he named Vernon Holme, in honour of his early patron. After the death of his first wife in 1842 Cooper remained a widower until 1863, when he married Mary, daughter of William Cannon, a miller, of Canterbury. They had one son, Nevill Louis (1864-1936). Soon after the death of Cooper's mother in 1865, he bought the house where he was born and some adjacent properties, which he developed into a picture gallery and school of art. In 1882 Cooper presented to the city of Canterbury the Sidney Cooper Gallery of Art, now known as the Royal Museum and Art Gallery. This museum holds the most important collection of his paintings, drawings, and lithographs, as well as his personal memorabilia. 
In addition to the museum in Canterbury and Tate Britain in London, there are paintings by Cooper in many provincial English museums. The Royal Collection includes two paintings by Cooper: 'The Entrance to Carisbrooke Castle' (1837), which he presented to Queen Victoria for her jubilee in 1887, and 'The Victoria Cow', a royal commission of 1848 when he was asked to paint the royal stock at Osborne. In 1901 Cooper was appointed CVO by Edward VII. 
Although he was still painting in his ninety-ninth year, there was a gradual decline of Cooper's strength in his last few months and he died at his home, Vernon Holme, on 7 February 1902, survived by his second daughter, Lucy, his second wife, Mary, and his son Nevill. His funeral was held on 13 February at Canterbury Cathedral, and he was buried in the churchyard of St Martin's, Canterbury. The contents of Cooper's studio were sold by Christie, Manson, and Wood from 12 to 15 April 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 32556


Cooper, Thompson (1837-1904), biographer and journalist, born at Cambridge on 8 January 1837, was the eldest son of Charles Henry Cooper (1808-1866), the Cambridge antiquary, and his wife, Jane, the youngest daughter of John Thompson of Prickwillow, Cambridgeshire. 
A younger brother, John William Cooper (1845-1906), who graduated from Trinity Hall, Cambridge (LLB 1866, LLD 1880), was called to the bar from Lincoln's Inn in 1868, but lived in Cambridge almost all his life, taking a prominent part in municipal affairs. He revised his father's 'Annals of Cambridge', to which he added a fifth volume. He died at Cambridge on 10 November 1906. 
Thompson Cooper, educated at a private school kept at Cambridge by the Revd John Orman, was articled to his father, who had become a solicitor in 1840, but the law was only nominally Thompson's vocation. His real inheritance from his father was a love of biographical and antiquarian research, and he was elected FSA at the age of twenty-three. He married young, his wife (died 1896) being a widow with two young daughters, though they had no further children. He was converted to Roman Catholicism. 
While still a boy Cooper began to collect material for a work modelled on the 'Athenae Oxonienses' of Anthony Wood. His father collaborated in the project, and in 1858 they published the first volume of 'Athenae Cantabrigienses', containing memoirs of those eminent alumni of Cambridge who died between 1500 and 1585. A second volume, published in 1861, carried the work forward to 1609. 
In 1861 Cooper began his career in journalism as sub-editor of the 'Daily Telegraph'. In 1862 he was made its parliamentary reporter. He became an authority on the history of shorthand, publishing a manual on the Mason-Gurney system as early as 1858. A long connection with 'The Times' lasted from 1866 until his death. He was one of its parliamentary reporters from 1866 to 1886, when he was appointed to write the daily summary of the debates in the House of Commons -- a task requiring unusual accuracy, conciseness, and familiarity with parliamentary and public affairs. In 1898 he took on the less arduous duties of summary-writer in the House of Lords. 
Cooper was associated with the 'Dictionary of National Biography' from its inception. In 1883 Leslie Stephen appointed him to compile the lengthy lists of proposed entries which were published every six months in 'The Athenaeum' to elicit information and comment. He himself wrote 1423 entries -- much the largest contribution by any one author. He specialized in Roman Catholic subjects, but was also responsible for Cambridge graduates of early date, modern journalists, and shorthand writers. His literary and historical insight was not profound, but he had the gift of serendipity and never lost his zest for research. 
In 1869 Cooper projected a new periodical, the 'Register and Magazine of Biography', but it ceased with the completion of one volume. His 'Biographical Dictionary', mainly of Englishmen, which first appeared in 1873, incorporated some of the material he had collected for the then unpublished third volume of 'Athenae Cantabrigienses' (finally published, with additions and corrections, together with an index, by G. J. Gray in 1913). He also wrote the text for a series of contemporary profiles entitled 'Men of Mark' (1876-83), and was responsible for four editions of 'Men of the time' (1872, 1875, 1879, and 1884). He was a frequent contributor to 'Notes and Queries' from the age of sixteen until the year before his death. Cooper died at his house, 38 Loughborough Road, Brixton, London, on 5 March 1904, and was buried, with Roman Catholic rites, in Norwood cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32557


Cope, Sir Alfred William (1877-1954), civil servant, was born in Kennington, London, on 14 January 1877, the eldest of eleven children of Alfred Cope, bottle merchant, and his wife, Margaret Elizabeth Dallimore. He joined the civil service as a boy clerk in the customs and excise, the lowest possible rung of the Whitehall ladder in one of its least prestigious departments. In 1896 he became a customs detective, in 1908 he was made a preventive inspector, and soon afterwards he was placed in charge of investigations throughout the London area, pursuing smugglers and illicit distillers. Contemporaries said there was always something of the sleuth about him. Cope was, however, also a gifted administrator and organizer, and it was these attributes rather than his talent for clandestine work which saw his translation from the arcane world of customs and excise enforcement into the Whitehall mainstream. In 1919 he was appointed second secretary in the Ministry of Pensions, with the task of bringing order to a department on the verge of collapse. In itself this promotion was a remarkable achievement for a man of modest origins and limited education who had entered the civil service at the humblest rank. The magnitude of his Whitehall success was, however, destined largely to be forgotten because of the dramatic course of the last two years of his public service career, in which he became a key figure in the framing of the Anglo-Irish settlement of 1921-2. 
Cope's ability and his unconventional background appealed to the powerful head of the civil service, Sir Warren Fisher. In May 1920 Fisher brought Cope as one of two assistants on an inspection of the Irish administration, which was showing signs of collapse under the pressures of the Anglo-Irish War. Fisher then advised Lloyd George to transfer a number of high-calibre Whitehall officials to Dublin, led by Sir John Anderson, in order to effect fundamental reform. Cope became an assistant under-secretary in Dublin Castle. His main task was to develop lines of communication to the Irish separatist leadership in order to explore possibilities for a settlement. He, Anderson, and other officials soon became convinced that the existing policy of thoroughgoing coercion of the separatist movement was futile, and that efforts should be made to reach an accommodation with Irish nationalism based on dominion home rule and protections for Unionist Ulster: they made their views plain to a meeting of cabinet ministers on 23 July 1920, although strains within the coalition government meant that their arguments were discounted. 
Nevertheless, supported by Anderson, by Fisher, and by Lloyd George, Cope persisted in probing the possibilities for compromise even as the Anglo-Irish War intensified. He did this with zest, courage, and initiative, on occasion having to shake off British intelligence agents as he travelled to clandestine meetings. His Dublin Castle colleague Mark Sturgis kept a diary in which he paints a vivid picture of 'Andy' Cope's relentless hunt for a means of ending the Anglo-Irish conflict, sometimes infuriating the police and army in the process. Cope won the respect and confidence of the separatist leaders, and after playing a key role in the negotiation of the July 1921 truce he became the main point of liaison between the British government and the emerging twenty-six-county state. He also established, organized, and staffed the new Northern Ireland administration, and at one point in 1921 was believed to be London's choice for the crucial post of permanent secretary of the ministry of finance in Belfast. However, his views on policing sectarian conflict made him suspect in Ulster Unionist eyes, and the idea was dropped. An intense and excitable man, he worked tirelessly to bring the Anglo-Irish treaty of December 1921 to fruition, and in the tense days leading up to the outbreak of civil war in Dublin in June 1922 he ensured that the pro-treaty provisional government got the resources necessary to confront anti-treaty forces, and oversaw the arrangements for the final transfer of civil authority to the government of the Irish Free State. 
Despite his high standing as a result of his achievements in Ireland, Cope chose not to return to the more sedate world of pensions administration in Whitehall. Instead he retired towards the end of 1922. He was appointed KCB, having been created CB in 1920. Cope then became general secretary of the National Liberal Party, but he found his hero Lloyd George a difficult employer and in 1924 he resigned. He played one further part in Anglo-Irish relations, giving private advice to the Irish government during the 1925 boundary commission crisis. He went into business as managing director of a group of collieries, where he experienced modest success before retiring in 1935. When war came in 1939 he briefly returned to Whitehall as a volunteer worker under his old chief Sir John Anderson, but soon stood aside. He died on 13 May 1954 at his home, 11 Westdown Road, Seaford, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 32558


Copeland, Ralph (1837-1905), astronomer, was born on 3 September 1837 at Moorside Farm, Woodplumpton, Lancashire, the youngest of several sons of Robert Copeland (died 'c'.1840), a yeoman farmer and part owner of a cotton mill, and his wife, Elizabeth Milner. He attended a small weaver's school, and then Kirkham grammar school. He was briefly apprenticed into the cotton mill of an older brother in Blackburn, but in 1853 emigrated to Australia, first as a shepherd in Victoria, then at gold diggings in the Omeo district. Here he developed an interest in astronomy. In 1858 he returned to England via Cape Horn, in the meantime studying John Herschel's 'Outlines of Astronomy' and observing Donati's comet. He became an apprentice in the locomotive firm of Beyer, Peacock & Co. of Manchester, and with some workmates set up a small observatory with a 5 inch Cooke refractor at West Gorton. His first published observation was of an occultation of 'greekLetterkappa' Cancri on 26 April 1863. 
Copeland resolved to abandon engineering because of depression in the cotton trade and retrain as an astronomer, although in 1859 he had married his cousin Susannah Milner. He spent some months improving his German in a village in Hesse, then in 1865 matriculated at the University of Gottingen to study under Klinkerfues, Weber, and Stern. In 1866 he had the misfortune to lose his wife and was left with a small daughter and an infant son. The following year he became a volunteer observer at the Gottingen observatory and, in anticipation of the long-term project for a great star catalogue, organized by the German Astronomische Gesellschaft and involving some seventeen observatories (part of which appeared as the 'First Gottingen Catalogue' in 1869), he began with Carl Borgen (later director of the Wilhelmshaven observatory) up to January 1869 a series of observations of star places down to ninth magnitude in the declination zone 0 degree to -1 degree with the Reichenbach transit circle. However, these were made before the plans by the Gesellschaft had been finalized and were not accepted by its council, although they remain a valuable list. 
Copeland, eager for adventure, was then invited to accompany Borgen on a German Arctic expedition under Captain Koldeway to explore the east coast of Greenland as far north as possible. During the preparations they took their degrees of doctor of philosophy, Copeland's dissertation being 'Uber die Bahnbewegung von greekLetteralpha Centauri' (1869). They carried out geodetic, meteorological, auroral, terrestrial magnetism, and natural history studies beyond 75 degree N, published in two volumes (1874), and on their return Copeland with others received the order of the Red Eagle from Kaiser Wilhelm I. 
In January 1871 Copeland was appointed assistant at Lord Rosse's observatory at Birr Castle, Ireland. In December he got married again, to Theodora (1847-1937), the daughter of the distinguished orientalist Professor Theodor Benfey of Gottingen; they had three daughters and a son. For the first two years he was occupied mainly with observations of the moon's radiant heat with the 3 foot reflector. In 1874 he was elected fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society and became assistant to Dr Robert Ball at the Dunsink observatory, Dublin, but was immediately granted leave of absence to accompany James Ludovic, Lord Lindsay, to Mauritius to observe the transit of Venus, the results of which were only partly successful in cloudy conditions. The yacht 'Venus' called in briefly at the small uninhabited island of Trinidad (or Trindada) in the south Atlantic, where Copeland discovered the giant tree fern 'Cyathea Copelandi' high in the interior. 
In 1876 Copeland was appointed director of the great observatory at Dun Echt in Aberdeenshire belonging to Lord Lindsay (later the twenty-sixth earl of Crawford), succeeding David Gill. He was singularly well suited to this, having expertise in its variety of instruments and a love of scientific and rare literature. There he assisted Lindsay in building up his great astronomical library, now the Crawford collection of the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh. The first five or six years were spent in reducing the backlog of the Mauritius observations, issued in 1885 as volume 3 of 'Dun Echt Observatory Publications'. 
Copeland became devoted to the main instrument at Dun Echt, the 15 inch Grubb refractor, and the spectroscope. Schmidt's nova in Cygnus was found on 2 September 1877 to have its spectrum reduced to a single emission line -- a notable discovery. Every comet visible from the observatory was then studied, some of their elements and ephemerides computed, and astronomical news sent worldwide through the Dun Echt 'Circulars'. The comets of 1881 and 1882 proved especially interesting: 1882I (Wells) exhibited strong sodium D lines and was visible in monochromatic sodium light with the slit open. 
Copeland was appointed to take charge of the Jamaica station for the successful transit of Venus collaborative programme of 6 December 1882; then at Crawford's expense he undertook an exploratory mission to test the potential of the seeing conditions in the Andes of Bolivia and Peru. Here he discovered five new Wolf-Rayet stars and studied the peculiar variable 'greekLettereta' Argus. Back at Dun Echt he employed a new spectroscope to study emission lines in the supernova in the Andromeda spiral, the emission spectrum of the variable 'greekLettergamma' Cassiopeiae, and in the Orion nebula found the D3 line later identified as Helium. During this eventful period many observations by Crawford, Copeland, and their German-trained assistants Ludwig Becker and Jacob Gerhard Lohse were published in 'Astronomische Nachrichten', in 'Monthly Notices', and in 'Copernicus' (3 vols., 1881-4), edited by Copeland and J. L. E. Dreyer, which, although printed in Dublin, was recognized as the 'organ' of Dun Echt. 
The happiest years were soon over. Lord Crawford, learning of government plans to suppress the Royal Observatory on Calton Hill, Edinburgh, on the retirement of Charles Piazzi Smyth, offered to present his entire instrument collection and library to the nation on condition that a new royal observatory be built to house them. Copeland accepted the joint posts of astronomer royal for Scotland, director of the observatory, and professor of astronomy at Edinburgh University. He was faced with the task of choosing the most suitable site -- Blackford Hill -- and unlike his predecessors he was, after a struggle, successful in instituting rigorous courses in astronomy for the new BSc degree. The new observatory was not completed until April 1896, so Copeland had to move between what was left of Dun Echt and the limited resources at Calton Hill. However, he was able to observe Thomas Anderson's discovery, Nova Aurigae (1892), and at the British Association's Cardiff meeting in 1891 suggested that the bright streaks on the moon were caused by lines of minute glassy spherules -- an extraordinary anticipation. 
In 1896 Copeland went to Vadso in Finnmark, Norway, for the total solar eclipse, with a 4 inch, 40 foot focal length Dallmeyer lens built into a huge camera. It was cloudy, but he had the compensation of meeting Nansen. Much more successful were the 1898 eclipse expedition to India and the 1900 expedition to Spain. The observation and issue of the 'Circular' for Anderson's Nova Persei (1900) proved to be Copeland's last notable work. The following year a bout of influenza was followed by increasingly severe attacks of angina. Copeland refused to retire. He died at the observatory residence in Edinburgh on 27 October 1905 and was buried on 30 October in Morningside cemetery. He was a robust, adventurous man, sporting a long white beard, and was held in great affection by his colleagues. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1890, and was a member of the Scottish Meteorological Society and a director of the Ben Nevis (meteorological) observatory. 


@@@@@


doc= 32559


Copinger, Walter Arthur (1847-1910), jurist and author, was born on 14 April 1847 in Clapham, the second son of Charles Louis George Emanuel Copinger (1821-1866), colonel in the American army, and his wife, Mary, widow of George James, and daughter of Thomas Pearson of Shepperton, Middlesex. Educated at the private school of John Andrews at Wellesley House, Brighton, he entered University College, Durham, but left without completing his course to join the office of a relative who was a solicitor in London. He did not remain there long. In 1866 he was admitted a student of the Middle Temple, and after spending a short time in the chambers of T. Bourdillon, a well-known conveyancing counsel, he was called to the bar on 26 January 1869. 
After his call to the bar Copinger turned his attention to the law of copyright, and in 1870 he published his 'Law of Copyright in Works of Literature and Art'. The work went through several editions and was revised in the 1920s; a tenth edition appeared in 1965. Also in 1870 Copinger settled in Manchester, and began practice as an equity draftsman and conveyancer, and in the chancery court of the county palatine of Lancaster. His work as a conveyancer increased so rapidly that he soon ceased to take court work and became the leading conveyancer out of London. At the same time he was widely consulted on questions of copyright. He had a strong grasp of the intricacies of the law, especially that relating to real property. He was sharp, and had a good memory, powerful concentration, and an easy style of draftsmanship. Pupils found his chambers an admirable school of training: he was said to have the power of making law live. On 3 September 1873 he married Caroline Agnes, eldest daughter of Thomas Inglis Stewart, vicar of Landscove, Devon; they had two sons and three daughters. 
Amid his heavy professional work Copinger continued to write on legal subjects, more particularly on conveyancing. Between 1872 and 1886 he published several large works on this and related topics. In 1876 he published 'An Essay on the Abolition of Capital Punishment' which, to his amusement, was so enthusiastically received by the abolitionists that his intention to publish another pamphlet demolishing all the arguments in the first was abandoned. 
In 1888 Copinger was appointed lecturer in law in the Owens College, Manchester, and in 1892, upon the resignation of Professor Munro, he became professor of law, and finally dean of the faculty of law in the Victoria University, Manchester. He received the Lambeth degree of doctor of laws from Archbishop Benson in 1889, and that of MA from the Victoria University in 1905. He was president of the Manchester Law Society's library. 
Copinger pursued versatile interests with untiring industry. Besides being an expert in old property law, he was also a keen bibliographer and antiquary, and took a deep interest in theology. Unfortunately all his bibliographical and historical work lacks the essential quality of minute accuracy. Largely owing to his efforts, supported by Richard Copley Christie, the Bibliographical Society was founded in London in 1892; he was the society's first president, and held the office for four years, doing much to establish the society on a firm basis. Between 1895 and 1898 he published his most important bibliographical work, the 'Supplement to Hain's Repertorium bibliographicum', comprising 7000 corrections of and additions to the collations of fifteenth-century works described or mentioned by Hain, and a list of nearly 6000 works not referred to by Hain. This work extends to upwards of 1630 closely printed double-column pages. Copinger contributed several papers to the 'Transactions of the Bibliographical Society', including an exhaustive monograph on the fifteenth-century printed editions of Virgil. In 1892 he published a bibliographical account of 124 editions of the Latin 'Bible' printed between 1450 and 1500. At The Priory, Greenheys, Manchester, his home at the time, he set up a small press, at which he printed four bibliographical works for private circulation. 
Copinger was equally keenly interested in genealogy, heraldry, and manorial history. In 1882 he published his 'History of the Copingers or Coppingers', in which he traced the descent of his family from the Danes in the tenth century, when they appear to have settled in Suffolk and in the south of Ireland. His last years were devoted almost exclusively to the history of Suffolk. Between 1902 and his death he produced a stream of work on this subject, including a five-volume general history of Suffolk and a work on the manors of Suffolk which ran to seven volumes. He also published work on heraldry. 
In religion Copinger was an Irvingite, and for a number of years was the angel, or minister, of the Catholic Apostolic church in Manchester. His interest in theology was wide and deep. The work which he valued most among his writings was his huge treatise on 'Predestination, Election, and Grace' (1889). He also wrote six other works on theological subjects. 
Copinger mainly found all the relaxation which he allowed himself in a change of work; but music always attracted him. He played several instruments, including the piano and violin, and found time to compose a number of musical pieces, including a collection of seventy-five original hymn tunes. 
Copinger was an ardent book collector, and accumulated a considerable library. It was rich in early printed books, 'Bibles', manuscripts, and printed editions of Thomas a Kempis's 'Imitatio Christi', hymnbooks, Elzevier editions, and general works of reference. Genial and affable, he was always ready to place his knowledge and his library at the disposal of any student. 
Copinger died, a widower, at his home, Ormonville, Lower Broughton, Salford, on 13 March 1910 from pneumonia following an attack of influenza, and was buried at Birch, Rusholme, Manchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 32560


Copisarow, Maurice (1889-1959), chemist, was born at Biruch in Russia on 16 August 1889, the son of Elkana (Conan) Copisarow, who following military service was a rabbinical scholar, and his wife, Sarah. After emigrating to England in 1908 Copisarow was taken under the wing of Chaim Weizmann, then a lecturer in chemistry at the University of Manchester, later first president of Israel. Copisarow obtained his MSc in 1914; a joint paper with Weizmann published in 1915 dealt with new phthalides of the benzene, naphthalene, and carbazole series. He was naturalized in that year. 
Copisarow's research was original and independent; even from 1914 he published papers mostly without collaborators, very occasionally with a junior colleague. At first his work was in the field of synthetic organic chemistry, for example on new applications of the Friedel Craft reaction, but even in the early years he developed wider interests which gradually absorbed his whole attention. His work on the structure and mode of oxidation of carbon led to a series of papers on the subject of allotropy. 
At Manchester, Copisarow was Dalton research scholar (1914-16), honorary research fellow (1916-19), and in 1925 obtained his DSc. His research was interrupted, however, when for financial reasons he was obliged to accept a variety of external tasks. He worked as temporary demonstrator in the chemistry department, on behalf of the research committee of the Royal Society, and for the government Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. During the First World War he worked for the Ministry of Munitions. 
In the summer of 1915 Copisarow was sent by Professor H. B. Dixon, with the support of Weizmann, to organize the analytical section of the newly installed trinitrotoluene (TNT) plant at the government factory at Gorton. He set out to discover the cause of a series of disastrous explosions in the TNT plants of northern England and Scotland, in which several hundred workers had been killed since the beginning of the war. He soon found the Woolwich arsenal testing specifications to be inadequate, limited as they were to the conditions of nitration and a few tests of the product. New problems were the purification of TNT; the action of alkalis thereon; the related question of inherent acidity; and the utilization of rapidly accumulating residues. These led to extensive research, partly published in 'Chemical News', but the most significant paper was held back until after the armistice, at the express wish of Lord Moulton. This work was instrumental in substituting steam treatment of crude TNT for the hazardous alkali wash. Copisarow also discovered methods for converting the dangerously unstable waste products generated by the production of explosives into gelatinous dynamite, chloropicrin, and khaki dyes. 
During three years with the Ministry of Munitions, Copisarow was on the so-called coal tar chemical testing staff, stationed at Manchester University. In 1919-22 he was on the research staff of British Dyestuffs Corporation. Among his research was a paper entitled 'Carbazole-blue and carbazole-violet' ('Journal of the Chemical Society', 117, 1920, 1542-50), and he took out a patent on the industrial production of carbazole as a base for hydron blue. This was acquired by Levinstein Ltd. He also developed a continuous process for the conversion of toluene and the xylenes to benzene. On 10 December 1919 Copisarow married Eda Cohen, of Manchester. They had a daughter and a son, Sir Alcon Charles Copisarow, who in 1964-6 was chief scientific officer of the Ministry of Technology, and from 1995 chairman of the Eden Trust. 
As early as 1917 Copisarow's eyesight had begun to fail and the deterioration was doubtless accelerated by continued contact with such toxic materials as phosgene, chloropicrin, and TNT. He had eight unsuccessful eye operations, and lost the sight of both eyes shortly after 1925. Owing to this and general bad health he had no employment after 1922. Between 1925 and 1927 he had several major operations for gastric and duodenal troubles and was artificially fed for a period of six months. His indomitable character was clearly displayed in these extremely adverse circumstances. Finding himself in need of an income, Copisarow first of all set to work with his wife to establish a successful business connected with furs. He set up a laboratory in his attic and continued experimental work, which led to the publication of a series of papers on the most varied topics, all of which were characterized by the highest originality. After 1932 the effect of the slump in trade compelled the Copisarows to realize and utilize all their small means, to resort to mortgages and borrowing on life policies. Nevertheless they managed to bring up and educate their two children. 
In later years Copisarow's practical approach to problems was replaced by theoretical writings. He considered a number of topics, among them the mode of synthesis of marble and alabaster. He provided evidence which justified the replacement of the igneous theory of Sir James Hall by a new hydrothermal conception of the formation of marble. He also developed his ideas on rock formation in other directions, focusing particularly on the effects of silica in a number of its forms. He also wrote on the fundamentals of periodicity and the co-ordination of physical and chemical periodic structures, and on mineral arborial growth, its range and bearing on the form of organic structures. In the unrelated field of physiological chemistry his studies of the biochemical causes of malignant growth and possible control of carcinoma were discussed in a comprehensive review article, 'History of human cancer', published in the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' (1952). Copisarow was very interested in enzymes and wrote about their action in relation to malignant growth and radiation, and to influenza and other viruses. The high quality of his writings, after he had lost most of his sight, was quite remarkable. 
Among many agricultural topics which Copisarow studied were the preservation of fruit and vegetables, natural and artificial fertilizers, destruction of bracken, and a method for making new materials from woody and other cellulosic starting-points. During the Second World War he was able to use this knowledge to help the war effort, and was as a consequence placed on the civil list in recognition of special services to his country. Finally, an essay on the ancient Egyptian, Greek, and Hebrew concepts of the Red Sea, published soon after his death in 'Vetus Testamentum', showed that Copisarow's erudition was not entirely confined to scientific matters. 
In the difficult circumstances of his later life it was impossible to complete much of his work, but his papers teem with original ideas. Physical infirmity deprived him of the opportunity fully to develop his undoubted scientific ability. Copisarow died of a coronary thrombosis at his home, 1 Gildridge Road, Manchester, on 15 April 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 32561


Coppard, Alfred Edgar (1878-1957), short-story writer and poet, was born on 4 January 1878 at 35 St John's Street, Folkestone, Kent, the eldest child and only son of the four children of George Coppard (died 1887?), a journeyman tailor, and Emily Alma Southwell, who had been a housemaid. They were 'shockingly poor', although as Coppard was to recall in his unfinished autobiography, published posthumously, the two rooms comprising his first home were 'snug enough' (Coppard). But it was not until they moved to Brighton, when Coppard was five, that their fortunes improved sufficiently for them to live for a time as sole tenants of a house. Supposed ill health terminated Coppard's schooling at nine, but it was his father's death which made it necessary for him to go out to work as an assistant to a street vendor of paraffin and firewood. Perhaps because of this poverty, Frank O'Connor described Coppard's early life as 'cruel' (O'Connor, 171), although in his autobiography Coppard characteristically expressed its freedom and pleasures. By the time he was twenty, Coppard had worked for an auctioneer, a cheesemonger, a soap agent, and a carrier. He next spent several years in the office of an engineering firm, and then in 1907 moved to Oxford as confidential clerk in the Eagle ironworks (attached to Lucy's factory). On 5 August 1905 Coppard married Lily Annie ('b'. 1881/2), daughter of Albert Richardson, a plumber, of Brighton. After her death he married Winifred May, daughter of Dirk de Kok, solicitor, of South Africa; they had a son and a daughter. 
It was on 1 April 1919 that Coppard gave up his business occupation and became a full-time professional writer. ' 'All Fools' Day was truly the congenital date of it', he recalled (Coppard), for he had saved only $50. Indeed, his office colleagues thought he was 'daft'. Nevertheless, many years later he was honoured by his old firm, which showed great pride in his literary achievement. 
Coppard's early enthusiasm for reading and study had not lessened while he was a clerk, and he gained sufficient success as a spare-time athlete to use the prize-money to buy books and shape himself for his literary vocation. He appreciated the atmosphere of Oxford, where he 'was fired, though not by any more worthy muse than the spirit of rivalry' (Coppard). The deep impression made on his creative mind by Chekhov, Maupassant, Thomas Hardy, Katherine Mansfield, and the short stories of Henry James had already determined him to concentrate on the genre of the short story. But in his first three months as a freelance he sold only 'one little tale, one little poem, and received twenty rejections' (Coppard). It was therefore a timely relief and encouragement when an American periodical paid him $50 for 'The Tiger', a piece of a few thousand words. 
In 1921 Coppard's first collection, 'Adam and Eve and Pinch Me', was published by Harold Taylor, the young owner of the Golden Cockerel Press, who had been impressed by Coppard's early efforts. This volume was the forerunner of a lengthy series of collected short stories. Coppard received early praise from Ford Madox Ford, who wrote: 'He is almost the first English prose-writer to get into English prose the peculiar quality of English lyric poetry -- the fancy, the turn of the imagination, the wisdom... and the beauty of the great lyricists' (Ford, 173). Coppard was an innovator in the English short story: he frequently presented a woman's point of view, and his writing strongly conveys the mystery and unpredictability of life. Like many short-story writers, he showed a preference for the misfit and the underdog. The hatred and dismay that he was made to feel by injustice and cruelty caused him to become prominent in the peace movement. 
Coppard ranks with contemporaries such as Sean O'Faolain and T. F. Powys in the history of the short story, although his best work is closer in spirit to that of Thomas Hardy. Poetry as well as prose occupied him from the outset, and 'Hips and Haws', the first of five volumes of lyrics, came out in the same year as his second book of stories, 'Clorinda Walks in Heaven' (1922). However, Coppard's verse is undistinguished, and his finest poetry is to be found in his short stories. Between 1921 and 1951 hardly a year passed without a publication bearing the imprint A. E. Coppard: 'Fishmonger's Fiddle' (1925), 'The Field of Mustard' (1926), 'Silver Circus' (1928), 'Nixey's Harlequin' (1931), 'Crotty Shinkwin' (1932), and 'Dunky Fitlow' (1933) are the titles he invented for what proved to be his best successes. 'It's me, O Lord!' was the title given to the first part of his autobiography, published a few months after his death of a heart attack in the Royal Northern Hospital, Islington, London, on 13 January 1957. 
Coppard's closing years were heartened by the Book of the Month Club of America, which issued his 'Selected Tales' (1946) to its vast membership, the first occasion on which it had made a work of this kind its leading choice. The undergraduates of Oxford paid him tribute with a celebration of his seventy-fifth birthday, attended by many distinguished personages, including Sir Maurice Bowra, the vice-chancellor. Coppard's many friends appreciated his twinkling eyes and a face suggesting the kindest of laughter. His last home, at Hillside, Duton Hill, Dunmow, Essex, delighted him, with its encircling trees, and birds so tame that he would pretend to be cross with them whenever they became too obtrusive. He spent a term on a rural council, and shared his second wife's enthusiasm when she was appointed assistant county medical officer in mid-Essex. She died in 1969, having become popular on television in frank discussions of family problems. 


@@@@@


doc= 32562


Coppin, George Selth (1819-1906), actor and politician, born at Steyning, Sussex, on 8 April 1819, was the only child of George Selth Coppin (1794-1854) and his wife, Elizabeth Jane Jackson (1789-1869). His father, of a Norwich family, gave up medical practice for the stage and became a theatrical manager. 
As a child the son showed proficiency on the violin and played juvenile characters on the stage. At the age of seventeen Coppin took to his profession seriously, and in November 1837 he was a minor member of the Sheffield stock company, playing Osric to the Hamlet of the young starring tragedian Gustavus Vaughan Brooke. Having developed into a capable low comedian, he was engaged at the Queen's Theatre, Manchester, early in 1841, and in August of that year began an engagement at the Abbey Street Theatre, Dublin. For a time he sang comic songs nightly between the pieces, accompanying himself on the violin. Here he met a fascinating American actress, Maria Watkins Burroughs, the wife of a provincial actor-manager, with whom he eloped to Australia. They landed at Sydney in March 1843 and lived together until Maria's death on 10 August 1848. Coppin acted at the Royal Victoria Theatre, and made a lot of money which, however, was lost in commercial enterprises, and he left Sydney in debt. 
In January 1845 Coppin began an engagement at Hobart Town, and in March commenced theatrical management at Launceston, where he had a prosperous season. Three months later he took his company to Melbourne, where he rented the Queen's Theatre Royal, and made his first appearance there in June, when he played Glavis in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons' and Crack in 'The Turnpike Gate'. Thereafter he moved to Adelaide, where he converted a billiard room in less than two months into a 700-seat theatre, which he opened in November 1846. Here within three or four years he made a fortune from various enterprises, including a tavern and racehorse breeding, only to lose it by speculations in copper mining. After passing through the insolvency court in 1851, he returned to Melbourne and spent a fortnight at the gold diggings: he determined that entertaining the miners would be more profitable than mining himself. Following a short engagement in Melbourne, in 1852 he commenced management at the Great Malop Street theatre, Geelong, where he rapidly made another fortune. He returned to Adelaide, paid his creditors in full, and sailed for England in January 1854. His first appearance was made at the Haymarket, London, in June. Later he fulfilled engagements at Birmingham, Manchester, Edinburgh, and Dublin. While at Birmingham in August he induced G. V. Brooke to sign articles to star under his management for 200 nights in Australia and New Zealand. 
After returning to Melbourne, Coppin reappeared at the Queen's Theatre in December 1854, and the following month began a successful engagement at the Victoria Theatre, Sydney. In June 1855 he opened the new Olympic Theatre, Melbourne, popularly known as 'the Iron Pot', under his own management, and played Colonel Damas in 'The Lady of Lyons' and Mr Trotter Southdown in Tom Taylor's 'To Oblige Benson'. In August 1855 Coppin married Harriet Hilsden, 'nee' Bray ('b'. 1820), a widowed sister-in-law of Brooke. Meanwhile Brooke's tour proved highly prosperous, and Coppin joined him in purchasing the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, which they opened in June 1856. About the same period they acquired the freehold of the Cremorne Gardens Amusement Park; they also owned four hotels. At the Theatre Royal they organized the first grand opera season in Australia. The partnership was dissolved in February 1859, Brooke continuing the management. Coppin then built the Pantheon Theatre; but owing to Brooke's difficulties he resumed control of the Theatre Royal in December 1860. 
Harriet Coppin had died on 2 September 1859 following the birth of the couple's third child. On 4 June 1861 Coppin married Harriet's daughter by her first marriage, Lucy Hilsden; they were to have two sons and five daughters. In 1862 he lost control of the Theatre Royal, but in September of that year he completed a new theatre, the Haymarket. A second bankruptcy followed, but he brought out Mr and Mrs Charles Kean to Melbourne in October 1863, and then took them to Sydney, with the result that he paid his creditors in full. After touring with the Keans in America (1864-5) he reappeared at the Haymarket, Melbourne (January 1866), in a variety of characters, including Daniel White in H. T. Craven's 'Milky White'. 
In 1871 Coppin went into partnership with Messrs Harwood, Stewart, and Hennings in the management of the Melbourne Theatre Royal, but suffered a considerable loss through the burning of the uninsured building in March 1872. He immediately took a ninety-nine years' lease of the site and rebuilt the theatre, subsequently transferring the property to the Theatre Royal Proprietary Association, Ltd, of which he remained managing director until his death. At this house in November and December 1881 he gave farewell performances for twelve nights. His last appearance was on 9 December 1881 as Bob Acres in Sheridan's 'The Rivals' and Crack in 'The Turnpike Gate'. 
During the same period Coppin was also engaged in politics. In 1858 he was elected first to the Richmond municipal council and then to the legislative council of Victoria for the south-western province, but he resigned his seat on leaving the colony in 1864 for his American tour. During this time he helped to pass the 'Transfer of Real Property Act' and to introduce Post Office Savings Banks. He advocated the federation of the colonies and intercolonial free trade and opposed the payment of members. He unsuccessfully sought election in 1866, but from 1874 to 1877 and from 1883 to 1888 he was member of the legislative assembly for East Melbourne. He was then returned to the legislative council, unopposed, for Melbourne (1889-95). He was twice elected chairman of the Richmond municipality, and for two years was chairman of magistrates in that district. His political commitments entailed periodical retirement from the stage, as low comedy and political office were deemed incompatible. 
A man of immense energies and extraordinarily diverse interests, Coppin left the mark of his talents upon the colony of Victoria. As early as 1870 he advocated acclimatization, and was the first to import camels and English thrushes into Australia. About 1861, in association with Charles Gavan Duffy, he founded the beautiful watering place Sorrento-on-the-Sea, 40 miles south-east of Melbourne, where Mount Coppin was called after him, and where he maintained a home until his death. In 1868 he built a magnificent residence, Pine Grove, Richmond Hill, Melbourne, where he died on 4 March 1906. 


@@@@@


doc= 32563


Coppinger, Richard William (1847-1910), naval surgeon and naturalist, born on 11 October 1847 in Dublin, was the youngest of the six sons of Joseph William Coppinger, a solicitor of Farmley, Dundrum, co. Dublin, and his wife, Agnes Mary, only daughter of William Lalor Cooke, a landed proprietor of Fortwilliam, co. Tipperary. The father's family was long settled at Ballyvolane and Barryscourt, co. Cork, and was said to descend from the first Danish settlers in Cork city. Coppinger received his medical education in Dublin, graduating MD at the Queen's University in 1870. Entering the medical department of the navy, he was appointed surgeon to HMS 'Discovery', which left Portsmouth on 29 May 1875 under the command of Captain George S. Nares on a voyage of exploration towards the north pole. The 'Discovery' reached a higher latitude than had ever been touched before, and Coppinger distinguished himself as the naturalist in charge of one of the sledging parties. On the return of the 'Discovery' to England in October 1876 he was specially promoted staff-surgeon and awarded the Arctic medal. Coppinger served as naturalist in the HMS 'Alert' on her four years' exploring cruise in Patagonian, Polynesian, and Mascarene waters from 1878 to 1882. He married, on 8 January 1884, Matilda Mary, daughter of Thomas Harvey Browne, a landed proprietor of Sydney, New South Wales. They had three sons and one daughter; she survived her husband. 
In 1889 Coppinger was appointed instructor in hygiene at the Haslar Royal Naval Hospital at Gosport, where he was a most successful teacher, his knowledge of bacteriology being in advance of the time. On 13 March 1901 he was appointed inspector-general of hospitals and fleets, and was for three years in charge at Haslar. On 15 May 1904 he was placed on half pay, and, disappointed at not being made director-general of the medical department of the navy, he retired in 1906. 
Coppinger wrote 'The Cruise of the Alert, 1878-82' (1883); 'Some experiments on the conductive properties of ice made in Discovery Bay, 1875-6' ('PRS' 27, 1878, 183-9); and 'Account of the zoological collections made in the years 1878-1881, during the survey of HMS 'Alert' in the Straits of Magellan and the coast of Patagonia' ('Proceedings of the Zoological Society', 1881). He also contributed to the parliamentary paper containing the report of the Admiralty committee (1877) on 'The outbreak of scurvy in the Arctic expedition, 1875-6' ('Parl. papers', 1877, 56, 557), and to the 'Report on the zoological collections made in the Indo-Pacific Ocean during the voyage of HMS Alert 1881-2' (British Museum, Nat. Hist., 1884). He died at his residence, Wallington House, Fareham, on 2 April 1910, and was buried at Fareham cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32564


Corbet, Matthew Ridley (1850-1902), landscape painter, was born on 20 May 1850 at South Willingham, Lincolnshire, the son of the Revd Andrew Corbet and his wife, Marianne Ridley, through whom he was descended from the Ridleys of Blagdon, Northumberland. Educated at Cheltenham College, Corbet was originally intended for a military career. Instead, he was apprenticed to Alexander Davis Cooper, a painter of landscape and literary subjects. Corbet studied art at Heatherley's School of Art and at the Slade School of Fine Art in London, where he was among the first intake of students. He then went on to the Royal Academy Schools. Corbet worked at first as a portraitist, influenced by the example of George Frederic Watts; portraits by him appeared at the Royal Academy summer exhibitions during the second half of the 1870s. Later in his career he seems to have restricted himself to painting friends, his last exhibited portrait being a likeness of the painter Walter Maclaren, shown at the Royal Academy in 1889; in the 1890s he made portraits of members of the family of the amateur artist George Howard, ninth earl of Carlisle. 
Corbet spent a period of years away from England during the first half of the 1880s, devoting himself to landscape painting. In 1880 he travelled to Egypt, where he made oil sketches of the desert. By the winter of 1880-81 he was established in Rome, living at via di San Basilio 20 and joining a group of young artists in the city which included the sculptor Alfred Gilbert and the American painter Elihu Vedder. In Rome Corbet soon encountered the Italian painter Giovanni Costa, from whom he learned how to refine his landscape compositions by the use of subdued and harmonious colour. In the winter of 1883-4 Corbet was one of the group of painters of different nationalities -- all of whom revered Costa -- who formed the so-called Etruscan school. Later, Corbet's paintings were shown with those of Costa at the exhibitions 'In arte libertas'. 
Although the city of Rome and the Roman Campagna were Corbet's favourite painting grounds in the first half of the 1880s, he also made painting expeditions into the south, joining the community of artists that formed around Charles Caryl Coleman at Capri about 1882, and to the countryside near Perugia, where he shared a rented farm house with Gilbert and his family. In 1885 Costa settled at Bocca d'Arno in Tuscany. Corbet made frequent visits to Costa, staying with him or lodging at the Albergo Ascani at Marina di Pisa. Over the following years Corbet made a thorough exploration of the countryside of the coastal plain between Leghorn and Viareggio, as well as of the hills inland around Volterra and to the north of Lucca. That Corbet knew how to capture the characteristic effects of the Italian countryside in a delightful way was commented on by an obituarist: 'His knowledge of Italy is not that of a tourist; it is that of a poet-painter, whose imagination is stirred by the cadence of the hills, the magic of dark cypresses silhouetted against the evening sky, the elusive beauty of olive-clad slopes, the 'temper' of that country whose every valley, as mists steal silently across, is charged with memories. ('Art Journal', 93)' From about the mid-1880s Corbet seems to have established a pattern of life between Italy and London. In the winter months he occupied a studio in The Avenue, off the Fulham Road. He had probably first met Sir Coutts Lindsay -- the proprietor of the Grosvenor Gallery -- in Rome, and from 1880 he was invited to send works to the Grosvenor summer exhibitions. In 1888 he transferred to the New Gallery, along with other progressive painters at the time when the Grosvenor was seen to be losing its position as the most interesting of the London summer exhibitions. In 1889 he won a bronze medal for his painting 'Sunrise' at the Paris Universal Exhibition. Corbet was also a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy, from where two of his landscapes, 'Morning Glory' (one of a small number of English landscapes by Corbet) and 'Val d'Arno', were bought by the trustees of the Chantrey bequest, in 1894 and 1901 respectively (both Tate collection). In January 1902 Corbet was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy. 
On 17 March 1891 Corbet married Edith Jane Murch, 'nee' Edenborough ('b'. 1846/7), the widow of the painter Arthur Murch and herself a landscape painter and an Italophile. They lived together in London at 54 Circus Road, St John's Wood, and it was there that Corbet died on 25 June 1902, following an attack of pleuro-pneumonia. His wife survived him, and his ashes were later taken to South Willingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 32565


Corbett, Edward James (1875-1955), hunter and conservationist, was born at Naini Tal, India, on 25 July 1875, the eighth child of Christopher William Corbett (1822-1881), a postmaster, and his wife, Mary Jane (1837?-1924), 'nee' Prussia, widow of Charles Doyle. From childhood, Jim (as he was commonly known) was closely acquainted with the life of the jungle, spending many nights alone in it and growing accustomed to the cries and calls of bird and beast, and studying their natural history. He also hunted, shooting birds and, later, big game, killing his first leopard at the age of eleven. Initially educated by his mother and half-sister Mary, he progressed to the Diocesan Boys' School (now Sherwood College), Naini Tal. He had ambitions to be an engineer but a lack of family money prevented this and, in 1895, he joined the Bengal and North-Western Railway as a fuel inspector at Bihar; later he was promoted to trans-shipment inspector at Mokameh Ghat, Bengal. In the First World War, with the rank of captain, he helped to recruit a labour corps of Kumaoni hillfolk, and commanded his own unit of 500 in France in 1917: he brought 499 safely home. Promoted to major, he served in the Waziristan campaign of the Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919-21). 
A legacy enabled Corbett to quit the railways and buy into the partnership of a Naini Tal hardware and estate agency business, and devote his time to the welfare of the people of the Kumaon region. He and his sister Maggie, with half-sister Mary, ran a surgery at Kaladhungi, the family winter home in the 'terai'. Near by was the dilapidated village of Choti Haldwani. Corbett bought the village and surrounding farmland, turning them into a successful and much admired model community which still exists. He built (with his own hands, working alongside the local people) a wild-pig-proof stone wall 6 feet high and 6 miles long, designed and installed a field irrigation system, and experimented with agriculture, bringing in seeds and cuttings from trips he made to British East Africa, where he hunted in Kenya and Tanganyika with his lifelong friend Sir Percy Wyndham. Not all his experiments were fruitful. Introduced African bananas, grapefruit, vines, and coffee all failed miserably but a large-kernelled maize was a considerable success. 
In Naini Tal, Corbett's estate agency business flourished by the letting of houses during the hot summer to Europeans escaping the heat of the plains. This business success in turn afforded him the opportunity to return to the jungle to hunt. He was an expert shot and keen angler, especially for mahseer. Over the 1920s he gradually realized the damage being done to the environment of Kumaon by deforestation and increasing human population, and he began to preach conservationist theories and to criticize British policies. His theories were dismissed but he continued to pursue them, publish them, and cause controversy, often to his detriment. He took against shooting for sport and turned to big game photography, using both still and movie cameras. With the infinite patience and courage of a hunter, using bait animals and his ability to call up leopards and tigers by imitating their calls, he took the first moving pictures of a rare white tiger at a distance of 30 feet, without a telephoto lens. 
Although eschewing shooting, Corbett accepted responsibility for hunting down man-eating tigers and leopards, much to the anxious chagrin of his sister Maggie, with whom he lived all of his life and whose obsessive possessiveness of her brother prevented him from marrying. Between 1907 and 1945 he dispatched at least twelve man-eaters. Wiry and incredibly fit, he endured terrible hardships and sometimes illness in the execution of his errands of mercy. He frequently went without adequate sleep or food for days on end, and spent many long nights hunched on a makeshift platform in a tree overlooking a kill, sometimes the gruesome remains of the most recent human victim. He was in continual danger and more than once was nearly killed. His resolve and bravery became legendary and brought him the deepest affection and even worship of the Kumaoni people, who still regard him as a 'sadhu' or holy man. He maintained that no tiger or leopard was by nature a man-eater but became one through injury or by the effect of human environmental factors such as careless hunting or habitat destruction. 
During the Second World War, Corbett was too old for active service but he was, from 1940 to 1942, actively involved in the recruitment of over 1400 soldiers for a Pioneer Corps. Later, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, he trained British troops in jungle survival techniques in readiness for the invasion of Burma. His survival lessons included warning against bathing in jungle pools because they often housed sleeping pythons and the issuing of silk stockings to combat troops as the fine mesh of the silk prevented leeches from gaining purchase on the skin: the latter recommendation was not officially sanctioned. 
Under the instigation of Lady Violet Haig, wife of the provincial governor, Corbett wrote a thin, privately published booklet on his man-eater hunting escapades. Entitled 'Jungle Stories', it was modest yet thrilling and filled with jungle lore as well as ripping-yarn excitement. This developed into three commercially published books: 'Man-Eaters of Kumaon' (1946), 'The Man-Eating Leopard of Rudraprayag' (1948), and 'The Temple Tiger' (1954). 
In 1947 Corbett and his sister Maggie decided to leave India and settle at Nyeri, Kenya, living near relatives and renting a cottage in the grounds of the Outspan Hotel, which had originally been built for Lord Baden-Powell. Corbett was made an honorary game warden, and devoted much of his time to photographing and filming wildlife, and to writing. In addition to the works already mentioned, he published the autobiographical 'My India' (1952), 'Jungle Lore' (1953), and 'Tree Tops' (1955), an account of the visit of Princess Elizabeth and the duke of Edinburgh to the famous game-viewing lodge near Nyeri. He was with the royal party on the night the princess ascended to the throne. Of his books in English well over 2 million have been sold, with translations in eighteen languages. 
Tall, slim, and blue-eyed, Corbett was a handsome, scrupulously honest, and modest man, kind and generous, and beloved and admired by all who knew him, no matter what their rank. He was awarded the volunteer decoration (1920), the kaisar-i-Hind gold medal (1928), the OBE (1942), and the CIE (1946), and was granted the freedom of the forests in India, a privilege given only once previously to a European. In 1957 the Indian government renamed the Hailey National Park, the famous tiger sanctuary in Garhwal, the Corbett National Park 'in memory of one who had dedicated his life to the service of the simple hill folks of Kumaon'. Corbett died at the Mount Kenya Hospital, Nyeri, on 19 April 1955, and lies in the same cemetery as Baden-Powell, at St Peter's Church, Nyeri. He is today considered one of the earliest conservationists and the father of the movement to save the tiger from extinction. 


@@@@@


doc= 32566


Corbett, John (1817-1901), chemical manufacturer and philanthropist, born at The Delph, Brierley Hill, Staffordshire, on 12 June 1817, was the eldest son in a family of five sons and one daughter of Joseph Corbett and his wife, Hannah. The father, originally a Shropshire farmer, moved to Staffordshire to become a carrier of merchandise by canal boats. John, after attending as a child Mr Geary's school at Brierley Hill, helped on his father's boats from the age of ten to twenty-three. He devoted his leisure to an unaided study of mechanical problems, and in 1840, at the mature age of twenty-three, was apprenticed for five years to W. Lester, chief engineer of Messrs Hunt and Brown of the Leys ironworks, Stourbridge. In 1846 he reluctantly abandoned the career of an engineer to become his father's partner, and under the name of Corbett & Son a prosperous business was carried on, a large fleet of boats being maintained between the Staffordshire district and London, Liverpool, Manchester, and other commercial centres. In 1852 the business was sold, the advent of railways threatening to decrease canal traffic, and Corbett then bought the Stoke Prior salt works near Droitwich. In April 1856 he married Anna Eliza, daughter of John O'Meara of co. Tipperary. They had two sons and four daughters. 
Salt had been discovered at Stoke Prior in 1828 but efforts to extract it had been frustrated by the local geology. Corbett was aware that he was taking a risk in purchasing the premises of two defunct companies, which faced each other across the Worcester and Birmingham Canal. With a firm grasp of the mechanical, commercial, and economic problems, however, Corbett completely transformed the enterprise. He installed new brine pits lined with cast-iron cylinders to prevent the inflow of fresh water, and introduced a novel process whereby a system of pipes doubled the intensity of both the fire-heat and steam, yielding a whiter, more finely grained salt than was obtainable elsewhere, the size of the grain or crystal depending on the temperature at which the brine was evaporated. Fifty canal boats were acquired, and tributaries were excavated from the canal to the warehouses in which the salt was stored in lofts. A railway was laid down within the works, to carry coal to and salt from such places as could not be reached by water, and a wagon factory, a foundry, fitting shops, sawmills, and a brickyard were established. As many as seven depots were established in London. Corbett himself supervised all details. Within twenty-five years he raised the annual output of salt from 26,000 tons to 200,000 tons, and built up the most perfect system of salt manufacture in the world. Corbett enjoyed excellent relations with his workpeople. He built model houses, gardens, schools, a club house, lecture room, and dispensary. In 1859 he abolished female labour at the works, and in order that the family incomes should not suffer, increased the men's rates of pay, an act of generosity commemorated by a window placed by public subscription in Stoke Prior church. He sold the works in 1889 to the Salt Union. 
Corbett was interested in politics on the Liberal side. In 1868 he contested Droitwich unsuccessfully against the Conservative candidate, Sir John Pakington, but the voters reversed their decision in 1874, when Corbett defeated Pakington and was elected. He kept the seat in 1880; in 1885, when the old borough was merged in the mid-Worcestershire division, he was returned unopposed for that constituency. In the Commons, though never prominent in debate, he showed interest in questions of local taxation, advocated alterations in the laws of land tenure, and was an early advocate of women's suffrage. Opposed to Irish home rule, he joined the ranks of the Liberal Unionists in 1886 and was returned by a large majority in that interest in July 1886. He retired at the dissolution of 1892. 
Corbett acquired from Lord Somers a large estate at Impney near Droitwich and from Athelston Corbet (not a relative) a second estate at Ynysmaengwyn near Tywyn in Merioneth. On the Impney property he erected a residence in the style of a French chateau of the time of Francois I. Having an interest in transport systems, he was a director of various canal companies and of the River Severn Navigation. He was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1876. A generous supporter of philanthropic institutions in the midlands, Corbett presented land and buildings for Corbett Hospital to Stourbridge in 1892 and Salters' Hall, a building capable of holding 1500 people, to Droitwich. He also contributed generously to the funds of Birmingham University, of which he was a governor, to the University College of Wales, and to the Bromsgrove Cottage Hospital; he helped in the development of Droitwich as a health resort by the erection of St Andrew's Brine Baths (1889), and by the restoration of the old Raven Hotel and the building of the Worcester Hotel; he presented a church clock to Brierley Hill and placed memorial windows in the church there to his father and mother. To the development of Tywyn he contributed by the erection of a fine esplanade, a massive sea wall, and the provision of water and sewage systems. Corbett died at Impney on 22 April 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 32567


Corbett, Sir Julian Stafford (1854-1922), naval historian, the second son of Charles Joseph Corbett, architect and property developer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Byrne, was born on 12 November 1854 at Walcot House, Kennington Road, Lambeth, London. He was educated at Marlborough College (1869-73) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1873-6), where he gained a first class in the law tripos in 1876. In 1877 he was called to the bar and practised for five years, although he found the work irksome. In 1882 he abandoned it and, having private means, travelled extensively, visiting among other places India and the United States. In 1886 Corbett found in fiction an outlet for his literary ability: his first novel, 'The Fall of Asgard' (1886), was quickly followed by 'For God and Gold' (1887) and 'Kophetua the Thirteenth' (1889). He was also drawn towards biography, contributing to the 'English Men of Action' series the life of Monk in 1889, and in the following year that of Drake. In 1894 he reverted to fiction, his next novel being 'A Business in Great Waters' (1895). 
During this period Corbett continued to travel, visiting Norway frequently, and almost invariably spending the winter in Rome. His taste for sport and travel induced him in 1896 to accompany the Dongola expedition to the Sudan as special correspondent of the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. His experiences were much less exciting than he had anticipated, but the campaign undoubtedly set him thinking about the conduct of war as a subject for his pen. In 1898 he produced his first serious contribution to historical literature, 'Drake and the Tudor Navy'. As he had already written two novels on this theme as well as a biography, the choice of subject was natural enough, but his experiences as a war correspondent had sharpened his perceptions. A critical and popular success, the book was notable not only for its comprehensive use of archival material, but for Corbett's understanding of the relationship between national policy and the use of naval power. Although he was to develop a deep knowledge of sailing battle tactics, his insistence on the primacy of national strategy was to be an abiding theme in his work. 

'Drake and the Tudor Navy' opened a new chapter in Corbett's life, but he was still uncertain about his future direction. His researches had brought him into touch with the Navy Records Society, recently founded by Sir John Knox Laughton, who persuaded him to edit a volume connected with Drake, 'Papers Relating to the Navy during the Spanish War, 1585-1587' (1898). At forty-five Corbett was hesitating whether to resume the role of the novelist or to follow his friends' advice and stand for parliament, when his marriage on 7 February 1899 to Edith Rosa ('b'. 1870/71), only daughter of George Alexander, cotton manufacturer, of Manchester, made up his mind. At his wife's request, he decided to devote himself to serious historical writing. 
The first fruit of this decision was 'The Successors of Drake' (1900). Two years later (1902) Corbett edited for the Navy Records Society Sir William Slyngsbie's contemporary 'Relation of the Voyage to Cadiz, 1596'. From 1900 onwards, at first with articles in the 'Monthly Review', he began to comment on contemporary defence matters, focusing initially on the need to integrate the efforts of both army and navy. He soon became involved in the movement for naval educational reform, which brought him into contact with Lieutenant Herbert Richmond and Admiral Sir John Fisher. In 1902 Corbett became lecturer in history to the Royal Naval War College, just established at Greenwich, and in 1903 was selected to deliver the Ford lectures at Oxford. In 1904 he presented the results of recent research in 'England in the Mediterranean, 1603-1714', a comprehensive study of naval strategy. Naval tactics next engaged his attention, and for the centenary of Trafalgar (1905) he prepared for the Navy Records Society 'Fighting Instructions, 1530-1816', a collection of documents illustrating the art of handling battle fleets in the days of sail. But at the War College it was strategy rather than tactics that his audiences required, and in 1907 he completed another notable contribution to the subject, 'England in the Seven Years' War'. Benefiting from Corbett's study of the work of Clausewitz, this was a book which, more than any of its precursors, analysed the complex relationship between naval power and national policy. 
During Fisher's term as first sea lord (1904-10), he called on Corbett to support many of his innovations, notably the 'Dreadnought' and the battle cruiser, with historical argument in the public press and in material for government committees. Corbett did much to assist the admiral but he was always careful to limit himself to judgements which could fairly be deduced from historical analysis. In 1908, he edited for the Navy Records Society volumes dealing with 'Views of the Battles of the Third Dutch War' and 'Signals and Instructions, 1776-1794', the latter a supplement to his 'Fighting Instructions'. He also found time to write numerous articles and pamphlets, including 'The Capture of Private Property at Sea', reprinted by A. T. Mahan in 'Some Neglected Aspects of War' (1907). But Corbett was chiefly engaged upon a new study, 'The Campaign of Trafalgar', published in 1910. His most important work so far, it disappointed some reviewers, who were expecting more emphasis on Corbett's controversial treatment of Nelson's tactics. They received instead what may be called the first staff history of a naval campaign. Nevertheless, Corbett's tactical assessments were sufficiently controversial to cause the formation of an Admiralty committee on the subject in 1912. Its findings largely vindicated him. 
Corbett's continuing work at the War College and his revision of his associated pamphlet 'Strategic Terms and Definitions used in Lectures on Naval History' (1906; the 'green pamphlet') caused him to present the essence of his doctrine in 'Some Principles of Maritime Strategy' (1911). At the same time he was editing for the Navy Records Society the 'Private Papers of George, Second Earl Spencer' (1913-14), which threw new light on naval administration in Nelson's day. On the appearance of the second volume of this work, he was awarded the Chesney gold medal by the Royal United Service Institution (1914). 
When the First World War broke out Corbett offered his services to the Admiralty. In addition to organizing the collection of material for the history of the struggle at sea, he wrote pamphlets to press the allied cause with neutrals and supplied statements of historical parallels for the assistance of the naval staff. He also helped in drafting a number of key staff documents. His work in 1914-15 included advising on both the Dardanelles campaign and what Lord Fisher later termed his 'Baltic project'. In 1917 he was knighted. 
Shortly before the war Corbett had undertaken to write a two-volume classified history of the naval campaigns of 1904-5; this was completed in 1915 under the title 'Maritime Operations in the Russo-Japanese War, 1904-06'. This confidential work suffered from its timing and its very limited distribution. It received little or no official attention, despite the significance of much of Corbett's analysis to the First World War at sea. However, the experience that he gained was to prove invaluable in compiling the official history of the current naval war and strengthened the historian's hand when seeking access to materials and dealing with cabinet and Admiralty over the issue of censorship. The friendship of Maurice Hankey, secretary of the cabinet and the committee of imperial defence, proved of critical importance, but Corbett's path was not an easy one. All three volumes of 'Naval Operations' (1920, 1921, and 1923) which Corbett wrote were marked by delay, debate, and attempts at suppression, particularly the last, which dealt with the battle of Jutland. He was forced to tread carefully, making his assessments implicit and leaving criticism often unstated. Even then the Admiralty disclaimed agreement with Corbett's narrative of Jutland, complaining that the 'tendency to minimise the importance of seeking battle' was in conflict with the navy's views. This misinterpretation of Corbett's insistence on a utilitarian approach to command of the sea had been a recurring theme in the previous decade. It had brought him into conflict with Lord Sydenham of Combe immediately after Jutland when the latter blamed Corbett's teachings for the indecisive result. 
In 1921 Corbett delivered the Creighton lecture at King's College, London, sketching in outline the subject which he had put aside to chronicle the Russo-Japanese War, and to which he always hoped to return -- 'Napoleon and the British navy after Trafalgar' published in the 'Quarterly Review', in April 1922. But his plans were frustrated. The strain and bitterness of the controversies over 'Naval Operations' had taken their toll and Corbett died quite suddenly, of heart disease, at Manor Farm, Stopham, Pulborough, Sussex, on 21 September 1922, only two weeks after delivering the manuscript of the third volume of 'Naval Operations'. He was survived by his wife and by one son and one daughter. 
Corbett had a natural bent for history, collected rare books and manuscripts, and wrote in a cultured and arresting style. There was as much of the philosopher in him as the historian. It was fortunate that his career was undetermined when the Royal Naval War College was instituted. Finding in him the instrument it needed, it inspired the series of monographs and histories which won for Corbett a wide measure of esteem and, for the Royal Navy, a more profound understanding of its purpose. 


@@@@@


doc= 32568


Corbould, Edward Henry (1815-1905), watercolour painter, born at 70 St John Street, Fitzroy Square, London, on 5 December 1815, was the eldest son of Henry Corbould (1787-1844), painter and draughtsman, and his wife, a Miss Pickles of Chelsea, and a grandson of Richard Corbould (1757-1831), painter and illustrator. His brothers were Francis John Corbould (1819-1884), a sculptor, and the twins Henry Heath and Alfred Hichens Corbould, born in 1821: one became a surgeon, and the other an artist. All four were educated at King's College School, London, where the younger brothers were taught drawing by John Sell Cotman. 
Edward Corbould was taught by his father, and studied at Henry Sass's drawing school in Bloomsbury before entering the Royal Academy Schools in 1834. In that year his watercolour the 'Fall of Phaeton' won a gold medal at the Society of Arts, but his prize entries in the following two years were models, a 'St George and the Dragon' and a 'Chariot Race from Homer'. His first exhibits in the Royal Academy, in 1835, also included a model, but thereafter he abandoned sculpture. However, in 1889, when the London corporation invited designs for sculpture for Blackfriars Bridge (a project never carried out), he produced drawings of colossal groups. With rare exceptions, such as the oil painting 'The Canterbury Pilgrims' (exh. RA, 1874), he worked in watercolour, or claimed to. In fact, at least from 1851 -- when he contributed one of the few paintings shown at the Great Exhibition -- he often used the 'new silica colour and a glass medium' invented ten years previously by Thomas Miller of Long Acre. 
Corbould also exhibited at the New Watercolour Society, later the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, from 1837, being elected a member in that year. In 1861 he resigned over financial mismanagement, but returned after failing to win election to the Old Watercolour Society. He finally retired from active membership in 1898, having exhibited about 250 works. Corbould's highly wrought exhibition pieces -- sometimes harsh in colour and rigid in composition -- were very obviously intended to face down oil paintings on their own terms; numerous prints of his works were published. His sketches owe something to the works of the German Nazarene school, employing strong pen outlines and light colour washes. Corbould was also a prolific book and magazine illustrator, working on many standard nineteenth-century editions of authors such as Chaucer, Edmund Spenser, and Walter Scott. Many of his illustrations were mere hackwork, and the historian of 1860s illustration Gleeson White dismissed the work of Corbould and other contributors to the 1870 volume of 'Cassell's Magazine' with the remark that it would be kindest to ignore it. 
In 1840 Corbould drew the portrait of the queen for the new penny black stamp, from Wyon's medal, and he also designed stamps for Trinidad, Mauritius, Ceylon, and Van Diemen's Land. In 1842 his 'The Woman Taken in Adultery' was bought by the prince consort, who subsequently presented a number of his works to the queen, and in 1851 he was appointed 'instructor of historical painting to the royal family'. For the next twenty-one years he taught various members of the family, and many of his best works were acquired by them. His duties could be time-consuming: in 1862 he wrote to J. J. Jenkins from Osborne: 'Here I am a prisoner but I hope to get up to town on Saturday night. The Princess Alice has made me promise to 'stay over Saturday'. Surely HRH never understands that I am to be visible here on the Monday? I shall only understand 'till' Saturday evening. (Royal Watercolour Society archives)' Corbould was married three times: his first marriage on 28 September 1839 to Fanny Jemima (died 1850), daughter of the engraver Charles Heath (1785-1848) ['see under 'Heath family], produced three daughters. The eldest, Jemima, married the painter Francis John Wyburd (1827-1909), and the second, Isabel Fanny, Mrs G. H. Heywood, had two artist daughters. His second marriage, to Annie Middleton Wilson (died 1866), took place on 7 August 1851; the couple had two sons, Ridley Edward Arthur Lamothe (1854-1887) and Victor Albert Louis Edward ('b'. 1866), who became a doctor. He married thirdly, on 15 January 1868, Anne Melis Sanders, daughter of Ellis Lee Sanders, with whom he had a further son and daughter. 
Between 1851 and 1853 Corbould's brother Alfred built Eldon Lodge, at 8 Victoria Road, in the new suburb of South Kensington, but Edward was then by far the more prosperous of the two and in the 1860s he took over the property. He extended it, creating a worthy neighbour for Leighton House and its artistic fellows on Campden Hill: Corbould's studio measured 26 feet by nearly 25 feet, was proportionately high, and panelled with English and continental oak carving dating from the middle ages to the Gothic revival. Below was an equally sizeable picture store. While the hall was tiled in the manner of Pugin, the dining-room was in the Adam style, and the study was fashionably japanesque. 
After the death of Prince Albert, the queen employed Corbould to colour photographs of him; he was responsible for the image of Albert the Good in knightly armour receiving his crown of glory, which hung as a memorial in the Albert Room at Windsor Castle. However, by the mid-1870s Corbould's historical paintings were out of fashion. On 6 May 1875 the queen noted in her journal that she 'thought him much aged and altered' (Royal Archives, Windsor), and thereafter she not only paid $50 p.a. towards his son's school fees, but from 1891 a personal allowance, continued by Edward VII. He died at Eldon Lodge on 16 January 1905. As well as the watercolours and albums in the Royal Collection, there are examples of his work in the British Museum and the Sydney Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32569


Corfield, William Henry (1843-1903), sanitarian, born on 14 December 1843 at Shrewsbury, was the eldest son of Thomas Corfield, chemist, and his wife, Jane Brown. Educated at Cheltenham grammar school, he gained a demyship in natural science at Magdalen College, Oxford, and matriculated on 12 October 1861; he gained a first class in mathematical moderations in 1863. While studying at Oxford Corfield was selected by C. G. B. Daubeny to accompany him to Auvergne, France, where he investigated the volcanic landforms in the Montbrison district. He graduated BA at Oxford in 1864, and from 1865 to 1875 he held the Sheppard medical fellowship at Pembroke College, Oxford. Corfield entered University College, London, as a medical student in 1865; in 1866 he won the Burdett-Coutts scholarship at Oxford for geology, and in 1867 he was elected Radcliffe travelling fellow. 
Influenced by Sir Henry Acland and by George Rolleston, Corfield had by this time directed his attention to hygiene and sanitary science. He spent some time in Paris, where he attended Apollinaire Bouchardat's lectures and studied hygiene under Professor Berthelot at the College de France. He proceeded afterwards to Lyons, worked in clinical medicine and surgery, and made a special study of the remains of the aqueducts of ancient Lugdunum. He also visited some of the medical schools in Italy and Sicily. He graduated MB at Oxford in 1868 and MD in 1872. In 1869 he was admitted MRCP, and in 1875 he was elected FRCP. He became a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry in 1877. Corfield married in 1876 Emily Madelina, youngest daughter of John Pike FSA; they had six children. 
Meanwhile in 1869 Corfield had been appointed professor of hygiene and public health at University College, London, and in 1875 he opened the first laboratory in London for the practical teaching of hygiene. In memory of E. A. Parkes, in 1876 Corfield actively helped to found a museum of practical hygiene, which was situated first at University College, then at Margaret Street, Cavendish Square, and after 1909 at Buckingham Palace Road, Westminster. Corfield was medical officer of health for Islington (1871-2), and for St George's, Hanover Square (1872-1900), and he was at one time president of the Society of Medical Officers of Health. 
A member of the committee appointed in 1869 by the British Association for the Advancement of Science to inquire into the treatment and utilization of sewage, Corfield worked as reporter to the committee until 1875, and he became an ardent advocate of land filtration and sewage farms. At the Royal Society of Arts in 1879 he delivered the Cantor lectures, entitled 'Dwelling houses, their sanitary construction and arrangements'; in 1893 he gave the Harveian lecture before the Harveian Society of London, entitled 'Disease and defective house sanitation'; and in 1902 he gave the Milroy lectures at the Royal College of Physicians of London, 'On the aetiology of typhoid fever and its prevention'. 
Corfield shares with Rogers Field the honour of being a pioneer in house sanitation and of being the first to enunciate the hygienic principles of a healthy home. Public interest was aroused in 1871 when the prince of Wales (the future Edward VII) contracted typhoid fever at Londesborough Lodge, Scarborough. For the next thirty years Corfield enjoyed a large consulting practice throughout England, in connection with the sanitation of public and private buildings. In 1899 he was the first holder of the newly established office of consulting sanitary adviser to the office of works. 
With John Netten Radcliffe, Corfield was joint secretary of the Epidemiological Society from 1870 to 1872, and he was president in 1902-3. He was also president of the public health section of the British Medical Association meeting held at Bristol in 1894 and of a section of the sanitary congress of the Sanitary Institute held at Newcastle upon Tyne in 1896, and he originated the successful International Congress of Hygiene held in London in 1891. He represented the office of works at the International Congress of Hygiene and Demography, of which he was honorary president, at Paris in 1900; and he presided at the conference held by the Sanitary Institute at Paris in August 1900 under the auspices of the Societe Francaise d'Hygiene. 
Corfield belongs to the second generation of sanitary reformers in England. Entering professional life after a general education, he took up the subject of public health where it had been left by Edwin Chadwick, John Simon, Sir George Buchanan, Netten Radcliffe, Richard Thorne-Thorne, and others, and carried it forward into the twentieth century. 
Corfield was a collector of rare books and a connoisseur of bindings. His library was especially rich in works on fishing. He was also a lover of prints, and made a fine collection of Bewick woodcuts. For more than twenty years he was chairman of the committee of the Sunday Society, which promoted the opening of museums, picture galleries, and public libraries on Sunday. Corfield died on 26 August 1903 at Marstrand in Sweden, during a visit for his health. 
In addition to his numerous appointments and large practice Corfield published many works, mostly on sanitary dwelling arrangements and the problems presented by sewerage. 'Laws of Health' (1880) reached nine editions, and 'Dwelling Houses: their Sanitary Construction and Arrangements' (1880) and 'Disease and Defective House Sanitation' (1896) were both translated into other European languages. 


@@@@@


doc= 32570


Cornford, Frances Crofts (1886-1960), poet, was born in Cambridge on 30 March 1886, the only child of Sir Francis Darwin (1848-1925) and his second wife, Ellen Wordsworth Crofts (1856-1903), daughter of John Crofts, of Leeds. Ellen was a lecturer in English at Newnham College, Cambridge. Francis Darwin, then lecturer in botany at Cambridge, was the third son of Charles Darwin, whom he had helped with his biological researches. Frances was half-sister to the writer and golfing expert Bernard Darwin, the only child of her father's first marriage. Her education was private, and during her childhood her chief associates were her cousins, the children of George Darwin and Horace Darwin. Her mother died when she was seventeen; her father then moved their home for a short time to London, but soon returned to Cambridge where Frances spent most of the rest of her life. 
In the summer of 1908 members of the Cambridge Marlowe Dramatic Society arranged a performance of 'Comus' as part of a Milton tercentenary celebration at Christ's College, where Frances Darwin met Francis Macdonald Cornford (1874-1943), a fellow of Trinity College and afterwards Laurence professor of ancient philosophy at Cambridge, who had been cast for the part of Comus. They were married in 1909. Their home at Conduit Head off the Madingley Road soon became a meeting-place for artists and men of letters such as Will Rothenstein, Eric Gill, Lowes Dickinson, Bertrand Russell, and occasional visitors such as Rabindranath Tagore. The Cornfords had five children. Their eldest son, (Rupert) John Cornford, was killed in Spain, in December 1936. The second son, Christopher Francis Cornford, became an artist and in 1963 was appointed the first dean of the Royal College of Art in London. 
Frances Darwin, with intellect and artistic sensibility strongly represented in her forebears, started writing poetry at sixteen and subsequently published enough to entitle her to a distinguished place among the minor poets of the Georgian period and later years. Her first volume, 'Poems' (1910), brought somewhat embarrassing fame for 'To a Fat Lady Seen from a Train', which became a standard anthology piece and was parodied by G. K. Chesterton. Rupert Brooke was one of her closest friends and she was always eager to profit by his criticism and that of others such as Christopher Hassall and Sir Edward Marsh. She was herself always ready to give help of the same kind to younger writers. One of her early books was a 'morality' play, 'Death and the Princess' (1912). With the publication of later volumes of poetry, 'Different Days' (1928), 'Mountains and Molehills' (1934), and 'Travelling Home' (1948), the quiet but distinctive quality of her work began to be recognized. She was not influenced by the poetic trends set by T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound and her short, often epigrammatic, poems are characterized by visual acuity and quiet humour. In 1954 her volume 'Collected Poems' was the official 'choice' of the Poetry Book Society and in 1959 she was awarded the queen's medal for poetry. She also tried her hand with some success at verse translations, publishing 'Poems from the Russian' (1943, assisted by Esther Salaman) and a selection (1950) from the French of Paul Eluard. Three of her books were decorated with woodcuts by her cousin Gwen Raverat, and one had cuts by Eric Gill. 
Frances Cornford was of medium height and of brown complexion, with dark hair and eyes. Her appearance was striking and attractive rather than beautiful, her attractions being increased by her gentle friendliness, her amusing conversation, and her wish to enter with warmth and imagination into the feelings and emotions of her many friends. In the ordinary affairs of life she was endearingly vague and unpractical, with an extraordinary capacity for mislaying her possessions. She had not been baptized and was brought up without religion. Initially, she wrote as a troubled agnostic. Later, however, she accepted with deep conviction the faith of the Church of England. Her sensitive nature led to her suffering from several periods of deep depression, the first one following the shock of her mother's death. Each time, however, she made a good, though slow, recovery and she lived to the age of seventy-four; she died of heart failure at her home, 10 Millington Road, Cambridge, on 19 August 1960. She was buried at St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32571


Cornford, Francis Macdonald (1874-1943), classical scholar, was born at Eastbourne, Sussex, on 27 February 1874, the second son of the Revd James Cornford (1840-1900), and his wife, Mary Emma Macdonald. He was educated at St Paul's School under F. W. Walker and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his father had studied. He won a scholarship (1894), obtained a first class in both parts of the classical tripos (1895, 1897), and was bracketed equal for the chancellor's classical medal (1897). Among the important influences upon him were Henry Jackson, Arthur Woollgar Verrall, and Walter George Headlam. 
Cornford considered becoming a schoolmaster but decided rather to follow an academic career, and in 1897 applied for the chair of Greek at the University College of South Wales in Cardiff. Although this application failed, he was subsequently elected a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1899; the earlier possibility of a fellowship had been delayed because of Cornford's criticism of Jackson in a thesis. After his father's death in February 1900 Cornford took responsibility for his mother. In 1902 he was appointed assistant lecturer in classics at Trinity College and lecturer in 1904. Except for the period of the First World War, almost the whole of his adult life was to be spent in Cambridge. 
Cornford was from the first dissatisfied with the somewhat narrow nineteenth-century Cambridge ideal of 'pure scholarship'. In an address to the newly established Cambridge Classical Society in November 1903 -- and published as a pamphlet, 'The Cambridge Classical Course: an Essay in Anticipation of Further Reform' (1903) -- Cornford (the first secretary of the society) advocated a more humane, less philological type of instruction, as well as a better co-ordinated intercollegiate lecture system in place of the semi-chaotic conditions then prevailing. He felt that: 'a course of lectures ought to be the outcome of recent first-hand work. When a man's mind is full of fresh ideas and quickened by the excitement of discovery, then is the time to lecture: there is the chance of interesting his class, while the discipline of exposition will test and clarify his thoughts.' Recognizing that lectures ought not to repeat what can better be obtained from books, Cornford always aimed at stimulating his classes by an original treatment of his subject; the better men appreciated this, but his methods were perhaps less well suited to the ordinary minds which formed the majority of his audiences. Concurrently with lecturing he had a considerable amount of college teaching; but although he never compromised this work, his heart was from early days elsewhere, namely in writing books. Apart from the professorial lectures of his last years, it is as a writer rather than as a teacher that he is chiefly remembered. 
One of the people who influenced Cornford's view of lecturing was the unconventional Jane Harrison (1850-1928) of Newnham College. Cornford had attended her lectures in 1898 (soon after her return to Cambridge), and they became close friends. Cornford associated with Jane Harrison and Gilbert Murray, and together they formed a loose group; Murray recalled of them: 'we somehow had the same general aim and outlook, or something, and the work of each contributed to the work of the others. We were out to see what things really meant, looking for a new light our elders had not seen. (Stewart, 83)' Members of this group looked to the Near East for influences. In an attempt to get to grips with oriental languages, Cornford, Harrison, Arthur Bernard Cook, and James George Frazer were being given Hebrew lessons by Robert Hatch Kennett, the regius professor in Cambridge. Cornford and Harrison were also learning cuneiform, even taking texts on holiday to Marazion in Cornwall. Jessie Stewart recorded how she was presented with a Plasticine tablet on which Cornford had cut a cuneiform text, translated by Harrison, that celebrated the exploits of Stewart's black Russian poodle, Kapi (Stewart, 69). 
What primarily interested Cornford in this period was the study of those primitive modes of thought and feeling which provided the background, largely unrealized, of the writers -- poets, historians, and philosophers -- of the classical age of Greece, and the investigation of the ritual forms in which those thoughts and feelings found outward expression. Out of this group's thinking emerged Cornford's first book, 'Thucydides mythistoricus' (1907), a work dedicated to Harrison as 'a dream which but for help and understanding would have gone up the chimney with the smoke'. 'Thucydides', although highly original and stimulating, is probably the least convincing of Cornford's three books of this period; Gilbert Murray was to quote an Oxford philosopher, 'Much of the book is wrong, but I have learnt more from it than from any book I have read for years' (Murray, 422). Historians were not slow to challenge some of the book's arguments. An anonymous review in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1907) noted that 'Mr Cornford has written a most brilliant essay, but cannot be said to have penetrated below the surface of his subject' (p. 307). John Percival Postgate, in an extensive review article, concluded that Cornford had 'combined scientific analysis with literary form and that he has invested the conclusions of a rationalist with all the charm of a mythistorian' ('Classical Quarterly', 1907, 318). 
Relations between Harrison and Cornford at this point were close. They frequently went on holiday together: Marazion in Cornwall and Southwold in Suffolk were two favoured spots, though they also travelled on the continent. Together they attended the first International Congress of Classical Archaeology in Athens in April 1905; around Cambridge they were also a regular sight on their bicycles, 'Francis very upright, with his usual rather Spanish dignity' (Stewart, 104). Both suffered from illness during 1907, which proved a turning point in their relationship. In May Cornford was struck down by appendicitis, a condition which had caused the death, in 1901, of Harrison's friend, R. A. Neil, tutor at Pembroke College. This fear may have induced Harrison's spell of blindness during Cornford's convalescence in Southwold that June. 
Cornford had long played an active part in Cambridge life. In May 1897 he had supported degrees for women and helped to organize an undergraduate petition in its favour. He had been a member of the editorial committee of the 'Cambridge Review' since 1897 and became editor in 1899; a number of his poems were published there between 1903 and 1908, including 'The academic dilemma' and 'A ballad of cadavers, or, The MATERIAL needs of the medical school'. He had a reputation for composing Latin valentines, represented by his 'Quaestiones Valentinianae' (1902). Cornford prepared an anonymous flysheet, 'Compulsory Chapel' (1904), which provoked a flysheet response from Russell Kerr Gaye -- and eventually ended compulsory chapel at Trinity College in 1913. Pamphlets distributed in 1910 by William Chawner, master of Emmanuel College, promoted a rationalist position in the university, and in the wake of the controversy Cornford and Charles Kay Ogden were responsible for founding the Cambridge Society of Heretics. One of Cornford's lectures to the society was published as 'Religion in the University' (1911). 
Cornford was also active in wider circles, speaking on university education to the Oxford and London Fabian societies (1910). One of his long-lasting commitments was to the Working Men's College, then meeting in Great Ormond Street in London, for which he had helped to establish an annual summer course in Cambridge in 1901; George Macaulay Trevelyan, who introduced Cornford to the Working Men's College, recalled that 'Cornford was devoted to the men he met there, more I think than to the average of his pupils at Cambridge' (Trevelyan, 24). 
The wit and light satire of Cornford's vision for classics in Cambridge found fuller scope in 'Microcosmographia academica' (1908), originally anonymous. It was a skit on university politics, 'one of the few university satires', it has been said, 'which have outlived their occasion'. It contained pictures of the 'Young Man in a hurry' who 'is afflicted with a conscience, which is apt to break out, like measles, in patches'. It also responded to the growth of science as a subject at Cambridge, noting the 'Adullamites' who 'inhabit a series of caves near Downing Street'. 
The success of the 'Microcosmographia academica' brought Cornford into contact with a young woman, an episode which was to alter his relationship with Harrison. Frances Darwin ['see 'Cornford, Frances Crofts (1886-1960)], the only daughter of Ellen Crofts (1856-1903), one of Harrison's closest friends at Newnham College, and the botanist Francis Darwin (1848-1925), son of Charles Darwin, had recently returned to Cambridge after recuperation following her mother's death. Frances had been intrigued by 'Microcosmographia academica', and Harrison, a close family friend of the Darwins, arranged a tea party in Lent term 1908, so that Frances could meet Cornford. Their friendship developed during a production of Milton's 'Comus' in July 1908 as part of the celebrations for Milton's tercentenary, supported by Cornford as treasurer of the Marlowe Society. During rehearsals the cousins Frances and Gwen Darwin persuaded the producers, Justin and Rupert Brooke, that Cornford, 'in spite of his great age' should be Comus (Stewart, 109). (The 'great age' -- of thirty-four -- is no doubt a hint at Cornford's view, expressed in 'Microcosmographia academica', that middle age started at thirty-five.) Cornford, who acted in the production anonymously, subsequently acquired the nickname Comus. 
While accompanying Harrison, who was convalescing after surgery, to Braunton, Devon, Cornford successfully proposed to Frances Darwin. He was not insensitive to Harrison's feelings for him, and wrote to Frances, 'About Aunt Jane we shall have to be thoughtful. You see she and I were both rather lonely people, we foregathered and made friends and we have been a good deal together' (Stewart, 109). Their formal engagement was announced in early October 1908. That Christmas Frances painted a card showing herself, her father, Cornford, and Harrison, all bearing or leading pigs, in a direct reference to the Greek cult practice at the sanctuary of Demeter and Kore at Eleusis in Attica. In July 1909 they married in a register office. Their first child, Helena, was born in 1913. 
Harrison found her relationship with Cornford strained. She seems to have hoped that one day they would marry, or that they could have continued in their semi-married status: 'I had come back from Death... just to find the man I always called my 'Rock of Ages' slipping away from me' (Beard, 157). Cornford was now nicknamed Zeus and Frances Old One, the name given to one of Harrison's favourite toy bears. She and Cornford were, however, able to work together again. Cornford contributed a chapter on the origin of the Olympic games to Harrison's 'Themis' (1912) as a refutation of Professor William Ridgeway's theories. He now concentrated on ancient philosophy and his next book, 'From Religion to Philosophy: a Study in the Origins of Western Speculation' (1912), was dedicated to his father-in-law, Francis Darwin. The work is notable for its penetrating interpretation of the pre-Socratic thinkers. Gilbert Murray had contributed an essay, 'Excursus on ritual forms preserved in Greek tragedy', to Harrison's 'Themis'. This was in part the inspiration for Cornford's 'The Origin of Attic Comedy' (1914), which analysed the structure of Aristophanes' plays in order to detect the ritual sequence lying behind them. 
During the First World War Cornford, who had been a member of the Cambridge University rifle volunteers, was soon enlisted and to the surprise of his friends Rupert Brooke and Gilbert Murray became a musketry instructor at Grantham. In December 1915 Cornford's first son was born, named Rupert John in honour of Brooke, who had died that April. Now a commissioned officer holding the rank of captain, Cornford transferred to the Ministry of Munitions, of whose founding he wrote an anonymous satirical account, 'The First Book of Munitions called Genesis', 'in the style of the first chapter of 'Genesis', with the contrary views of Jahvist and Elohist strongly marked in accordance with a burning controversy of the time' (Murray, 431; copy in Trinity College Library). He was involved in the attempt to have Bertrand Russell restored to his fellowship at Trinity. 
Cornford's return to life in Cambridge was dominated by Frances's serious bout of depression; this seems to have followed the birth of a third child, Christopher Francis Cornford, later an artist and writer, in February 1917. Virginia Woolf observed to Vanessa Bell: 'The poor woman has a delusion that she must never be tired, and has now spent 2 years in going from rest cure to rest cure. She refuses to see either her husband or children. The doctors have at last sent her home, but think she may be incurable. ('Letters of Virginia Woolf', 2.377, no. 1068, 17 July 1919)' Gilbert Murray commented that this illness 'brought out [Cornford's] infinite practical helpfulness and patience' (Murray, 432). The Cornfords had two more children: a son born in 1921, and a daughter in 1924. 
On the death of Henry Jackson in 1921 Cornford was an unsuccessful candidate for the regius professorship of Greek. He presented a lecture, 'The beginnings of natural science: Euripides, 'Melanippe the wise', frag. 484 (N2)', described by Harrison as 'a beautiful sermon quite over their heads -- the row of old cabmen who were electors looked bothered' (Harrison to Murray, 17 Nov 1921, Bodl. Oxf., MSS G. Murray). 'Microcosmographia academica' was reissued under Cornford's name in 1922, and dedicated to Edward Granville Browne, Sir Thomas Adams's professor of Arabic. Cornford added a short preface, including the comment that the first edition had lacked a chapter on 'propaganda' which he 'defined as that branch of the art of lying which consists in very nearly deceiving your friends without quite deceiving your enemies'. Further editions appeared in 1933, 1949, 1953, 1964, and 1970. 
Cornford's work now became more strictly concerned with ancient philosophy. He published important papers: 'Mysticism and science in the Pythagorean tradition' ('Classical Quarterly', 16, 1922), and 'Anaxagoras' theory of matter' ('ibid'., 24, 1930). He also prepared 'Greek Religious Thought from Homer to Alexander' (1923), consisting of translated extracts with a valuable introduction. In 1927 he was appointed Brereton-Laurence reader in classics (with special direction to instruct in ancient philosophy). At the same time he assisted Philip Henry Wicksteed, who had been working on a translation of Aristotle's 'Physics' but had been 'overtaken by paralysis and symptoms of approaching death' (Murray, 426), and took dictation of the manuscript. Cornford subsequently prepared the notes as two volumes in the 'Loeb Classical Library' (1929-34), supplementing Wicksteed's free translation with an alternative rendering and masterly annotation. 
Cornford was gaining an international reputation, and in 1928 was invited to lecture at Harvard, though he was again an unsuccessful candidate for regius professor of Greek at Cambridge. His academic contribution was finally acknowledged in 1931 when he was appointed first holder of the Laurence chair of ancient philosophy at Cambridge. His inaugural lecture was published as 'The Laws of Motion in Ancient Thought' (1931). A series of four lectures presented for the board of extra-mural studies at Cambridge in August 1932 was published as 'Before and after Socrates' (1932). In that same autumn he gave a series of BBC lectures under the title 'Our Debt to the Past', concluding with 'How Greece reconciled ethics and science'. 
In 1935 came the first of the three great commentaries on Plato's later dialogues, all published in the 'International Library of Psychology, Philosophy and Scientific Method' series, which crown Cornford's achievement and placed him in the forefront of modern Platonic scholars: 'Plato's Theory of Knowledge: the Theaetetus and Sophist of Plato' (1935); 'Plato's Cosmology: the Timaeus of Plato Translated and with a Running Commentary' (1937); and 'Plato and Parmenides: Parmenides' way of truth and Plato's Parmenides; translated with an introduction and a running commentary' (1939). In his last years he produced an excellent translation of the 'Republic' (1941), with interpretative summary, section by section, and a judicious pruning of the encumbrances of dialogue-form. Murray observed that this work reflected 'Cornford's own strong interest in the same problems as they recur in modern society' (Murray, 429). Cornford supported young scholars through the creation of the 'Cambridge Classical Studies' series for which he served as one of the editors. Volumes included R. P. Winnington-Ingram's 'Mode in Ancient Greek Music' (1936) and J. Enoch Powell's 'The History of Herodotus' (1939). 
Life at home had been varied. Frances had become well known as a poet, but their children had given them some concern. Gilbert Murray remembered: 'His relations with a series of brilliant children, whose opinions were at times vehemently opposed to his own, and whom he encouraged 'to sail away like ships' in pursuit of their own ideals, were a model to those parents who believe in the supreme power of affection and the value of freedom. (Murray, 432)' Cornford's eldest son, the poet (Rupert) John Cornford, an active member of the Young Communist League, left for Spain and was killed near Cordoba in December 1936, on or just after his twenty-first birthday, while fighting against the forces of General Franco in the Spanish Civil War. Cornford contributed an essay on his son's childhood to Pat Sloan's 'John Cornford: a Memoir' (1938). 
Cornford received the honorary degree of DLitt from Birmingham University in 1937 and was elected FBA in the same year. He retired from his chair in 1939. His health then started to fail. His last two papers challenged what he saw as misguided contemporary theories. 'The Marxist view of ancient philosophy' was presented to the Classical Association (summary in 'Proceedings of the Classical Association', 39, May 1942). He was due to give a paper, 'Was the Ionian philosophy scientific?', to the joint congress of the Hellenic and Roman societies in September 1942, but in the end it was read by Gilbert Murray; it was subsequently published in the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1942). Cornford died at his home, Conduit Head, Madingley Road, Cambridge, on 3 January 1943. 
Professor W. K. C. Guthrie, a former student, added a foreword to the 1949 edition of 'Microcosmographia academica' and published some of Cornford's works posthumously. A series of essays written between 1921 and 1943 appeared in 'The Unwritten Philosophy and other Essays' (1950), along with a memoir. A more substantial work, 'Principium sapientiae' (1952), contained Cornford's latest speculations on the origins of Greek philosophical thought. Fifty years after Cornford's death a tenth edition of the 'Microcosmographia' was published with the further title 'Cambridge's Classic Guide to Success in the World' (1993), and a foreword by Henry Chadwick. The satire's enduring qualities were reflected in the endorsement by Ray Bell, head of strategy development of British Telecom: 'For every young MBA in a hurry, it will save you years of struggling to find this out for yourself'. Cambridge University Press also issued an edition with an essay by Gordon Johnson on Cornford's Cambridge under the title 'University Politics' (1994). 
Frances Cornford described her husband at their first encounter at a concert about 1901: 'a tall dark man with hair parted in a stylised way like a wig' (Stewart, 105). Virginia Woolf's impression on meeting Cornford in Cambridge in early 1923 was of 'a military man, of upright bearing and manly spirit' although on a previous occasion 'he was wearing a French peasant's blouse and a red tie' (Woolf to Jacques Raverat, 'Letters of Virginia Woolf', 3.24, 30 March 1923). Gilbert Murray recalled that Cornford 'combined great personal charm and courtesy with a certain aloofness and apparent indifference to worldly values and received opinions' (Murray, 421). 


@@@@@


doc= 32572


Cornish, Charles John (1858-1906), naturalist and journalist, was born on 28 September 1858 at Salcombe House, near Sidmouth, the residence of his grandfather, Charles John Cornish JP DL. He was the eldest son of Charles John Cornish (1834-1913), then curate of Sidbury, Devonshire, and his first wife, Anne Charlotte Western (1831-1887); the geographer Vaughan Cornish was his brother. He was brought up at Debenham, Suffolk, where his father became vicar in 1859. In 1872 he entered Charterhouse School as a gownboy, and left in 1876. After receiving private tuition, he entered Hertford College, Oxford, as a commoner in 1881, and was elected Brunsell exhibitioner in 1882, and Lusby scholar in 1883. He obtained his blue in association football, a second class in classical moderations in 1883, and a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1885. After leaving Oxford he was appointed assistant classics master at St Paul's School, London, a post which he held until his death. In 1893 he married Edith, eldest daughter of Sir John I. Thornycroft FRS, and they had one daughter. In 1896 he founded the school field club. 
Soon after going to London Cornish started to write occasional articles on natural history and country life. In 1890 he became a regular contributor to 'The Spectator', and, later, to 'Country Life'; many of his articles reappeared in book form. The work for which he was best known was 'Life at the Zoo' (1895); his final work, 'Animal Artisans and other Studies of Birds and Beasts', was published posthumously in 1907 with a prefatory memoir by his widow. 
Cornish's country tastes and love of shooting and fishing were fostered by his father, in whose family they were traditional. His artistic and literary gifts he inherited from his mother. His powers of observation were unusually keen and rapid, his memory remarkably good, and he had vivid powers of expression. His literary energy, which continued through twenty years, stimulated public interest in natural history and country life, and helped to give these subjects an assured place in English journalism. He died at 114 Marine Parade, Worthing, Sussex, on 30 January 1906, from an illness originating in an accident he suffered when shooting, many years before. After cremation his ashes were interred at Salcombe Regis, near Sidmouth, and a mural tablet to his memory was placed in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32573


Cornish, Vaughan (1862-1948), geographer, was born on 22 December 1862 at Debenham, Suffolk, the third and youngest son of Charles John Cornish (1834-1913), vicar of Debenham, and his wife, Anne Charlotte Western (1831-1887). His father's cousin was Francis Warre Warre-Cornish and his elder brother was the naturalist Charles John Cornish. He was educated first at home and then, when he was seventeen, at St Paul's School, London. After working as a private tutor he studied chemistry at Victoria University of Manchester. While a student he presented a paper to the British Association with Percy Kendall in 1887; he graduated BSc with first-class honours in 1888, and proceeded MSc in 1892 and DSc in 1901. 
In 1891 Cornish married Ellen Agnes (1853-1911), the daughter of Alfred Provis, an artist, of Kingston Lisle, Berkshire. In the same year he became director of technical education for Hampshire county council. Living in a cliff-top house near Branksome Chine, between Bournemouth and Poole, he began his studies of waves, and in 1895 he resigned from his job to devote himself to research. In this he was encouraged and financially supported by his wife, who had private means. Ellen was trained as an engineer, and the couple exercised their scientific interests through worldwide travel, giving up a permanent home. Ellen died in 1911, and is recalled in Cornish's 'The Travels of Ellen Cornish: being the Memoir of a Pilgrim of Science' (1913) and 'Kestell, Clapp and Cornish' (1947). Cornish's global experience would later inform his survey of 'The Beauties of Scenery' (1943). In 1913 he married Mary Louisa, the daughter of William Richards Watson, rector of Saltfleetby, and the widow of his second cousin, the explorer Ernest Ayscoghe Floyer, whose notice he contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. They settled in Camberley, Surrey, though Cornish continued to travel extensively. There were no children of either marriage. 
Cornish's research on surface waves, to which he gave the label 'kumatology', was primarily observational, and often carried out in extreme conditions. He was awarded the Royal Geographical Society Gill memorial prize in 1901. Books such as 'Waves of the Sea and other Water Waves' (1910) and 'The Waves of Sand and Snow' (1914) document sand waves in the Libyan desert, wind-blown snow in Canada, and water waves below Niagara and in the mid-Atlantic. Cornish also studied British tidal bores, shooting the first film of the Severn bore in September 1901 from a boat anchored in mid-stream and tracking the Trent 'eagre' by car in 1922. His results were summarized in 'Ocean Waves and Kindred Geophysical Phenomena' (1934), with theoretical elaborations by Harold Jeffreys. He illustrated his work with his own photography, for which he won awards at the St Louis Exposition in 1904 and the Franco-British Exhibition in London in 1908. He later collected his work in 'The Photography of Scenery' (1946), with a companion volume of 'Sketches of Scenery in England and Abroad' (1949). The aesthetic concerns which dominated his later career were already strong in his physical geographic research. 
In 1907 and 1910 Cornish visited the construction site of the Panama Canal, which he described in 'The Panama Canal and its Makers' (1909) as a spectacular landscape of engineering and which proved a key inspiration for his political and strategic geography. He promoted Britain's imperial mission and position in 'Naval and Military Geography' (1916), 'Imperial Military Geography' (1920), and 'A Geography of Imperial Defence' (1922), and lectured to officers in wartime on the western front and at Scapa Flow, an experience recalled in 'Geographical Essays' (1946). Cornish's imperial geography was also a racial geography, proposing the migration of 'British stock' through the empire to safeguard the future of the 'white races'. He argued for a geographical eugenics in the 'Eugenics Review' (1925), asking 'which Nations are now the most useful part of the Human Community'. Strategic concerns also informed his well-received historical geography of 'The Great Capitals' (1923), which argued for the 'forward position' of capital cities as a focal point of internal and foreign communications. His 'Borderlands of Language in Europe' (1933) further argued that polyglot areas reflected periods when the 'Historic Frontier of Christendom' had remained stationary. Cornish was president of the geographical section E of the British Association in 1923. 
From around 1918 Cornish began to formulate an 'aesthetic geography', later citing Sir Francis Younghusband's 1920 address to the Royal Geographical Society on natural beauty and geographical science as a key inspiration. In his 1928 presidential address to the Geographical Association on harmonies of scenery ('Geography', 1928) he proposed a 'science of scenery' which would enable the geographer to assess and advise on the beauty of landscape. 'Nature' devoted an editorial to his work in March 1928. Cornish explored the workings of the eye in 'Scenery and the Sense of Sight' (1935) and in reviews of landscape art exhibitions for 'Nature' between 1929 and 1942. He termed himself a 'Pilgrim of Scenery', and his nature-mysticism received fullest expression in 'The Poetic Impression of Natural Scenery' (1931) and 'The Churchyard Yew and Immortality' (1946). His mystical and aesthetic geography extended the patriotic concerns of his imperial geography by presenting landscape as a key element of national identity, the 'proper' experience of which would improve the citizen. Cornish was active in the Council for the Preservation of Rural England (CPRE), for whom he gave evidence to the national parks committee in 1929 and produced 'The Scenery of England' (1932). He proposed national parks in 'National Parks and the Heritage of Scenery' (1930) and 'The Preservation of our Scenery' (1937), and put preservationist principles into practice after inheriting land in Salcombe Regis, Devon, in 1938, described in his CPRE pamphlet 'The Farm upon the Cliff' (1939) and 'The Scenery of Sidmouth' (1940). Cornish entered into agreements to preserve the cliff-top South Combe farm in perpetuity, and as owner of Thorn Farm erected a stone to explain the communal folk meaning of the Salcombe Regis thorn, discussed in his 'Historic Thorn Trees in the British Isles' (1941). 
Cornish was intensely proud of his family, minor gentry of the Sidmouth district of Devon since the fifteenth century. He regarded land as a source of family as well as national identity and was devoted to family history. He wrote the entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' for his elder brother, Charles, edited 'Reminiscences of Country Life' (1939) by his brother the Revd James George Cornish, and published two works on family history, 'A Family of Devon' (1942) and 'Kestell, Clapp and Cornish' (1947). Cornish was somewhat austere yet courteous, and his reserve thawed when he discussed his lifelong interests. He died at the Willersley Nursing Home, Park Road, Camberley on 1 May 1948, and was buried alongside his first wife in Salcombe Regis churchyard. 
Under the terms of his will of 4 August 1945 the Vaughan Cornish bequest was established at the University of Oxford to enable graduate students of the university to pursue studies 'relating to the beauty of scenery as determined by nature or the arts in town or country at home or abroad'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32574


Cornwallis, Sir Kinahan (1883-1959), diplomatist, was born on 19 February 1883 in New York, the son of Kinahan Cornwallis, journalist and writer, and his wife, Elizabeth Dickinson Chapman, of Hartford, Connecticut. He was educated at Haileybury College and at University College, Oxford; he graduated with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1905, before going on to study Arabic. Cornwallis was a renowned athlete, representing Oxford against Cambridge at athletics for four consecutive years, and was president of the Oxford University Athletic Club from 1904 to 1906. On leaving Oxford in 1906 he joined the Sudan civil service. After postings in Khartoum and Kassala, his knowledge of Arabic and Arab affairs was recognized by the Egyptian government, which first borrowed him in 1912 for service in the ministry of finance, and then, in 1914, made him a permanent member of their civil service. He remained there for the rest of his career, being seconded at different times to the army, the foreign office, and the Iraq government. On 14 October 1911 he married Gertrude Dorothy Bowen (died 1958), second daughter of Sir Albert Edward Bowen, first baronet, businessman and public servant. There were two sons and one daughter of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1925. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914, Gilbert Clayton at general headquarters intelligence had Cornwallis commissioned in the Egyptian army and took him into his own office; in 1915 he became a member of the Arab bureau where D. G. Hogarth was then director. A year later he accompanied Hogarth and Ronald Storrs to Jiddah in order to confirm with Sherif Hussein of Mecca the outbreak of the Arab uprising against Ottoman rule; during the event one of Hussein's sons, Feisal, accompanied by T. E. Lawrence, led an Arab force alongside allied forces in the occupation of Palestine and Syria and, specifically, in the capture of Damascus in October 1918. Cornwallis succeeded Hogarth as director of the Arab bureau in 1916, and he took over as regular editor of the 'Arab Bulletin', a series of wide-ranging summaries of confidential information on the Arab world, to which he contributed 'Asir before World War I: a Handbook' (1916). Lawrence immortalized Cornwallis in his 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom' (1935) as being at this stage of his career: 'a man rude to look upon, but apparently forged from one of those incredible metals with a melting point of thousands of degrees. So he could remain for months hotter than other men's white-heat, and yet look cold and hard. (Lawrence, 58)' Cornwallis inspired trust and confidence at all levels, while his kindness, courteousness, and innate leadership evoked the loyalty of all those who served him. Having become a lieutenant-colonel in 1916, he was awarded the DSO in 1917, and appointed CBE in 1919. 
Cornwallis's appointment in 1919 as a political officer with the Egyptian expeditionary force occupying Syria marked the beginning of a long collaboration and close friendship with Feisal. While the allies gathered at the Paris peace conference, Feisal attempted to create an independent Arab state. However, as determined by an Anglo-French agreement in 1916, and by negotiations of the allies in Paris, British forces evacuated Syria in November 1919 and left France with a free hand to expel Feisal and establish mandatory rule. Feisal protested, and Cornwallis was assigned the task of persuading him to accept a compromise. When, the following year, an uprising in Mesopotamia persuaded British officials that its inhabitants were as determined to establish self-government as Britain was to reduce its military responsibilities, Cornwallis was deputed by Lord Curzon to offer Feisal a newly created throne at Baghdad. Feisal especially asked that Cornwallis accompany him on his journey from Jiddah to his new kingdom in June 1921. This attachment lasted for fourteen years, during which Cornwallis remained permanently in Baghdad at the ministry of the interior (where he exerted influence over the political administration and the military) and acted as a personal adviser to King Feisal. While the British mandate operated, Cornwallis helped construct the new state of Iraq: his great influence with the tribes and ruling members of the Iraq government enabled him to carry on the Iraq civil service originated by Sir Arnold Wilson with the aim of training Iraqis for independence. 
Cornwallis also worked untiringly to bring about the Anglo-Iraqi treaty of 1930, which led to the independence of Iraq while safeguarding essential British strategic interests in communications and oil. British advisers clearly continued to exert much influence in independent Iraq, and the extent to which a precarious balance was maintained at that period between King Feisal, the Iraqi government, and the British authorities is surely a testament to Cornwallis's abilities. 'Among us', wrote Freya Stark, 'he held quiet authority which no one dreamt of gainsaying, made up of wisdom and kindness and courage' (Stark, 2). During these years Cornwallis's appointment as CMG in 1926, his knighthood in 1929, and his advancement to KCMG in 1933 underlined the recognition he received in London. After the signing of the treaty Cornwallis continued at Baghdad to advise on the workings of the new state, but King Feisal died in 1933 and was succeeded by his popular, though inexperienced, son, Ghazi I. Upon the admission of Iraq to the League of Nations in 1932, there followed continuous efforts on the part of the government to reduce both the number of foreign advisers and their influence; many contracts were simply not renewed. Cornwallis retired in 1935 and, as a special mark of the royal family's appreciation for his long and distinguished service, he was invested with the first class of the order of Rafidain (order of the Two Rivers) by King Ghazi. On 19 July 1937 he married, as his second wife, Margaret (Madge) Clark, only daughter of Harry Ralph Clark, of Lymington, Hampshire. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 found Cornwallis in the Middle East division of the Ministry of Information. In April 1941 he returned to Baghdad as ambassador, in succession to Sir Basil Newton. He arrived at a critical period: an army coup had forced the regent and the pro-British politicians to flee the capital and had brought to power an apparently pro-axis government under Rashid Ali al-Gaylani. The status of the 1930 Anglo-Iraqi treaty was of immediate concern, and Cornwallis's first task was to demand that British troops be allowed transport through the country. Realizing that the new regime was widely supported, Cornwallis proceeded with caution; but when negotiations with Rashid Ali's government deteriorated, British military intervention duly restored power to the old ruling coalition. On 31 May an armistice was signed. When the mayor of Baghdad and two officers came to surrender, and asked that the independence of the country still be respected, Cornwallis is said to have replied: 'Many years ago I fought, together with King Feisal the lamented who was my friend, for the freeing of the Arabs, and together we built up the Kingdom of Iraq. And do you think that I would willingly see destroyed what I have helped to build? (Stark, 163)' But the crisis through which Iraq had passed would have profound repercussions: the humiliation of being placed under British military occupation for the duration of the war played a formative role in the Iraqi revolution of 1958 and the overthrow of the monarchical regime which Cornwallis had done so much to foster. 
Cornwallis, who was advanced to GCMG in 1943, remained as ambassador until March 1945. After returning to England he continued at the Foreign Office as chairman of the Middle East committee, and in 1946 he went with Lord Stansgate to Cairo on the commission to discuss a new Egyptian treaty; but ill health beset him and he retired altogether in that year. He died at his home, Castle Mill House, North Warnborough, near Basingstoke, Hampshire, on 3 June 1959. He was survived by his second wife and by the daughter and one son of his first marriage, his younger son having been killed in action in 1945. 


@@@@@


doc= 32575


Cornwell, James (1812-1902), educational writer, born in east London on 4 August 1812, was one of nine children of James Cornwell, silk manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Blake. Up to the age of fifteen he was mainly self-taught. He then studied at the model school of the Borough Road Training College of the British and Foreign School Society, and by August 1829 was a fully-fledged student. In the early part of 1830 he was sent as a teacher on supply to the society's schools at Brighton and Chelmsford, and in October to Lindfield in Sussex. He returned to the college in January 1833 for a short period of training. 
In April 1835 the society appointed Cornwell organizer of country schools, his duty being to 'organize new schools' and assist newly appointed masters in obtaining 'good discipline by moral means'. In October 1839 he was appointed normal schoolteacher and inspector, and from 1835 worked both in the training college and as an inspector outside. In 1846, when the training department of the institution in Borough Road was recognized by the privy council as a grant-earning normal college, Cornwell was appointed by the British and Foreign School Society its head teacher or principal. Under his care the institution greatly developed and took a high position among the training colleges of the country. His lectures were clear, pertinent, and accurate, and he showed much ability in practical teaching. His principles and methods of school management anticipated later developments. 
Cornwell married on 19 November 1840 Mary Ann Wilson of Besthorpe, Nottinghamshire; they had one daughter. He continued his own studies, obtaining an external degree from London University and in 1847 he received a PhD from a German university. In 1860 he became a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
In 1841 Cornwell began to publish school books, which enjoyed a universal vogue. With J. T. Crossley, J. G. Fitch, and Henry Dunn, he established the standard type of secular school book which came into general use in the second half of the nineteenth century. His first, 'A New English Grammar' (1841), produced in collaboration with Dr Alexander Allen, had reached a twenty-third edition by 1855, and their 'Grammar for Beginners' (1855) went through ninety editions. He collaborated with Fitch in publishing 'The Science of Arithmetic' (1855). His 'School Geography' (1847; 90th edn, 1904) had an enormous sale, though its relentless presentation of facts about the countries of the world, which were to be committed to memory, made it a rather unattractive volume. 
Cornwell resigned from the principalship of Borough Road College at a comparatively young age in 1856, and lived in semi-retirement for nearly half a century, writing new works or revising his former ones for the series of school books entitled 'Dr Cornwell's Educational Series'. He was fond of music and the study of nature. For sixteen years he lived at a house he built for himself, Loughborough Park Villa, Brixton, before moving to Purbrook, Crescent Wood Road, Sydenham, where he died on 12 December 1902. He was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32576


Corry, Montagu William Lowry, Baron Rowton (1838-1903), politician and philanthropist, was born in London on 8 October 1838, the third of four children (second of two sons) of Henry Thomas Lowry Corry (1803-1873) and his wife, Lady Harriet Anne Ashley-Cooper (died 1868), second daughter of the sixth earl of Shaftesbury and granddaughter of the fourth duke of Marlborough; Corry's paternal grandfather was the second earl of Belmore, whose wife (his cousin) was a daughter of the second earl of Carrick. Monty Corry was educated at Harrow School and at Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1861); he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1863 and then joined the Oxford circuit. Successful in his profession and popular in society, he was also an occasional contributor to 'The Owl'. 
On 31 August 1865 at the duke of Cleveland's Raby Castle, Benjamin Disraeli observed the handsome young man amusing some bored young women by dancing while singing a comic song, and told him, 'I think you must be my impresario'. On 29 June 1866, when Lord Derby was forming his third administration, Corry reminded Disraeli of their meeting, although he could 'scarcely presume to ask for the honour of being Private Secretary to yourself'. Disraeli, however, offered him the post, and on 11 July Corry wrote: 'it will be owing to no neglect on my part, if I fail to prove myself worthy of it'. True to his word, he served Disraeli faithfully both in and out of office until (and even after) Disraeli's death in 1881. 
Disraeli quickly developed great confidence in Corry, and by the autumn of 1866 was praising his work and frankly discussing with him his views on men and affairs. Meanwhile, Corry began keeping Disraeli informed of the opinions current in society. In October Disraeli asked him to be the nominal editor of a collection of his speeches on parliamentary reform; it appeared in January 1867. One of Corry's first assignments was to protect Mrs Disraeli at Grosvenor Gate from the crowds agitating for reform in Hyde Park, when he concluded, 'she sympathizes with them'. He and Mrs Disraeli became close friends; from his watch by her deathbed in 1872 Disraeli wrote, 'She says she must see you'. With the termination of her life interest in her first husband's estate, Disraeli left the search for a new town residence entirely to Corry, who increasingly looked after Disraeli's personal affairs, such as (in 1874) the redecoration of Downing Street, and the purchase of a wedding gift for the countess of Pembroke. Corry nevertheless maintained his freedom to look after his own family, especially his frail unmarried sister, Alice, who after 1873 usually lived with him at 71 South Audley Street. Disraeli invariably bemoaned his absences. 
Although he never sought any higher office, Corry became so much an extension of Disraeli (especially in domestic affairs) that, as Lord Carnarvon remarked in 1874, 'M. Corry is in fact Prime Minister.' He vetted political hopefuls, controlled access to the prime minister, suggested positions on major issues, and was Disraeli's link with the social world. After an invitation to Osborne in January 1868, he became friends with the queen, and established good relations with the court circle, as well as with the prince of Wales and his friends. Corry was privy to Disraeli's most confidential dealings, and attended him at cabinet meetings from an adjoining room, most famously in 1876, when Disraeli by a signal sent him to Baron Rothschild for a loan of $4 million to purchase the khedive of Egypt's shares in the Suez Canal. In May 1877, when Disraeli (now Lord Beaconsfield) was too ill to attend cabinet meetings, the queen summoned Corry to report to her. 
The heavy workload undermined Corry's health with bouts of depression, most seriously in early 1878, when he went abroad with his sister. Beaconsfield had other secretaries, but 'no substitute for him'. Corry recovered in time to attend Beaconsfield at the Congress of Berlin in June and was present at the seven-minute meeting with Bismarck that broke the impasse with Russia in England's favour. Also in 1878, Corry negotiated with Longman the unprecedented sum of $10,000 for 'Endymion', Beaconsfield entrusting him with completing the novel if necessary. 
Corry never married, but he had many affairs and several children, whom he provided for as their godfather; one of his daughters was Violet Manners, daughter of Violet Manners, wife of the eighth duke of Rutland (Lambert, 79). The queen originally saw him as 'a man of pleasure', and Beaconsfield remarked, 'What a Lothario Monty is'. His most enduring liaison was with Lady Mary Dawson (from 1872 countess of Ilchester). Beaconsfield bemusedly tolerated this aspect of Corry's life; during one absence in 1879 he remarked to Lady Bradford: 'I want him, & could have commanded his presence, but I can't work with a man, perpetually sighing, & whose thoughts are in another place. In a week's time, I hope, he will think only of me' (Zetland, 2.243). 
On leaving office in 1880, Beaconsfield told Lord Barrington that 'he chiefly deplored his fall from power on account of M. Corry, who in his opinion was fitted to fill any 'Cabinet' office'. When Corry loyally declined the many posts offered him, Beaconsfield recommended him for a peerage, making sure that Corry's aunt, Lady Charlotte Lyster, would bequeath him her estate (listed in 1883 at 6300 acres yielding $5600 a year) to support the dignity. On 6 May 1880 he was controversially created Baron Rowton, of Rowton Castle, Shropshire, an unprecedented honour for a secretary. He continued (unpaid) as Beaconsfield's secretary, and was with his 'dearest Chief' -- who typically addressed him as 'my dearest Monty' -- when he died on 19 April 1881. Beaconsfield left all his private papers unconditionally to Rowton, who did much of the original work of putting them in order and preserved material (such as the Henrietta Sykes papers) which Sir Philip Rose wanted to destroy. Rowton was frequently the queen's guest, adviser, and link with her former prime minister and, after Beaconsfield's death, with parliament and the Conservatives. 
During 1889 Rowton developed philanthropic interests; in November he accepted an active trusteeship of the Guinness Trust Fund for the provision of artisans' dwellings in London and Dublin and, after inheriting his aunt's estate in December, conceived the idea of a poor man's hotel. Against advice he invested $30,000 in the first Rowton House, opened on the last day of 1892 in Bond Street, Vauxhall. Rowton Houses Limited was incorporated in March 1894, and five more houses were opened by 1905, providing cheap but respectable accommodation for over 5000 men while realizing a modest profit. 
Rowton was made a CB in 1878, a KCVO in 1897, and sworn of the privy council in 1900; he was also a deputy lieutenant for Shropshire. He died of pneumonia at his residence, 17 Berkeley Square, on 9 November 1903, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery; he left his property to a nephew, but his title became extinct. 
Lord Salisbury, who considered appointing Rowton to the Berlin embassy, said of him in 1895: 'He is charming, and sympathetically intelligent, without being what people call 'clever'. His disposition is most sociable, and he delights in knowing all about his friends' griefs and joys, and helping them. Art and nature are words that mean nothing to him, so his whole mind is turned to friends.' Disraeli's experience with Rowton is reflected in chapter 49 of 'Endymion': 'The relations between a minister and his secretary are... among the finest that can subsist between two individuals. Except the married state, there is none in which so great a degree of confidence is involved, in which more forbearance ought to be exercised, or more sympathy ought to exist.' Queen Victoria said that Rowton devoted himself to Disraeli 'as few sons ever do', and it is as Disraeli's model secretary that he will always be known. 


@@@@@


doc= 32577


Cory, John (1828-1910), coal broker and philanthropist, was born on 28 March 1828 at Bideford, the eldest of five sons of Richard Cory (1799-1882), merchant, and Sarah, both of Bideford. The father was the owner and master of a small vessel in the coastal trade, and his decision in the 1830s to open a store as ship's chandler and provision merchant in Cardiff proved to be decisive in the family fortunes. In the early 1840s the business was moved to the new Bute Dock, and shipbroking and coal agency were added to its activities. The two elder sons, John and Richard, joined their father as shipowners, brokers, coal exporters, and colliery agents, trading first as Richard Cory & Sons from 1856 and, when their father retired in 1859, as Cory Brothers & Co. It was as coal exporters and shipowners that John and his brother were most directly involved in the business of the region, which was then growing fast enough to absorb their attention: they especially used their knowledge of freight rates and insurance to take over some of the financial risks from the colliery sales agencies. The firm's shipping and coal business steadily increased, and the universal demand for south Wales steam coal for navigation led John Cory to conceive the idea of establishing coal depots, offices, and agencies in all major overseas ports. One of the earliest was established at Port Said on the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. At the time of Cory's death the firm had acquired about a hundred of these depots, located on the maritime routes to India, China, South Africa, and South America, and was the leading supplier of steam coal for shipping. The firm also moved into coalmining. It acquired the Resolfen colliery and in 1869 the Pentre colliery in the Rhondda, and floated them in 1873 as the Cardiff and Swansea Smokeless Steam Coal Co. This led Cory into some financial difficulties: with the collapse of the coal boom in the early 1870s, there was a slump in share values and in 1875 there were even half-hearted accusations of fraud from disappointed shareholders. However, the company's fortunes revived and it was able to acquire the Gelli and Tynybedw collieries in the Rhondda (1884); Aber colliery (1893); Dunraven (1896); and Wyndham and Penllwyngwent (1906); and it took back direct control of Pentre and Resolfen (1894). In separate enterprises the two brothers also partnered their brother-in-law, Thomas Beynon, in promoting a profitable sale of shares in the Newport Abercarn Black Vein Steam Coal Co. in 1873 and, with other partners, sank the Penrikyber colliery in the Cynon valley between 1872 and 1878. John Cory was thus, from the 1870s on, a substantial coal owner; but although a member, he played no active part in the Coalowners' Association. He also played no direct role in the management of the collieries; instead he installed salaried managers and left himself free to exercise overall control over the company's activities from its Cardiff office at Oscar House, where a staff of more than 100 was employed by the time of his death, and where the day began with the partners and heads of departments meeting for prayer. In 1883 Cory became associated with other Rhondda coal owners to promote the Barry dock and railway. He afterwards held a large interest in that concern and became vice-chairman of its company. Although Cory Brothers was a limited company from 1893 entire control remained in the hands of the family; and John Cory served as chairman. The range of the productive and commercial interests of Cory Brothers in the coal trade gives credence to the claim that they were, before 1914, the largest private railway-wagon owners in Britain. 
On 19 September 1854 Cory married Anna Maria (died 1909), daughter of the Monmouthshire coal owner John Beynon, of Newport; they had one daughter and three sons. An alderman on Glamorgan county council and a long-serving member of the Cardiff school board, he was also an active philanthropist. Cory was one of the first to sign the pledge, and was one of Cardiff's leading advocates of teetotalism. However, although temperance and evangelical causes benefited particularly, his largess was not confined to these. In part the nature of the causes Cory supported reflected the family's religious shift (the father moved from the established church to the United Methodists, John became a Wesleyan, and his brother became a Baptist). During his lifetime, he funded a project for a garden village (Glyn-Cory) on his estate, provided Maendy Hall at Tonpentre for the Salvation Army, and financed the Cory Hall in Cardiff, which was opened on 9 September 1886 and was designated a temperance hall during the 1890s. This building, which was demolished in the 1980s, was characteristic of Cory's search to give his wealth useful public expression. At his death, Cory left more than $798,777, and just as he had given consistently and lavishly during his life so he listed thirty-five separate legacies, totalling $89,000, in his will. The largest was a $20,000 bequest to the Salvation Army, in three separate donations for its foreign, general, and rescue work. Equally significant were gifts of $1000-$5000 to home and foreign missionary societies, 'Bible' societies, the YMCA, Cardiff Infirmary, orphanages, and sailors' rest houses in various ports. In his will Cory also requested that his children, as a matter of honour and affection to their father, give to charities at least 10 per cent of their income from his legacies -- an indication of the scale of his own practice. 
Cory died at his estate at Dyffryn, St Nicholas, near Cowbridge, on 27 January 1910 only five months after his wife, Anna, had died; he was buried at the parish church at St Nicholas. 


@@@@@


doc= 32578


Coryndon, Sir Robert Thorne (1870-1925), colonial governor, was born in Queenstown, Cape Colony, on 2 April 1870, one of six children born to Selby Coryndon (1835-1885), a lawyer, and Emily Caldecott (died 1889), daughter of a Cape politician. He was educated at a number of South African schools, finishing off his secondary school career at Cheltenham College (1884-7), then returning to the Cape to work in the law firm of his uncle Alfred Caldecott. Office routine was too confining for an outdoorsman like Coryndon, and when his mother died in July 1889, he joined the Bechuanaland border police. This elite force, recruited from the ranks of well-to-do Cape families -- euphemistically known as the 'Top Hat Brigade' -- signified Coryndon's entry into the imperial world of Cecil Rhodes. He was to become one of Rhodes's 'twelve apostles' or 'young lambs'. 
The British government's reliance on the British South Africa Company to execute its imperial schemes proved critical for Coryndon's future in the colonial service. In 1890, after being transferred to the company's police, Coryndon was a member of the pioneer column to Mashonaland, part of the territory later known as Southern Rhodesia. While the Rhodesian incursion effectively ended his police career, it did not, as with most of the invading force, mean life as a European settler. The twenty-year-old joined the administration instead, soon working as a surveyor and cartographer with the surveyor-general's department in Salisbury. Late in 1892 Coryndon accepted a commission from Lionel Walter Rothschild to collect specimens of flora and fauna, taking leave of absence from his post in the administration. He captured two white rhinoceroses, which were dispatched to the British Museum (Natural History) in Kensington and to Rothschild's museum at Tring. His precise recording of all his kills, and the technically proficient sketches he executed -- he is credited with the first ever drawings of the ancient ruins of Zimbabwe -- stand in marked contrast to his later lack of attention to bureaucratic procedures as a top-level colonial administrator. 
The Rothschild contract was cut short by the Matabele (Ndebele) campaign of 1893; Coryndon joined a volunteer burgher force under Major Forbes. After Lobengula's defeat Coryndon took up big game hunting professionally, and on occasion drove the postal cart from Salisbury to Kimberley. Less than three years had elapsed when the Rhodesian adventurer became involved in the second, more formidable, conflict with the Matabele, who were this time joined by some Shona groups in the 1896-7 uprising. Coryndon was in charge of a party of Beal's scouts but saw action only once before succumbing to pneumonia. While in hospital he learned of the death in the rising of his younger brother John Selby (1877-1896), a trooper with the Salisbury Rifles. Discharged in November 1896, Coryndon took up a position as one of Rhodes's private secretaries, and accompanied his employer to face the hearings on the Jameson raid (1896-7). Rhodes then offered his amanuensis the choice of either managing one of his estates or becoming resident adviser to King Lewanika of Bulozi (Barotseland). Coryndon, portentously, chose the latter. 
Coryndon's move to Barotseland (North-Western Rhodesia, later part of Northern Rhodesia) marked the beginning of a career spanning almost three decades as an imperial pro-consul. He was the first administrator of Barotseland, which meant negotiating with Lewanika on political authority, instituting a tax regime, and abolishing slavery. He received little guidance from his British South Africa Company overseers; in turn, he was regarded by an official at the South African high commission as 'a remote and at times disturbing figure... no office man' (Coryndon MSS, Bodl. RH, MSS Afr. s.633 10/1/31-33). It was Coryndon's ability to survive in the bush that had attracted Rhodes. Muscular and 5 feet 9 inches tall, the professional hunter was renowned for his feats of physical strength, including tearing in half a deck of cards with his powerful hands, and for his skills in carpentry and building. The two men were reputed to have met on the postal run to Kimberley, although Rhodes already knew Coryndon as his father's son in elite Cape society. Yet they were never really close, and Coryndon's Barotseland experience created a greater distance between them. 
In April 1907 Coryndon took up his appointment as resident commissioner of the new protectorate of Swaziland as the direct representative of the British government. He was to remain there until 1916. After many itinerant years in the Rhodesias where, he claimed, 'I did not spend three consecutive months in one place' and 'with no real foothold' in England, the new resident commissioner regarded Swaziland as 'the first real home I have ever had' (University of Zambia, Coryndon MS 4). It was in 1909, during his Swazi appointment, that he married Phyllis Mary, daughter of James Worthington of Lowestoft, Suffolk, and sister of his Barotseland colleague Frank. They had three sons and one daughter. 
Coryndon's main duty in the high commission territory was to oversee the land partition between the Swazi and European concessionaires, a partition considered unfavourable by the Swazi royals when it was announced in October 1907. The new resident commissioner, while not responsible for the recommendations of the land commission (1904-7), was responsible for their implementation. For his role, he earned the Swazi nickname Msindazwe (translated as 'he who sits heavily upon the land' or 'he who exerts tremendous influence over the land'). As in Barotseland, Coryndon was charged with setting up an administrative infrastructure, initiating tax collection and ensuring a smooth relationship with the indigenous authority. 
In 1914 Coryndon's Rhodesian experience, along with his immersion in the Swazi land settlement, earned him the chairmanship of the Southern Rhodesian native reserves commission, known as the Coryndon commission. The Colonial Office was anxious for a final settlement of the land question before the anticipated incorporation of the settler territory into the Union of South Africa. The highly controversial Coryndon commission smacked of being a company affair, and the chairman's connections with the British South Africa Company, coupled with the recommendation that African reserves be diminished by over 1 million acres, sparked a torrent of criticism. Yet it was Coryndon's aversion to segregation, stemming from his belief that tribalism was retrogressive, that inspired the commission report, ratified by order in council in 1920. 
The Rhodesian inquiry virtually filled the last two years of Coryndon's Swazi appointment. A brief stint as resident commissioner of Basutoland (1916-17) was followed by his first governorship, Uganda (1917-22). In Uganda he complained again about a lack of direction in policy, especially economic policy. The post-war slump virtually wiped out European plantation agriculture, but Coryndon acceded to European demands for political representation and established the first executive and legislative councils (1921). The governor placed his economic faith in Lancashire cotton, encouraging peasant production while simultaneously endeavouring to control the chiefs whom he denigrated as a plutocratic, corrupt class hindering economic progress. Coryndon's reputation as a governor of 'Native territories' preceded his appointment to the governorship of Kenya (1922-5), and so he was initially distrusted by the vociferous white settler community -- who referred to him as 'policeman Bobby Coryndon' -- then embroiled in a controversy over Asian political rights. Yet Coryndon's antagonism towards Indians, deriving from his belief that the Asian community blocked African economic progress, and his objections to 'tribalism', coincided with settler aspirations. Indigenous production and settler agriculture both fared well under the governor, although his so-called dual policy (the complementary interests of white and black) has been characterized as a disguise for his support of settler hegemony. The 1923 Devonshire declaration pronouncing African paramountcy ended the Indian crisis but put paid to settler hopes for self-government. Although Coryndon set up local native councils for African regional government (1924), he was commonly regarded as a spokesman for settler interests at the time of his death in Nairobi from acute pancreatitis on 10 February 1925. He was buried the next day at the new cemetery in Nairobi. Lady Coryndon survived him. 
Coryndon left little in the way of published works, and certainly no philosophical rationale of colonialism. He was the type who wanted to 'get on with the job', something which has been associated with an imperious, dictatorial manner. He often criticized both the British South Africa Company and the Colonial Office for poor pay and benefits, and for lack of imperial vision. He was made a CMG in 1911 and promoted KCMG in 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 32579


Cosgrave, William Thomas (1880-1965), president of the executive council of the Irish Free State, was born at 174 James Street, Dublin, on 5 June 1880, the second son and second child of Thomas Cosgrave, licensed vintner, of 174 James Street, and his wife, Bridget Nixon. After schooling with the Christian Brothers he entered his father's business, soon turning also to share his father's interest in local politics. 
In 1905 Cosgrave participated with Arthur Griffith in the founding of Sinn Fein and in 1909 was elected a Sinn Fein representative to Dublin corporation. He served this body for thirteen years, being elected chairman of its estates and finance committee in 1915, and being returned as an alderman in 1920. In 1916, as a lieutenant in the Irish Volunteers, he fought under Eamon Ceannt in the South Dublin Union, was captured and condemned to death, a sentence later commuted to life imprisonment. After one year in Portland prison he was released in the general amnesty of 1917. 
Cosgrave entered national politics as a Sinn Fein abstentionist, winning a two-to-one victory over the parliamentary party candidate, John Magennis, in the Kilkenny City by-election of August 1917. In October 1917 he became one of the honorary treasurers of Sinn Fein, and in December 1918 was returned unopposed in the general election, for Kilkenny North. At the meeting of the first Dail Eireann on 2 April 1919 he was appointed minister for local government. In that year he married Louise (died 1959), daughter of Alderman Flanagan, a farmer of Dublin; they had two sons. 
In the elections of 1921, 1922, 1923, and June 1927 Cosgrave represented the Carlow-Kilkenny constituency. In the election for the sixth Dail, in September 1927, he was returned for both Carlow-Kilkenny and Cork borough, topping the poll in each. He chose to sit for the Cork seat and in the elections of February 1932, January 1933, July 1937, June 1938, and June 1943 he topped the poll there on all occasions except 1938. He retired from Dail Eireann in 1944. 
Local government, the seat of much disruption of British administration, was perhaps the true revolutionary arena in the years 1919-21. The department's inspectors and numerous councillors waged a continuous, consciousness-raising battle with the official local government board, withholding allegiance yet striving to retain as many housing and employment moneys as possible. Inefficiency and mismanagement were other characteristics, however, and Cosgrave's experience undoubtedly affected the attitude of the independent Irish government towards local authorities in the years to come, when he himself was to be thrust into greater prominence. A determined advocate of the Anglo-Irish treaty of December 1921, which he felt represented the best settlement available, he accepted membership of the provisional government, established to receive power from Britain, in January 1922, becoming its chairman in August after the death of Griffith and Michael Collins. He added the office of president of Dail Eireann in September 1922, finally becoming the first elected president of the executive council of the Irish Free State on 6 December 1922. He held also the ministry of finance, in 1922-3, and for short periods the Ministry of Defence, in 1924, and the ministry of external affairs, in 1927. Having steered the country through civil war during 1922-3, it was his responsibility to establish the domestic administration and the international reputation of his country, which had assumed a somewhat ambiguous 'dominion status' by the 1921 treaty. 
Under Cosgrave's wise chairmanship an able cabinet team established full parliamentary, legal, and administrative processes on a foundation of probity and wide acceptance. Orthodox financial management and cautious economic development secured an equally sound reputation for integrity in these spheres. The government's main economic initiative, the harnessing of the River Shannon to generate electricity, also proved a resounding success, while the body established to control it, the Electricity Supply Board (established in 1927), set a pattern of semi-state authorities widely emulated in the future. The failure of the boundary commission to advance Irish unity provided both crisis and disappointment for the government in 1925, but the ensuing agreement with Britain in December of that year was, Cosgrave felt, 'a damned good bargain'. His subsequent policy of co-operation with Belfast and of promoting Irish unity through the attraction of good government set a realistic course all too soon interrupted. 
Surviving other crises such as the army mutiny in 1924 and the assassination of his vice-president, Kevin O'Higgins, in 1927, Cosgrave enjoyed a personal triumph when he visited the United States and Canada in 1928. Already he had led his country into the League of Nations, in 1923, and at successive imperial conferences, notably 1926 and 1930, his ministers helped expand 'dominion status' into full sovereignty, a position given legal force in the 1931 'Statute of Westminster'. 
With the state firmly founded at home and abroad, and successfully weathering the world depression, Cosgrave suffered defeat in February 1932, but watched with satisfaction the ensuing peaceful change from his administration to that of Eamon De Valera. An unflagging democrat, he recoiled in horror at aspects of the amalgamation of his foundering party with the neo-fascist Blueshirt movement in 1933. When the brief leadership of General O'Duffy ended in September 1934, however, Cosgrave soon returned (spring 1935) as head of the renamed Fine Gael, and led the parliamentary opposition until his retirement in January 1944. His interest in horse-racing was then reflected in his chairmanship of the Irish racing board, from 1946 to 1956, and again from 1957. 
Cosgrave received a number of honours during his lifetime, becoming a knight grand cross, first class, of the Pian order, in 1925, and gaining honorary doctorates from the Catholic University of America; Columbia, Cambridge, and Dublin universities; and the National University of Ireland. He died at his home Beechpark, Templeogue, co. Dublin, on 16 November 1965, and was buried in the Golden Bridge cemetery, Inchicore, co. Dublin, two days later. His elder son, Liam, became leader of Fine Gael in 1965, and subsequently taoiseach (prime minister) of a coalition government in 1973. 
Regarded by Sir Winston Churchill as 'a chief of higher quality than any who had yet appeared', Cosgrave was throughout his life an unpretentious and modest man. Short in stature, with a shock of hair he retained into old age, he had a lively eye and a ready wit, with gifts of common sense, courage, coolness, good humour, and humanity, which won the respect and affection of opponents as well as supporters. A deeply religious man, courteous and considerate, and a reconciler, he proved more successful in office than as an opposition leader, his greatest work being done in the decade 1922-32. The parliamentary democracy then established against daunting odds remains his most fitting monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 32580


Costain, Sir Richard Rylandes (1902-1966), building contractor and industrialist, was born in Crosby, Liverpool, on 20 November 1902, the elder son of William Percy Costain (died 1929), builder, and his wife, Maud May Smith. W. P. Costain was one of the five sons of Richard Costain (1839-1902), a Manxman who had founded and developed a small but well-equipped and successful building and contracting business in Crosby, into which he took three of his sons. 
Costain was sent first to Rydal School at Colwyn Bay, then in 1911 to Merchant Taylors' School at Crosby. By the time he left there in 1920 the family firm, Richard Costain & Sons, had grown to considerable stature on Merseyside. It had built many thousands of houses for sale, artisans' flats for Liverpool corporation, houses and cottages for steelworks and other industries, army camps, munitions factories, churches, theatres, and college extensions. Costain automatically entered the family firm, first learning the trades of the joiner and the bricklayer. He took also a short architectural course in Rome. In 1922 W. P. Costain decided on a move to London, leaving his brothers to continue with the activities in Liverpool, so it was in London that Richard Costain cut his teeth as a builder, notably by working on the firm's large venture on the Kingswood housing estate in Surrey. 
By 1927 Costain was joint managing director, and on the death of his father in 1929 R. R. as he was then widely known, became sole managing director. Speculative house building was at that period the firm's main activity, some ten thousand houses being built on eight estates. The London end of the business was floated as a public company in 1933. This marked a policy change; the company set out to be less dependent on house building and many building contracts were won for important public and industrial buildings and for blocks of flats. In 1934 important civil engineering contracts were won for the first time for sewage disposal works, and in 1935 for a variety of works in Persia. 
A unique opportunity occurred in 1935 when proposals were made to build a huge block of flats, known as Dolphin Square, on the Embankment, on the site of the former army clothing depot. Costain took a personal decision in a matter of hours to seize the opportunity of purchasing this site and constructing what was not only the biggest block of flats in Europe, but the first to be conceived as a self-contained city community with its own shops and social amenities. He remarked to a colleague: 'in two or three years we'll either drive up to this spot in a Rolls-Royce, or we'll be standing here selling matches'. 
This decision demonstrated Costain's spontaneity and courage and also the reputation and liking he had earned, for he was able in a few hours to gather the financial backing which this undertaking involved. His ability to size up a project was matched by his quick assessment of men. He was an inspired picker of staff, and a natural leader. He was short but sturdy in stature, with a forthright manner and a ready smile. He was good company, especially on the golf course, where he was an exceptional club golfer who twice reached the second round of the amateur championship; and at the bridge table, where he was brilliant. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Costain offered his services to the government and was appointed deputy director of emergency works, later deputy director of works, in the Ministry of Works. After the war, when he was appointed CBE (1946), he returned as chairman to his company, which had become thoroughly experienced and well-equipped for contracting. He saw clearly the national need to earn foreign exchange and set himself the objective of obtaining a half of the company turnover abroad. It was, however, no longer possible to speak of 'the company', for with the launching or absorption of specialist activities, association with other companies in joint ventures, and the formation of subsidiaries and branches in many countries, it became the Costain Group. 
Among many domestic contracts in the early post-war years, Costains was responsible for the Festival of Britain buildings and was involved in very large building and civil engineering works in many different countries. Chairman Dick, as he became affectionately known throughout the company, in 1950 replaced the centralized control which had been characteristic of a family business by a system of operating divisions, which led progressively to the structure of something like eighty autonomous companies within the group. 
Costain did not keep himself exclusively to company affairs. In 1950 he was elected president of the London Master Builders' Association, and in the same year the government appointed him chairman of Harlow Development Corporation. This was the piece of public work which gave him the greatest satisfaction, and he devoted great efforts to seeing that the town was a well-balanced community. His work there was rewarded in 1954 by a knighthood. 
From 1955 to 1957 Costain was president of the export group for the construction industries. Both for this group, and for his own company, he travelled extensively, for he believed in personal knowledge of his customer as well as his staff; he was also concerned with international consortia formed for specialist construction work in many countries. He took a particular interest and pleasure in Southern Rhodesia, where his contract for the construction of the Kariba Dam township frequently took him. 
In 1927 Costain married Gertrude, daughter of William John Minto, with whom he had one son and two daughters. He died from coronary thrombosis at his home, Rylandes, The Sands, Farnham, Surrey, on 26 March 1966. 
Norman Kipping', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32581


Cotton, Jack (1903-1964), property developer, was born at Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 1 January 1903, the third son of Benjamin Marcus Cotton and his wife, Caroline Josephine Rudelsheim. His father was an import-export merchant with a flourishing trade in silver plate cutlery to South Africa, and treasurer of Birmingham's chief synagogue. Cotton was educated at King Edward VI's Grammar School, Birmingham, and afterwards in the Jewish house at Cheltenham College. At the age of eighteen he was articled to a firm of Birmingham estate agents, and subsequently passed the examinations of the Auctioneers' Institute. Against his father's wishes his mother lent him $50, and on his twenty-first birthday he opened his own estate agency in Birmingham. He worked single-handedly as agent, auctioneer, rent collector, and typist until 1926, when he hired his first staff. Cotton married in 1928 Marjorie Rachel, daughter of Moss Mindelsohn. They had three sons and one daughter before separating in the 1940s. 
In the early 1930s Cotton laid the basis of his fortune by acting as a middleman between farmers and speculative builders interested in suburban ribbon development around Birmingham. He also often acted for the builders in selling these houses. His first great development (undertaken with a Birmingham solicitor, Joseph Cohen) was the demolition of the grammar school in New Street where he had been a pupil, and its replacement with the office block called King Edward House. His redevelopment of the site of the Midland Conservative Club was another such scheme. Cotton and Cohen also led a syndicate which developed Birmingham's first block of luxury flats, Kenilworth Court, in 1935, but the market proved sluggish, and thereafter Cotton avoided residential developments. He became a rich man with a strong local reputation: when the Air Ministry needed a shadow armaments factory in the Birmingham area in 1938, it approached Cotton for help. 
During the Second World War Cotton served in the Home Guard and was employed by the government in factory building. He was a British delegate of the World Jewish Congress in 1945, and visited the USA in the cause of Zionist emigration to Palestine. He was a benefactor of many Jewish charities, endowing chairs of architecture and fine arts at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and the chair of biochemistry at Israel's Weizmann Institute. He also gave $250,000 to the zoological gardens in Regent's Park, and $100,000 to the Royal College of Surgeons. He was nevertheless disappointed in his hopes of a knighthood. 
Cotton moved to London after the war, living in a suite at the Dorchester Hotel on Park Lane, and operating in the London property market. After forming the City of Birmingham Real Property Company to redevelop blitzed sites in the midlands and elsewhere, he bought control in 1947 of a shell company with a quotation on the London stock exchange, Mansion House Chambers Ltd, and appointed his accountant as chairman. During the early 1950s he bought, sold, and reconstructed several property companies before consolidating his interests in 1955 in a company called City Centre Properties. Although he conceived and implemented all the deals, and was City Centre's major shareholder, he preferred to act through nominees and for many years kept off the boards of his companies. In 1958, at the insistence of institutional shareholders, he became chairman of City Centre. 
Building restrictions imposed during the war were enforced until 1954, and Cotton made a fortune out of the shortage of office space. After he had built several office blocks for the civil service his schemes became so big that he could not finance them by himself. In 1955 he took Legal and General Assurance as a partner for a proposed $7 million development of the Monico site in Piccadilly, and in the following year initiated a development partnership with Pearl Insurance. This type of arrangement was widely copied. Cotton was also the first developer to realize that pension funds were ideal partners for property companies because their investment managers could take a longer view than those in insurance companies, especially as their investments were tax-free. In the early 1960s Cotton undertook major developments in association with the pension funds of companies such as ICI, Imperial Tobacco, and Unilever. 
In 1958-9 Cotton launched a programme of developments in South Africa and the West Indies in which Barclays Bank (Dominion, Colonial, and Overseas) had a holding of 20 per cent. In 1959 City Centre took a half-interest in the $100 million scheme for the 59-storey Pan Am tower over Grand Central Station in New York. During 1960-61 City Centre merged with Walter Flack's Murrayfield Properties and Charles Clore's City and Central Investments to create the biggest property company in the world, called City Centre, with a stock market valuation (somewhat inflated) of $65 million. Cotton remained chairman. 
Cotton's business methods proved inadequate for these new conditions. His staff had hitherto comprised only a few accountants, clerks, and typists who were seldom privy to his confidence. He kept the details of his deals in his head, or in a few files which were heaped on the spare bed in his suite at the Dorchester. After clashes with both Clore and institutional shareholders, Cotton relinquished City Centre's chairmanship in July 1963. His shares in the company (held by family trusts) were sold in November for about $8.5 million to a consortium headed by Kenneth Keith and Sir Isaac Wolfson. A month after leaving City Centre's board in February 1964, Cotton died of heart disease at Frilsham House, New Providence, Nassau, in the Bahamas, on 21 March 1964. 
In business Cotton was quick, sharp, calculating, and opportunistic. His private character was ebullient and noisy. He disliked solitude and drank heavily in his later years. Having always shunned publicity, he was the object of intense journalistic interest after 1955, and often treated as a new King Midas. His suite at the Dorchester was a gathering place from which his truer friends were gradually driven away by sly sycophants, who would ply him with drink and tempt him to indiscretions. His consuming interest in life was property development; although he collected Impressionist paintings, his inspiration was chiefly pecuniary. Apart from the potential profit, the governing criterion of his developments was size, and even when he employed an architect such as Walter Gropius the results were seldom pleasing. Having disfigured many prime sites in London, Cotton conceived a need to redevelop Piccadilly, and from 1960 brought forward a series of grandiose proposals which fortunately were rejected. His most enduring monuments are therefore eyesores like the Big Top complex in Birmingham or the shopping centre at Notting Hill Gate in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32582


Couch, Sir Richard (1817-1905), judge, was born on 17 May 1817, the only son of Richard Couch of Bermondsey, London. Educated privately, he entered as a student of the Middle Temple on 10 January 1838, and was called to the bar on 15 January 1841. In 1844 he assisted in editing Blackstone's 'Commentaries' (21st edn). In 1845 he married Anne (died 1898), eldest daughter of Richard Thomas Beck of Combs, Suffolk; they had one son, Richard, who later became a barrister of the Middle Temple. For some years Couch practised on what was then the Norfolk circuit, and he was recorder of Bedford from 1858 to 1862. In the last year he became a judge of the high court of Bombay and on the retirement of Sir Matthew Sausse in 1866 he succeeded to the chief justiceship of the court and was knighted. In 1870 he succeeded Sir Barnes Peacock as chief justice of the high court of Calcutta. In 1875 Couch was appointed president of the commission of inquiry into the charge brought against Malharrao Gaikwad, the ruler of the major Indian state of Baroda, of poisoning the representative of the Bombay government at Baroda, Colonel Robert Phayre. The matter was an extremely sensitive one, as many Indians believed that Malharrao was being victimized by the colonial rulers. Also, the government of India, based in Calcutta, was seeking to utilize the crisis to extend its direct control over the princely states of the Bombay Presidency. The commission consisted of three British commissioners and three Indians, and in their verdict they were divided along those lines, the former, led by Couch, finding Malharrao guilty of the crime, the latter insisting on his innocence. The government of India promptly ignored the commission, deposed Malharrao, and, in 1876, took responsibility for dealing with Baroda State. By then, Couch had already resigned the chief justiceship. On his return to England he was sworn of the privy council, and in January 1881 he was appointed to the judicial committee as one of the two members who had experience of judicial work in the colonies. He acted in this capacity for twenty years, providing clear and sound, but hardly brilliant, judgments. He was elected a bencher of his inn in March 1881. He died at his residence, 25 Linden Gardens, Bayswater, London, on 29 November 1905, and was buried at Paddington cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32583


Coulton, George Gordon (1858-1947), historian and controversialist, was born at Tower Place, King's Lynn, Norfolk, on 15 October 1858, the third son and sixth child of John James Coulton, a solicitor of Yorkshire origins, and his wife, Sarah Radley. After early schooling at a dame-school at Lynn, the 'lycee' at St Omer, and Lynn grammar school, he was sent to Felsted School from where, in 1877, he won a classical scholarship to St Catharine's College, Cambridge. He remembered his Cambridge years without affection, perhaps owing to the failure of health which in 1881 confined him to an 'aegrotat' degree. Briefly a master at a preparatory school in Malvern, he then trained for holy orders under Charles John Vaughan, though already subject to doubts concerning the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. Ordained deacon in 1883, he held curacies at Offley and Rickmansworth, but his misgivings grew, and in 1885 he finally decided that he could not proceed to the priesthood. Coulton then held a series of teaching posts in public schools, an experience he seems to have found increasingly depressing, since about 1896 he attempted suicide. But his life was saved, and in that year he took up a tutoring job at a coaching establishment in Eastbourne which he ran with his college friend Henry von Essen Scott for thirteen years. He had been studying the middle ages since the mid-1870s, and his new position gave him time both for extension lecturing and for the methodical study of primary sources which made him one of the most learned medievalists of his age. It also financed foreign travel -- it was in Switzerland that in 1903 he met Rose Dorothy ('b'. 1876/7), daughter of Owen Ilbert, of Thurlestone, Devon, and niece of the parliamentary draftsman Sir Courtenay Ilbert. They married on 19 July 1904 and had two daughters. 
During the first decade of the twentieth century Coulton began to publish and to establish his scholarly reputation, starting with a translation of Salimbene (1906; enlarged edn, 1907) and a book about Chaucer (1908). He followed these with two anthologies of medieval sources, 'A Medieval Garner' (1910) and 'Social Britain from the Conquest to the Reformation' (1918), in which he began the process of putting original historical material before the general public which constituted one of his most notable services to scholarship. In 1911 he had moved to Cambridge, following his election as Birkbeck lecturer in ecclesiastical history at Trinity College, and supported himself by private tutoring. The fall in student numbers during the war made his position financially precarious, but in 1919 he was elected to a lecturership in the English faculty, which he held until his retirement in 1934, and a fellowship of St John's College. A secure income provided the basis for further research and writing, and in the last twenty-five years of his life Coulton published several substantial books as well as a number of shorter ones: 'The Medieval Village' (1925); 'Art and the Reformation' (1928); 'Inquisition and Liberty' and 'Medieval Panorama' (both 1938); 'Five Centuries of Religion', published in four volumes between 1923 and 1950, the last appearing posthumously. From 1940 to 1944 he was guest lecturer at the University of Toronto. He was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1929 and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Durham (1920), Edinburgh (1931), and Kingston, Ontario (1942). He died at his home, 201 Chesterton Road, Cambridge, on 4 March 1947; he was survived by his wife. 
A bare account of Coulton's career and its achievements conveys no idea of its frequently embattled course. He was constantly embroiled in controversy, by no means all of it academic. Thus he was a strong supporter of the National Service League, advocating compulsory national service for home defence, and campaigned energetically for it; his book 'The Case for Compulsory Military Service' (1917) runs to nearly 400 pages. But he was far more often in the public eye for his recurrent conflicts with a group of Roman Catholic historians and apologists prominent in the early twentieth century, all of whom, and particularly Cardinal Francis Gasquet, he repeatedly denounced for what he described as 'habits of literary dishonesty' ('The Monastic Legend', 1905, 12 n. 2). The sense of outrage which runs through practically all Coulton's writings had several roots. One was an absolute commitment to truth, which in a historiographical context meant a scrupulous dependence on contemporary sources, accurately cited, and furious broadsides of reproof for those who transgressed against this basic standard. Then there was a measure of religious antagonism. After deciding not to become a priest Coulton moved to a rather elusive spiritual position, somewhere between deism and Christian agnosticism, which in its acceptance of doubt left him radically opposed to the certainties of ultramontane Catholicism. Unlike his opponents, moreover, he fully accepted the claims of modernism; indeed he actively promoted them. This third strand in his historical thinking he himself described as his determination 'to justify the main trend of modern culture' ('Ten Medieval Studies', 3rd edn, 1930, vii), and he attacked Catholic writers like Gasquet and G. K. Chesterton because he felt that they had constructed a false image of the medieval past, as centuries in which religious devotion had bred social contentment, in order to use it as a rebuke to the present. Far from regretting his involvement in controversy, he regarded it as part of his duty as a historian. 
The carelessness and tendentiousness of Gasquet and his followers fully merited correction, but there was a degree of naivety about Coulton's obsession with truthfulness, unsurprising, perhaps, in a man who could denounce his six-year-old daughter as a liar for a fib about a rabbit's nest. He acknowledged that preachers and moralists might have overstated the evils of their age, but in practice usually ignored his own caveat, with the result that his claims for the realities of medieval life sometimes appear as overbalanced in one direction as those of his adversaries in another. This feeling of imbalance is accentuated by Coulton's pugnacious literary style, as great accumulations of evidence (he was said to have read the entire 'Rolls Series') are deployed to overwhelm his opponents. Many of his books have dozens of appendices in which the errors of his opponents are exposed at length; 'The Medieval Village' concludes with fifty-eight pages devoted entirely to 'A rough list of misstatements and blunders in Cardinal Gasquet's writings'. Coulton's only novel, 'Friar's Lantern' (1906), is a 'jeu d'esprit' in which a young curate devoted to the idea of the middle ages as an age of faith is transported back to the fourteenth century, where he undergoes a series of harrowing experiences; it ends with a characteristic assurance from the author that 'there is scarcely an incident which I have not taken from the most unimpeachable sources' (p. 247), together with two documentary illustrations to underline the point. 
In appearance Coulton was tall and thin, his height accentuated, in the eyes of a French journalist, by his wearing clothes that were too short and tight. In academic circles he was combative but not malicious, and often made friends with those who stood up to him in debate -- for instance the young Maurice Powicke. His abundant energies were not confined to scholarship, however, and sometimes made him a trial to his family. In his daughter Mary's 'Father: a Portrait of G. G. Coulton at Home', a minor masterpiece of exasperated affection, he appears as 'a powerful intellect and personality which steadily sustained a small middle-class household and sporadically wrecked its peace' (Campion, 140), a man addicted to cocoa brewed according to an elaborate recipe entirely his own, which he drank in a study filled with home-made gadgets, and also given to eccentricities like the embarrassing habit of removing meat-bones from plates at other people's dinner parties in order to take them home for his cats. 
Coulton deserves to be remembered for more than his personal idiosyncrasies, however, for he made important contributions to medieval history. Not the least of them was his own extensive scholarship. He supported his arguments with a vast array of citations, more often from printed texts than from unpublished sources, but still extending far beyond the government-sponsored publications which proliferated in western Europe about the end of the nineteenth century. He appreciated the value of the medieval sermons and theological treatises which were still being printed in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and also made good use of literary sources. This substructure of knowledge gives lasting value to even his most contentious writings. He also contributed to a widening of the range of medieval studies by his attention to social and economic issues. He expressed admiration for a few great men, like St Francis, St Bernard, and Archbishop Eudes Rigaud, but was principally concerned to study the effects of institutions like monasticism on the lower orders of society. 
Coulton believed in bringing the fruits of his learning to a wider public than one made up of his fellow academics. A fine public speaker (several of his books originated in lecture courses), and always lucid and vigorous in his writings, he deliberately conceived anthologies of sources and books like 'Medieval Panorama' to this end. He also encouraged other scholars to publish, and through the series 'Cambridge Studies in Medieval Life and Thought', which he inaugurated in 1920, provided the means for younger historians like Eileen Power to make their first appearances in print. Here and elsewhere, Coulton's obsession with factual accuracy helped to raise standards of scholarship. It is at least partly owing to him that twenty-first-century historians who present a view of medieval society more favourable than any he would have countenanced himself do so from a basis of scholarship unknown to his adversaries. Coulton's passionate concern for truth had some curious side-effects, but overall it served him and his profession well. 


@@@@@


doc= 32584


Couper, Sir George Ebenezer Wilson, second baronet (1824-1908), administrator in India, born at Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 29 April 1824, was eldest of the six children of Sir George Couper, first baronet (1788-1861) -- then military secretary to Nova Scotia's governor, Sir James Kempt -- and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1880), daughter of Sir John Wilson, judge of common pleas. The father was subsequently comptroller of the household and equerry to the duchess of Kent. The second son, Major-General James Kempt Couper (1827-1901), served in the Indian Staff Corps, and the fifth son, Henry Edward (1835-1876), captain of the 70th foot, saw service in the Indian mutiny of 1857. 
In 1839, after education at Sherborne School and at Coombe, Surrey, Couper entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Passing out with distinction in 1842, he was gazetted to the 15th regiment as an ensign, but on receiving a nomination to a writership in India he went instead to East India College, Haileybury, and, at the close of 1846, joined the Bengal civil service. 
Couper was first posted to Dinajpur in eastern Bengal as an assistant magistrate, but was transferred to the Punjab on its annexation in 1849 and, at the relatively young age of twenty-five, was made assistant commissioner at Jhelum. Thereafter his rise through the ranks was rapid, something which the satirical 'Charivari's Album' of 1875 attributed in part to the charmed childhood he had spent in the duchess of Kent's household. Certainly Couper had influential friends. Lord Dalhousie, governor-general and 'oldest and dearest friend' of his father, took a keen interest in him, and, as shown in his 'Private Letters' (1910), reported frequently to his father on his progress. On 29 April 1852, while on furlough, Couper married Caroline Penelope (died 1910), daughter of Henry Every of the Life Guards and his second wife, the Hon. Caroline Flower; she was granddaughter of Sir Henry Every, ninth baronet, of Eggington Hall, Burton upon Trent. 
In 1853 Couper was transferred to Calcutta as under-secretary to the government of India, first in the home and finance department and then in the foreign department. On the annexation of Oudh in February 1856 he was appointed secretary at Lucknow to the chief commissioner, Sir James Outram, staying on to serve his successor, Sir Henry Lawrence. Through the uprising of 1857, of which Oudh was at the epicentre, Couper was with Lawrence, serving as his aide-de-camp as well as his chief secretary until the latter's death at the residency on 4 July. He continued these positions with Sir John Inglis, and finally, after the relief, with Outram again. During the siege of Lucknow, Couper put his early military training to good use and won high praise from his chiefs. He was the author, save for the mentions of himself, of Inglis's celebrated dispatch of 26 September 1857 reporting the death of Lawrence, which he later reprinted for private circulation with selections from his own speeches on the uprising, but omitting Inglis's references to himself (1896). He also wrote the text to Captain C. H. Mecham's 'Sketches of the Siege of Lucknow' (1858). 
The viceroy, Lord Canning, rejected Outram's recommendation of Couper as his successor to the chief commissionership of Oudh, on the ground that Couper had been only twelve years in the service. Instead, in April 1859, after furlough, Couper was posted to Allahabad as chief secretary to the government of the North-Western Provinces. On 18 May 1860 he was made a CB. In the following year he succeeded to his father's baronetcy and in December 1862 returned to Oudh as judicial commissioner. From April 1871 he acted as chief commissioner of the province, and was confirmed in the appointment in December 1873. In that office he presided over the revision of the land revenue assessments, pursuing the post-1857 'Oudh policy' and securing the position of the 'talukdars' (local landed magnates), of whom he was an ardent supporter. 
On the retirement of Sir John Strachey in July 1876, Couper was made acting lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces, while retaining his control of Oudh, thereby accomplishing the amalgamation of Oudh with the larger province. On 17 January 1877 Couper became the first 'lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces and chief commissioner of Oudh'. After two decades of cosseting by the British the 'talukdars' were deeply suspicious of the change, and it was only Couper's assiduously cultivated image as the 'talukdars'' friend that enabled its smooth implementation. Couper's administration became known for its conservation of resources or, as his detractors labelled it, its parsimony. His handling of a serious famine in 1877-8 invoked widespread public criticism, including a blistering assault conducted by the Anglo-Indian newspaper the 'Statesman and Friend of India' on the administration's delay and meanness in establishing relief works for the starving. Couper was stung by the attacks, but stuck to his argument that economy in relief was both morally and financially sound; the tax rises necessary to fund widespread gratuitous relief for the indigent would, he believed, impoverish the independent classes in society and retard India's progress. 
Economy notwithstanding, Couper initiated a policy of canal and light railway construction for the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, although some of the local benefits of this were lost to a subsequent ruling by the government of India that railways should not be provincial undertakings. Couper also developed the provincial agricultural department so that it became a model for other provinces; and he encouraged Indian industrial enterprises, such as the 'Couper' paper mills at Lucknow. 
Couper was created KCSI in January 1877, and CIE a year later. Due to retire in January 1882, he had hoped to extend his term by another year but, regardless of the appeals of the Oudh 'talukdars', Lord Ripon, the viceroy, was only prepared to offer him another three months. He therefore retired in April 1882. He declined the proposal of the Husainabad endowment trustees, Lucknow, to erect a statue in his memory, and as an alternative they built a clock tower, as a symbol of progress and order. 
After residing at Cheltenham for a few years Couper settled at Camberley. He died on 5 March 1908, at 11 Duchess Street, Portland Place, London, and was buried in St Michael's churchyard, Camberley. Couper's wife died on 28 November 1910 and was buried beside her husband. They had five sons and four daughters; one of the latter, who lived for barely a month, was born in the Lucknow residency during the siege. The eldest son, Sir Ramsay George Henry, succeeded as third baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 32585


Coupland, Sir Reginald (1884-1952), historian, was born in London on 2 August 1884, the only surviving child of Sidney Coupland (1849-1930), consulting physician and lecturer at the Middlesex Hospital, London, and his wife, Bessie, daughter of Thomas Potter of Great Bedwin, Wiltshire. An elder brother died in early childhood, and Coupland himself suffered frequent ill health. A contemporary later recalled that he was 'always much taken up with his own health, and indeed with all his own concerns' ('The Times', 13 Nov 1952). He was educated privately in Brighton and at Winchester College, where he edited a youthful collection of essays and poems, 'Horae iuventutis' (1903). He then studied classics at New College, Oxford, where Alfred Zimmern was one of his tutors. As an undergraduate he was noted as an ardent Liberal -- as was his father, who was a close friend and supporter of Stopford Brooke -- but he also discovered, and was much influenced by, the idea of fellowship put forward by John Ruskin and the early William Morris. He obtained a second class in classical honour moderations in 1905 and a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1907. On the strength of his examination papers he was elected to a fellowship and lectureship in ancient history at Trinity College, Oxford, later the same year, and started work on an unpublished history of ancient Greece, in which he argued that the impermanence of the Greek city states was largely the result of their failure to combine. 
Coupland's career was transformed by his coming into contact with Lionel Curtis, who was Beit lecturer in colonial history at Oxford from 1912 to 1913. Curtis persuaded Coupland to succeed him as Beit lecturer, and to join the Round Table, which had been formed as an imperial 'ginger group' in 1910. Coupland subsequently maintained a lifelong connection with the group, editing its eponymous journal from 1917 to 1919 and 1939 to 1941, and contributing many anonymous articles. On the eve of the First World War he was employed by Curtis to write the volume of 'Round Table Studies' relating to Canada. A proof version (dated 1920) survives, but again the work was unpublished. During the war Coupland remained in Oxford, having been declared ineligible for national service on medical grounds. In 1915 he published an edition of 'The War Speeches of William Pitt the Younger'. This was reissued, with a preface by Winston Churchill, in 1940. 
Some surprise was expressed when in 1920 Coupland was elected to succeed H. E. Egerton as Beit professor and professorial fellow of All Souls College. In his inaugural lecture Coupland admitted his lack of the usual professorial stock-in-trade, but asked to 'be judged not by what he has done but by what he means to do' (R. Coupland, 'The Empire in these Days', 1935, 6). His tenure of the Beit chair, which lasted until 1948, was indeed marked by a steady output of books, many of them published to public and critical acclaim. His first was 'Wilberforce' (1923), a life which reflected his long-held belief that 'personality is the really interesting thing in history' (Symonds, 53). 'Wilberforce' was followed by 'Raffles' (1926), 'Kirk on the Zambesi' (1928), and 'Livingstone's Last Journey' (1945), in each of which Coupland developed his theme of the moral basis of British rule, based on imperial trusteeship and the evolution of the empire into a Commonwealth of self-governing nations. An interest in the problem of nationality was reflected in 'The Quebec Act' (1925), a study which emphasized the far-sightedness of British policy in Canada. His 'The American Revolution and the British Empire' (1930) argued that the British empire had been transformed in the half-century after the American War of Independence, through the rise of trusteeship, anti-slavery, and free trade. He wrote the book in order to help Americans in particular to 'begin to look at [the empire] from a new angle' (May, 236). The theme of trusteeship was further explored in what Coupland considered to be his most important historical work, 'East Africa and its Invaders' (1938), a detailed study of east African history from antiquity to the death of Seyyid Said, and 'The Exploitation of East Africa' (1939), which continued the story from 1856 until the establishment of the British protectorate in 1890. 
Coupland was instrumental in securing the training of colonial service probationers at Oxford. Sir Ralph Furse later recalled that 'one of the most capable officers in the service' had told him that Coupland's lectures had been 'the greatest help': they had 'sustained his faith... and... been a touchstone by which to judge the stream of criticism... directed in recent years at British colonial policy and the men who execute it' ('The Times', 24 Nov 1952). Coupland also played a key role in setting up the school of philosophy, politics, and economics, for which he devised the special subject on the political structure of the British empire. He was involved in the negotiations leading to the founding of Nuffield College, Oxford, of which he was a professorial fellow from 1939 to 1950. Less successfully, he was also associated with the schemes for a school of government or of African studies put forward by his Round Table colleagues. An abiding interest at Oxford was the Ralegh Club, founded by Curtis to provide a forum for the discussion of imperial problems. Under Coupland's professorship, the club attracted as speakers many of the empire's most distinguished proconsuls, statesmen, and critics. 
Coupland played a role on a wider stage as a member of the royal commission on the superior services in India, appointed under the chairmanship of Lord Lee of Fareham in June 1923. This reported in March 1924 in favour of increasing Indianization of the civil service in India. For his services on this commission, Coupland was appointed CIE in 1928. He worked under Lord Peel as an adviser to the Burma round-table conference in 1931, and again as a member of the royal commission on Palestine, appointed in July 1936. Coupland was widely believed to have played a key role in the commission, and to have drafted its report, published in July 1937, which concluded that the Arab-Jewish conflict was intractable, and that the only lasting solution would be partition, the forcible transfer of population, and the retention of a buffer zone by Britain. The British government's rejection of such a policy following the report of the Palestine partition commission, under Sir John Woodhead, was a source of great disappointment to him. 
In February 1941 Coupland was persuaded by his old Round Table colleague Leo Amery, now secretary of state for India, to conduct a study of the Indian constitutional question, under the auspices of Nuffield College. When Sir Stafford Cripps arrived in India on his mission of March to April 1942, Coupland served on his staff. He subsequently published a sketch, 'The Cripps Mission' (1942), and a more substantial study in three volumes, 'The Indian Problem, 1833-1935' (1942), 'Indian Politics, 1936-1942' (1943), and 'The Future of India' (1943). Coupland was one of the first British writers to discuss seriously the idea of partition, but he came down in favour of a loose confederation of regions, formed by groups of provinces and princely states. He again put forward this solution in 'India: a Re-Statement' (1945). 
Coupland was appointed KCMG in recognition of his many services in 1944. He retired from the Beit chair in 1948, and was succeeded by Vincent Harlow. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1948 and a fellow of All Souls in 1952. Meanwhile he had started work on a multi-volume study of nationalism in the British empire. He handed the manuscript of the first volume to his publisher on 5 November 1952. The following day he died suddenly, as he embarked at Southampton on a fact-finding voyage to South Africa. He was buried in the chapel of All Souls College, Oxford, on 12 November 1952. He was unmarried. His 'Welsh and Scottish Nationalism' was published posthumously, to wide acclaim, in 1954. 
Coupland was small, slight, and in later years stooped, with a quiet voice and an earnest demeanour. Nevertheless, his contemporaries remembered his lively lectures and his entertaining company. His views often irritated those who did not share his own belief in the moral rectitude of British rule. When Mahatma Gandhi addressed the Ralegh Club in 1931, Coupland lectured him on the need for patience and co-operation. Gandhi replied that he was only a peasant, not a professor, but that this was not how he understood America and Ireland to have won their independence (Symonds, 54). Eric Williams, later prime minister of Trinidad, wrote that Coupland was 'the most tedious of British historians' (Williams, 154). This was unfair. Coupland's books were expertly crafted, and appreciated by a wide audience. He was a fluent writer, with a flair for narrative and an exceptional geographical and historical scope. Even in his own lifetime many of his views came to be seen as outdated, but his interpretations of east African and Indian history in particular have remained influential, as the most coherent exposition of a particular point of view. 


@@@@@


doc= 32586


Courtauld, Augustine (1904-1959), Arctic explorer, was born on 26 August 1904 at Bocking, Braintree, Essex, the eldest child of Samuel Augustine Courtauld (1865-1953), a director of the family textile firm, and his wife, Edith Anne (Edian) Lister (died 1951), daughter of Walter Venning Lister. He had one brother and one sister and was a cousin of Samuel Courtauld (1876-1947). August, as he was known, was educated at Charterhouse, which he disliked, and Trinity College, Cambridge, which he enjoyed and where he read engineering and geography and from where he graduated BA in 1926. In that year he joined James Wordie's summer expedition to east Greenland as photographer. The party spent the summer surveying the area between Pendulum Oer and Davy Sund. They also took gravity readings in the area. In the spring of 1927 Courtauld travelled with Francis Rodd and Peter Rodd to the mountains of Air in the southern Sahara. The party travelled to Kano, down the Niger to Timbuktu, thence to Dakar, and home in the spring of 1928. Little is known of this expedition as it was not written up by any member of the party. 
After an unsuccessful attempt at a career with a firm of City stockbrokers, Courtauld returned to Greenland in the summer of 1929 on another expedition with Wordie. Courtauld was one of the party that reached the summit of Petermann Peak, then the highest known point in the Arctic, but which the party established was only 9300 feet high and not 14,000 feet as had previously been thought. In 1930 Courtauld met H. G. Watkins, who was planning an expedition to Greenland to explore the possibilities of an air route from the United Kingdom to western Canada over the ice cap. Courtauld secured substantial funds from his family for Watkins's British Arctic air route expedition. An essential part of the meteorological programme was the establishment of the ice-cap station some 140 miles north-west of the base camp and 8500 feet above sea level and its maintenance throughout the whole year by two men who would be relieved at approximately monthly intervals by dog sledge or aircraft. As winter approached weather conditions were so severe that a party, including Courtauld, took six weeks to reach the ice-cap station from the base camp and it became clear that it would be many months before it could be relieved again. It was also clear that there was not enough food for two men to be left safely at the camp. Courtauld persuaded the party to allow him to man the station alone and he was left there on 5 December 1930. A relief party reached the vicinity of the station in late March 1931 but in appalling weather conditions they were unable to find it. On the return of the party with this alarming news Watkins, with Frederick Spencer Chapman and another companion, left the base camp and on 5 May located the ice-cap station, though it was completely submerged in snow. Courtauld had spent five months alone, part of the time imprisoned beneath the snow and in darkness. His home was a tent 10 feet in diameter covered by a snow house. He was cheerful and unperturbed. He characteristically wrote of this episode that his main aim had been to 'dispel strange ideas of danger and risk in leaving a man in such a situation', though the main result of his action had in fact been that the meteorological readings which were the scientific goal of the party were maintained uninterrupted at least until April when he ran out of fuel. He later recounted his experiences in a series of articles for 'The Times'. In 1932 he was awarded the polar medal by George V. 
In 1932 Courtauld married Mollie, elder daughter of Frank Douglas Montgomerie, land agent. They had known each other since childhood and together had four sons and two daughters. In the year of his marriage Courtauld bought a 22-ton gaff-rigged yawl which he named 'Duet' and he and his family and friends had much pleasure from it. He was a skilled and fearless seaman. In the summer of 1935 Courtauld organized an expedition with Lawrence (Bill) Wager to Knud Rasmussen Land to map and climb a range of mountains which had been distantly sighted and photographed from an aircraft by Watkins. These proved to be the highest in the Arctic (12,200 feet) and were named the Watkins Range. Before the Second World War Courtauld joined the organization which was to become the Special Operations Executive, and in the summer of 1939 was asked by naval intelligence to take 'Duet' up the Norwegian coast from Bergen to Trondheim gathering as much intelligence as he could. Severe fog tested his skill as a navigator but he brought 'Duet' safely home. 
Courtauld served throughout the Second World War in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as sub-lieutenant (1939) and lieutenant (1940-45). He was never promoted beyond the rank of lieutenant as he did not take kindly to rules and regulations. After the war he devoted himself to local government and community service. He served on Essex county council from 1945 to 1955, and became a JP and deputy lieutenant in 1946, and high sheriff of Essex in 1953. He was a governor of Felsted School, chairman of Essex Association of Boys' Clubs, and vice-president of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) (1957), and gave a lifeboat to the institution in memory of his mother. He served three times on the council of the Royal Geographical Society and was honorary secretary between 1948 and 1951. He also served on the committee of management of the Scott Polar Research Institute. 
In 1953 Courtauld was found to be suffering from multiple sclerosis and he became increasingly incapacitated, though for a time he was able to attend official and social occasions in his wheelchair. His Christian faith which had brought him comfort during his time in isolation in the Arctic also sustained him through his final illness. His autobiography, 'Man the Ropes' (1957), shows the signs of his illness, but his anthology of polar writings, 'From the Ends of the Earth' (1958), is a well-chosen collection. He had little interest in the social advantages which his family wealth might have brought him and characteristically used his money to further exploration and local causes in which he was personally interested. James Wordie described him as a 'loveable and popular member of any party' ('Polar Record', 610). In 1956 he set up the Augustine Courtauld Trust to help causes which 'wouldn't get much help otherwise'. 
Courtauld died in hospital in London on 3 March 1959. He was buried at sea from the lifeboat which he had given to the RNLI. He was in turn memorialized by a lifeboat given to the RNLI by his brother, Peter, and named 'Augustine Courtauld'. On 21 October 1959 his widow became the second wife of R. A. Butler (later Lord Butler of Saffron Walden). They were married in the presence of their ten children and the marriage was very happy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32587


Courtauld, Samuel (1876-1947), industrialist and patron of the arts, was born at Bocking, Essex, on 7 May 1876, the second son of Sydney Courtauld, a silk manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah Lucy, the daughter of William Sharp. The Courtaulds had arrived in England as Huguenot refugees at the end of the seventeenth century. Three generations of the family worked as London silversmiths. The silk firm was effectively founded in 1816 by Sydney's uncle, Samuel Courtauld (1793-1881). Samuel, the great-nephew of the founder, followed precedent and in 1898 joined the company. He had meanwhile been educated at Rugby School (1890-94) and was then sent to Krefeld and Lyons to learn the techniques of textile manufacture. In 1901 -- the year in which, on 20 June, he married Elizabeth Theresa Frances (died 1931), the only daughter of Edward Kelsey -- he became manager of the company's weaving mill at Halstead, and in 1908 he was appointed general manager of all the firm's textile mills. This promotion was not mere nepotism. He was the only member of the family in the business to have earned the approbation of H. G. Tetley, an outsider to the family but then the dominant power in the company and the architect of its move from silk into rayon. Courtauld, who proved himself an able and vigorous manager, joined the board of Courtaulds Ltd in 1915 and succeeded Tetley as joint managing director in 1917, when Tetley became chairman. On Tetley's death in 1921 the way was open for Courtauld to succeed as chairman of what had become a $12 million international concern. For the next quarter of a century he filled two roles in British public life: he was chairman of what was for most of that time the world's largest firm of rayon manufacturers, and he was one of Britain's best-known patrons of the arts. 
The highly profitable company which Courtauld took over was just beginning to face competition as a big rayon boom got under way. His response to that boom exhibited certain central facets of his character. Clear, knowledgeable, and authoritative in his statements, he strove for conciliation and compromise, limits on competition, and ordered growth. Bold, aggressive, and risky business ventures of the sort which his great-uncle or Tetley had pursued were anathema to him. Many of the new rayon companies founded in the 1920s came crashing down in the 1930s depression. In 1931 Courtauld voiced his disapproval of what he called 'the senseless increase in production resulting from the orgy of company-promoting and speculation' and observed loftily that it was 'a discreditable chapter in industrial history' (Coleman, 2.219). Under his leadership the company which bore his family name became a highly respected industrial giant, a blue-chip security. It pursued a policy of financial conservatism, with large reserves and a cautious dividend policy. 
Courtauld's own lengthy and forthright speeches at annual general meetings were something of an event in the business calendar. He became a public figure, yet he characteristically turned down the offer of a barony in 1937. His ideas on a variety of subjects were disseminated in numerous letters to 'The Times' and, especially during the Second World War, by sundry pronouncements on industry and the state and on capital-labour relations. He sat on numerous committees concerned with such issues and was a visiting fellow and trustee of Nuffield College, Oxford. Some of his views -- for example, his dislike of advertising and his advocacy of more government control of the economy and of a more sympathetic regard for the claims of labour to a share in management -- did not go down well with some of his fellow businessmen. His dignified and respected leadership had costs as well as benefits for the company. It became complacent. Not until the end of 1938 did Courtauld tell his colleagues on the board that it had rested too much on its laurels, neglecting research. There was also a failure to understand the need for changes in organization, management, and personnel as the firm expanded. Too much power was left in the hands of unimaginative bosses whose rough and ready methods had worked in the past but who remained contemptuous of change. Again, it was not until the later 1930s, and then after the Second World War, that many necessary changes were brought about. 
The fact that Courtauld was in many ways the antithesis of the adventurous entrepreneur owed much to his serious-minded upbringing. His parents retained longer than others of their generation a profound regard for the family Unitarianism. He inherited from his father both an interest in the technical side of the business and a regard for music; from his mother came an appreciation of art and literature. The latter found its outlet in his picture collecting and in his acquaintanceship with many prominent figures of the literary and artistic world, such as the Sitwells, Roger Fry, and Charles Morgan, as well as with Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes, who provided links between Bloomsbury and business. His collecting started before he became a very rich man and showed an adventurousness not evident in his business career, for it resulted in the building up of what became the finest collection of French Impressionist paintings in the country. It contained many works by Degas, Renoir, Manet (including the famous 'Bar at the Folies-Bergere', for which he paid some $23,000 in 1926), Seurat, and especially Cezanne, whose cause he particularly championed. By far the greater part of the collecting was done in the 1920s; it virtually ended with the death of his wife on 25 December 1931. In 1923 he had given $50,000 to the Tate Gallery for the purchase of similar works. 
On his wife's death Courtauld established and handsomely endowed the Courtauld Institute of Art in the University of London (which conferred on him an honorary DLitt), providing the new institute with the lease of his splendid Adam house, Home House, in Portman Square, and a substantial part of his own collection. He had strong emotional reactions to what these paintings revealed to him; and a sense of duty to make available to the public the civilizing influence of art. He was a trustee of the Tate Gallery from 1927 to 1937 and of the National Gallery from 1931 to 1947. He and his wife also gave financial support to music and concert-going in London. In the 1930s he became much enamoured of Christabel, Lady Aberconway; and his self-doubt and private quest for truth and beauty can be seen in many letters to her, letters often charged with a rather heavy sententiousness. It is perhaps hardly surprising that Edith Sitwell should have recorded, after conversation at a lunch party, that he made her feel 'unpardonably flippant' (Glendinning, 172). 
In May 1946 Courtauld suffered a severe illness and in October resigned from the chairmanship. He remained on the board, but died on 1 December 1947, at his home, 12 North Audley Street, London. His will was proved at $1,030,126. After various legacies much of his property went to his only daughter, Sydney Elizabeth, and to her husband, Richard Austen Butler (later Lord Butler of Saffron Walden), whom she had married in 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 32588


Courthope, William John (1842-1917), poet and literary scholar, the elder son of William Courthope, was born on 17 July 1842 at South Malling, near Lewes, Sussex, where his father was rector. His mother, Caroline Elizabeth Ryle, was the daughter of John Ryle, banker and MP for Macclesfield, and a sister of John Charles Ryle, first bishop of Liverpool. Courthope's father died in 1849 and the three children were brought up by their uncle, the head of this ancient Sussex family, at Whiligh, near Wadhurst. 
Courthope was sent to Blackheath and then taught at Harrow School by C. J. Vaughan and (from 1859) H. Montagu Butler. In 1861 he matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and in 1862 became an exhibitioner of New College where he was a pupil of Edward Charles Wickham and formed a close friendship with John Conington, then Corpus professor of Latin, which continued until Conington's death in 1869. In 1865 Courthope published his first volume of poetry, 'Poems by Novus Homo', and was awarded the Newdigate prize. He graduated BA with a double first in classics in 1866. In 1868 he won the chancellor's prize with an essay entitled 'The Genius of Spenser', which was subsequently published in two editions that year. 
As Courthope had a legacy which made him ineligible for a fellowship, he was called to the bar, and in 1869 he entered the education office as an examiner. Later that year he co-founded the 'National Review', of which he was joint editor until 1887, and published 'Ludibria lunae', a satire on the 'woman question'. In 1870 he published a second collection of poems, 'The Paradise of Birds', and married Mary Scott, eldest daughter of John Scott, her majesty's inspector of hospitals at Bombay. The couple settled at Wadhurst, Sussex, and raised a family of four sons and two daughters. 
While working at the education office, Courthope began to collaborate with Whitwell Elwin on the standard edition of Alexander Pope's works in ten volumes (1871-89). Five volumes, edited by Elwin, had appeared by 1872. In 1881 a sixth followed, bearing Courthope's name as joint editor, and indicating that he would be solely responsible for the remainder. He took much care over the text, which had previously followed that of Bishop Warburton (1751) without examination of his sources. Courthope closed the series in 1889 with an acclaimed biography of Pope. The 'Saturday Review' remarked that he 'has endeavoured to imitate the excellent example of Johnson, and make the study of the writer's work his main business, in preference to moralising upon his defects as a man'. 
While working on Pope, Courthope contributed a volume on Joseph Addison in 1884 to the 'English Men of Letters' series, produced 'The Liberal Movement in English Literature' in 1885, and was appointed civil service commissioner in 1887. Five years later he was promoted to first civil commissioner. In his 'History of English Poetry' (1895-1910) he undertook a work which had been projected by Pope and passed on to Thomas Gray and Thomas Warton, but never carried out. The 'History' traced through successive poets the continuity of English poetry, locating each poet within a historical context. It ended at the Romantic period and was completed in six volumes. In 1895 Courthope was elected unanimously to the chair of poetry at Oxford, and made a CB, and in the following year he was made an honorary fellow of New College. In 1901 he published the lectures given in his five years as professor under the title 'Life in Poetry, Law in Taste'. 
Courthope was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1907, to which he contributed many papers. His last published work was a translation (1914) of a selection from the 'Epigrams' of the Roman poet Martial. He died at his home, The Lodge, Wadhurst, Sussex, on 10 April 1917. A volume of selected poetry, 'The Country Town and other Poems', was published posthumously in 1920. 


@@@@@


doc= 32589


Courtney, Leonard Henry, Baron Courtney of Penwith (1832-1918), journalist and politician, eldest son of the nine children of John Sampson Courtney (died 1881), banker, of Alfreston House, Penzance, and his wife, Sarah (died 1859), daughter of John Mortimer, was born at Penzance on 6 July 1832 and was baptized on 3 October 1832. He attended a local school and then worked for six years in Bolitho's Bank at Penzance. A local doctor taught him classics and mathematics in the evenings and he won a sizarship at St John's College, Cambridge. Courtney's university career was distinguished: he became second wrangler (1855), Smith's prizeman, and fellow of his college. In 1857 he went to London and in 1858 was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. After six years as a briefless barrister and freelance journalist -- the latter being his real interest -- he became in 1865 a leader writer for 'The Times', where J. T. Delane was the editor. During the next sixteen years he wrote some three thousand articles for the paper, and helped it maintain a Liberal patina as it drifted towards Conservatism. Courtney also contributed sixteen articles for the 'Fortnightly Review', mostly on political and economic topics. He became a close friend of its editor, John Morley. 
From 1872 to 1875 Courtney was professor of political economy at University College, London. His political economy was not that of a thoroughgoing Liberal, for in the 1890s he sympathized with bimetallism, but he was always a free-trader. In 1874 he stood unsuccessfully as parliamentary candidate for Liskeard, in opposition to E. Horsman, also standing as a Liberal, though with tory support; Courtney lost in a vicious campaign by five votes. On Horsman's death in 1876, he won the by-election and held the seat until 1885. In the Commons he was attached to the radical group centred around Joseph Chamberlain and Sir Charles Dilke. In 1880 W. E. Gladstone made him under-secretary for the Home Office and in 1881 he succeeded Sir M. Grant-Duff as under-secretary for the colonies, an appointment made in the face of strong opposition from Queen Victoria, for Courtney already had a reputation as an anti-imperialist. In May 1882 his favour with Gladstone was confirmed by his appointment as financial secretary to the Treasury in succession to Lord Frederick Cavendish. 
Courtney was thus quickly launched on a promising political career, but one which relied on executive ability, for he from the first often irritated the Commons by his portentous and long-winded speeches, which reflected the worst features of his experience as a leader writer and professor. On 15 March 1883, at St Jude's, Whitechapel, he married Catherine or Kate ['see 'Courtney, Catherine (1847-1929)], daughter of Richard Potter, formerly chairman of the Great Western Railway, and his wife, Lawrencina, 'nee' Heyworth. The Courtneys made a formidable couple, prominent in radical circles, but with Leonard, especially, seen initially as something of a bore: his wife's sister Beatrice Webb thought 'he had no subtlety, no originality -- he thought in the grooves made by other minds and by minds of the plainer sort' (Hart, 124). There was some social prejudice against Courtney, and in 1883, when the speakership was vacant, Dilke thought that Courtney would be unsuitable because he dropped his aitches. 
Courtney's career was not, however, to run in the grooves of Liberal executive politics, for in 1884 during the debates on the 'Representation of the People Bill', he made the inclusion in the bill of proportional representation -- which he had advocated since the 1870s -- a condition of his membership of the government, and had to resign. From the back benches Courtney and John Lubbock (1834-1913) pressed the cause of proportional representation, especially with respect to school boards, local government, and home rule for Ireland, with no effect except for the aborted Irish county council measure of 1892 (introduced by A. J. Balfour). Courtney was elected for Bodmin in 1885. He opposed Gladstone's home rule proposals in 1886, but Gladstone rescued Courtney from political sterility by proposing him as chairman of committees and deputy speaker, which offices he held from 1886 until 1892. In them he was described as being 'impartially unfair to both sides'. In 1892 the Liberals encouraged him to stand for the speakership, but he declined, as he feared it would muzzle him. He was sworn of the privy council on 29 January 1889. 
Despite Courtney's unionism, he remained a passionate anti-imperialist. He especially opposed British expansion in Africa, and argued against the 'forward' policy in Egypt, the Sudan, and South Africa. He opposed the annexation of the Transvaal in 1877, denounced the Jameson raid of 1896, and attacked the policy which led to the outbreak of the South African War in 1899. During that conflict he was chairman of the South African conciliation committee, which opposed demands for annexation of the Boer states and unconditional surrender. Courtney had always been an improbable Unionist, and this led to his final severance from that party. He did not stand for re-election in 1900. For the next six years Courtney 'lived the life of a political sage in Chelsea', as F. W. Hirst put it in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. His eyesight had already partially failed, but he turned to authorship, publishing 'The Working Constitution of the United Kingdom' in 1901 and, anonymously, 'The Diary of a Churchgoer' in 1904. However, he declined requests from the Electoral Reform Society to revive the cause of proportional representation until the Unionist government announced in February 1905 that there would be a redistribution of parliamentary seats. With the encouragement of Leonard and Kate Courtney, the Proportional Representation Society was revived and steadily campaigned throughout the years of Liberal government from 1905 to 1914. 
Courtney stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for West Edinburgh in 1906 and was given a peerage by Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman in July that year, when he became Baron Courtney of Penwith. He often spoke in the Lords, assisting the meagre Liberal group there, even on home rule. He became a strong critic of Sir Edward Grey's foreign policy and an advocate of armament reduction. He attacked the entente with France and advocated a similar, balancing, agreement with Germany. After 1914 he criticized what he saw as the failings of British diplomacy. During the war he defended freedom of speech and freedom of conscience, and in a speech on 8 November 1915 was the first parliamentarian to call for peace negotiations, a cause he advocated until his death, as the only means of ending the war. He worked with the Union of Democratic Control to pursue justice for conscientious objectors, and he gained the respect of many young radicals: C. R. Buxton recorded: 'I should have become quite outrageously cynical about old age, if it had not been for Lord Courtney' (Harvie, 241). 
Courtney died at his home, 15 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, on 11 May 1918, and was buried four days later at Chelsea Old Church, London. His wife survived him by eleven years. The couple having no children, the barony became extinct. In Courtney's later years what had earlier seemed social inadequacies became strengths, and he and his wife played an important social as well as political role in giving vigour and tone to radical circles. His readiness to put principle before office gained him a place in the radical pantheon. F. W. Hirst, a friend and disciple, noted: 'To a mathematical mind and a strong logical sense, which insisted on arguing out every question, he united a very warm and emotional disposition' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 32590


Courtney, William Leonard (1850-1928), philosopher and journalist, was born at Poona, India, on 5 January 1850, the youngest in the family of three sons and three daughters of William Courtney, of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Ann Edwardes, daughter of Captain Edward Scott RN, of Hoegarden House, Plymouth; his early years were profoundly influenced by his eldest sister, Emily (Minnie), a remarkable woman. Educated at Somerset College, Bath, under the Revd Hay Sweet Escott, a stimulating teacher, he was elected scholar of University College, Oxford, the vigorous life of which he enjoyed from 1868 to 1872. After gaining first classes in classical moderations (1870) and 'literae humaniores' (1872), he won a fellowship at Merton College in the latter year, and shared the society of Mandell Creighton, William Wallace, R. J. Wilson, Andrew Lang, and F. H. Bradley among the fellows. In 1873 Courtney was appointed headmaster of his old school, Somerset College, and in the following year married Cordelia Blanche, daughter of Commander Lionel Place, RN, with whom he had three daughters and four sons, the youngest of whom was Air Marshal Sir Christopher Courtney (1890-1976). 
Courtney returned to Oxford in 1876, having been elected to a fellowship and tutorship in philosophy at New College, where he remained until 1890. His lectures, especially those on Plato's 'Republic', were remarkable for their excellent form and clear presentation of philosophical problems, and many distinguished pupils acknowledged their debt to his teaching. It was the period when a social life for married dons was beginning at the university and the Courtneys played an active part in it. He wrote on philosophy and, with Benjamin Jowett's help, promoted the foundation of the New Theatre, and assisted in the production of 'Agamemnon' in Balliol College hall in 1880 and of the early plays of the Oxford University Dramatic Society (founded 1884). In the last enterprise he was associated with amateurs who later achieved fame -- Arthur Bourchier, Ernest Holman Clark, and Harry Irving, whose father, Henry Irving, Courtney brought to lecture in Oxford in 1886. He was treasurer of the University Boat Club, and a conspicuous figure on the tow-path. This versatility possibly stood in the way of his reputation as a philosopher. 
Courtney was already writing for 'The World', and for the 'Fortnightly Review' and 'Edinburgh Review', and in 1882 he became assistant to T. H. S. Escott (son of his former headmaster), who was then editing the 'Fortnightly'. Divided between his devotion to philosophy and the call of a wider sphere, he accepted, in 1890, a post on the 'Daily Telegraph' -- by then a staunchly unionist and imperialist paper -- where he joined a group of able journalists, including John Merry Le Sage, Henry Duff Traill, and Edward Levy-Lawson (afterwards Lord Burnham), from whom he learned much. He left many friends, not only in New College, which he served with distinction and where he retained his fellowship for life, but in Oxford generally, chief among them being Edward Armstrong and Thomas Case. 
Courtney worked for thirty-eight years in Fleet Street, writing general articles, and becoming in the mid-nineties chief drama critic and literary editor of the 'Daily Telegraph', a post he held until 1925; he wrote the weekly 'Book of the day', and always kept in touch with dramatic, literary, and general society at the Garrick Club (joined 1891), the Beefsteak Club (joined 1896), and elsewhere. His scholarly training and dramatic experience, his wide interests and resource in emergency, made him a first-rate journalist. In 1890-91 he edited 'Murray's Magazine', but he found his great opportunity when he became editor of the 'Fortnightly Review' in 1894. He kept it at a high level on both the literary and the political side to the end of his life, editing it with sympathy and judgement. He had an uncommon flair for choosing subjects and writers, and delighted in encouraging new talent. For many years he was chairman of the publishing firm of Chapman and Hall. 
Courtney's first wife died in 1907, and in 1911 he married Janet Elizabeth Hogarth, an old pupil and friend, daughter of the Revd George Hogarth, vicar of Barton upon Humber, Lincolnshire, and sister of David George Hogarth; she shared his life as editor and journalist, to the great happiness of both. 
Although Courtney gave up writing on philosophy after leaving Oxford, philosophy and religion remained near to his heart, and most of his writing had a serious note, the outcome of a sane outlook and a high ideal. His influence did much to keep journalism steady at a time of shifting standards. His philosophical studies, 'The Metaphysics of John Stuart Mill' (1879), 'Studies in Philosophy' (1882), and 'Constructive Ethics' (1886), were published in his Oxford period; these were significant contributions, though not at the highest level. Of his later books, collected from his articles or written as holiday studies, the most original was 'The Feminine Note in Fiction' (1904). His plays had little success. 
Courtney was a tall and striking figure, resembling a soldier more than a philosopher. A portrait of him by Sir Hubert von Herkomer at New College is like him, but hardly does justice to his force of character. He was always a genial companion and a loyal friend. He died from cerebral thrombosis and general arteriosclerosis at his home, 36 Westbourne Gardens, London, on 1 November 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 32591


Cousin, Anne Ross (1824-1906), poet and hymn writer, only child of David Ross Cundell, an assistant surgeon of the 33rd regiment at Waterloo, and his wife, Ann, was born in Hull on 27 April 1824. Her family moved soon after to Leith, Midlothian. Educated privately, she became an expert pianist under John Muir Wood. Although raised as an Episcopalian, she became a Presbyterian. In 1847 she married the evangelical minister William Cousin (who was born at Leith in 1812 and died at Edinburgh in 1883). Cousin was called from the Chelsea Presbyterian Church to the Free Church at Irvine, Ayrshire, in 1850, and in 1859 to Melrose. He retired to Edinburgh in 1878. 
Described as 'a lady of scholarly tastes and artistic temperament' ('MT', 30), Cousin began publishing anonymous poems in the 'Christian Treasury' in 1845. The intensity of her poems reflects contemporary religious turbulence in Scotland. Her best-known work is the joyous, visionary hymn 'The sands of time are sinking' of 1854. 'I wrote it', she said, 'as I sat at work one Saturday evening, and though I threw it off at that time, it was the result of long familiarity with the writings of Samuel Rutherford, especially his Letters'. It appeared first as 'The Last Words of Samuel Rutherford' in nineteen stanzas in the 'Christian Treasury' in 1857. It did not become generally known until J. Hood Wilson (1829-1903) of the Barclay Church, Edinburgh, introduced a version of five verses (only the fourth and fifth of which correspond with the now popular version) into a hymnal, 'Service of Praise', in 1865. It achieved wide circulation by its inclusion in many hymnals, including the 'Song-Book of the Salvation Army' (1953). In Britain it is usually set to the hymn tune 'Rutherford' by Chretien Urhan (1790-1845), while in America it is sung to a setting by the American evangelist Ira D. Sankey (1840-1908). 
Cousin wrote other popular hymns, including 'O Christ, what burdens bowed Thy head' (from the poem 'The Substitute') and 'King eternal! King immortal' (from 'Adoration'). 'To thee and to thy Christ, O God' (from 'To God and his Christ') was included in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' (1875). 
The refrain of 'The Sands of Time' gave the title to Cousin's 'Immanuel's Land and other Pieces' (1876; 2nd edn, 1896). In this volume of 107 poems she demonstrates her versatility and proficiency, ranging from early Christianity and Scottish history to the anguish of a child's death and other bereavements. 'An Anthology of Scottish Women Poets' (ed. C. Kerrigan, 1991) includes 'Christ within the Veil' and 'The Double Search'. The future reputation of the 'Scottish Christina Rossetti, with a more pronounced theology' (Campbell, 147) may depend on compositions neither intended nor adapted for public worship, and Cousin may be appreciated at least as much for expressions of human suffering and aspiration as for celebrations of divine grace. 
Anne Ross Cousin had four sons and two daughters. John William Cousin (died December 1910) included his mother in his 'Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature' (1910). Twenty-three years a widow, she died in Edinburgh on 6 December 1906. In 1910 a memorial window to Cousin and her husband was placed in St Aidan's United Free Church, Melrose. 


@@@@@


doc= 32592


Cowan, Sir Walter Henry, baronet (1871-1956), naval officer, was born on 11 June 1871 at Crickhowell, Brecknockshire, the eldest son of Walter Frederick James Cowan who settled after retirement from the Royal Welch Fusiliers with the rank of major at Alveston, Warwickshire. His mother was Frances Anne, daughter of Henry John Lucas, physician, of Crickhowell. Although he had never been to school, Cowan passed into the navy in 1884, in the same term as David Beatty, with whom, two years later, he joined the 'Alexandra', flagship in the Mediterranean of the duke of Edinburgh. Invalided after less than a year, he returned home, but eventually rejoined the 'Alexandra'. She came home in 1889, and Cowan was appointed to the 'Volage' in the training squadron where he was promoted sub-lieutenant in 1890. Appointed to the 'Boadicea', flagship on the East India station, he took passage in the 'Plassy', a gunboat which was being delivered to the Royal Indian Marine. The 'Plassy' took four months to reach Bombay, being nearly lost in a Bay of Biscay storm. Promoted lieutenant in 1892, Cowan was appointed first lieutenant of the gunboat 'Redbreast' whence, after about a year, he was invalided again, this time with dysentery. On recovery, he applied for the west coast of Africa, then a very unhealthy station but with the attraction for Cowan that it offered a better chance of active service in one or other of the many punitive expeditions. 
Cowan was appointed in 1894 to the small cruiser 'Barrosa', in which he was to serve for three and a half years. He assisted in refloating the French gunboat 'Ardent' which had grounded 170 miles up the Niger River and soon afterwards was landed with the punitive expedition against Nimbi. After three months at the Cape the 'Barrosa' was due for a turn of duty on the east coast where Cowan at once came in for the Mwele expedition, followed by a number of smaller expeditions from individual ships. The 'Barrosa''s next visit to the west coast was just in time for the Benin expedition of 1897 in which Cowan had control of the carriers. For the third time he was awarded the general Africa medal, this time with the Benin clasp. 
Cowan's next appointment was to the 'Boxer', destroyer in the Mediterranean, which he commanded for a bare six months before being transferred to Nile service, in which he commanded the river gunboat 'Sultan'. In her he took part in the battle of Omdurman (1898), after which all the gunboats were ordered to Fashoda, where a French force under Marchand had arrived via central Africa. The task of dealing with the French devolved almost completely upon Cowan who had the satisfaction of seeing them depart for home via Abyssinia. Cowan was left in command of all the gunboats, all the other naval officers returning to England. He had over a year more in Egypt and was aide-de-camp to Sir Reginald Wingate in the pursuit of the Khalifa in 1899. 
When Lord Kitchener left for South Africa, Cowan gained his permission to accompany him. His status was afterwards regularized by his appointment as Kitchener's aide-de-camp and the whole of 1900 was spent in the field. He returned to England with Lord Roberts, to whose staff he had just transferred, to be greeted coldly at the Admiralty for having gone to South Africa without their lordships' permission and for having been over two years away from sea service. Yet he was appointed to the 'Prince George' as first lieutenant and, in June 1901, promoted commander at the age of thirty, with only eight and a half years' service as lieutenant. Cowan married in that year Catherine Eleanor Millicent (died 1934), daughter of Digby Cayley, of Brompton by Sawdon, Yorkshire; they had one daughter. 
Cowan was next appointed to command the 'Falcon', destroyer, as second in command of the Devonport destroyers under Roger Keyes. He had several different ships in the next two years, at the end of which, having built up a great reputation as a destroyer officer, he moved up to succeed Keyes in command, transferring in 1905, at the end of his time, to the scout 'Skirmisher', in which he was promoted captain (1906). He was then appointed to the 'Sapphire' (1907) and in 1908 took command of the destroyers attached to the Channel Fleet. Then, after a year in the Reserve Fleet, he took command of a new light cruiser, the 'Gloucester' (1910), for two years, taking no leave at all in the first so that he might have plenty in the second -- for hunting, always a passion with him. He got plenty of it in his next job, two years as chief of staff to John De Robeck, the admiral of patrols, who was just as keen. 
When war broke out in 1914 Cowan was in command of the 'Zealandia', but he was not happy in a slow ship. In less than six months, however, he went to the 'Princess Royal' as flag captain to Osmond Brock, an appointment after his own heart, for the battle cruisers were certain to be in the forefront of any action. Yet he had to wait for almost eighteen months before it came. In the battle of Jutland (31 May 1916), the 'Princess Royal' was severely damaged and had over a hundred casualties. It took some two months to repair her, during which Cowan paid a visit to the British front in France. In June 1917 he was made commodore of the 1st light cruiser squadron. His ships were constantly at sea and Cowan with them, to his great delight, for if one were damaged and out of action he could always shift his flag to another. On one occasion they went right into the Heligoland bight in the attempt to join action with a German light cruiser squadron, chasing it to within sight of Heligoland. In 1918 he was promoted rear-admiral and remained in his command, but there was little more activity for the remainder of the war. 
In January 1919 Cowan and his squadron were sent to the Baltic, where the situation was extraordinarily involved. His task, as soon appeared, was to hold the ring for Finland and the Baltic states against the Bolsheviks, while keeping the Germans, still armed, to the terms of the armistice. In this he was ably assisted on shore by Stephen Tallents. His command lasted until the end of 1919 and he left only when the Russians were sealed up in Kronstadt by ice. Six months later he returned for the plebiscite in Danzig and then relinquished his command. 
In 1921 Cowan was appointed to command the battle-cruiser squadron, consisting only of the 'Hood' and 'Repulse'. The highlight of the period was a visit to Brazil in 1922 during the international exhibition, where they created a great impression, for the battle cruisers had never been smarter or more efficient. Two years' unemployment followed, in the course of which he was promoted vice-admiral (1923), and after which he held the Scottish command (1925-6). Before this was over he accepted with alacrity the America and West Indies command (1926-8). It was a peacetime cruise, with his flag first in the 'Calcutta', then in the 'Despatch', but it concluded with a characteristic success, the salving of the 'Dauntless' which had grounded in the entrance to Halifax harbour. Cowan was promoted admiral in 1927, appointed first and principal naval aide-de-camp to the king in 1930, and retired from the active list in 1931. 
Cowan then became assistant secretary to the Warwickshire hounds; but on the outbreak of war in 1939 it was more than he could bear not to be involved. Eventually he was allowed to serve in the rank of commander and was appointed to the commandos under his old friend and chief, Roger Keyes. In due course he found himself in Egypt and served with the commandos in their various activities in north Africa. Finally, when his unit was disbanded, he attached himself to the 18th King Edward VII's Own cavalry, an Indian regiment. He served with them in all their operations in the western desert until he was taken prisoner on 27 May 1942 at Bir Hakeim, fighting an Italian tank crew single-handed, armed only with a revolver. He was repatriated in 1943 and, reappointed to the commandos, headed for Italy, where he took part in many operations against the Dalmatian Islands. For these services in 1944 he was awarded a bar to the DSO which he had won in 1898. By this time he was seventy-three and beginning to feel the strain. He returned to England, where an inspection of a Royal Marine commando about to go overseas was his last service. In 1945 he reverted to the retired list. One more distinction, a very welcome one, was his: on 22 November 1946 he was appointed honorary colonel, the 18th King Edward VII's Own cavalry, whom he visited in India in 1947. He retired once more to Kineton, and died in Warneford Hospital, Leamington Spa, on 14 February 1956. In spite of his unequalled record of active service he had never even been wounded. He was appointed MVO in 1904, CB in 1916, KCB in 1919, and created a baronet in 1921. 
H. G. Thursfield', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32593


Cowans, Sir John Steven (1862-1921), army officer, was born on 11 March 1862, at Woodbank, St Cuthbert Without, Carlisle, the eldest son of John Cowans and his wife, Jeannie ('nee' Steven). His father was a prominent civil engineer, who founded Cowans, Sheldon & Co., cranemakers, at Carlisle, before retiring to a mansion and parkland, Hartland, at Cranford, Middlesex. John, who was known to his family and friends as Jack, was sent to Dr Burney's academy at Gosport, to prepare for the entrance examination for the navy. In 1878 he failed and went instead to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he passed out near the top of the list in 1880 and joined the rifle brigade. This was one of the most socially prestigious infantry regiments, and he joined it in the same year as Henry Wilson and Charles a Court Repington, the latter a lifelong friend who, as a journalist in the First World War, staunchly defended Cowans's career and reputation. In 1881 Cowans became an aide-de-camp to Sir John Ross, who commanded the Poona division of the Bombay army. On 14 February 1884 Cowans married Eva Mary ('b'. 1858/9), daughter of John Edward Coulson, vicar of Long Preston, Yorkshire. They had no children. Cowans passed the Staff College course with distinction in 1890. 
Shortly afterwards Cowans made an impact as an industrious staff captain at the newly created mobilization section, where the development of improved procedures for the dispatch of forces overseas remained at an elementary stage in the aftermath of the Khartoum fiasco of 1886. Despite earnestly volunteering for active service Cowans arrived in India shortly after the conclusion of the Burma campaign in 1890 and too soon for action on the north-west frontier in 1897. In 1898 he became deputy assistant quartermaster-general and supervised transport for the expedition to Egypt; he was promoted major in 1898 and lieutenant-colonel in 1900. He remained on staff duties in London throughout the South African War and, afterwards, having been gazetted colonel in 1903, he reviewed the mobilization plans of the 2nd division at Aldershot. In 1906 he returned to India as director of military education, a post he held until 1907 and in which he investigated the professional education of the officer corps at Lord Kitchener's behest. He served in India as director of staff duties (1907-8) and commanded the Bengal presidency brigade (1908-10). In 1910 Cowans returned to the War Office in London as director-general of the Territorial Force, and his commitment to the strengthening of the reservists, in numbers and equipment, reinforced the important role which they were expected to play if a continental commitment became necessary. In 1912 his crucial role in the mobilization plans for the British expeditionary force was confirmed by his appointment as quartermaster-general. In this post he was the supreme administrator of the supply services of the army, including accommodation, food, horses, clothing, and equipment, with responsibility for liaising with the Admiralty for their transport to the operational theatre. On the outbreak of war in 1914 Cowans was, by virtue of this appointment, the third military member of the army council. Lord Kitchener, who recognized his growing reputation for administrative ability, forbade him to go to France, but Cowans's route to high office clearly offended some military commentators. He was created KCB in 1913. 
In August 1914 it soon became clear that the quartermaster-general's branch would have to enlarge its functions dramatically to cope with the supply implications of mass industrialized war. Cowans managed the expansion of his department's work through a mixture of judicious personal intervention, excellent appointments which facilitated substantial delegation, patience in the face of the unprecedented task, and, in the early years, the maximizing of voluntary patriotic activity. Billeting provides an example of the scale of Cowans's problems and a measure of his success. The pre-war capacity of barrack accommodation was 175,000 men, yet by January 1915, 1,185,000 men had enlisted. In harsh, wintry conditions, large hutted camps were rapidly constructed to billet the recruits, although much depended on local raisers of manpower, who funded and employed labour, to construct the camps. This decentralized process was not the answer to the provision of divisional training centres in 1915, and the delays which ensued were more problematic than Cowans suggested in his post-war report on the supply services. The arrival of Dominion and, later, American troops, the growth of the technical arms of the army, and the expected evacuation of many services from France in March 1918 ensured that the availability of military accommodation in the United Kingdom (which was serving 1,750,000 men and women in 1918) remained a problem that never went away. 
The pre-war horse census that Cowans had conducted ensured their rapid mobilization in 1914. He was also alert to the relatively novel value of motor lorries for carrying food, ammunition, and stores; they were eventually co-ordinated by the establishment of the Mechanical Transport Board in 1917. In semi-official correspondence with Edith, marchioness of Londonderry, founder of the Women's Legion, he accepted the employment of uniformed women for military-related work, and was more sympathetic to the practice of releasing men for front-line service by employing women to fill their former positions than were most general officers. He appointed quartermaster inspectors to control waste and promote salvage in 1915, and had a high regard for the work of voluntary organizations, such as the YMCA, which provided rest and recreation facilities for the forces both in Britain and on the fighting fronts. Cowans was instrumental in making valuable resources available to the YMCA, and its director, Arthur Yapp, referred to him in thankful terms as a 'genial autocrat' (Chapman-Huston and Rutter, 250). 
Unlike some military administrators who operated in tightly focused departments and thought in 'pennyworths', Cowans understood that civil and military responsibilities, if well defined, were complementary in conditions of total war, and he had the capacity of 'going large' (Chapman-Huston and Rutter, 310) to ensure the availability of sufficient quantities of materials, whether entrenching tools or frost-bite ointment. The efficiency of the army postal service, the army veterinary corps, and army clothing department all bore testimony to his willingness to use civilian improvisers, albeit in roles subordinate to the military chain of command. But for all his willingness to maintain a wider perspective and to employ outside experts, Cowans was not a modernizer. His department's vulnerability to political interference stemmed from his adherence to the social presuppositions of the old regular army, and, in November 1916, threatened to bring about his downfall. Under new statutory provisions a court of enquiry admonished his 'departure from official propriety' ('Reports', 4.327, 16 Nov 1916). When Mrs Cornwallis-West (better known as the actress Mrs Patrick Campbell) pursued a grievance against a young subaltern, which resulted in his peremptory transfer and unfair treatment, Cowans lent her his support, agreeing to 'fight for her if he had time' (ibid.). His intervention conveyed the impression that upholding the interests of the privileged social elite remained paramount at the unreconstructed War Office. Furthermore, in a separate case, Mrs Cornwallis-West corresponded with Cowans to recommend for promotion an infantry colonel of her acquaintance, at the same time criticizing another officer, and the court of inquiry found that Cowans had intervened in an issue far beyond his department's jurisdiction. Apart from the question of 'petticoat influence' at the War Office, Lloyd George, then secretary of state for war, reflected unfavourably on the adverse effects of this interference for 'the man at the bottom' (Taylor, 125), and the king's intervention merely increased Lloyd George's resolve to remove Cowans from the War Office. He owed the retention of his office to the political crisis of December 1916. Prime minister Lloyd George decided that continuity of office was more important than a demonstration of his power over the generals by a round of dismissals. The government's displeasure with Cowans was stated in the House of Commons on 22 December 1916, but its impact was limited by Lloyd George's knowledge that significant improvements had taken place in the administration of supply services for the Mesopotamian campaign, which came under Cowans's direction after July 1916. 
Unsurprisingly Cowans regarded Asquith's resignation as the greatest blow to the British war effort after the death of Kitchener. Cowans was a warm admirer of Asquith, and, unlike many of his colleagues at the War Office, in March 1914 had been intent on 'damage limitation' during the Curragh mutiny (Beckett, 23). In return Asquith had respected the soldier's quest for autonomy in strategic and supply policy formulation. After 1916 the necessity for more collaborative inter-allied schemes to conserve scarce manpower and resources worried Cowans. Along with the adjutant-general, General Sir Nevil Macready, he resisted the plans for a common pool of manpower and material resources on the western front in 1918 and opposed the principle of unity of stores as a corollary of unity of command. Throughout the war the quartermaster's branch (or Q) remained a lively intersection of civil-military relations. For example, the survey and expansion of military railways in all theatres of war that in 1917 came under the supervision of businessman Sir Eric Geddes provided a constant reminder that the Q side of the War Office would be 'civilianized'. Cowans's old friend and ally, Charles Repington, vociferously opposed such a scheme in the 'Morning Post' in September 1918. 
Remarkably, therefore, Cowans was the only military member of the army council to remain in place throughout the war. He was a successful administrator within a hierarchical decision-making process with well-defined functions. He worked hard and late into the night, but not to the exclusion of social lunches and dinners. He depended on six hours' sleep a night, but left London every weekend for country house parties or to play golf. He demonstrated unostentatious efficiency and much adaptability in an army which desperately needed such unfashionable skills. Although Cowans and Lloyd George were personally incompatible, in his 'War Memoirs' (1938) Lloyd George commended Cowans as 'the most capable soldier thrown up by the War in our Army' (Lloyd George, 1.493), excluding him from his otherwise comprehensive condemnation of 'brass hats' in London and on the western front. Many tributes included in Chapman-Huston and Rutter's two-volume hagiography (1924) noted Cowans's good humour, hearty laugh, and lurid story-telling. Asquith and George V agreed that if victory was attributable to any individuals, it was to Cowans and Sir Maurice Hankey (Roskill, 1.631), but few subsequent studies of Britain's war effort have troubled to acknowledge or assess the significance of this pre-eminent military administrator. 
Cowans finally reached the rank of general in 1919, and received the GCB. He abruptly left the War Office in March 1919 to accept an invitation from Shell Transport and Trading Company to visit Mesopotamia and survey its progress in oil exploration prior to joining the company. He looked forward to inaugurating a business career which would bring new challenges and increased remuneration. Moreover, leaving the army gave him the freedom to express his disgust at the absence of any reference to the work of the administrative services of the army in parliament's expression of thanks to the armed forces in July 1919. His letter of protest to Lloyd George was followed by a speech accepting the freedom of his home city, Carlisle, on 18 September 1919, in which he informed his audience that the war was essentially a contest of administration, rather than strategy, and asserted that the Q department had succeeded in meeting all demands placed upon it. 
In 1920 Cowans's health declined quickly. He had an operation for a kidney condition in November 1920, but died on 16 April 1921 at the Villa Louise, Garavan, Menton, in the south of France, where he had gone to convalesce. He had been received into the Roman Catholic church five days earlier. He lay in state in Westminster Cathedral, and his funeral procession, in which many battalions of infantry took part, on 25 April, followed the long route of 5 miles to Kensal Green cemetery. The sombre spectacle reflected the endeavour to come to terms with a new type of military leader, the great departmental chief who had little experience of the battlefield. Cowans had been extravagant in many ways, and debt consumed his estate. To the king's chagrin his widow declined a pension, and to his consternation Cowans's orders and decorations were put up for sale shortly after his death. They were bought privately by his service friends and were subsequently placed in the United Services Museum. Cowans survived the blandishments of Mrs Cornwallis-West with his reputation intact and accusations of jobbery unproven, but four years after his death 'his name was dragged into one of the most lurid court cases of the post-war period' (Grigg, 369). In the early stages of the 'Dennistoun v. Dennistoun' (1925) case mention was made of 'General X' as the lover of Mrs Dorothy Dennistoun in the years 1916-1920. During this alimony case she revealed, in the witness box, that he was Cowans, which caused a sensation. 


@@@@@


doc= 32594


Coward, Sir Henry (1849-1944), chorus master, was born at Liverpool on 26 November 1849, the only son of Henry Coward, a Sheffield-born cutler who became an innkeeper and black-face minstrel, and his wife, Harriet Carr, who was also a singer. A hard youth as a cutler's apprentice in Sheffield was followed from 1870 by seventeen years of schoolteaching, of which sixteen were spent as headmaster of various elementary schools, a considerable achievement given that he was self-educated and at the age of twenty-one could hardly write or spell. Coward developed an interest in music after joining a tonic sol-fa class; in 1876 he founded the Sheffield Tonic Sol-fa Association, later named the Sheffield Musical Union, and directed it for nearly sixty years (1876-1933). 
In 1887 Coward left teaching and devoted himself to music. He obtained at Oxford the degrees of BMus in 1889 and DMus in 1894. From 1896 to 1908 he was chorus master of the Sheffield music festival, which quickly achieved worldwide fame by setting up and maintaining a new standard of choral excellence. In 1906 and 1910 he took a Yorkshire chorus to Germany. In 1908 he was training and conducting choral societies in Sheffield, Leeds, Huddersfield, Newcastle, and Glasgow. In that year he and his singers toured Canada and in 1911 they made a round-the-world tour of the empire. These years were the zenith of Coward's career, and he was much requested as an adjudicator at various music festivals and as teacher, lecturer, and examiner. He was a music master at the Sheffield Training College and lecturer in music at Sheffield University. In later years his effects were criticized as mere tricks, and unfortunately the scope of his musicianship was always limited by his inability to handle an orchestra. A valuable exposition of his methods is given in his 'Choral Technique and Interpretation' (1914) and its supplement ''CTI', the Secret' (1938). 
Coward was somewhat formidable at a first encounter, but those who came to know him learned to admire his humanity and integrity. He was knighted in 1926, and was made an honorary freeman of the city of Sheffield and of the Cutlers' Company of Hallamshire. In 1933 he received the honorary degree of DMus from the University of Sheffield. He was a lifelong advocate of the tonic sol-fa system of sight-singing and was president of the Tonic Sol-fa College in London (1929-43). 
Coward was married three times: first, in 1875, to Mary Eliza, daughter of Charles Best, a silversmith of Sheffield; secondly, in 1894, abroad, to Louisa Hannah Best, the sister of his first wife, who had died; and thirdly, after the death of his second wife, in 1911, to Semima Alice, the daughter of Simeon Dewsnap, a cabinet-case manufacturer of Sheffield. There were four sons and four daughters of the first marriage. Coward died, a wealthy man, at his home, 6 Kenwood Road, Sheffield, at the age of ninety-four, on 10 June 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 32595


Cowell, Edward Byles (1826-1903), orientalist, born in St Clement's Street, Ipswich, on 23 January 1826, was the eldest son (in a family of three sons and one daughter) of Charles Cowell (died 1842), who had inherited a successful business of merchant and maltster, and as a cultured Liberal was active in local affairs. His mother was Marianne, elder daughter of Nathaniel Byles Byles of the Hill House, Ipswich, also a successful merchant of that town. 
Cowell was precocious, attending Ipswich grammar school from his eighth year. In 1841 he compiled a few numbers of the 'Ipswich Radical Magazine and Review', in which he showed sympathy with his father's politics, combined with a singularly wide reading in classical literature. He was first drawn to oriental literature in 1841 after finding in the public library of Ipswich a copy of Sir William Jones's works, including the 'Persian Grammar' and the translation of Kalidasa's 'Sakuntala'. In the same year his reading of Macaulay's essay on Warren Hastings made him aware of Horace Hayman Wilson's 'Sanskrit Grammar', a copy of which he promptly acquired. Meanwhile he took his first steps in Persian, at first by himself, but soon with the aid of a retired Bombay officer, Major Hockley, who probably also initiated him into Arabic. As early as 1842, while still at school, he contributed to the 'Asiatic Journal' a number of verse renderings from the Persian. 
On his father's death in 1842 Cowell was taken from school to be trained for the management of the family business. But during the next eight years, while engaged in commerce, he read in his spare time with extraordinary zeal and variety. Of his scholarship and breadth of knowledge he soon gave proof in a series of contributions to the 'Westminster Review', writing on oriental and Spanish literature. At the same time he formed the acquaintance of many who shared his interests, among them the Arabic and Persian scholar William Hook Morley and the Persian scholar Duncan Forbes, and he also called on Carlyle in London. In 1846 he sought an introduction to 'the great professor', Horace Hayman Wilson, and four years later he read in the East India Library and obtained a loan of a Prakrit manuscript (Vararuci's 'Prakrta-Prakasa'), his edition of which (1854) was destined to establish his reputation as a Sanskrit scholar. Through John Charlesworth, rector of Flowton near Ipswich, whose daughter Elizabeth Susan ('c'.1812-1899) he married on 23 October 1847, he came to know the poet and translator Edward FitzGerald, the best-known of his many friends and correspondents. Their correspondence at first related chiefly to classical literature. It was Cowell who gave FitzGerald his first lesson in the Persian alphabet. 
In 1850, the next brother being now of an age to carry on the Ipswich business, Cowell matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, going with his wife into lodgings. 'I went there [to Oxford]', he wrote later, 'a solitary student, mainly self-taught; and I learned there the method of study'. During the six years of his university life he greatly widened his social circle, receiving visits not only from FitzGerald, who read Persian with him, but from Tennyson and Thackeray, to whom FitzGerald introduced him. He saw much of Jowett, Morfill, Max Muller, and Theodor Aufrecht, and was greatly aided by the lectures and tuition of the Sanskrit professor, Horace Hayman Wilson. In 1854 he took a first class in 'literae humaniores' and an honorary fourth in mathematics. While missing the scholarship in Hebrew, he was awarded a special prize of books. The next two years were spent in coaching, chiefly in Aristotle's 'Ethics'. He also catalogued Persian and other oriental manuscripts for the Bodleian Library. 
As an undergraduate Cowell had made a reputation by his oriental publications. A translation of Kalidasa's 'Vikramorvasi', though finished earlier, was published in 1851. His admirable edition of Vararuci's 'Prakrta-Prakasa' followed in 1854. On taking his degree he wrote on the Persian poets for 'Fraser's Magazine', besides contributing to 'Oxford Essays' (1855) an essay on Persian literature. 
In June 1856 Cowell was appointed professor of English history in the re-formed Presidency College, Calcutta. His post involved him in arduous work. He soon instituted an MA course in the Calcutta University, and extended the themes of his lectures to political economy and philosophy. In 1857 Cowell became secretary of the Vernacular Literature Society, founded with the object of providing Indian readers with translations of good English literature. At the same time he was increasingly attracted to missionary work. He held 'Bible' readings in his house on Sundays, and a number of conversions resulted, not without some risk of offence to his Hindu connections. One of his chief Calcutta friends was William Kay, principal of Bishop's College. Meanwhile he pursued oriental studies untiringly. Persian continued to fascinate him. Of two copies which he procured of the manuscript of 'Umar Khayyam belonging to the Asiatic Society at Calcutta, he sent one to FitzGerald. His own important article on 'Umar Khayyam appeared in the 'Calcutta Review' in March 1858. 
Having passed the government examinations in Hindustani and Bengali, Cowell undertook in 1858 an additional office at Calcutta, that of principal of the Sanskrit College founded by Warren Hastings. Cowell's predecessor was a native Indian scholar. His relations with the pandits of the college were soon close and affectionate. By their aid he acquired a profound knowledge of the scholastic Sanskrit literature in rhetoric and philosophy, while he stimulated the pandits' scholarly activity, and often gratified them with a prepared speech in Bengali and a Sanskrit 'Sloka'. Many Indian editions of works on rhetoric and poetry which were published in the 'Bibliotheca Indica', a series issued by the Asiatic Society of Bengal, of which he became early in 1858 a joint philological secretary, express their indebtedness to Cowell. His own Sanskrit publications during this period also appeared chiefly in the 'Bibliotheca Indica'. With Dr R. Roer he continued the edition of the 'Black Yajur Veda' (vols. 1 and 2, 1858-64), which he afterwards carried on alone -- it was ultimately finished by its fifth editor in 1899; and singly he edited two 'Upanisads', the 'Kaustaki' (1861) and the 'Maitri' (1863; translation added 1870). The most important of his works at this time was his edition and translation of the 'Kusumanjali' with the commentary of Haridasa (1864). The book, which in respect of difficulty might be compared with the 'Metaphysics' of Aristotle, supplies a Hindu proof of the existence of God. Cowell read it with Mahesa Candra, whose name he associated with his own on the title-page, and the edition was dedicated to Max Muller. He made a close study of the 'Siddhanta-Muktavali', a philosophical work, which he used as a college manual and examination textbook, and of the 'Sarvadaraanasamgraha', of which he translated one chapter, relating to the Carvaka system ('Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', 1862). He contemplated full translations of both books. 
One of Cowell's last official duties in India was to visit the Tols (Indian quasi-colleges) at Nadia, which were homes of pandit research and had last been inspected by Wilson in 1829. His report, published in the 'Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal' for 1867, supplied interesting details concerning the teaching methods of these institutions, and has become one of the more important sources for the history of indigenous Indian Sanskrit education and philosophical discourse. 
By the spring of 1864 the state of Cowell's health demanded a furlough. With his oriental scholarship immensely strengthened he revisited England. His original intention of returning to India was not realized. In the summer of 1865 he became examiner in oriental subjects to the civil service commission; in the same year he refused a curatorship at the Bodleian and in 1866 a similar position at the British Museum. Occupying himself in varied literary work, he recommenced his general reading and renewed his contact and correspondence with FitzGerald. 
In 1867 the University of Cambridge bestowed on Cowell the newly founded professorship of Sanskrit. Theodor Aufrecht was another candidate, but Cowell was warmly supported by Max Muller and many eminent scholars and friends. He was elected on a general vote of the university by ninety-six votes to thirty-seven. He published his inaugural lecture on the Sanskrit language and literature in 1867. The remainder of his life was spent happily at Cambridge. In 1874 he became a fellow of Corpus Christi College. He retained the professorship and the fellowship until his death in 1903. During those thirty-six years his time was unstintingly given to his duties. He announced each term a formidable list of lectures, generally delivered at his own house. At first he lectured not only on Sanskrit but also on comparative philology, and became one of the founders of the Cambridge Philological Society, with which he was connected as auditor until the close of his life, and he contributed to the early numbers of the 'Journal of Philology' (from 1868). In 1884 a lecturer was appointed to take charge of the more elementary Sanskrit teaching. Nevertheless, the pupils who read with Cowell were of all grades of proficiency, ranging from undergraduates grappling with their first Sanskrit play to eminent scholars (both English and foreign) eager to elucidate the various Indian philosophies, the Vedic hymns, the 'Zendavesta', or the Pali 'Jataka'. Alone or with his pupils Cowell issued an imposing series of Sanskrit texts and translations, of which the most important are 'The Sarva-Darsana-Samgraha' (translated with A. E. Gough, 'Oriental Series', 1882); 'Divyavadana' (edited with R. A. Neil, 1886); 'The Buddha Karita of Asvaghosha' ('Anecdota Oxoniensia', 'Aryan Series', 8, 1893), with translation in 'Sacred Books of the East', 49, 1894; 'The Jataka', translated under Cowell's editorship (6 vols., 1895); 'The Harsacarita of Bana' (translated with F. W. Thomas, Oriental Translation Fund, new ser., 1897). Many of these and his exegetical and secondary works have been of lasting value and are still used over a century later by students and scholars of classical Indian literatures and philosophies. 
Outside Sanskrit, Cowell still pursued other interests. Persian he resumed as opportunity offered. Spanish he always kept up, reading 'Don Quixote', at first with FitzGerald, and after his death with other friends in Cambridge. His Hebrew notes were used by Dr Kay in 1869 for the second edition of a translation of the book of 'Psalms', and later he studied the 'Talmud'. About 1877 he took up archaeology and architecture, a new study which led him to translate into English Michelangelo's sonnets, two of which were published in George Cowell's 'Life and Letters of Edward Byles Cowell'. Welsh poetry and the science of botany had been passing fancies of Cowell's youth. During 1870-80 they were cultivated simultaneously in vacations spent in Wales, sometimes in company with the Cambridge professor of botany, (Charles) Carsdale Babington. The Welsh studies, which were inspired by Borrow's 'Wild Wales', culminated in a masterly paper on the poet Dafydd ap Gwilym, read before the Cymmrodorion Society in 1878, and published in 'Y Cymmrodor' (July 1878). Cowell's manuscript translation of this poet's work is in the university library at Cambridge. Botany remained one of the chief pleasures of his later life, and his scientific interests extended to geology. He collected a complete flora of Cambridgeshire, and gave expression to his botanical enthusiasm in some charming sonnets. 
In 1892 Cowell was prevailed upon to accept the presidency of the Arian section of the International Congress of Orientalists held in London. His inaugural address (comparing rabbinical and Brahmanical learning) and his charming Sanskrit 'Sloka' made a very favourable impression. In 1895 he was made an honorary member of the German Oriental Society. In 1898 he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Asiatic Society, then bestowed for the first time. Among Cowell's other distinctions were the honorary LLD of Edinburgh University in 1875 and the honorary DCL of Oxford in 1896. In 1902 he was chosen as one of the original members of the British Academy. 
Cowell's last publication was a verse translation, revised after thirty years, of some episodes from an old Bengali poem, 'Candi', which he had read at Calcutta and subsequently with Bengali students at Cambridge ('Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', 1903). Although he continued to lecture, he had long been conscious of failing powers when he died at his residence, 10 Scroope Terrace, Cambridge, on 9 February 1903. He was buried at Bramford, near Ipswich, beside his wife, who had predeceased him on 29 September 1899. They had no children. His wife's sister was the author Maria Louisa Charlesworth. 
During his lifetime Cowell founded a scholarship in Sanskrit at the Sanskrit College in Calcutta (1878), and endowed a prize for classics at his old school in Ipswich; by his will he devised to Corpus Christi College the sum of $1500 for a scholarship in classics or mathematics, besides leaving his library for distribution between that college, the university library, the Fitzwilliam Museum, and Girton College. 
Cowell was remarkable for the versatility of his knowledge of language and literature and for the breadth of his scholarly interests. Primarily a modest, patient, and serious savant, he was at the same time an accomplished man of letters, who excelled as an essayist, a familiar correspondent, and someone who could write charming and thoughtful verse. An unusual tenacity and subtlety of intellect appear in his mastery of Sanskrit logic and metaphysics (Nyaya and Vedanta). A chronological list of his writings is appended to George Cowell's 1904 biography. 


@@@@@


doc= 32596


Cowen, Sir Frederic Hymen (1852-1935), conductor and composer, was born on 29 January 1852 in Kingston, Jamaica, the younger son of Frederick Augustus Cowen (died 1876) and his wife, Emily, the second daughter of James Davis of Kingston. Back in England, his father's positions as private secretary to the earl of Dudley and treasurer of Her Majesty's Theatre gave him the entree to concerts at Dudley House (where he himself gave performances) and to opera productions. Cowen was a child prodigy: two dances for piano were published by the time he was seven, and when he was eight an operetta, 'Garibaldi' (whose libretto was by his sister Rosalind), was performed privately. He made his public debut as a pianist in 1863; in 1864 he was the soloist in a performance of Mendelssohn's D minor piano concerto, and in 1865 he performed his own piano trio with the illustrious violinist Joseph Joachim and the cellist Pezze. That year he was awarded the second Mendelssohn scholarship (the first had been awarded to Arthur Sullivan), but his parents refused to accept the terms of the scholarship and he attended the conservatory at Leipzig independently. Later he studied in Berlin. A concert held at St James's Hall, London, in 1869 included his first symphony and his piano concerto, in which the composer, all of seventeen, was the soloist. 
From 1871 Cowen spent about seven years as accompanist in J. H. Mapleson's touring opera company and at Her Majesty's, under Sir Michael Costa. Finding his hopes of becoming an opera conductor frustrated, he turned to orchestral conducting, and in 1880 conducted the Promenade Concerts (then held in Covent Garden). He continued to compose. Concert tours in Scandinavia led to the composition of his third symphony, the 'Scandinavian', the premiere of which he directed in 1880. Noted for its orchestral effects, this work gained international attention, being conducted by Hans Richter in Vienna in 1882 and later by Cowen himself in Budapest, Stuttgart, Cologne, and Paris, and it was also performed in the United States. Cowen's orchestral compositions eventually included six symphonies and various lighter pieces: he was especially known for the latter, such as the suite 'The Language of Flowers' (1880). He also developed a reputation as a composer of choral works for music festivals, then a staple part of British musical life, and, in time, of nearly three hundred songs. Some are in a Schumannesque style, but the majority are sentimental ballads which enjoyed great popularity. By the mid-1880s Cowen was among the leading members of the burgeoning 'English musical renaissance'. In 1884 he was engaged as a choral conductor in Glasgow; in the Birmingham festival of 1885 his cantata 'The Sleepers' was heard alongside works by Gounod and Dvorak; and in 1888 he succeeded Sullivan as conductor of the Philharmonic Society, where he improved the orchestral standards and broadened the concert repertories. Grieg and Tchaikovsky were among the musicians who performed with the society during his conductorship. Such was his standing that, also in 1888, he was engaged as the conductor of the Centennial Exhibition in Melbourne for the then extraordinary fee of $5000. 
In 1892 a disagreement over rehearsal time led to Cowen's dismissal from the Philharmonic. He now gave renewed energy to opera. Neither his 'Pauline' (1876) nor 'Thorgrim' (1890) had achieved success. 'Signa' was intended as one of a series of English operas initiated in 1891 by D'Oyly Carte. When this project collapsed Cowen managed to have the premiere given in Milan -- a rare achievement for a British composer -- in 1893. But here and later in London it failed, as did 'Harold' (1895). Cowen blamed these failures on non-musical factors, and with some justification; nevertheless, for all their stylistic versatility, ranging from the Italianate 'Signa' to the more Wagnerian vein of 'Thorgrim' and 'Harold' (which he considered his best), his operas lack sustained dramatic power. Henceforth it was as a conductor that Cowen was primarily known. In 1893 he was again engaged as conductor of the Promenade Concerts, and in 1896 he succeeded Halle at Manchester. Engagements at Liverpool and Bradford followed. He bitterly resented being forced to relinquish the Halle post to Richter in 1899, claiming prejudice against British musicians in favour of a foreign conductor -- a frequent complaint. The following year, 1900, saw his return to the Philharmonic Society and an engagement with the Scottish Orchestra, positions which he held until 1907 and 1910 respectively. While continuing as conductor of the Liverpool Philharmonic and the Bradford Festival Choral Society, he took on the triennial Cardiff festival in 1902 and the Handel festival at the Crystal Palace in 1903. Honorary doctorates were awarded by Cambridge in 1900 and by Edinburgh in 1910. Two years earlier, on 23 June 1908, he had married the 26-year-old Frederica Gwendoline, the only daughter of Frederick Richardson, a leather merchant. They had no children. Cowen was knighted in 1911. 
This was the pinnacle of Cowen's career. But he found the extensive travelling increasingly tiring and gradually reduced his engagements. By the end of the First World War he had largely retired. The Handel festival of 1923 saw his last major appearance as a conductor. Late in life he gave children's radio broadcasts, published in 1933. His compositions were by this time rarely performed. He died at his home, 105 Maida Vale, London, on 6 October 1935, and was buried in the Jewish cemetery at Golders Green. 
In 1932 Elgar had described Cowen as 'a dominating factor in the musical life of this country since 1875' ('The Times', 7 Oct 1935). That importance rested on his work as a conductor. As a composer he was overshadowed first by Sullivan and later by Elgar himself, and his compositions lack outstanding imaginative invention. His conducting drew mixed reactions: for Bernard Shaw it was lethargic, and Cowen was disconcerted when Elgar, in a controversial lecture, placed him no higher than among 'choral men' (Elgar, 129). Nevertheless, for more than forty years he was a focal point in this branch of the musical profession, establishing the status of the British conductor despite assumptions regarding foreign musical superiority. 


@@@@@


doc= 32597


Cowie, William Garden (1831-1902), bishop of Auckland, was born in London on 8 January 1831, the second son of Alexander Cowie (1802/3-1843), advocate, of St John's Wood, London, formerly of Auchterless, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, also from Aberdeenshire, who was the daughter of Alexander Garden. After his father's death his mother ran a boarding school. Cowie was admitted as a pensioner of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, on 20 May 1852 and elected scholar in the following October. He gained the second highest mark of his year in the law tripos of 1854 and also gained a first class mark in theology. He graduated BA in 1855, MA in 1865, and DD in 1869. Ordained deacon in 1854 and priest in 1855, he was curate of St Clement's, Cambridge, in 1854 and of Moulton in Suffolk from 1855 to 1857. 
Appointed, in 1857, assistant chaplain in the Bengal establishment of the East India Company, Cowie was seconded to the army and in 1858 was present at the capture of Lucknow (receiving medal and clasp) and at the battles of Aliganj, Ruyah, and Bareilly. He accompanied Sir Neville Chamberlain's column in the Afghan campaign of 1863-4 (medal and clasp), and in 1864 acted as domestic and examining chaplain to G. E. L. Cotton, bishop of Calcutta. In 1865 he was chaplain in Kashmir; he worked with Dr Elmslie at the Punjab missions, warmly supported the work of the Church Missionary Society at Srinagar, and wrote 'Notes on the Temples of Cashmere'. 
In 1867 Cowie returned to England and became rector of Stafford. In 1868 Bishop G. A. Selwyn, after moving from the see of New Zealand to that of Lichfield, was empowered by the diocesan synod of Auckland to choose a successor for that diocese. He nominated Cowie, who, in 1869, was consecrated bishop of Auckland in Westminster Abbey. In the same year he married Eliza Jane (died 1902), eldest daughter of William Webber of Moulton, Suffolk, and granddaughter of Sir Thomas Preston, bt, of Beeston Hall, Norfolk. They had six children, of whom two sons died in infancy; of their surviving three sons and one daughter, two sons were ordained. 
Cowie readily won the confidence of the settlers, diligently visiting all parts of his diocese. He found many of the Maori alienated by the war, but was able to encourage the native ministry to establish native church boards in his northern archdeaconries. He ordained three Maori deacons in 1872, and went on to ordain twenty-eight in total during his episcopate. He promoted the development of St John's College, Auckland (for ordination candidates), of which he was visitor and governor, and in 1880 was made a fellow of the University of New Zealand and the Auckland University Council, 1883. He supported the Sailor's Home, Institute for the Blind, and the Women's Home in Auckland. 
Cowie returned to England for the Lambeth conference of 1888 and in the same year published an account of his diocese, 'Our Last Year in New Zealand'. In 1895 he was made primate of New Zealand. He visited England again for the diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria and for the Lambeth conference of 1897, receiving in that year an honorary degree of DD from the University of Oxford. He resigned his see in 1902 because of poor health, but died at Bishopscourt, Auckland, New Zealand, on 26 June 1902, before his resignation took effect. He was given a military funeral and buried at St Stephen's cemetery, Tararua, Parnell, on 29 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 32598


Cowley, Sir Arthur Ernest (1861-1931), orientalist and librarian, was born on 13 December 1861 at 3 South Hill, Forest Hill, Sydenham, the fourth son among the seventeen children of Frederick Thomas Cowley (1822-1881), customs house agent, and his wife, Louisa Emily, 'nee' Boddy (1830-1912). He was educated at St Paul's School, London (1872-9), then at Trinity College, Oxford (1879-83), where he was an exhibitioner. He showed early promise but ill health and increasing interest in oriental languages resulted in his graduating with a fourth class in 'literae humaniores' in 1883. Cowley then spent two years at the 'college cantonal', Lausanne, Switzerland, improving his French and German, before becoming master in modern languages successively at Sherborne School (1885-9), and Magdalen College School, Oxford (1890-95). 
In 1890 Cowley had begun work on the Samaritan liturgy at the suggestion of Alfred Neubauer, sub-librarian in charge of the Bodleian Library's oriental collections, and spent his vacations working in British and continental libraries. In 1894 he and John Frederick Stenning examined Greek and Semitic manuscripts in the library of St Catherine's Monastery on Mount Sinai. He was appointed an assistant sub-librarian at the Bodleian in 1896 to help Neubauer, with whom he published 'The Original Hebrew of a Portion of Ecclesiasticus' (1897), followed by 'Facsimiles of the Fragments Hitherto Recovered of the Book of Ecclesiasticus in Hebrew' (1901). In 1898 he produced a revised edition of G. W. Collins's translation of Gesenius's 'Hebrew Grammar', which became the standard work of reference for English students. 
Cowley succeeded Neubauer as sub-librarian in December 1899, also taking on his teaching of rabbinical Hebrew literature. A fellowship at Magdalen College followed in 1902. At the Bodleian he worked on a catalogue of its Sanskrit materials which was completed in 1905. With Neubauer he edited the second volume of the 'Catalogue of Hebrew Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library' (1906). For this and his work with A. H. Sayce on fifth-century BC Aramaic papyri, published as 'Aramaic Papyri Discovered at Assuan' (1906), he was awarded a DLitt by the university in 1908. His early studies culminated in the appearance of 'The Samaritan Liturgy' in two volumes in 1909. A second, revised, edition of Gesenius followed in 1910. He was elected Sandars reader in bibliography at Cambridge in 1912. 
On 3 April 1913 at St Margaret's, Westminster, Cowley married Mabel Beatrice Watts (died 1950), of St Osyth's Priory, Essex, the second daughter of William Longmore Watts, rector of Boxted, Essex. The couple had no children of their own but adopted two sons. The war found Cowley too old for active service but in 1917 he spent six months with a British ambulance unit in France. In December 1918 he delivered the Schweich lectures on biblical archaeology at the British Academy, published as 'The Hittites' in 1920. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in July 1919, and served on its council from 1922 until 1931. 
In 1919 Cowley succeeded Falconer Madan as Bodley's librarian. He began by tackling the problem of the growth of the unwieldy transcribed catalogue of printed books. Attempts to publish it were abandoned on grounds of cost and Cowley inaugurated a new catalogue on printed slips for all books published after 1919. His time as librarian was, however, chiefly characterized by his desire to see a unified library management system in the university, to be achieved by staffing other institutions from the Bodleian, the principle of dependent libraries. The process began in 1923, when a Bodleian assistant took charge of a separate library for law students. In 1927 the Radcliffe Library of scientific and medical books and the Indian Institute Library were placed under Bodley's librarian. Finally in 1929 the Rhodes House Library for books on the British dominions and colonies, the United States, and Africa was set up. A third, pressing concern was the perennial one of storage space for the ever-growing collections. The transfer to the Ashmolean Museum of collections of coins and engraved portraits helped, but much more space was needed. As early as 1921 Cowley had maintained that the existing library buildings could not be abandoned. He favoured the retention of the old library and the construction of an extension on the other side of Broad Street. After a decade of argument and discussions this idea was the one largely adopted shortly before his retirement. 
Cowley still found time to pursue his scholarly interests. In 1923 he published 'The Aramaic Papyri of the Fifth Century', a revision of his 1906 work, incorporating the critical results of the best-known Semitic scholars, his original text largely unaltered. The publication of 'A Concise Catalogue of the Hebrew Printed Books in the Bodleian Library', the culmination of thirteen years' work, followed in 1929. 
Cowley's strength as a scholar lay not so much in high originality as in a complete mastery of his chosen field, to which he brought a painstaking and thorough accuracy. His knowledge of Hebrew and Aramaic was exhaustive. Combined, they marked him out as one of the leading Semitic scholars of his day. 
As Bodley's librarian Cowley became more and more taken up with congresses, conferences, and international boards. In 1926, the year he received a DLitt from Cambridge University, he was invited to serve on the International Committee of Bibliography, becoming its chairman. The following year he was elected a corresponding member of the Institut de France, and also appointed a member of the royal commission on national museums and galleries. In June 1931 his knighthood was announced. 
By then Cowley was already too ill to perform his duties in the library. On 3 May he had undergone an operation for the removal of a malignant tumour. He remained in hospital until the beginning of August, and resigned as Bodley's librarian on 31 July. While recuperating in Eastbourne he suffered a stroke; after returning to Oxford he had a second stroke and died at his home at 1 Holywell in the early hours of 12 October 1931. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 14 October. His estate was bequeathed in trust to the university for the benefit of the Bodleian Library, subject to certain annuities. 
Cowley had a strong muscular frame and generally enjoyed good health, though he was not fond of exercise. He had a Roman nose, a dignified bearing, with a red complexion and fierce blue eyes, which belied his nature; he was cheerful, genial, and kind, and always ready with help and advice when asked. He had a remarkable capacity for friendship with young and old alike, and was quickly on easy terms with all. Immensely sociable, he was a member of several Oxford common rooms, various dining clubs, and two London clubs, the Athenaeum and the Union. He was an enthusiastic freemason and filled various high offices, including mastership of the university lodge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32599


Cowper, Francis Thomas de Grey, seventh Earl Cowper (1834-1905), politician and landowner, was born on 11 June 1834 in Berkeley Square, London. Styled Viscount Fordwich until he succeeded to his father's title, he was the eldest in the family of two sons and four daughters of George Augustus Frederick Cowper, sixth Earl Cowper (1806-1856), and his wife, Anne Florence (1806-1880), elder daughter and coheiress of Thomas Philip de Grey, second Earl De Grey and fifth Baron Lucas (1781-1859). Based at Panshanger in Hertfordshire, Cowper was born into a family of great wealth at the centre of the whig political, social, and familial cousinhood. His paternal grandmother had one prime minister, William, second Viscount Melbourne, for a brother and another, Viscount Palmerston, as her second husband. On her death in 1869, Cowper inherited the neighbouring Hertfordshire estate of Brocket, along with other properties in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. On his mother's death, he came into the house and estate of Wrest, near Ampthill in Bedfordshire, as well as property in Lancashire and London. In middle life, Cowper was one of the wealthiest landowners in England with four country houses and a town house in St James's Square. Local county responsibilities were discharged during the autumn along with the holding of large house parties at Panshanger or Wrest, the spring was usually spent in London or abroad, while the summer months were taken up from late July by long spells in the highlands, first at Cluny near Inverness, and later at Torloisk, Isle of Mull. 
Cowper's father, the sixth earl, was whig MP for Canterbury (1830-34) and lord lieutenant for Kent from 1836 until his death. More influential on her son was Cowper's mother, a strong evangelical tory despite her marriage, who retained powerful personal links with all of her children, managing Cowper's life until his own marriage. Cowper was also close to his siblings, and all were painted by Leighton about 1861-2. On the death of both his sister and brother-in-law in 1870 he became effectively the adoptive father of Ethel (Ettie) Fane, later Grenfell (Lady Desborough). 
Cowper was educated first at preparatory school in Bembridge, Isle of Wight, and from September 1847 at Harrow School, at which he was unhappy and from which he was withdrawn at Easter 1849. He continued his education privately, until 1851 when he went up to Christ Church, Oxford, where he enjoyed the life of the aristocratic undergraduate, making friends in particular with William, eighth marquess of Lothian, whose brother, Walter, later married Cowper's sister, Amabel (1846-1906), and William, Lord Valletort (later fourth earl of Mount Edgcumbe). He toured Italy from late 1854, acquiring an interest in Florentine and Venetian painting, before returning home and deciding to submit for a degree in law and history, securing first-class honours in 1855. He had little interest in games, although later acquired a passion for stalking and shooting. Reading was his favourite pastime. 
Entry to the Commons was frustrated by the death of Cowper's father on 15 April 1856, which also prompted a mental breakdown. Cowper was always to regret that he was thereby denied the conventional political apprenticeship to a public career for a man in his position. This combined with an already discernible shyness, and a lack of motivating energy, confined Cowper to largely local affairs and social life for the next twenty years. An early enthusiast for the volunteer movement, he took a continuing interest in home defence. He became lord lieutenant for Bedfordshire in 1861, and was made a KG in 1865. At this time, in the words of his wife and later biographer, his friendship with Louise, duchess of Manchester (wife of William, seventh duke, and later on his death, duchess of Devonshire, wife of Spencer Compton, eighth duke), became 'a very intimate one'. On 25 October 1870 Cowper married Katrine Cecilia (1845-1913), eldest daughter of William Compton, fourth marquess of Northampton, and Eliza, third daughter of Admiral the Hon. Sir George Elliot. Family tradition has it that Cowper was speeded in his proposal of marriage by rumours of an arranged connection between himself and Princess Louise, fourth daughter of Queen Victoria. The marriage was a happy one, with Katrine, an energetically sporting and Christian woman with artistic and literary interests, providing much of the backbone to Cowper's political and social life, as well as supporting him during his periods of chronic illness. There were no children. 
During this period, Cowper was taken up with the ornate restoration of Panshanger (badly damaged by fire in 1855), in what Pevsner later called 'a grand rather pompous Neo-Italian style', and with the custody of its large collection of English portraits, Italian old master paintings, furniture, and porcelain. He purchased a 'Madonna and Child' by Titian in 1874 (now in the Thyssen collection), and was himself painted by Watts in 1872, while Katrine was painted first by Edward Clofford and later by Poynter. Between 1871 and 1873 he built an additional seat, Beauvale Lodge, on his Nottinghamshire property, with Edward Godwin as architect. As the patron of eighteen livings, he supported the rebuilding of the churches at Hertingfordbury and at Hertford, and paid for a new church at Eastwood, near Beauvale. Although not sharing the intense evangelicalism of his mother or the religious commitments of his wife, Cowper was a responsible patron and continued to urge more effective episcopal disciplines upon indolent or incompetent clergy. 
Throughout his life, Cowper was very conscious of his whig pedigree, and in 1866 in an anonymous letter to 'The Times' reaffirmed the whig tradition as that of the aristocratic support for extended individual political rights and moderate institutional reform. Disparaging ideas of fusion with moderate toryism, he urged his colleagues to accept the future leadership of W. E. Gladstone, whose background and experience he saw as leading him not to take 'a merely utilitarian view of politics' (Cowper, 139). He was not given office by Gladstone in 1868, but in April 1871 became a captain of the gentleman-at-arms, a court post coupled with being government spokesman in the House of Lords on Board of Trade matters. It was not a successful appointment. Cowper found the parliamentary routine irksome and the officials uncooperative, and he resigned in August 1873 on not being promoted to under-secretary. Despite political ambition, Cowper did not anticipate any further political opportunities. 
With Gladstone's return to office in 1880, Cowper was surprised to be offered the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. Despite his being, in Lord Spencer's words, 'more indolent than most men of his ability' (Spencer to Gladstone, 18 Sept 1880, BL, Add. MS 44308, fol. 42), Katrine persuaded him to accept. Noted by Lord Derby as 'a respectable but rather weak selection' (Political journal of the fifteenth earl of Derby, 30 April 1880, Derby MSS, Lpool RO), Cowper was not Gladstone's first choice -- Lord Carlingford refused the post when offered it, because it was not linked to a seat in the cabinet, a position already assigned to the incoming chief secretary, W. E. Forster. It was seen by the Cowpers as an important political opportunity. For Gladstone, already short of very wealthy whig peers to take on these viceregal roles, it promised a balanced executive in Dublin. Cowper was formally sworn in on 5 May. 
Cowper's period of office lasted until late April 1882 and did not prove to be the first chapter of a serious political career. In later life, both Cowpers were inclined to attribute this to the exclusive dominance established by Forster over all aspects of Irish government in both London and Dublin, which left Cowper with little independent authority. In fact, the explanation was more complex, involving a combination of bad luck, the severe challenges posed by the government of Ireland, as well as the temperamental differences between the two men. 
Cowper made his state entry into Dublin on 27 May 1880. In T. H. Burke, under-secretary, he found a powerful and experienced official, and by early July 1880 Cowper was already commenting on how little he had to do. From mid-July until 20 September 1880 he was out of Ireland, owing to the death of his mother. He expressed whiggish anxieties over the 'Compensation for Disturbance Bill', and did not regret its defeat in the House of Lords on 3 August. 
During the following autumn, Cowper supported the coercion measures to deal with rural crime in Ireland, but was already regarded by some leading Liberals as a cipher. Spencer urged him to become more energetically involved in the work of Dublin Castle, especially while Forster was in London. Perhaps as a result, Cowper prepared a vigorous cabinet memorandum on 28 December, which urged the banning of the Land League in addition to the suspension of habeas corpus and arms control, advice which went beyond that recommended by Forster, and which was not followed by the cabinet in its decisions on 30 December 1880. 
The early months of the new year were largely taken up by the Dublin season, a social routine which Cowper found tedious, making him homesick. In executive matters, he continued to follow Burke's advice, becoming frustrated at the government's caution over its arrest of suspects, notably Father Sheehy. He supported the government's Irish land legislation, but contributed little to the discussions which led to Parnell's arrest and the proclamation of the Land League in the autumn. 
Cowper increasingly found his position untenable. Forster, whom he found overbearing, had tried unsuccessfully to secure his removal in the previous May, and the Cowpers were anticipating retirement from September 1881. Thereafter, they largely restricted themselves to ceremonial duties, making a tour of Ulster in November, although privately they encouraged the landlord class in their attempts to develop a self-defence organization. On 28 December 1881 Cowper suggested to Gladstone that he step down within a few months, adding that he would want to do this at a time which would 'not give the impression of deserting in the middle of a battle, or of having been asked to retire from incompetence' (Cowper, 545). Gladstone agreed to Cowper's request, and by early April 1882, Spencer was reluctantly anticipating a return to Dublin in his place. For a few days there was some doubt about the timing of the change, with Cowper commenting to his brother that he saw no immediate prospect of escaping from 'this vile place' (ibid., 565). Then, a few days later, a possibly designedly tactless suggestion from Forster -- that Cowper might take 'long leave' (ibid., 566) -- brought matters to a head. Cowper demanded Gladstone bring forward his retirement, a development quickly leaked to the press. He resigned in a letter to the queen on 28 April. Although formally still in office, Cowper was kept completely in the dark about the final stages of the negotiations with Parnell and his colleagues, and on 2 May he initially resisted signing the papers releasing the Kilmainham prisoners. He also made it clear that he disapproved of the engagement entered into with Parnell, largely on the same grounds as had forced Forster's own resignation. The Cowpers left Dublin on 4 May. Much later Lady Cowper claimed that their decision owed more to Forster's attitude than they had admitted at the time. Their experience led Cowper to support the abolition of the viceroyalty in January 1886. 
Cowper never again seriously sought political office, adopting for the rest of his life a senatorial role in national politics as a whig grandee. He contributed a number of articles to the 'Nineteenth Century' at the request of James Knowles, the editor, during the years of political crisis of 1884-6. In these he urged what he regarded as the traditional virtues of whiggery, in its historic role as the moderating influence within the Liberal Party. As in 1866, he did not support fusion between moderate whigs and tories. Like his whig leader, Hartington, he rejected Gladstone's declaration for home rule, and presided at the first great unionist meeting at Her Majesty's Theatre on 14 April 1886. Despite the bitterness of the Liberal Party's divisions over home rule, Cowper only slowly accepted that they were likely to become permanent. Keen to preside over the royal commission on the 1881 and 1885 Irish land legislation, Cowper was disappointed that the second Salisbury government did not, at first, accept all of his report's conciliatory recommendations. Later, Liberal Unionist pressure during the debates on the 1887 'Irish Land Bill' resulted in the commission's recommendations on rent adjudication and the rights of leaseholders being accepted. Cowper continued to advocate a pragmatic approach to state interference on welfare questions, and remained a convinced free trader until the end of his life. 
In the years after 1886, Cowper suffered from chronic ill health but continued to be modestly involved in public life. He presided over the Gresham commission in 1893 charged with drafting a new constitution for the University of London. He was an early member of the newly formed Hertfordshire county council, being its chairman from 1891 to 1899. A continuing enthusiast for home defence, he was president of the Naval Volunteer Defence Association, and later entered the debate over the value of rifle clubs. He was a keen supporter of the Sunday opening of national museums and galleries. 
For the most part the Cowpers' routine was a social one, of some historical significance in its own right, as their house at Panshanger became one of the meeting grounds for the group known from the late 1880s as the Souls which included A. J. Balfour, George Wyndham, and the young Curzon among its men, and Margot Tennant, Mary Elcho, Evelyn de Vesci, and Cowper's own niece, Ettie Grenfell, among its women. Here in a self-consciously exclusive atmosphere of high living, fine sympathies, and cultivated conversation, relationships and liaisons were nurtured, and in ways thought less vulgarly physical than in the circle around the prince of Wales. Party political divisions were not critical in deciding who should receive the Cowpers' hospitality, and literary and artistic persons were also invited. The Cowpers' own artistic tastes were, like those of the Souls, not avant-garde; both rejected realism in art, drama, and literature, as represented by Millet, Zola, or Ibsen, with Cowper paying $2000 for Burne-Jones's 'Aurora' in 1898. Similarly, they remained essentially mid-Victorian in their views about the roles of men and women, regretting the decline in 'reserve' among women and opposing their increasingly public role. 
A handsome man 6 feet tall with a firm profile in adult life, Cowper was described by Edmund Gosse as 'The very type, and probably the last example, of the old class of sheltered, refined, exquisitely proud Whig noblemen, exalted by wealth and station above the faintest fear of rebuff, and happy to be a Liberal because he saw human nature through rose-coloured glasses from a great distance. (Ellernberger, 30)' In the last years of his life, Cowper was confined to a bath chair. On 25 June 1905 he was taken seriously ill with an abdominal abscess, and failing to recover from the necessary operation, he died at Panshanger on 19 July 1905. He was buried in Hertingfordbury churchyard and a recumbent effigy by Henry Poole was erected by his widow in 1909. She died at Cannes on 23 March 1913 and was buried beside him. Since he had no direct heir, Cowper's estates were divided at his death, the bulk, including Panshanger, going eventually to his niece, Ettie Desborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 32600


Cox, Alfred (1866-1954), medical administrator, was born on 5 May 1866 at Middlesbrough, the second son in the family of eight children of Thomas Benjamin Cox, a bridgeyard worker, and his wife, Dinah Sanderson Skilbeck, a blacksmith's daughter. He was an unhealthy child. Shortly after his birth the family moved to Darlington, where at the age of fourteen Cox was made a monitor of Albert Road board school as a step to becoming a pupil teacher. This was not a success, and at the age of seventeen he began to study for the civil service lower division, work he continued while staying in Carlisle as assistant to an insurance agent. It was there that a doctor visiting the house persuaded him to become a dispenser assistant; this provided a mode of entry to the medical profession later forbidden by the General Medical Council. Cox gained a good deal of experience in midwifery and moved first to Stockton-on-Tees and later to Haydon Bridge, where he had more time for study; finally he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne, where he received free board and lodging and $1 a month from the general practitioner for whom he worked. 
Despite this somewhat precarious existence Cox managed to matriculate at Edinburgh and on his twenty-first birthday he entered the University of Durham College of Medicine at Newcastle -- still earning his keep as a dispenser assistant. He qualified MB, BS in 1891 and, with a capital of $30, immediately entered general practice in Gateshead. In 1894 he married Florence Amelia (died 1927), daughter of Thomas Cheesman, iron merchant, of Newcastle upon Tyne. The marriage was childless. Cox served as district medical officer to the Gateshead poor-law union. In this capacity he gave evidence to the royal commission on the poor laws and relief of distress (April 1907). Shortly before he left Gateshead, in 1908, he became a factory surgeon. 
Cox's long years of penurious drudgery probably stimulated his interest in medical politics and the reform of his profession. He played an active part in local politics in Gateshead, and was elected to its municipal council. With the rector of Gateshead he joined forces in a campaign for slum clearance. He was also a justice of the peace. In 1898 Cox formed the Gateshead Medical Association, and tried to reform club practice and the methods used by friendly societies in appointing doctors for their members. He was active in forming in other towns in the north various medical societies for discussing medico-political and medico-ethical matters. These provided a focus for the expression of dissatisfaction with the British Medical Association (BMA), which Cox had joined in 1893. A conference held by the Medical Guild of Manchester in May 1900 brought this dissatisfaction into the open, and the possibility of forming a new organization was debated. It was Cox who carried the day with a motion which gave the BMA a chance to reform itself, and the result of this was the setting up in the same year of the committee which brought in the new constitution of the BMA, which to all intents and purposes remained unchanged until the reforms adopted in 1966. Cox was a member of the constitution committee from 1900 to 1902. 
Sidney and Beatrice Webb described the new BMA constitution of 1903 as a model of democratic organization. The culminating structure of this was the representative body, which at the annual representative meeting laid down the policy of the BMA. Cox was a representative from the beginning and the first honorary secretary of the Gateshead division, which replaced the Gateshead Medical Association he had formed. He was also honorary secretary of the north of England branch between 1902 and 1908, and its president in 1908. When the appointment of medical secretary to the BMA was being considered Cox was canvassed as a likely candidate, but he withdrew in favour of James Smith Whitaker, who was appointed in 1902. In the same year Cox was elected a member of the BMA's council on which he served until 1903. Cox was also a member of the parliamentary bills (later medico-politico) committee between 1899 and 1903 and again in 1907-8. In 1908 Cox became deputy secretary of the BMA, at an initial salary of $500 p.a., and gave up medical practice. When Smith Whitaker took office as deputy chairman of the National Health Insurance Commission in 1911, Cox succeeded him, being formally appointed medical secretary of the BMA in 1912. 
One of Cox's first tasks in his new position was to represent the association as a witness before the select committee on patent medicines between 1912 and 1914. The introduction of national health insurance by Lloyd George was accompanied by a bitter struggle between the BMA and the government, and Smith Whitaker's decision to leave the BMA at the height of this was the subject of much criticism. But Cox at the time, and in the years to come, never ceased to defend his action. During the crisis, especially after he succeeded Smith Whitaker, Cox took on arduous and anxious duties, not least in trying to maintain professional unity in an atmosphere of distrust and reproach. He also played an important role in negotiating the system of professional consultation which allowed the new scheme to function efficiently. Following its introduction Cox became an enthusiastic supporter of national health insurance. 
During the First World War, Cox acted as joint secretary of the central medical war committee set up to organize the supply of doctors to the armed forces. For this he was appointed OBE in 1918. The war over, much of his work as secretary of the BMA was concerned with negotiations between the medical profession and the Ministry of Health, and with the administration of a professional organization which over the years grew in numbers and strength. He also conducted an investigation into practice conditions in Britain, the findings of which influenced the BMA's proposals for a general medical service for the nation. As ambassador for the BMA he was successful in securing the allegiance to the home organization of doctors in Canada, which he visited in 1924 and 1930, and in South Africa, which he visited in 1925. In both countries there had been branches of the BMA and separate medical associations as well. By the time Cox died in 1954, the Canadian Medical Association and the South African Medical Association had become affiliated to the BMA. Another successful attempt to cement friendship among doctors of different countries was the formation in 1925 of the Association Professionnelle Internationale des Medecins (APIM); Cox was a co-founder and also one of its most enthusiastic supporters. After the Second World War the APIM was merged into a bigger organization, the World Medical Association. 
Cox devoted much of his life to the welfare and interests of his profession, and in the British Medical Association he found a powerful instrument to that end. He retired as medical secretary in 1932, the year of the BMA's centenary, having stayed in office a year beyond retirement age in order to oversee the celebrations. On retirement Cox received a cheque for $1000 along with a book containing the names of some 7000 subscribers to his testimonial fund. He was made vice-president of the association in 1933. After leaving the BMA, Cox occupied a variety of positions. He was part-time general secretary of the British Health Resorts Association (1933-8); chairman of the advisory council, medical section, British Industries House; part-time medical secretary of the London public medical service; medical adviser to the Proprietary Association of Great Britain; and, until the age of eighty, acting secretary to the National Ophthalmic Treatment Board (1941-6). 
Beneath a rather stern exterior Cox had a warm and generous heart which kept him free from the jealousies which so often beset professional life. He seldom missed an opportunity to encourage younger colleagues. He was a man of great integrity, and up to the end of his long life he kept his friendships in constant repair and his interests undimmed. Early in his career he was a member of the Independent Labour Party, being greatly influenced by Keir Hardie, whom he knew personally. But he later became disillusioned with socialism. 'The end of it all', he wrote in his autobiography, 'seems inevitably to be the authoritarian State' (Cox, 221). He was a vigorous opponent of Bevan's 'National Health Service Bill', suggesting that it was a step on the road to national socialism and to the transformation of the minister of health into a 'medical Fuehrer'. 
Cox wrote numerous articles for the medical press. He received the honorary degrees of LLD, from the University of Manitoba in 1930, and MA, from Durham in 1921. The BMA awarded him its gold medal in 1931. After several years of poor health and failing eyesight, Cox died in a nursing home at 54 Marine Parade, Brighton on 31 August 1954. His body was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 4 September, and there was a memorial service at St Pancras parish church on 16 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 32601


Cox, George William (1827-1902), historian, born at Benares, India, on 10 January 1827, was the eldest son of the six children of Captain George Hamilton Cox (died 1841), of the East India Company's service, and Eliza Kearton, daughter of John Horne, planter, of St Vincent in the West Indies. A brother, Colonel Edmund Henry Cox of the Royal Marine Artillery, fired the first shot against Sevastopol in the Crimean War. Sent to England in 1836, Cox attended a preparatory school at Bath and Ilminster grammar school. In August 1842 he was admitted to Rugby under A. C. Tait. In 1843 Cox won the senior school scholarship at Rugby, and in 1845 he was elected scholar of Trinity College, Oxford. Although he obtained only a second class in the final classical school in 1848, his scholarship was commended by the examiners. He both graduated BA and proceeded MA in 1859. 
The Oxford Movement gained Cox's sympathy, and in 1850 he was ordained by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford. In that year he married Emily Maria, daughter of W. Stirling, a lieutenant-colonel in the East India Company's army. They had five sons and two daughters. After serving a curacy at Salcombe Regis, Cox resigned owing to ill health, and in 1851 accepted the post of English chaplain at Gibraltar. But Cox's high-church views, which coloured his 'Life of Boniface' in 1853, met with the disapproval of his bishop, Dr Tomlinson, and he gladly embraced the opportunity of accompanying J. W. Colenso on his first visit to South Africa as bishop of Natal (1853-4). On his return to England, Cox became curate of St Paul's, Exeter, in 1854 and for a year (1860-61) he was a master at Cheltenham College. 
Meanwhile Cox's religious views completely changed. An article in the 'Edinburgh Review' (January 1858) on H. H. Milman's 'History of Latin Christianity' illustrates the development of his views on broad-church lines. He ardently supported Bishop Colenso in his stand for liberal criticism of the scriptures and in his struggle over his episcopal status in South Africa. He defended Colenso in a long correspondence with F. D. Maurice and warmly supported the bishop during his visit to England (1863-5). Cox's association with Colenso and the active support of Mrs Colenso who supplied him with many letters and papers after the bishop's death, gave him abundant material for his life of the bishop, which he published in 1888. In the same year he issued a last vindication of Colenso, in 'The Church of England and the Teaching of Bishop Colenso', maintaining Colenso's loyalty to the church. 
Throughout his life Cox was largely occupied by literary or historical work of varied kinds. His earliest volume, 'Poems Legendary and Historical' (1850), was written in collaboration with his friend E. A. Freeman. From 1861 to 1885 he was literary adviser to Messrs Longmans & Co., and for many years he was engaged in writing historical works which were widely read and much admired at the time but were not of permanent scholarly significance. These included 'The Great Persian War' (1861), 'Latin and Teutonic Christendom' (1870), 'The Greeks and the Persians' (1876), 'History of the Establishment of British Rule in India' (1881), 'Lives of Greek Statesmen' (2 vols., 1886), and 'A Concise History of England' (1887). His most elaborate work was a well-written 'History of Greece' (2 vols., 1874), largely a derivative from George Grote's work. He published also on mythology, where he followed Max Muller with some independence. His 'Tales from Greek Mythology' (1861), 'A Manual of Mythology' (1867), 'The Mythology of the Aryan Nations' (1870; new edn, 1882), and 'An Introduction to the Science of Comparative Mythology' (1881) all enjoyed a wide vogue, although they pressed to extravagant limits the solar and nebular theory of the origin of myths. He was a frequent contributor to the leading reviews, and joint editor with William Thomas Brande of the 'Dictionary of Science, Literature, and Art' (3 vols., 1865-7; new edn, 1875). 
In 1877 Cox claimed to succeed to the baronetcy of Cox of Dunmanway, which had been granted to Sir Richard Cox (1650-1733) in 1706. He believed himself to be the heir male of William, the eighth son of the first baronet. On the death in 1873 of a distant cousin, Sir Francis Hawtrey Cox, the twelfth baronet, the title had been treated by the Ulster office of arms as extinct. Nevertheless it was then assumed by Cox's uncle, Colonel Edmund Cox, on whose death in 1877 Cox adopted the titular prefix. His right to the dignity was doubtful because he was unable to produce any documentary evidence to prove that his ancestor, William Cox, was actually a son of the first baronet and not merely a young man for whose apprenticeship the baronet had paid the fee. The title was also assumed by Major-General John Cox who claimed descent from John Cox of Brandon, younger brother of the second baronet. George Cox's right to the dignity was disallowed after his death. On 9 November 1911 the baronetage committee of the privy council advised George V that the name of Edmund Charles Cox, his eldest surviving son and at that time district superintendent of police at Poona, should not be entered on the official roll of baronets. 
In 1880 Cox was appointed vicar of Bekesbourne by A. C. Tait, archbishop of Canterbury, and from 1881 to 1897 he was rector of the crown living of Scrayingham, Yorkshire. After the death of Bishop Colenso in 1882, the church council of Natal, having failed in a petition to the crown to appoint a new bishop by letters patent and also in an attempt to persuade the English archbishops and four other bishops to choose one for them, proceeded in August 1886 to elect Cox as Colenso's successor. Archbishop Benson, however, refused to apply for a royal licence to consecrate Cox on the ground that Natal had been from the beginning a part of the province of South Africa and that that province would not recognize the election. In the following year an attempt to persuade the crown to compel the archbishop also failed. 
On 18 May 1896 Cox received a civil-list pension of $120. He died at Ivy House, Walmer, Kent, on 9 February 1902. His ashes were buried after cremation at Long Cross, Chertsey, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 32602


Cox, Harold (1859-1936), economist and journalist, was born at Wimbledon on 16 August 1859, the second son of Homersham Cox (1821-1897), a county court judge, and his wife, Margaret Lucy Cox ('b'. 1832/3). He was educated at Tonbridge School, whence he obtained a mathematical scholarship at Jesus College, Cambridge. He was president of the union in 1881, and after graduating as a senior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1882, became a university extension lecturer in Yorkshire. After coming under the influence of Edward Carpenter, according to his own account he spent nearly a year working as an agricultural labourer in Kent and Sussex 'in order to gain an insight into the life of English labourers'. From 1885 to 1887 he taught mathematics in the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh in India. 
On his return to England in 1887 Cox joined Gray's Inn and read for the bar. In 1890 he married Helen Clegg (1861-1930). They had no children. Turning to politics, he was appointed secretary of the Cobden Club in 1899. In that position he took a prominent part in opposing the tariff-reform proposals of Joseph Chamberlain, and in maintaining the pure tradition of 'laissez-faire' liberalism against Liberal as well as Unionist innovations. He resigned the secretaryship in 1904 and in recognition of his services to free trade he was adopted as candidate by the Liberal Party in Preston, and won the seat at the general election in 1906. Cox represented the old Liberalism of retrenchment, disliked old-age pensions and, even more, Lloyd George's budget of 1909. He began working with Unionist free-traders -- he had a connection with St Loe Strachey and 'The Spectator' -- and at the general election of January 1910 stood for Preston as a free-trade Liberal (Sir John Gorst being the official Liberal candidate); he came bottom of the poll. In 1911 he stood for Cambridge University at a by-election, again as a free-trade Liberal, but again without success; that ended his parliamentary career. 
After his retirement from politics Cox constantly spoke and wrote against the growth of public expenditure and of bureaucracy. Although in early life he had been friendly with Sidney Webb, and had collaborated with him in a book, 'Eight Hours Day' (1891), he was now an uncompromising opponent of socialism; his book 'Economic Liberty' (1920) is a good exposition of old-style Liberal individualism. His public work included membership (1914-15) of the inquiry into alleged German atrocities in Belgium, held under the chairmanship of Lord Bryce, and of the committee on public retrenchment (1916). From 1910 to 1912 he was an alderman of the London county council, and in 1913 he was elected an honorary fellow of Jesus College. On the death of A. R. D. Elliot in 1912, he was appointed editor of the 'Edinburgh Review'; he held the post until 1929, when the journal ceased to be published, Cox lamenting: 'the political views that it was intended to support have ceased to play any leading part in the national life' ('Edinburgh Review', 250, Oct 1929, 193). He moved from Gray's Inn to Old Kennards, Leigh, near Tonbridge, where he died, from broncho-pneumonia and myocardial degeneration, on 1 May 1936; he was cremated at Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 32603


Cox, Leslie Reginald (1897-1965), palaeontologist and malacologist, was born on 22 November 1897 in Islington, north London, the son of Walter Cox, and his wife, Jessie Lucy ('nee' Witte). Educated at South Harringay county school, he won a foundation scholarship to Owen's School, Islington, in 1909. In 1916 he won an open scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge, but war service delayed his entry to the university. He joined the Royal Naval Air Service, experimental section, and worked on smokescreens and flame-throwers. In April 1918 he took part and was wounded in the raid to block the German submarine base at Zeebrugge. In 1919 he finally went to Cambridge to read for part one of the natural science tripos, making geology his main subject. He attained a double first (1920 and 1921), and took his MA in 1926. (He obtained his ScD in 1937.) 
Cox's 1920 reputation as a promising member of the university jazz band may have led him to attend the art student's dances at South Kensington, at which he met his wife, Hilda Cecilia Lewis, associate of the Royal College of Arts, daughter of the Revd William John Lewis of Mountsorrel, Leicestershire: they were married in September 1925. Both their son and their daughter eventually took degrees in geology at Cambridge. 
As a child Cox spent his holidays with grandparents at Charmouth, Dorset, where fossil collecting became a hobby. While at Cambridge he applied for a vacancy in the department of geology at the British Museum (Natural History) and was appointed an assistant keeper (second class) in 1922, becoming responsible for fossil Mollusca (apart from the Ammonoidea). He engaged in research on post-Palaeozoic Mollusca, and his scientific contribution was such that it was thought to be too valuable for his promotion to an administrative position. However, in 1951 he was given a special merit promotion to senior principal scientific officer, following his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1950. In 1961 Cox surprisingly accepted the post of deputy keeper in the department of palaeontology, adding its responsibilities to the many he had already undertaken. 
Many of Cox's early papers consisted of faunal descriptions of material collected by field geologists during exploration throughout the world. These enabled him to gain a wide understanding of the diverse morphology of the Mollusca and their distribution through time. He augmented this with examination of major collections in institutions and with field work in Britain and occasionally in Europe. Methodically he compiled a unique card-index system to the literature, together with a thematic reprint collection, both of which formed a reliable basis for his wide research and subsequent authoritative publications. 
A cursory analysis of Cox's publications (more than 160) indicates that Mesozoic faunas (52), particularly those of the Jurassic (40), were his main interest and that among the Mollusca this was directed to the Bivalvia (69). His involvement with colonial geology is revealed by those on African (27) and Indian (10) faunas. Although Cox's systematic description of British (28) and foreign faunas was important, his career was punctuated by more significant contributions. His work on the evolutionary history of the rudists, an aberrant group of bivalves (1933), was the first of several major reviews of molluscan subjects that either summarized previous work, or stimulated research: for example, the 'Thoughts on Classification' of the two classes (both 1960); 'Progress in Fossil Malacology' (1943); and 'British Palaeontology: a Retrospect and Survey' (1957). Cox's collaboration (1948-50) with William Joscelyn Arkell to revise John Morris and John Lycett's monograph, 'Great Oolite Mollusca', was equally important, while his monograph on 'British Cretaceous Pleurotomariidae' (1960) revealed the value of this neglected field. An interest in past literature and its relevance to nomenclature led to his authoritative work on William Smith (1930, 1942, 1948) and a sequence of papers in preparation for his 'Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology' contributions (1960, 1969), together with papers on several early descriptive works by writers such as Richard Pulteney (1940) and Gerard-Paul Deshayes (1942). 
Cox's thoroughness when dealing with any subject was typified by the records he made of every published molluscan classification, in order to establish the usage and priority of supra-generic names. Although he was not trained as a zoologist, his methodology and acumen enabled Cox to write extremely useful biological reviews of all the invertebrate classes he was involved with. He was astute enough to recognize molluscan body organs and structures on the rare occasions that these were preserved in fossil specimens (1960), or to describe the discovery of a bivalved gastropod (1960). 
As one of the world's authorities on Mollusca, Cox devoted the last decade of his career to contributions to the 'Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology'. The magnitude of these contributions to the gastropod and bivalve parts of this work was emphasized when the editors, R. C. Moore and N. D. Newell, dedicated the 'Bivalvia' volumes to him. Cox's continued efforts in persuading other researchers to contribute, and then giving them generous assistance, were vital to that enterprise. But his own authoritative and comprehensive introductions to both sections have to be recognized as the most valuable outcome of his devotion to Mollusca. 
Cox was acknowledged to be essentially a quiet and modest man, who dealt with everything in a calm manner and was never known to become irate. He kept his scientific and private lives separate. At Cambridge he had enjoyed rowing and retained this sporting link by attending Henley Regatta whenever possible. He regularly cycled into the museum from Hendon, a dangerous journey in the 1960s. 
Through his career Cox became involved with several scientific societies. He joined the Geological Society in 1922, was awarded the Murchison fund in 1929, the Lyell medal in 1956; he served twice on its council (1940-44, 1950-55), and was three times appointed vice-president (1952-4, 1957-61, 1962-5). From 1925 he was treasurer of the Malacological Society of London. He served as treasurer until 1951 (running the society throughout the Second World War), and was president in 1957-60. As a member of the Geologists' Association, he was made a vice-president in 1953 and became president in 1954-5. Inevitably he was one of the founder members of the Palaeontological Association, served as vice-president between 1958 and 1960, and was president at the time of his death. Cox was appointed OBE in 1958. He died suddenly at his home 30 Haslemere Avenue, Hendon, on 5 August 1965. His wife and two children survived him. His geological colleagues acknowledged the irreplaceable loss of his guidance, wisdom, balanced judgement, and quiet humour. 


@@@@@


doc= 32604


Cox, Sir Percy Zachariah (1864-1937), diplomatist and colonial administrator, was born on 20 November 1864 at Herongate, Essex, the youngest of the three sons of Arthur Zachariah Cox, formerly Button (died 1870), of Harwood Hall, Essex, deputy lieutenant of the county, and his wife Julienne Emily, younger daughter of Richard Saunders of Largey, co. Cavan, and Hawley House, Kent. He was educated at Harrow School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In 1884 he obtained a commission with the 2nd Cameronians, then stationed in India. In 1889 he joined the Indian Staff Corps, and on 14 November he married (Louisa) Belle, youngest daughter of Surgeon-General John Butler Hamilton. Soon afterwards he held minor appointments in the Maratha states of Kolhapur and Savantvadi. 
In 1893 Cox left India for the protectorate of British Somaliland, at that time governed by the resident at Aden as a dependency of the government of India, and after this his career progressed rapidly. He was appointed assistant political resident at Zeila, transferred to the principal port of Berbera in 1894, and in May 1895 was made captain of a punitive expedition against the Rer Hared clan, which had blocked trade routes and was raiding coastal groups. Despite having at his command only 52 trained Indian and Somali troops and 1500 untrained and inefficient irregulars, he defeated the Rer Hared in only six weeks. The expedition had not been officially approved from Aden, but its success established Cox's reputation for military acumen and general ability. Later that year he was promoted assistant to the viceroy's agent in Baroda. 
The next turning point in Cox's career came in 1899. He was intending to join the American explorer A. Donaldson-Smith in an expedition to the regions between the River Nile and Lake Rudolf, when the new viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, offered him the chance to become political agent and consul at Muscat (in what became Oman). He took up the post in October 1899 and was to spend virtually the rest of his career in the Middle East. His immediate task required all his powers of tact. Britain and France had both recognized the independence of Muscat, but the British had signed a secret land convention with its ruler, Sultan Feisal, and regarded the area as part of their informal empire, while the French not only gave protection to the local trade in slaves but leased a coaling station from Feisal. As a result Feisal had been ordered to board the British ship 'Eclipse', whose guns were trained on his palace, reprimanded, and told that the subsidy from the government of India had been removed. This was the tense situation which Cox inherited and which he had to try to assuage. He succeeded remarkably well, so that the subsidy was restored, French influence was curtailed, and Feisal even agreed to send his son to the Delhi Durbar of 1903. In the same year Curzon visited Muscat, judging that Cox virtually ran the place, and invested Feisal with the GCIE. Cox himself had become a CIE in 1902. 
In 1904 Cox was promoted acting political resident in the Persian Gulf as well as consul-general for the Persian provinces of Fars, Lurestan, and Khuzestan. He became resident in 1909. He had responsibility for the defence of the region, no easy task after the Persian revolution of 1905-7 and one which twice necessitated the calling in of imperial forces, to Bushehr in 1909 and Shiraz in 1911. He had also to promote British interests generally. One means for achieving this was his support of Sheikh Khazaal of Muhammarah, bordering Turkey in the Euphrates delta: he promised British aid when Turkey threatened aggression, and in return Khazaal leased the Shatt al- 'Arab, on the Euphrates estuary, to the Anglo-Persian Oil Company for the construction of refineries and an oil pipeline. At Kuwait Cox improved relations with the local ruler, Mubarak, and opened negotiations with Ibn Sa'ud, the Wahabi ruler of Nejd who was eventually to extend his territories to cover virtually the whole of modern-day Saudi Arabia. Also to Cox's credit stands his promotion of British trade in the gulf, which more than doubled in value from 1904 to 1914, the suppression of the arms trade, and improvements in communications. He was created KCIE in 1911. 
Cox (Kokkus to the Arabs) was highly respected for several reasons. He was a quick, efficient, and tireless worker; he was incorruptible; he had a genuine interest in the local people; he was shrewd and patient; he had a fine command of Arabic; and he was conspicuously silent, a trait which impressed the Arabs. He was also a popular and easily recognisable figure -- tall, thin, and with a crooked nose, the result of an injury received in a football match. He was to become more popular still from 1914, when Turkey's entry into the First World War led Britain to promote Arab nationalism in the Persian Gulf. 
Cox became secretary to the government of India early in 1914, but the outbreak of war saw his dispatch back to the gulf as chief political officer with the Indian expeditionary force. He was promoted an honorary major-general in the course of the war, and saw some action with Major-General Charles Townshend, but his main role was administrative and political. He masterminded the army's political relations in Mesopotamia. Baghdad was taken in March 1917 and Jerusalem in December. Palestine and Syria fell the following year. Before this, however, the campaigns against the Turks were long and arduous, and allies were needed. Cox's main contribution was to encourage the resistance of Ibn Sa'ud, who was also being wooed by Turkey. In December 1915 Ibn Sa'ud and Cox met at the Hasa oasis and signed a treaty whereby Britain was to grant a subsidy of $5000 a month. On the other hand the Foreign Office was encouraging Ibn Sa'ud's arch-rival Sherif Hussein as the spearhead of an Arab nationalism which would help defeat the Turks. Cox knew that his treaty with Ibn Sa'ud and the championing of Hussein were incompatible. But there could be no thought of resigning during the war, and instead he had to pretend to the Wahabi ruler that Britain's championing of the Sherif was not as serious as it seemed. As a sop, Ibn Sa'ud was knighted. Cox himself was made KCSI in 1915 and GCIE in 1917. 
Britain's policy in the Middle East was in many ways Machiavellian. As well as encouraging local rulers, Britain and France, in the Sykes-Picot agreement, decided to divide the region into spheres of influence. This dual policy was apparent in Mesopotamia (soon to be called Iraq): Britain accepted a League of Nations mandate for the region and at the same time set up an Arab administration which it aimed to control. 
After the armistice in November 1918 Cox became acting-minister in Tehran, where he negotiated a (largely ineffectual) Anglo-Persian treaty, but in June 1920 he was appointed KCMG and made high commissioner in Iraq, where during the previous month a widespread revolt had broken out, largely in protest at the power exercised by British officials. Having arrived in Baghdad on 11 October 1920 to replace Sir Arnold Wilson, he embarked on the most important work of his career. His first action was to set up a council of state under the venerable naqib of Baghdad. Policy was hammered out in detail at the Cairo conference, with colonial secretary Winston Churchill, in March 1921. Initially Churchill had been in favour of withdrawing from the region, which was proving a drain on the exchequer and over whose boundaries there were numerous disputes: he advised maintaining a presence only at the Basrah oilfields. But Cox, ably supported by Gertrude Bell, his oriental secretary, argued strongly in favour of remaining and of setting up an Arab regime under Feisal, son of Sherif Hussein. Cox had Feisal named king of Iraq in July 1921, after he had sent the main rival claimant to the throne into exile. His accession was confirmed by a referendum later that month. Soon there was not a single British officer with executive power, Cox's men having to exercise influence as unobtrusively as possible. 
It was a situation fraught with difficulty. In particular there was agitation that the mandate, which local people thought signified a degrading tutelage, should be replaced by a treaty. Cox accepted this, with the proviso that Britain should still be the mandatory power for Iraq at the League of Nations; but negotiating its provisions proved problematic. Feisal wanted to retain good relations with Britain, but his standing with Iraqis depended on his being seen not to be a British puppet. The British wanted a malleable figurehead, but he aspired to be a sovereign monarch. He dismissed several ministers without consulting Cox and he was loath to sign a 20-year treaty which pledged his willingness to be guided by the high commissioner on key issues. Cox began to feel that Feisal had 'unmistakably displayed the cloven hoof... he is without doubt both crooked and insincere' (Pearce, 69), and he was considering exiling him. A crisis was reached in August 1922, when a demonstration against Cox took place in the grounds of the king's palace, and the high commissioner demanded an apology from Feisal for this insult. Feisal was saved by a convenient attack of appendicitis a few days later: he took to his bed on 24 August 1922 and the compliant naqib signed the treaty in his absence, while Cox had a number of leading anti-British critics arrested. Cox followed up this success by meeting Ibn Sa'ud for a second time at 'Uqair on the shore of the Hasa. Not only did he persuade Ibn Sa'ud to recognize the kingdom of Iraq but, for the first time, he secured his agreement to limit his territory: where he and Cox disagreed over the precise boundaries on the map, they accepted that there should be a neutral zone between the two frontier lines. Cox was appointed GCMG in 1922, and he left Iraq for retirement in Britain on 4 May 1923, when the omens for the future of the new state looked relatively auspicious. According to one expert, 'he had done more than any other man to establish the infant Iraq state on a foundation of something like security' (Coke, 308). 
In retirement Cox received honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford (1925) and Manchester (1929). He was president of the Royal Geographical Society (1933-1936) and chairman of the Mount Everest committee. He died on 20 February 1937 while hunting at Melchbourne, near Bedford. His wife, who had spent long periods with Cox abroad and who was appointed DBE in 1923, survived him; his only son was killed in action in 1917 and his only daughter died at birth. 


@@@@@


doc= 32605


Hardy, Herbert Hardy Cozens-, first Baron Cozens-Hardy (1838-1920), judge, was born Herbert Hardy Cozens on 22 November 1838 at The Lodge, Letheringsett, Holt, Norfolk, the second son of William Hardy Cozens-Hardy (1806-1895), a former solicitor with a large practice at Norwich, and his wife, Sarah (1808-1891), daughter of Thomas Theobald, a textile manufacturer of the same city. When he was four years old the family moved to Letheringsett Hall. In the same year, 1842, his surname changed to Cozens-Hardy when his father, who was a supporter of the Wesleyan reform movement and was subsequently a member of the United Methodist Free Churches, inherited the estate of his uncle, William Hardy (1770-1842), the son of the diarist Mary Hardy. Educated at Amersham Hall School and at University College, London, Cozens-Hardy graduated at London University in 1858. He took the degree of LLB in 1863, and afterwards became a member of the senate of London University and a fellow of University College, London. In 1862 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn after obtaining a studentship and a certificate of honour. He read in the chambers of Thomas Lewin and James Dickinson, both eminent as equity draftsmen. On 26 July 1866 he married Maria (died 1886), the daughter of Thomas Hepburn, of Clapham Common; they had two sons and two daughters. Between 1871 and 1876 he was an examiner for London University in equity and real property law. 
Cozens-Hardy soon acquired practice as a Chancery junior, his nonconformist and Liberal connections being considerable assets. After twenty busy years he took silk in 1882. Attaching himself at first to the court of Mr Justice Fry, he took his seat before Mr Justice North when Fry went to the Court of Appeal in 1883. He proved so successful as a leader that in 1893 he joined the small band of 'specials' of which John Rigby and Horace Davey were also members. In this distinguished company he held his own, and was constantly employed in heavy cases both in the Chancery Division and before the appellate tribunals. 
A layman 'would have been puzzled to understand' Cozens-Hardy's success as an advocate ('The Times'). Although he was of unimpressive appearance, and without the vigour of Rigby or the subtlety of Davey, he had industry, knowledge, and lucidity of speech, and judges listened to him with respect. He was kindly and courteous, and his popularity with the practising members of the profession was shown by his election as chairman of the general council of the bar. Among the important cases in which he appeared as counsel were 'Sheffield v. London Joint Stock Bank' (1888, the right of a bank to sell securities deposited by a borrower with limited authority), 'Bradford Corporation v. Pickles' (1895, the effect of a malicious motive on the lawful use of property), 'Trego v. Hunt' (1896, the right of the seller of a business to canvass his old customers), and 'Attorney-General v. Beech' (1899, the liability of a remainderman who has bought a life interest to pay estate duty). 
At the general election of 1885 Cozens-Hardy was elected Liberal member of parliament for North Norfolk, and he continued to sit for the constituency until elevated to the bench in 1899. In the House of Commons, although never a prominent figure, he was a not infrequent speaker. As a rule he confined himself to matters of which he had professional or local knowledge, such as married women's property, the winding-up of companies, bankruptcy, and the law relating to trustees. His most notable achievement was the passing of an act relating to the law of mortmain, which was known among Chancery lawyers as 'Cozens-Hardy's Act'. In 1886, when the Liberal Party split on the subject of home rule for Ireland, Cozens-Hardy remained faithful to Gladstone, having in May 1886 been wavering towards Joseph Chamberlain and the Liberal Unionist defectors. He was never a violent partisan in the politically disruptive period which followed. 
In February 1899 the death of Lord Justice Chitty and the promotion to his place of Sir Robert Romer created a vacancy in the Chancery Division. Lord Halsbury, who was not ordinarily predisposed towards political opponents, disregarded Cozens-Hardy's Liberalism, and with the full approval of the profession raised him to the bench. He received the customary knighthood. Halsbury offered the post in a letter of 21 February 1899 beginning: 'My dear Cozens-Hardy. Notwithstanding your abominable politics I think you are the fittest person to succeed Romer...' (Heuston, 59). The incident inspired Theo Mathew to produce a cartoon entitled 'Kiss me -- Hardy' (Mathew, 70). As a judge Cozens-Hardy showed the industry and care that had marked his work at the bar. His findings of fact were more often criticized than his decisions on points of law. In November 1901, on the resignation of Lord Justice Rigby, he became a lord justice of appeal and was sworn of the privy council. 
In March 1907 Cozens-Hardy succeeded Sir Richard Henn Collins as master of the rolls. In this onerous office he performed his duties with ability and dignity. Appeals under the 'Workmen's Compensation Act' of 1906 were numerous, and Cozens-Hardy, although unversed in this branch of the law, dealt with them satisfactorily. His familiarity with equity law and practice made him a strong president of the court when Chancery appeals were being heard. Many of his judgments as master of the rolls stood the test of appeal, and afterwards proved of value to his successors. They were marked 'by clarity of reasoning and succinctness of expression' ('The Times'). In 1913 he was one of the three commissioners of the great seal during the absence in Canada of the lord chancellor, Lord Haldane, and in July 1914 he was raised to the peerage with the title Baron Cozens-Hardy of Letheringsett. For some years he chaired the Council of Legal Education; he was also a chairman of quarter sessions in Norfolk. His chief interests outside law were gardening and religion, and he was a frequent speaker at the Whitefield Tabernacle while his son-in-law the Revd Charles Silvester Horne was the minister there. His health had been failing for many months before his retirement in April 1918. He died at Letheringsett Hall on 18 June 1920, and was buried at Kensal Green. He was succeeded as second baron by his eldest son, William Hepburn Cozens-Hardy KC (1868-1924), who sat as Liberal coalitionist MP for South Norfolk (1918-20). 


@@@@@


doc= 32606


Craddock, Sir Reginald Henry (1864-1937), administrator in India and Burma, was born at Dharmsala, Punjab, on 11 March 1864, the youngest son of Surgeon-Major William Craddock, of the Bengal medical service, and his wife, Mary Charlotte, daughter of Francis Spencer Hawkins. Craddock was sent to Britain for education at Wellington College. In 1882 he passed the open examination for the Indian Civil Service and in 1884, after two years' probation at Keble College, Oxford, was posted to the Central Provinces ['see 'competition wallahs]. 
Craddock was initially based at Jubbulpore. In December 1888, shortly after his marriage on 6 March that year to Frances Henrietta (1863/4-1932), younger daughter of General Henry Ralph Browne, he was made assistant to the Nagpur commissioner of settlements and agriculture. From 1894 until 1901 he was intermittently seconded to the Central Provinces secretariat on revenue, agricultural, and famine duties, and in 1896-7, and again in 1899-1901, took charge of the province's famine operations. In May 1895 he became second secretary to the chief commissioner of the Central Provinces and, five years later, chief secretary. He attained the rank of commissioner in March 1902 and in May 1907 was appointed chief commissioner. He was made a CSI in 1902. 
Throughout the Central Provinces Craddock was renowned for his devotion to duty. His command of the vernacular and understanding of agricultural life outstripped that of most of his colleagues, and to his junior officers he was the model of a paternalistic ruler: benign and pragmatic, but firm. A conservative, Craddock saw himself as the defender of the peasant's traditions and rights against a rising tide of self-interested, Western-style nationalist agitation. 
In 1911 Craddock was appointed KCSI and in March 1912 he became home member of the government of India under Lord Hardinge. Confronted with terrorism in Bengal and the widespread home-rule agitation of the war years his conservatism became more marked. He recognized no distinctions between moderates and extremists, and classified all critics of the government as fundamentally disloyal. In opposition to the liberal counsels of Lord Carmichael, governor of Bengal, he advocated suppression of political dissent and, after the war, sought to have the repressive provisions of the 'Defence of India Act' preserved in peacetime legislation. The draconian and inflammatory Rowlatt bills were the ideological hangover of his time as home member. 
In 1917 Craddock was appointed lieutenant-governor of Burma, but he was appalled to discover that there too nationalism had taken root. In contrast to the government of India's softly-softly approach to Gandhi's non-co-operation movement of 1920-22, in Burma Craddock cracked down hard. Bowing to the inevitability of local self-government, he devised a scheme of political reform which, in its niggardliness, reflected his view of the Burmese as the 'spoilt children of the East' -- charming but entirely unfit for government. To his dismay, his scheme was jettisoned in favour of a version of the diarchy introduced in India under the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms. Fortunately, perhaps, Craddock left Burma in 1922, just before the reforms came into force. 
Craddock retired in 1923 and was appointed GCIE. Back in London he became chairman of the Indian Civil Service (Retired) Association and in 1923-4 served as a member of the royal commission into the superior civil services in India. In 1929, when the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms were due for review, he published 'The Dilemma in India' in which he derided the notion of Indian nationality and advocated an extension of electoral constituencies based on class, religion, and profession rather than territory. In 1931 he entered parliament as a Conservative member for the Combined English Universities. An obvious choice to sit on the joint select committee on Indian reforms, he was an outspoken, although cordial, opponent of further moves towards self-government in India. 
Craddock died on 10 February 1937 at the Empire Nursing Home in Westminster, where he had been recovering from an operation. On 13 February his remains were cremated at Golders Green crematorium. His wife, Frances, who was made a CBE in 1919, had died in 1932 and Craddock was survived by a son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 32607


Cradock, Sir Christopher George Francis Maurice (1862-1914), naval officer, was born on 2 July 1862 at Hartforth, Richmond, Yorkshire, the fourth son of Christopher Cradock (died 1896) and his wife, Georgina, daughter of Major Gordon Duff, 92nd highlanders. Cradock entered the navy via the training ship 'Britannia' in 1875. In the long period of unchallenged British naval supremacy during the nineteenth century it is not surprising that it was in campaigning on land that Kit (as he was generally known) Cradock would acquire a reputation for great gallantry. The term 'knightly' was easily applied to this very model of a late Victorian naval officer who never married. Tall, alert, and always immaculately dressed with a neatly trimmed beard, the well-spoken Cradock had a reputation as a fine sportsman and seaman. As commander in the Royal Naval College 'Britannia' in 1895 he reminded the future Admiral Andrew Cunningham of Sir Francis Drake. Cradock also published, notably 'Sporting Notes in the Far East' (1889) followed by 'Wrinkles in Seamanship' (1894). His best-known work was 'Whispers from the Fleet' (1907), a series of anecdotes and maxims providing common-sense advice for young officers that would also be carefully examined by historians after his death for possible explanations of his motives. 
In 1884 Cradock served with the naval brigade on garrison duties in Upper Egypt. In 1891 he was with the eastern Sudan field force as aide-de-camp to the governor-general of the Red Sea and was present at the battle of Tokar and occupation of Affafit. He was awarded the khedive's bronze star with clasp and appointed to the order of the Mejidiye (fourth class). He served in the royal yacht (1894-6) and was commander in 'Britannia', where he was also master of the 'Britannia' beagles. Cradock was in Chinese waters as commander of the dispatch vessel 'Alacrity' during the Boxer uprising in 1900. He distinguished himself leading the British naval contingent in the capture of the Taku (Dagu) forts on 17 July and later commanding the naval brigade in the relief of the Tientsin (Tianjin) settlement and Admiral Sir Edward Seymour's column at Siku. He was also with the naval brigade at the capture of Peiyang (Beiyang) arsenal, Tientsin. The future Admiral Roger Keyes wrote of Cradock's 'fiery, ardent spirit' in action (Keyes, 210). Cradock was mentioned in dispatches, won the China medal with clasps, promotion to captain in April 1901, and was made a CB in June 1902. He was an aide-de-camp to Edward VII (1909-10) and was promoted rear-admiral in August 1910. Cradock was rear-admiral in the Atlantic Fleet (1911-12), and in December 1911 played an important role in the operations that rescued the princess royal and her husband, the duke of Fife, after the P. & O. liner 'Delhi' was wrecked on the Moroccan coast near Cape Spartel. He was awarded the Board of Trade silver medal for gallantry in saving life at sea and in 1912 was made KCVO by George V 'for personal services'. In February 1913 Cradock received command of the North America and West Indies station and was subsequently praised for his action in helping to save British and American life and property during this turbulent period in Mexican history. 
When the First World War began Cradock's 4th cruiser squadron in the West Indies consisted of four old County-class armoured cruisers and a light cruiser. Cradock, flying his flag in the 'Suffolk', was initially concerned with the protection of British trade. There were only two German cruisers, 'Dresden' and 'Karlsruhe', on the western side of the Atlantic, but the area to be covered and the volume of shipping was immense and it was generally expected that the Germans would convert some of their fast liners into armed merchant cruisers. The Germans eventually ordered the 'Dresden' into the Pacific but the 'Karlsruhe' managed to avoid British forces and caused considerable trouble and loss before she was destroyed by an internal explosion. The Admiralty in the meantime reinforced North American waters, especially to cover the important troop convoys from Canada. Cradock shifted his flag to one of the reinforcements, the armoured cruiser 'Good Hope', and, with the northern waters secure, switched his attention to the south. He was slowly proceeding down the western coast of South America searching for German raiders and attacking German trade when a potential menace appeared from the other side of the world. The Germans had a powerful east Asiatic squadron including the armoured cruisers 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau' under Vice-Admiral Maximilian von Spee based at Tsingtao (Qingdao). Japan's entry into the war on the side of the entente doomed Tsingtao but Spee's squadron was able to get away and work its way eastward across the Pacific. The Admiralty found Cradock had the nearest British force once they had sufficient intelligence to indicate that the Germans were heading for the west coast of South America. On 14 September the Admiralty ordered Cradock to concentrate a squadron that would be strong enough to meet the 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau' and to keep the old battleship 'Canopus' and at least one County-class cruiser with his flagship until reinforcements in the form of the armoured cruiser 'Defence' arrived from the Mediterranean. Once he had superior force, Cradock was to proceed to the Strait of Magellan to search for the Germans, ready either to search the Chilean coast as far as Valparaiso or to return to the east coast to the area of the River Plate. Cradock was now standing into danger for he did not enjoy superior force. 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau' were armed with eight 8.2 inch and six 5.9 inch guns and had the reputation of being crack ships. 'Good Hope' had two 9.2 inch and sixteen 6 inch guns and 'Monmouth' sixteen 6 inch guns but neither could use them in their lower casements in a heavy sea. In contrast, the guns in the German ships were mounted higher above the water and less affected by heavy seas. Furthermore, 'Monmouth' had been hastily pulled out of the dockyard and manned with a scratch crew of coastguardsmen and boys. 'Canopus' was also manned by a scratch crew of naval reservists and coastguards and her old 12 inch guns were actually outranged by the German 8.2 inch guns. In addition her new crew had little opportunity for gunnery exercises and were probably at a low standard of efficiency. The biggest problem, however, was the low speed of 'Canopus'. Cradock must have known there would be little chance of bringing the German cruisers to action if his squadron was tied to the best speed of this elderly battleship, although these defects were exaggerated by the engineer commander of the 'Canopus' who had apparently broken down under the strain of war. Cradock also had a light cruiser, the 'Glasgow', and the armed merchant cruiser 'Otranto', but the latter was merely a converted liner not meant to engage in action with real warships. These ships were more than offset by Spee's potential three protected cruisers, the 'Leipzig', 'Nurnberg', and 'Dresden'. 
The responsibilities for what would happen have been debated and one will never know exactly what was in Cradock's mind, what he thought the Admiralty expected him to do, and what the first lord, Winston Churchill, and first sea lord, Prince Louis of Battenberg, assumed he would do. Churchill and Battenberg were aware of the disparity in strength and thought Cradock should merely detach the light cruiser 'Glasgow' to search the west coast of South America while keeping his squadron concentrated with 'Canopus' at the Falklands until the 'Defence', unfortunately delayed, arrived. Apparently this was never made clear to Cradock, who had Admiralty orders 'to search and protect trade in combination' and interpreted his orders as implying the Admiralty considered his force adequate and that his primary objective was to engage the Germans, something clearly impossible if tied to the 'Canopus'. There is nothing in Cradock's record of bold and gallant action in the Sudan and China to indicate he would have been inclined to protest against the odds and the Admiralty apparently -- and despite Churchill's subsequent denial of responsibility -- did nothing to discourage him in the belief the Germans were his primary objective. Furthermore, he had the recent example of the court martial of Rear-Admiral Troubridge for failing to engage the battle cruiser 'Goeben' in the Mediterranean at the commencement of the war in the belief this constituted the 'superior force' with which the Admiralty had ordered him to avoid engagement. Cradock may also have sensed that regardless of the outcome of any action it would be the Germans who could not afford to sustain damage far from home and with little likelihood of replenishing any large calibre ammunition they might expend. Arthur Balfour, the first lord in 1916, stressed this point when a memorial to Cradock was unveiled in York Minster that year. The Admiralty on 3 November belatedly ordered Cradock to remain concentrated with 'Canopus' until 'Defence' arrived, but the signal was too late for by this time the battle with the Germans had already taken place and Cradock and over 1600 of his men were dead. 
Cradock, acting on wireless intercepts from the 'Leipzig', had been searching for the single German cruiser near the Chilean port of Coronel when he encountered Spee's force late in the day on 1 November. The 'Canopus' was approximately 300 miles astern, convoying Cradock's colliers. Cradock detached the 'Otranto' which could do little and engaged with 'Good Hope', 'Monmouth', and 'Glasgow'. The battle began as the sun was setting and Cradock tried to close and force the action while the Germans would have the setting sun in their eyes. It was a desperate and bold manoeuvre in keeping with Cradock's traditional actions, but Spee refused to be drawn and once the setting sun dropped below the horizon it would be the German ships who were largely obscured in the dusk while the British were silhouetted in the afterglow. The German superior gunnery quickly told and first 'Good Hope' and then 'Monmouth' were sunk with all hands. Only the 'Glasgow' escaped to warn 'Canopus'. 
Coronel was the most serious British defeat in a naval action in over a century although in little over a month Cradock would be avenged and Spee's squadron virtually annihilated by Admiral Sturdee's battle cruisers at the Falklands on 8 December. The debate will continue as to whether Cradock was acting in a quixotic and unflinching but mindless manner in accepting a battle he knew he could not win or, on the other hand, was pushed into doing so by ambiguous Admiralty orders that in his mind at least left him little honourable choice. In this vein, as Balfour later put it, his courageous unselfishness and neglect of personal interest and ambition had shown a wise judgement in the interests of his country and 'there never was a nobler act' (Bennett, 106). Churchill may have been aware of the dilemma when a few weeks after Coronel he advised Admiral Beatty: 'Steer midway between Troubridge & Cradock & all will be well. Cradock preferred' (Ranft, 1.166). 


@@@@@


doc= 32608


Craig, (Edward Henry) Gordon (1872-1966), theatre director and designer and wood-engraver, was born on 16 January 1872 in Railway Street, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, the only son and second child of the architect and radical Edward William Godwin (1833-1886) and the actress Ellen Alice Terry (1847-1928), whose name appears on Craig's birth certificate as Eleanor Alice Godwin, formerly Watkins. His elder sister was Edith Ailsa Geraldine Craig, who later achieved prominence as a theatre director and costumier. Their parents were unmarried; indeed throughout their relationship, which began in 1868 and ended when Godwin left Terry in 1875, Ellen Terry was already married to her first husband, the artist George Frederic Watts. She had married Watts as a sixteen-year-old in 1864 and, in 1877, she was divorced from Watts and married to the actor Charles Wardell (stage name Charles Kelly). She judicially separated from Wardell in 1881. 
From an early age Craig lacked a father, had a peripatetic mother, and had a further uncertainty about his surname. Born Edward Godwin, by the age of nine he had become Edward Wardell. At sixteen, this uncertainty was resolved when he was baptized Edward Henry Gordon (the latter two names after his godparents Henry Irving and Lady Gordon). At the age of twenty-one he took the surname Craig by deed poll, after the rocky Scottish island Ailsa Craig. His schooling, too, was imprecise -- he attended Southfield Park preparatory school, near Tunbridge Wells, from 1883 to 1886, and after a brief interlude at Bradfield College, returned to Southfield, where the headmaster wrote of him as 'a good boy -- Flighty, but good' (E. Craig, 62). He moved on to a school in Heidelberg, but in 1888 was expelled. Craig had had walk-on parts in the theatre from the age of six, and took his first speaking role in 1885 when he went to Chicago during the Christmas holidays to join his mother in Henry Irving's production of 'Eugene Aram' by Edward Bulwer-Lytton. When his schooling was over he joined Irving's company at the Lyceum Theatre. 
Until 1897, when he ceased to act, Craig took roles including Hamlet (1894) and Macbeth (1896). He was hailed as the most promising young actor in England, and his mother observed 'I have never known anyone with so much natural gift' ('DNB'). On 27 March 1893 he married an actress, Helen Mary (May) Gibson ('b'. 1872), daughter of Robert Southam Gibson, with whom, by 1897, he had had four children. During this period, in which he was briefly an actor-manager (1897-9), his life took a new turn when he met the artists James Pryde and William Nicholson, who introduced him to woodcutting and engraving, and the making of plain black and white illustrations. Watching Nicholson at work put Craig under a spell of pleasure, and inspired him to take up this art. He had as natural a gift for wood-engraving as he had for acting, and in 1898 he launched a new magazine, 'The Page', largely written by him, albeit under inventive pseudonyms, and aimed at the worlds of theatre and the arts. It was illustrated with his own wood-engravings. 
Craig's earliest wood-engraving was a portrait of the poet Walt Whitman (1893), taken from a photograph. This was a revolutionary work, one of the earliest 'white line' wood-engravings of the modern era, in which the image is made to emerge from the block, which prints black, by engraved lines which carry no ink and remain the colour of the paper. Craig embraced wood-engraving wholeheartedly, with a boyish, breathless, energy, and by the end of 1899 had engraved nearly 200 blocks. This spontaneous, affectionate approach to creativity was an aspect of his character that articulated his entire life, embracing also the tone of his writing and his theatre design. 
The marriage with May Gibson ended in 1898 after Craig had embarked on an affair with the actress Jess Dorynne, one of many liaisons that were to decorate his life. He continued to engrave wood, but, yearning again for the stage, was encouraged by the musician Martin Shaw to embark on stage design and direction. His first production, 'Dido and Aeneas' (1900) for the Purcell Society at the Hampstead Conservatoire, was revolutionary. The restrictions of the building forced Craig to design his own stage, inspired by techniques pioneered by Hubert von Herkomer at Bushey, Hertfordshire, by creating an exceptionally low proscenium to hide the backcloth frames and lighting system. The effect was 'strikingly panoramic' (Innes, 38), and broke radically with the tradition of stage realism with the use of colour and light pouring in from above and evoking mood and movement. Harley Granville Barker articulated Craig's intentions by describing him as 'a supreme master of the theatre of the clouds' ('DNB'). This production was followed by Handel's 'Acis and Galatea' (1902) at the Great Queen Street Theatre, where it was described by Granville Barker as 'an ever-shifting maze of colour, form, and motion' (ibid.). Haldane McFall observed to Craig that the colours in the first act were 'good enough to eat' (quoted E. Craig, 153). 
By now Craig had shifted his affections once more, and was living with the 22-year-old violinist Elena Fortuna Meo (1879-1957), daughter of the Hampstead painter Gaetano Meo. He designed productions for his mother at the Imperial Theatre, Tothill Street, including Ibsen's 'The Vikings at Helgeland' (1903) and Shakespeare's 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1903). These drew yet more inventive lighting, staging, and costume effects from Craig -- the church in 'Much Ado', act IV being evoked not so much by architecture but by diagonal streams of coloured light from an unseen stained-glass window illuminating a vast, partially obscured crucifix. The American theatre critic James Huneker wrote of 'The Vikings at Helgeland': 'Abolishing foot and border lights, sending shafts... from above, Mr Craig secures unexpected and bizarre effects' (J. Huneker, 'Iconoclasts: a Book of Dramatists', 1905, 32). Craig's theatre designs, which evoked the work of Edmund Dulac, Charles Ricketts, and Charles Shannon, appealed to artists rather more than to managers of the established theatre, and his productions had a high commercial failure rate. Through his inability to compromise, many projects were aborted or abandoned. Craig moved to Berlin in 1904, where he designed 'Venice Preserv'd' by Otway at the Lessing Theatre (1905) and in the same year 'The Tempest' by Shakespeare and Shaw's 'Caesar and Cleopatra' for Max Reinhardt. He rarely returned to England -- he and May had divorced in 1905, and by that same year he had had three children with Elena. 
In 1905 also, Craig began his affair with the dancer Isadora Duncan (1878-1927), with whom he had two children. He and Duncan shared a passionate conviction for a unified theatre experience of dance, music, colour, and staging, which crossed national boundaries, under one controlling mastermind. They worked together on Craig's book 'Isadora Duncan: Six Movement Designs' (1906), but in 1907 they parted, and Craig brought Elena and their children to live with him in Florence where he had settled. He designed a production of Ibsen's 'Rosmersholm' (1907) which was staged at the Teatro della Pergola in Florence, where it was described by the Italian designer Enrico Corradini as 'a new architecture of great height, ranging in colour from green to blue...; it portrayed a 'state of mind'' (E. Corradini, 'L'arte della scena', 'Vita d'Arte', 1908). His theatrical work took him to Moscow, where, in 1912, he designed a 'Hamlet' for Konstantin Stanislavsky at the Art Theatre. This was a resounding success, especially its first court scene, with 'Claudius and Gertrude enthroned at the back of the stage in a glittering sea of gold, and Hamlet, a lonely black-clad figure, sitting far downstage, a silhouette under a great shadow' ('DNB'). 
In Florence, Craig started his theatre magazine 'The Mask', which ran (with a break in the First World War) from 1908 until 1929, and he founded the School for the Art of the Theatre in 1913. His highly influential book 'On the Art of the Theatre', in which he expounded his visionary ideas, was published in 1911. For part of the First World War, Craig lived in Rome, where Elena and their children joined him, and in 1917 they moved to Rapallo where Craig wrote, drew, and engraved on wood, using cut wood blocks as figures for stage models. He was now an essentially European figure. His visits to England were brief, but nevertheless in his absence he had a continuing influence over the development of wood-engraving and the theatre in his native country. He became a leading, if distant, member of the Society of Wood Engravers, and contributed to their exhibitions. He wrote on both theatre ('The Theatre Advancing', 1921) and wood-engraving ('Woodcuts, and some Words', 1924), and made a final essay in theatre design in the production of Ibsen's 'The Pretenders' in Copenhagen (1926). For this he received the Danish order of the knights of Dannebrog (1930). His stage designs were published by Oxford University Press in 1930, and in 1937 he was appointed a royal designer for industry by the Royal Society of Arts. Throughout his life Craig could strike an elegant pose for the camera. Articulated by well-cut features and luxuriant hair, his style of dress seemed to linger in the early nineteenth century. Craig's small, sharp eyes and curved nose gave him a bird-like appearance into old age, but his was a garden bird rather than a raptor, quizzical and busy rather than aggressive. 
Craig moved away from stage design in the 1930s, concentrating instead on writing and wood-engraving. His edition of 'Hamlet', published with his wood-engravings in 1929 by Count Kessler's Cranach Press in Weimar, became a classic of private-press book production. His biography of Henry Irving appeared in 1930, and that of his mother, 'Ellen Terry and her Secret Self', the following year. 'Still a handsome amorist', as J. C. Trewin gently put it, Craig left Elena once again and went to Paris to live with his secretary, Daphne Woodward (1906-1965), and their daughter ('DNB'). This family was interned during the Second World War, but Craig continued his work on their release. After the war Craig travelled alone and settled in Vence, France, where he completed the memoir of his early life, 'Index to the Story of my Days, 1872-1907', published in 1957. Elena, who had retained a lifelong affection for him, died that same year. 
Friends from the arts and the theatre made pilgrimages to visit Craig in his latter years. He was appointed Companion of Honour in 1958, and in 1964 he became the president of the Mermaid Theatre, London. His influence, taken up by Adolphe Appia and Max Reinhardt, passed on to younger generations of theatre directors including Tadeusz Kantor, Peter Brook, and Peter Hall. He died at Vence on 29 July 1966 after suffering two strokes. He was cremated in Marseilles on 1 August, and his ashes were buried in Elena's grave at Thame, Oxfordshire. Christopher Innes described Craig as 'passionate, improvident, mercurial, a self-taught genius who mastered almost everything except self-discipline and who scattered his energy among multitudinous projects; dogmatic yet secretly self-doubting, whimsical as well as visionary' (Innes, 8). Of his many children, one, Edward (Teddy) Craig, his biographer, became a film designer and, under the pseudonym Edward Carrick, a distinguished wood-engraver. 


@@@@@


doc= 32609


Craig, James, first Viscount Craigavon (1871-1940), prime minister of Northern Ireland, was born on 8 January 1871 at The Hill, Sydenham, Belfast, one of the sons of James Craig (1828-1900), a whiskey distilling millionaire of Scottish origin. His father was a self-made man who had worked his way up from lowly positions in flour-mills, the linen bleaching business, and Dunville's Distillery, Belfast, and who made his fortune within twenty years. His mother, Eleanor Gilmore Browne ('b'. 1835), was the daughter of Robert Browne, a prosperous man who owned property in Belfast and a farm outside Lisburn, co. Antrim. They had eight sons and one daughter; James Craig was the seventh child and sixth son. He grew up in co. Down in Craigavon, a large house in grounds close to Belfast, and Tyrella, a house on Dundrum Bay. He was educated in a preparatory school near Craigavon, run by a Presbyterian minister, and in 1882 was sent to Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh, a Church of Scotland public school; this enabled him to retain his Ulster accent, a valuable asset to his local political career. He left school at seventeen and worked in a firm of general agents and brokers in Belfast for thirty months, then in 1890 in a stockbroking firm in London, and then, after two years, he returned to Ulster and opened his own stockbroking firm, Craigs & Co., in Belfast. 
Craig's background was typical of the middle-class business families who dominated Ulster politics, but his early instincts were for a life of action rather than business or politics. He was a restless, though successful, stockbroker, and he took his chance of leading a more physical life when he enlisted in the 3rd (militia) regiment of the Royal Irish Rifles on 11 January 1900 to serve in the South African War. Military life suited him well, but he became impatient with the lack of professionalism and efficiency in the British army in this its most severe test. He was seconded to the imperial yeomanry, becoming a lieutenant and then a captain, was taken prisoner in May 1900, but released by the Boers because of a perforated eardrum. On his recovery he became deputy assistant director of the Imperial Military Railways, showing the qualities of organization that were to mark his involvement in both British and Ulster politics. In June 1901 he was sent home suffering from dysentery, and by the time he was fit for service again the war was over. This experience was central to Craig's development. He revealed an easy-going style and an ability to get on with his men, but these qualities were combined with a certain resolution in his character. He was now familiar with imperialism and war, and he belonged to a younger generation of Unionists to whom the former was an essential part of their outlook, and the latter a possible means of defending their ideology. 
Craig's father died in April 1900, leaving his son a legacy of $100,000. Craig now turned to the political life. He had acted for a brief period as honorary secretary to the Belfast Conservative Association, and his interest in politics quickened when his brother Charles (who also served in the South African War) was elected Unionist MP for South Antrim in a by-election in February 1903. In March 1903 James Craig was selected to oppose a nationalist in North Fermanagh, mainly because he was able to finance his own campaign and did not need to draw on the slender funds of the local Unionist association. He was narrowly defeated, but on 11 November 1903 he was selected as candidate for East Down and won the seat in the general election of 1906, with a majority of 670. He held the seat in the two general elections of 1910, with increased majorities, and sat for East Down until the 1918 general election when following an increase in the number of co. Down constituencies, he was returned with a majority of 9932 for North Down, a seat which he held until 1921, after which he sat in the Northern Ireland parliament as one of the members for County Down. In appearance Craig was a large, strong-featured, red-faced man, easily open to caricature as a typical straight-talking Ulsterman or, alternatively, the bull-necked, inflexible Ulster Unionist. His wife, Cecil Mary Nowell Dering Tupper (died 1960), whom he married on 22 March 1905 after a very brief courtship, was English, the daughter of Sir Daniel Tupper, assistant comptroller of the lord chamberlain's department of the king's household. They had twin sons and a daughter. She was obliged, as one of Craig's biographers put it, to make 'many abrupt and deep adjustments' to living in Ulster (Ervine, 109). 
Craig was not an original thinker, nor even a very clever man; but he had the ability to win and keep the confidence of his constituents and his fellow Unionist MPs. He briefed himself well on other issues besides the Union. He spoke in favour of non-sectarian education, tariff reform, votes for women, and agricultural interests. He became one of the Unionist MPs who threw themselves into the campaign against the Liberal government's administration of Ireland, but he also took a keen interest in the reform of the British army, and he spoke for greater financial provision for Irish education, especially for teachers' salaries and the upkeep of the national schools. He quickly established his reputation as a promising back-bencher, displaying an even temper, and a careful mastery of detail. He was flung into prominence and even notoriety by the crisis over the third 'Home Rule Bill' between 1912 and 1914. 
Craig regarded it as axiomatic that a Dublin parliament, dominated by rural interests and the Roman Catholic church, would prove destructive to the interests of protestant and industrial north-east Ulster. He was a member of the Orange order, and grand master of a co. Down lodge, and though personally free from bigotry, he identified with the beliefs of the order and knew that it was central to the mobilization of Ulster Unionism. His grasp of grass-roots Ulster politics, and his genial personality, were vital in enabling him to maintain the unity of what was potentially a very divided movement. His organizational skills were also important as he and his fellow Unionists prepared to resist home rule by force of arms, using their Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), and to set up their own provisional government the day that home rule became law. He was willing to work behind the scenes, leaving the glory to Sir Edward Carson, a Dubliner and southern Unionist, whose leadership (Craig freely acknowledged) was indispensable in giving Unionism a powerful voice in Great Britain. Craig entered this dangerous period with his eyes open. He hoped to defeat home rule, but he prepared methodically for an armed clash which, following the Larne gun-running for the UVF in April 1914, seemed inevitable. The Liberal government, he declared, was a 'caucus, led by rebels' (Buckland, 'Craig', 32). 
Craig's apparent imperturbability in the face of these developments never deserted him. The Liberals felt obliged to seek some kind of compromise on the Ulster issue, with perhaps four counties excluded from the operation of the 'Home Rule Bill' for a period of time. Such suggestions failed to break the deadlock, but they posed difficulties for Craig and his colleagues: were they to abandon their solemn league and covenant of September 1912 which pledged them to oppose home rule for Ireland as a whole? This would be acceptable to most Ulster Unionists, but problematical for Unionists left outside the kind of 'excluded area' which the Liberals were discussing. The outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 postponed any decision on this matter, and the whole Irish question, though home rule was formally placed on the statute book in September. Craig used the opportunity to press home a propaganda advantage, placing the UVF at the disposal of the British government, and even ordering thousands of uniforms from Moss Brothers of London. The UVF was designated as the 36th (Ulster) division, and Craig became lieutenant-colonel and the division's assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general. His health prevented him from accompanying the division abroad, and in 1916 he reluctantly resigned his commission. 
Craig now resumed his political career, becoming a treasurer of his majesty's household and a Unionist whip. In 1917 he received a baronetcy in the new year honours list. When Sir Edward Carson resigned from the cabinet Craig followed him in January 1918, but he resumed his career a year later, becoming parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Pensions. On 20 April 1920 he was given a promotion as financial secretary to the Admiralty under the former Unionist leader Walter Long. His steady, if unspectacular, rise in British politics was interrupted when the government introduced its 'Government of Ireland Bill' in March 1920, giving home rule to 'southern' and 'northern' Ireland. Craig acted as a broker between the Ulster Unionists and the government in working out key details of this act, in particular the decision to make the second chamber of the Northern Ireland parliament a mere reflection of the Unionist majority in the lower house, with twenty-four of twenty-six members elected by the House of Commons, which produced an insignificant minority representation (only five nationalists in 1936). Craig also influenced the vital question of the area to be governed by the Northern Ireland parliament, which the British agreed to reduce from nine to six counties. However, Craig suggested that the problem of minorities in the border areas might be settled by a boundary commission: 'to examine the distribution of population along the borders of the Six Counties, and to take a vote in those districts on either side of and immediately adjoining that boundary in which there was a doubt as to whether they would prefer to be included in the Northern or the Southern Parliamentary area. (cabinet conclusions, 15 Dec 1919, CAB 23/18, TNA: PRO)' This suggestion was rejected by the government for fear of causing unease in those areas. Craig also used his influence to persuade the Unionists of co. Cavan, co. Monaghan, and co. Donegal to accept their severance from the new Northern Ireland state, arguing that it was necessary for the security of the state if Ulster Unionists were not soon to be outnumbered by a substantial, and growing, Catholic minority. Here Craig revealed a stern realism, and his determination to secure Ulster Unionism was seen also in his urging the cabinet, in July 1920, to push the 'Home Rule Bill' quickly through parliament, and his defence of Unionists against the charge of using random violence against Catholics. He suggested that the UVF be reorganized as a separate unit to defend Northern Ireland against the IRA, and this led to the formation of the Ulster Special Constabulary in November 1920. When the 'Government of Ireland Act' received the royal assent on 23 December 1920 Craig was, unsurprisingly, the chosen candidate for the job of making the state of Northern Ireland a reality, and he became leader of the Ulster Unionists and first prime minister of Northern Ireland, with the formal offer coming from the standing committee of the Ulster Unionist Council on 26 January 1921. He was sworn of the Irish privy council in 1921, and of the Northern Ireland privy council in 1922. 
The next four years were to be the most demanding of Craig's career. He had several tasks: to establish the state on firm foundations; to defend it against its enemies, within and without; to prevent its over-zealous supporters from taking the law into their own hands, thus destabilizing the state; and to keep a watchful eye on the British government which by the spring of 1921 was becoming increasingly anxious to reach a compromise with Sinn Fein. These were interrelated problems. From the start of serious negotiations with Sinn Fein the government was increasingly drawn into a strategy of accommodating Irish nationalism through the offer of dominion status, but with the question of partition regarded as central to the success of this policy. Tom Jones, assistant secretary to the cabinet, expressed the spirit of the government's approach when he declared that 'we are pledged not to coerce Ulster', adding that 'some would confine that to physical force' (Bew and others, 51). Lloyd George and his colleagues put pressure on Craig to place his parliament under Dublin rule as an enticement for Sinn Fein to accept dominion status, but in the end the difficulty was resolved by the very method that Craig had suggested earlier, that of a boundary commission, which should delimit the border if Northern Ireland were to opt out of the Anglo-Irish treaty, which she duly did in December 1922. Meanwhile Craig wrestled with other problems. 
In January 1922 Winston Churchill brought Craig and Michael Collins together in London to try to improve north-south relations and control the rising tide of violence in the north. Craig showed that he could make an effort to do business with the most unlikely of men. Both leaders agreed that they would make efforts to address the most troublesome problems, such as the southern boycott of northern business, and the expulsion of Roman Catholic workers from their employment in Belfast. But once again Craig confronted the difficulty that, however honest his intentions, he must, if he were to avoid dangerous criticism, stress to his Unionist followers those aspects of the pact that seemed most favourable to them. A second pact in March 1922 began, at Churchill's behest, with the words 'Peace is today declared'; but Collins remained actively hostile to the Northern Ireland state, and in any case Craig was obliged to pursue the implementation of those items most favourable to his less than secure fledgeling state. The whole affair demonstrated yet again that Craig was willing to take the wider view, both in Anglo-Irish relations and in relations between north and south; but also that he could never move too far ahead of his less sophisticated Unionist colleagues. 
Craig's struggle with the British to give the new state a firm financial beginning was concluded successfully when a joint exchequer board was established to adjudicate disputes between the Northern Ireland government and the Treasury in June 1922 (much to Treasury officials' disgust). Craig resisted demands from the British government for a judicial inquiry into his government's security measures in May 1922, though he accepted an inquiry in secret. The inquiry was duly set up, but its head, S. G. Tallents, though no admirer of Craig and his colleagues, concluded that to push matters too far would be to endanger Craig's control of his Unionist followers, a pattern that was to be repeated in Craig's premiership. 
These events revealed the successes and shortcomings of Craig's leadership. He was able to carry the British government with him in important respects because it did not want him to resign and place the responsibility of governing Northern Ireland directly on British shoulders. But all this was part of Craig's belief that his only political purpose must be to stand firm: 'no surrender' was the call. This did not deprive him of sympathy with the nationalist minority in his state, but it placed their welfare low in his order of priorities, and complaints about his abandonment of proportional representation for local elections in 1922, or his adoption of the special powers act in the same year, were ignored. He was often a voice for moderation, for example over the expulsion of Catholics from the Belfast shipyards in 1921-2, but his main concern was to maintain Unionist unity, and he did not want Catholics to see him as someone to whom they could 'come squealing' (Buckland, 'Craig', 87). 
Craig's premiership lasted another twenty years, but the pattern of his government was established in the climactic years of 1914-23. This was: a firm defence of the Ulster Unionist position; Unionist unity in the face of external and internal foes; and a cautiously worked out relationship with the British government. The heroic defiance of 1912-14, the demanding task of state construction between 1921 and 1925, were followed by a period marked by political stagnation and unimaginative leadership. This caution was reinforced, rather than challenged, by the devolutionary powers granted to Northern Ireland in 1921, which greatly restricted the role of the Northern Ireland parliament and executive, and left Northern Ireland, after 1927, dependent on subsidies from the British Treasury. The relationship between Stormont and the local authorities in Northern Ireland worked unsatisfactorily, with most services being administered by local authorities, which became a byword for patronage and deeply contested sectarian politics. Craig's state suffered from the decline of its heavy industries, and unemployment remained high, at an average figure of 26 per cent of the total workforce, and 30 per cent of the male workforce. Moreover, the local character of Northern Ireland politics in an area about the size of Yorkshire, and containing 11/4 million people, divided roughly into two-thirds protestant and the rest Catholic, rendered Craig vulnerable to pressure from local Unionists. Craig, often to the consternation of his more professionally minded colleagues, was inclined to respond to demands by handing out largess that his government could hardly afford. He succumbed to pressure on the question of religious instruction in schools between 1923 and 1925. The Northern Ireland government sought to establish a non-sectarian and integrated educational system, but the Roman Catholic hierarchy rose up against any attempt to transfer its schools to state control, and protestant clergy agitated for 'Bible' instruction in schools administered by local authorities, instruction which was protestant in content and doctrinally unacceptable to the Catholic minority. The result was that state schools became protestant schools, and again Craig revealed that visionary policies, or even just plain good intentions, were not in the gift of a leader of Ulster Unionists (or anybody else in Northern Ireland). Craig was in any event not a prime minister given to dragooning colleagues; indeed, he never dismissed a minister. His desire to maintain unity was seen in his emphasizing the threat from de Valera's government, with its constitutional claim to Northern Ireland and its irredentist rhetoric. Craig possessed no economic ideas, beyond leaving things to work out for themselves. Craig was made Viscount Craigavon of Stormont in 1927. He enjoyed being prime minister of Northern Ireland, with all the office's prestigious connotations. He received an honorary LLD from Queen's University, Belfast, in 1922 and a DCL from Oxford in 1926. His 'Who's Who' entry proudly proclaimed him a knight of grace, order of St John, in 1937. His wife also enjoyed the perks of office, including using the cabinet secretary to telephone Fortnum and Mason in London to order marmalade. However, she also bore up well to the demands made on a prime minister in Northern Ireland, and when her husband was ill she would deputize for him at official functions. 
Craig had made his career in British as well as Ulster politics; but his premiership showed little sign of his earlier close acquaintance with the British political world. He became intensely parochial, and suffered from his loss of intimacy with British politicians in 1938, when the British government concluded agreements with Dublin to end the 'economic war' between the two states, on terms highly unfavourable to Northern Ireland. He never tried to persuade Westminster to protect Northern Ireland's industries, especially the linen industry, which was central to its economy. He was anxious not to provoke Westminster, or draw too much attention to what was happening in Northern Ireland, especially in the treatment of the Catholic minority. His desire to retain the closest links with Great Britain was seen in April 1939, and again in May 1940, when he called for conscription to be applied in Northern Ireland (which the British government, fearing a nationalist backlash, refused). In February 1940 he declared in a radio broadcast that Ulstermen were 'King's men' (Ervine, 551). His indignation when Winston Churchill suggested to de Valera that partition might be re-examined if Eire would join the British war effort can be imagined. 
James Craig died at his home, Glencraig, Craigavad, co. Down, on 24 November 1940, and was buried in the grounds of the Stormont parliament building. His wife survived him. He was succeeded as second viscount by his elder son, James (1906-1974). Inevitably, any assessment of his place in Irish, Ulster, and British politics is influenced by the history of Northern Ireland since his death, and especially by the 'troubles' that beset the state after 1968. Critics point to his failure to build bridges to the Catholic minority, but his statement in 1934 that he stood for 'a Protestant parliament and a Protestant state' must be seen in the context of de Valera's claim that 'we are a Catholic nation' (Buckland, 'Factory of Grievances', 72), and indeed Craig's whole career can be regarded as reactive, fashioned in opposition to the claims of Irish nationalism. Yet Craig was on good terms with individual nationalists, and he was punctilious in his dealings with the Roman Catholic hierarchy. But he did little to meet Catholic complaints about discrimination, and by the time of his death there were few Catholics in administrative posts, and fewer in the Royal Ulster Constabulary than there had been in 1922. He had no insight into, nor understanding of, the Roman Catholic mentality, and sought none. In 1938 he told the 'Daily Express' that he was 'the one politician who can win an election without ever leaving his fireside' (Buckland, 'Craig', 122), which sums up both the limits of his ambition and the nature of his political power. 


@@@@@


doc= 32610


Craig, Sir John (1874-1957), steel manufacturer, was born at Clydesdale, New Stevenston, Lanarkshire, on 11 December 1874, the fourth son of Thomas Craig, a furnaceman at David Colville's Dalzell ironworks, Motherwell, and his wife, Elizabeth Wilson. He was educated at Dalziel public school, Motherwell, and in 1888 went to work as an office boy with his father's employers. His energy and shrewdness soon marked him out for further promotion, and when John Colville entered parliament in 1895, Craig was entrusted with his duties at the Royal Exchange in Glasgow. In 1905 Craig was made ironworks salesman and five years later was invited by Archibald and David Colville jun. to join the board. 
At this time Colvilles was expanding rapidly and by 1913 possessed an annual ingot capacity of over 350,000 tons, making it the second largest steel making firm in Britain. The demands of war accelerated this growth. Responding to appeals by the Ministry of Munitions to boost output, Colvilles purchased both the Clydebridge steelworks and the Glengarnock Iron and Steel Company. In order to safeguard fuel supplies, these acquisitions led to the purchase of the collieries of Archibald Russell Ltd. Craig played a major role in the exacting negotiations involved in the firm's expansion and, with the sudden deaths of David and Archibald Colville in 1916, he was elected to the chairmanship of the company. As such he was responsible for the further integration of the firm, forwards into the manufacture of sheets, alloy steel, and steel castings and backwards into limestone quarrying. Colvilles' most important product was ship plates and its largest customer was Harland and Wolff, and so when the shipbuilders attempted to secure their steel supplies by gaining control of the manufacturers, Craig welcomed the moves which led in 1920 to the sale of the majority of Colvilles' ordinary shares to the Belfast concern, part of the Royal Mail Group controlled by William, Viscount Pirrie (1847-1924). Although ultimate control of Colvilles thereby passed into the hands of Lord Pirrie, Craig's power within the firm was increased since Pirrie and his successor, Owen Philipps, Baron Kylsant, left the effective direction of this part of their swollen empire to John Craig. 
When the boom collapsed in 1921 Craig kept the works efficient, and embarked on protracted discussions with his fellow steelmakers both at home and abroad to try to reduce the severity of competition and with the government to obtain some degree of tariff protection. When these initiatives failed, he attempted to attain the more modest objective of strengthening Colvilles' position within Scotland. The first real breakthrough was the creation of Colvilles Ltd in 1931, the outcome of a merger of David Colville & Sons and the iron and steel making interests of Sir James Lithgow (1883-1952) ['see under 'Lithgow family]. Together Craig and Lithgow sought to build a modern iron and steel making group by the acquisition of the plate business of Stewarts and Lloyds, the Mossend works of William Beardmore & Co., the Steel Company of Scotland, and the Lanarkshire Steel Company. By 1936 Colvilles controlled 80 per cent of Scotland's ingot capacity. 
It was one thing to control the industry, quite another fully to exploit the potential economies of scale offered by unified ownership. Financial constraints prevented what in retrospect is seen to have been the optimum solution, and Craig's own obduracy in refusing to close works at the cost of severe local unemployment inhibited the drive towards even greater productive efficiency. The Second World War and the ensuing post-war boom provided the opportunity for more radical reconstruction, but Craig's deeply felt social responsibility strengthened the more pragmatic calculations of his joint managing director, Sir Andrew McCance (1889-1983), in determining the policy of welding together Colvilles' collection of works. This policy eventually culminated in the creation of a fully integrated steelworks on a green-field site adjacent to the original Dalzell works: the Ravenscraig project. 
The life of John Craig and the development of Colvilles are virtually synonymous. Aspects of his policies have been criticized. In seeking Colvilles' domination of a Scottish steel monopoly, his inflexibility of purpose may have retarded beneficial change, and his reluctance to close the least efficient works of the Colville group of companies undoubtedly constituted an obstacle to greater rationalization, but it is important to recognize that he strove always to preserve intact his inheritance from the Colville family and to care for the welfare of the labour force. 
Craig's religious sincerity reflected itself in his whole life, according to a contemporary associate, and the eagerness with which he sought success for the works for which he was responsible, 'was not so much measured by shareholders' dividends as by the substance and security for the thousands of Scottish families whose breadwinners toiled at its furnaces and mills' (H. Douglass, 'Colvilles Magazine', spring 1957). 
Craig married Jessie, daughter of John Sommerville, shovel plater, in 1901; they had three daughters and two sons, the elder of whom became the last chairman of the Colville group in 1964. Craig was appointed CBE in 1918 and knighted in 1943. The honorary degree of LLD was conferred upon him by Glasgow University in 1951. He retired from Colvilles in 1956, having been with the company for sixty-seven years. 
During the time that he directed Colvilles, Craig also played a leading part in the affairs of the steel industry as a whole. He believed passionately in co-operation and threw himself into making a success of the National Federation of Iron and Steel Manufacturers, of which he was an original council member and, in 1922, third president. He was president of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1940-42, a member of the executive committee of the British Iron and Steel Federation, and a director of the British Iron and Steel Corporation. His only outside interests were his family, the Church of Scotland, and the YMCA, with which he had been actively associated at Motherwell since 1897, being the chairman of the Scottish National Council in 1927 and president in 1944. Sir John Craig died at his home, Cambusnethan Priory, Wishaw, Lanarkshire, on 1 February 1957. He was survived by his wife, and was buried at St Airbles cemetery, Motherwell, on 4 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 32611


Craig, William James (1843-1906), literary editor and university teacher, was born on 6 November 1843 at Camus-juxta-Bann, also known as Macosquin, co. Londonderry, the second son of George Craig (1800-1888) and his wife, Mary Catherine Sandys (1803-1879). His father was curate of Camus-juxta-Bann and later rector of Aghanloo, co. Londonderry. William Craig was educated at Portora School, Enniskillen, and admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, on 1 July 1861; he received his BA degree in 1865, with honours, and that of MA in 1870. At Trinity College he met and became the lifelong friend of Edward Dowden. 
After a stint of tutoring in history and literature at Trinity, Craig migrated in 1874 to London, where he tutored for the army and civil service. Two years later he became professor of English language and literature at University College, Aberystwyth, where he organized a reading class in Shakespeare. He resigned from the position in 1879, but not without having instilled a love of literature in a number of his students. He returned to tutoring, eventually giving it up in 1898; some of those he tutored were later to become men of some prominence, for instance Lord Hugh Cecil, youngest son of the marquess of Salisbury, whom he taught in 1884. After retiring from teaching he devoted himself to reading, research, and publication in the area of Shakespeare studies. As early as 1883, however, he had published a collation of the folio texts of 'Cymbeline' for the New Shakspere Society. Some ten years later, in 1894, he edited the complete works of Shakespeare in one volume with a brief glossary and an appended 'Index of characters' as well as an 'Index of first lines of songs, etc.'. As it was published by the Clarendon Press of Oxford, it became known as the 'Oxford Shakespeare'. 
The brief glossary appended to the 'Oxford Shakespeare' was to be augmented by Craig into a comprehensive glossary, a project on which he was working when he died. Unfortunately, the materials which he left for this glossary were in such a state as to preclude posthumous publication. He did, however, edit the so-called 'Little Quarto Shakespeare' in forty volumes, completed two years before he died. The scholarly paraphernalia consists of an introduction to each of the plays and footnotes. For a brief period, from 1901 to his death five years later, he succeeded his friend Edward Dowden as general editor of the 'Arden Shakespeare', which also ran to forty volumes edited by various scholars. He himself edited 'King Lear' and was at work editing 'Coriolanus' at the time of his death, and the modern editor of the Arden 'Coriolanus' (1976), Philip Brockbank, acknowledges having 'assimilated much from the 1922 Arden edition by W. J. Craig and R. H. Case' (Brockbank, ix). Dowden edited 'Cymbeline', making early reference to Craig's collation of the folio texts of the play and to his theories on the matter of possible sources of the story. Dowden also acknowledged that Craig 'With great generosity... placed a large body of his manuscript notes at my disposal, and gave me many later additions to this mass of annotations' (Dowden, xlii). A number of these are recorded in Dowden's own footnotes. 
Contemporaries state that Craig was a tireless long-distance walker and a gregarious person. He died, a confirmed bachelor, in a nursing home at 12 Beaumont Street, London, on 12 December 1906 and was buried in Reigate churchyard. A number of volumes from his library are, fittingly, in the public library at Stratford upon Avon, donated by his sister Mrs Merrick Head. 


@@@@@


doc= 32612


Craigie, Pearl (1867-1906), novelist and playwright, was born on 3 November 1867 at Chelsea, Massachusetts, the first of the five children of John Morgan Richards, merchant (1840/41-1918), and Laura Hortense, 'nee' Arnold (1846-1914). Both parents were from a long line of upper middle-class protestant Americans. Immediately after Pearl's birth her father settled in London in the patent medicine business, and from then on, her family resided there, spending summers in the Isle of Wight and frequently visiting the United States and travelling in Britain and Europe. Richards's business, which soon included American cigarettes, made him a millionaire. Pearl's parents were lively, hospitable, and close to their children -- Laura religious, artistic, socially ambitious, and eccentric, John almost as passionately devoted to the theatre and journalism as to business. (He purchased 'The Academy' in 1896 and in 1902 the London 'Times' literature section, which he incorporated into 'The Academy'.) Pearl and her siblings were always included in the Richardses' varied and interesting social circle. 
A pretty, dark-haired, brown-eyed child, vivacious and precocious, Pearl was educated intermittently in a few day and boarding-schools, and at home with governesses and tutors, but mostly through voracious independent reading. From early childhood she scribbled letters, stories, and plays, which she 'produced' at home; she was a gifted, mischievous mimic. When she was nine years old, Dr Parker, family friend and preacher at the City Temple, published two of her stories in his newspaper, 'The Fountain'. From her toddling days she was her father's constant companion. 
In her teens, in England and Europe, Pearl continued to devour books, attend the theatre, write stories, and study music, becoming an accomplished pianist. She also frequented art museums, galleries, and concerts, and occasionally performed in amateur theatricals. In Paris from 1885 to 1886 she studied the French language, literature, and drama, and became quite Gallic in tastes and manners. She dressed fashionably and expensively, and in May 1886 she was presented at court. In some areas of her life, however, young Pearl was torn and unhappy. As the child of an American nonconformist who had made his money in trade, she was hurt by fashionable society's snobbishness; she came to loathe the nonconformist spirit and recoiled from her mother's idiosyncrasies. 
At the age of nineteen, on 16 February 1887, at Christ Church, Lancaster Gate, London, Pearl married Reginald Walpole Craigie (1860-1930), who was a handsome, popular man about town seven years her senior. He was a cashier at the Bank of England and a photographer, and his forebears included the duke of Marlborough and the earls of Orford and Cadogan. The marriage soon proved disastrous, 'a psychic earthquake whose repercussions would affect Pearl's whole life' (Harding, 53), as she found herself repelled by the fast society that Reginald enjoyed. She consequently immersed herself in University College classes in Greek and Latin language and literature, and at home closeted herself for hours, studying and writing. (In 1888 and 1889 she published a few journalistic pieces.) Reginald resented her literary pursuits and was madly jealous of her classics teacher. He also had at least one adulterous relationship, and drank excessively, becoming violent when drunk. Finding herself pregnant, an increasingly desperate Pearl rode her horse wildly in an attempt to abort the child, but on 15 August 1890 she gave birth to a son, John Churchill Craigie. After this she spent more and more time in her parents' home, and in May 1891, determined to prevent Craigie from having any access to the child, she went to live with her parents permanently. On 5 July 1892 she entered the Roman Catholic church, adopting the name Mary-Teresa; it was probably at this time that she took a vow of celibacy. On 4 July 1895, after a humiliating two-day hearing, she was granted a divorce on the grounds of Craigie's adultery and cruelty, and she was granted complete custody of her son. 
The chief cause of the collapse of that marriage has only recently become known: not only did Reginald have syphilis; he gave at least a mild case of it to Pearl. That fact throws new light on many aspects of Pearl's life: the young couple's early return from their honeymoon in Cannes; Pearl's illness for the next six months and her temporary lameness; her attempt to abort her child; her subsequent erratic health, dependence on medical drugs, and early death; her vow of celibacy and strict keeping of it; and her frequent melancholy. 
Re-established in her parents' luxurious homes in London and the Isle of Wight and from 1891 not only the 'brilliant Mrs Craigie' but the increasingly famous author John Oliver Hobbes, Pearl soon became one of society's most popular hostesses and guests. A fascinating conversationalist, she was also very attractive, petite, and elegant, with 'dark, brilliant eyes, restlessly intelligent and remotely tragic' (Harding, 97). For a brief term she was president of the Society of Women Journalists (1895-6) and the Ruskin Society (1903-4), and she supported many charitable causes, particularly for children. She travelled extensively in England, Scotland, and elsewhere in Europe and was royally entertained in the United States, once by President and Mrs Cleveland in the White House (1895). Early in 1903, as guest of the viceroy and vicereine, Lord and Lady Curzon, she attended Curzon's durbar in India. In the early 1900s she lectured widely in England and Scotland; on a hectic Lyceum tour in the winter of 1905-6 she was lionized in many cities in the United States. 
In her character and personality, Pearl was a mass of contradictions. Indisputably brilliant, learned, witty, ambitious, self-dramatizing, moody, and extremely attractive to men, she seemed to some cold and self-aggrandizing, but to many more, warm, generous, and deeply religious, an ideal friend. Among the men with whom she had close platonic relationships were Walter Spindler, Alfred Goodwin (her classics teacher), George Moore, Owen Seaman, and -- probably the most important romantic relationship in her life -- George Nathaniel Curzon, Marquess Curzon of Kedleston. George Meredith, Edmund Gosse, William Archer, Thomas Hardy, Henry James, and Henry Irving all admired her, and her many clerical friends included the protestant Dr John Parker, the modernist Roman Catholic theologian the Revd George Tyrrell, and the Revd Mgr William Brown. Among her closest women friends were Zoe Procter (her secretary), Florence Henniker, Ellen Terry, Olga Nethersole, and, dearest of all, Mary Victoria Curzon and Jennie Churchill, with whom Pearl helped to create the 'Anglo-Saxon Review' (1899-1901) and with whom she played the piano in public concerts. 
With 'Some Emotions and a Moral' (1891), an ironic little love story, Pearl burst upon the literary scene as John Oliver Hobbes -- John for her father and son, Oliver for Oliver Cromwell, Hobbes for Thomas Hobbes. (Pearl used a pseudonym mainly because her publisher, T. F. Unwin, wished to include the book in his new 'Pseudonym Library' series.) That novella was immediately followed by three more (1892, 1893, 1894). Act I of a social comedy, 'The Fool's Hour' (in collaboration with George Moore, never completed), appeared in the first issue of the 'Yellow Book' (April 1894); a one-act 'proverb', 'Journeys End in Lovers' Meeting' (also in collaboration with Moore), was successfully produced at the Lyceum Theatre in 1895 with Ellen Terry in the lead. 
From 1895 to 1906, in addition to short works, Pearl wrote nine full-length novels and several full-length plays, gaining a large following on both sides of the Atlantic. The most notable novels were: 'The Gods, some Mortals, and Lord Wickenham' (1895), 'The School for Saints' (1897), 'Robert Orange' (1900), 'Love and the Soul Hunters' (1902), 'The Vineyard' (1904), and 'The Dream and the Business' (1906). Her most successful play, a four-act comedy, 'The Ambassadors', was produced in 1898 at the Lyceum with George Alexander in the lead and enjoyed a long West End run. Her numerous essays are also noteworthy, especially 'George Eliot', 'George Sand', her many articles on the contemporary theatre, and 'Dowries' (1904), a feminist pamphlet. 
Those diverse works are linked by a strong family resemblance. Pearl's immediate 'fin de siecle' world and her complex inner life are reflected throughout, but there are also consistent literary influences discernible throughout, spanning the classics of Western literature from the 'Bible' and Homer to her own century and, in that century, particularly Thackeray, Ruskin, Newman, George Eliot, Meredith, Browning, Balzac, George Sand, and the contemporary French theatre. Certain themes resonated more and more firmly as their author matured: individual responsibility for one's fate; love as the primal force and the great educator; the importance of rational, unselfish love and the dangers of sentimentality, hypocrisy, and egotism; the inevitability of suffering; mankind's grounding in 'original ignorance' rather than 'original sin'; the necessity of renunciation, courage, and compassion; the strong vocational attractions of art and religion; and an unmilitant, apolitical feminism -- a feminism based on a belief in women's worth, intelligence, and right to a good education and financial independence, but also on a conviction of women's essential psychological difference from men. 
Opinions about Pearl Craigie's works have differed widely. While most readers would consider her novels 'good reads', her detractors have complained that her plots are often contrived, her wit and gem-like style chilling, and her characters unrealistic. Their appeal for others, however, lies in their lucid and graceful style, their fast-moving stories abounding in dramatic talk-filled scenes, their interesting characters, and their constant expression of their author's humour, rare psychological insight, and fine intelligence. Though the early novellas are probably the most charming, the mellow novels 'Love and the Soul Hunters', 'The Vineyard', and 'The Dream and the Business' would probably appeal most to the modern reader. Her most impressive work, however, is the monumental two-volume novel comprising 'The School for Saints' and its sequel 'Robert Orange'. Set in Britain and Europe in the 1860s, the first volume is epic: a wide-ranging, political-religious-historical novel packed with adventure and intrigue, and also a romantic-psychological novel of Robert Orange's apprenticeship to life. The second volume is dramatic: more concentrated and more reliant upon theatrical episodes. The vast web of personal relationships in 'The School' is complicated in 'Robert Orange' by the addition of a third heroine. Throughout, politics, love, and religion vie for importance in Robert's life. 
Pearl's life ended suddenly. Although she had remained active, her health had deteriorated under strains in her personal life -- debts, her mother's idiosyncrasies, distress about Mary Curzon's long illness and death (18 July 1906), and the consequent revival of the old question as to whether Pearl and Curzon would marry. On 13 August 1906, she was found dead of heart failure in her bed at her London home, 56 Lancaster Gate. The literary world was stunned; more than 150 notices of her death appeared in the British press. Among the messages of condolence to her family were notes from the queen and the princess of Wales, and one from Reginald Craigie to his sixteen-year-old son. After a requiem mass at the Jesuit church in Farm Street, London, Pearl's body was buried on 17 August 1906 in Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery. 
On 2 July 1908, thanks to the efforts of Jennie Churchill (Mrs George Cornwallis-West), Blanche Eliot, Zoe Procter, and many others, a memorial ceremony was held at University College, London, with Lord Curzon presiding. A plaque bearing a bronze portrait of Pearl Craigie, and $500 for a John Oliver Hobbes scholarship in English literature, were donated to University College. Simultaneously an identical plaque was donated to Barnard College, Columbia University, where Pearl had lectured. 


@@@@@


doc= 32613


Craigie, Sir Robert Leslie (1883-1959), diplomatist, was born in Southsea on 6 December 1883, the elder child and only son of Commander (later Admiral) Robert William Craigie (1849-1911) and his wife, Henrietta Isabella Dinnis. He was educated at Heidelberg and entered the Foreign Office as a clerk in 1907. Promoted third secretary in 1908, he served as secretary to the international copyright conference at Berlin in 1908; secretary to the British delegation at the international sugar commission in Brussels from 1908 to 1913; secretary to the international conference for the protection of the elephant and rhinoceros in Africa, held in London in 1914; and secretary to the international conference relating to the New Hebrides, also held in London the same year. In 1916 he was promoted second secretary and posted to Bern as an additional commercial attache, serving also as British representative on the inter-allied blockade committee. While in Switzerland he met Pleasant (died 1956), daughter of Pleasant Alexander Stovall, a newspaper editor from Savannah, Georgia, who was then serving as United States minister in Bern. They married in 1918, and had one son. 
Craigie remained in Bern until 1920, having been promoted first secretary in 1919. He then served briefly as acting high commissioner at Sofia, before being transferred to Washington, still as first secretary. In 1923 he returned to London, where he was employed by the department of overseas trade. He resumed his duties in the Foreign Office at the beginning of 1925. 
In 1928 Craigie was promoted to counsellor, made head of the American department and designated the Foreign Office's chief negotiator in the area of naval arms limitation. In this capacity he was instrumental in negotiating the London naval treaties of 1930 and 1936 and the Anglo-German naval agreement of 1935. Craigie gained a reputation for being a meticulous and skilful diplomatist, winning praise from politicians such as Ramsay MacDonald and Sir John Simon. In recognition of his services he was made a CMG in 1929, a CB in 1930, and a KCMG in 1936, and promoted to assistant under-secretary of state in 1935. 
On the basis of this reputation Craigie was appointed ambassador to Japan in 1937 and sworn of the privy council. This came as a surprise as he had not previously served in east Asia, but he did have some experience from the naval talks of negotiating with Japanese diplomats. His appointment was announced in the spring when there was a mood of renewed optimism about the chances of an Anglo-Japanese rapprochement. However, by the time he arrived in Japan in September 1937 the Sino-Japanese War had broken out and relations had deteriorated alarmingly. 
Craigie saw his role in this new political situation as being to stop Japan from drifting further into the German orbit and thus threatening Britain with the possibility of a two-front war. Accordingly he argued that, as Britain was too weak to defend its interests in the region and as the United States was considered to be an unreliable potential ally, the best policy was to maintain an attitude of strict neutrality towards the war in China in order to avoid antagonizing Japan. He also contended that if Britain followed a conciliatory line it might well encourage moderates in the Japanese government to re-exert their influence. This view was opposed by the Foreign Office, which disparaged the idea that the moderates could exercise any power and felt that Britain should assist China in the hope that Japan would dissipate its energies in a prolonged war. In June 1939 the uncompromising attitude of the Foreign Office helped to contribute to a crisis in Anglo-Japanese relations over the status of the British concession at Tientsin (Tianjin) in north China. Craigie, who felt vindicated by the failure of Foreign Office policy, helped to resolve this crisis by exercising his astute diplomatic skills and again won high praise, this time from Chamberlain, who recommended his elevation to a GCMG, an award made in January 1941. 
The start of the war in Europe did not lead to any substantial change in Craigie's interpretation of his role. He continued to argue the need for delicate handling of Japan and in February 1940 helped to neutralize another potentially dangerous crisis when HMS 'Liverpool' intercepted a Japanese merchant vessel, the 'Asama Maru', just outside Japan's territorial waters. In addition, in June 1940 he was able, after months of laborious talks, to get a final solution to the Tientsin problem. However, just as he hoped that a corner had been turned another crisis rocked Anglo-Japanese relations. 
In late June 1940 Japan demanded that Britain should close the Burma Road. This ultimatum arrived at Britain's lowest ebb in the war against Germany and, although the Foreign Office felt that Japan was bluffing, Winston Churchill's war cabinet decided to seek an acceptable compromise. Once again Craigie provided a diplomatic way out of the crisis, arranging a three-month closure of the Burma Road in return for a Japanese promise to seek a fair settlement of the war in China. Craigie hoped that this would lay the basis for better relations but he was to be sorely disabused. In late July 1940 the Konoe government came to office in Japan determined to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the apparent collapse of British power, and in the coming months signed the tripartite pact with Germany and Italy and occupied the northern part of French Indo-China. Craigie's hopes were dashed and in an attempt to contain Japan, Britain reacted by introducing a policy of economic sanctions, strengthening its military stance in the region, and developing a common front with the United States and the Netherlands. 
Craigie broadly supported this idea of applying pressure on Japan but was disappointed that it was not accompanied by diplomatic incentives to change the nature of its foreign policy. In the autumn of 1941, fearful that war was imminent, he began to press the Foreign Office to become involved in the Japanese-American talks that were then taking place in Washington, and warned the foreign secretary, Anthony Eden, that Japan was prepared if necessary to fight. His advice was, however, ignored as Churchill and Eden believed that Japan was unappeasable and that the United States would not welcome British interference in the diplomatic process. 
After the war in the Pacific began, Craigie was interned for seven months in the Tokyo embassy before being allowed to return to Britain. On his return he produced a controversial report in which he criticized the British government for not heeding his warnings in the autumn of 1941; Churchill was furious at his temerity and suppressed the report. Craigie also summarized his experiences in Japan in a more measured way in a book published in 1946, 'Behind the Japanese Mask'. 
Craigie retired from the Foreign Office in April 1944, but from 1945 to 1948 he was the British representative to the United Nations War Crimes Commission, and in 1949 he headed the British delegation to the Geneva conference for the protection of the victims of war. He died at The Day House, Sleepers Hill, Winchester, on 16 May 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 32614


Craigie, Sir William Alexander (1867-1957), lexicographer and philologist, was born in Dundee on 13 August 1867, the youngest son of James Craigie, jobbing gardener, and his wife, Christina Gow. His native speech was thus the lowland Scots of Forfarshire, and during his childhood he learned some Gaelic from his maternal grandfather and later his eldest brother. About the age of twelve he began reading the early Scottish writers. From the headmaster of his school -- the West End Academy, Dundee -- he gained a knowledge of phonetics. While attending St Andrews University, where he graduated with honours in classics and philosophy in 1888, he also found time to learn German and French, and began studying Danish and Icelandic. In his final session he carried out the research on the university library's manuscript of the early Scots Wyntoun's 'Chronicle' which enabled him to demonstrate conclusively the relationships of the several versions of this work. 
With a Guthrie scholarship Craigie proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, and thence, after one term, to Oriel College as a bible clerk. Apart from the work of his regular curriculum, which led to firsts in both honour moderations (1890) and 'literae humaniores' (1892), he continued his private study of Scandinavian, attended lectures on Celtic, and began producing articles on these subjects for Scottish journals. The winter of 1892-3 he spent in Copenhagen, where he studied Icelandic manuscripts and learned modern Icelandic from Icelandic friends. From 1893 to 1897 he was assistant to the professor of Latin at St Andrews. In his spare time he continued his writing of articles, produced his valuable 'Primer of Burns' (1896), and contributed translations from Icelandic and Danish to the fairy books and 'Dreams and Ghosts' of Andrew Lang as well as his own 'Scandinavian Folk-Lore' (1896). 
On 28 June 1897 Craigie married Jessie Kinmond (1864/5-1947), daughter of William Hutchen, tailor and clothier, of Dundee; on her loving care and companionship he depended greatly. They had no children. Also in 1897 Craigie accepted an unexpected invitation to join the staff of the Philological Society's 'New English Dictionary' in Oxford. He was appointed co-editor of the 'New English Dictionary' with James A. H. Murray and Henry Bradley. Thereafter he continued to work on the dictionary until the completion of its supplement in 1933, producing the letters N, Q, R, U, and V, Si-Sq, and Wo-Wy, amounting to nearly a fifth of the main work, and about a third of the supplement. 
Along with his daily stint of seven and a half hours of lexicography, which was far from using up all his energy or exhausting his zest for work, Craigie kept alive all his old interests. In 1904 he was appointed Taylorian lecturer in the Scandinavian languages at Oxford, and in 1916 he became Rawlinson and Bosworth professor of Anglo-Saxon. In 1921 he began seriously to collect material for his projected dictionary of Older Scottish, and when in 1925 he moved to the University of Chicago, as professor of English, in order to edit a 'Dictionary of American English', he was for some years occupied simultaneously with three major dictionaries, yet still turning out a steady flow of other writings. 
In 1936 Craigie resigned his Chicago chair and settled at Christmas Common, Watlington, Oxfordshire, on the Chiltern Hills. He now gave most of his time to the 'Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue', which he carried to the end of the letter I in 1955, when he was eighty-seven, before handing over to his successor, A. J. Aitken. He had also continued to contribute to the American dictionary until its completion in 1944. After the war he produced his 'Specimens of Icelandic Rimur' (3 vols., 1952), a masterly survey of a field of Icelandic literature in which his erudition and discernment were unrivalled, and a supplement (1957) to the 'Icelandic Dictionary' of G. Vigfusson. 
Craigie's remarkable knowledge of many languages was perfected, and friendships with the scholars of other countries cemented, in the course of the travels on which he and his wife spent all their vacations, visiting all the countries of northern Europe and in 1921 going round the world. In this way he became one of the most widely known of the scholars of his generation, and the quietly dignified, rather reserved, yet unfailingly kindly and companionable personality of this tiny Scotsman, with his modest tastes and tidy habits, and his fellow-feeling for simple folk and small nations, made him one of the best loved. His travels included four visits to Iceland, where he was revered by the whole nation. 
Craigie was the ablest and most productive lexicographer of his time, and was universally recognized as the supreme master of the art and techniques of dictionary making. Yet in addition to his major works he contrived also to produce, almost entirely in his spare time, an astonishing number of other, smaller-scale but authoritative writings in many provinces of specialist philology, notably on Older Scottish and on English philology of every period. Over the whole extent of Icelandic literature, ancient and modern, he gained a greater mastery than perhaps any non-Icelander had ever done, and wrote valuably on skaldic verse and on the sagas as well as on his beloved 'rimur'. These writings and others on Frisian and on Gaelic display his characteristic virtues of clarity, brevity, and directness, and his acute and perceptive observation of philological facts and details. 
His published work was only part of the vast service Craigie rendered to scholarship. He gave a new impetus to Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon studies in Oxford and later in Chicago. Throughout his career he initiated and encouraged new scholarly enterprises. Out of his plan for 'completing the record of English' by means of the 'period dictionaries', which he launched in 1919, were born the great historical dictionaries which followed the 'New English', among them his own American and Scottish dictionaries. His lifelong interest in Frisian, and the enthusiastic support which he gave to the Frisian scholars in their attempt to re-establish their language, they recognized by making him one of the two original honorary members of the Frisian Academy on its foundation in 1938. His sponsorship, and the active leadership which he provided in partnership with Professor M. K. Pope, brought about the foundation in 1938 of the Anglo-Norman Text Society, and as its president he fostered this society's project (initiated in 1947) for an Anglo-Norman dictionary. His suggestion and encouragement led likewise to the founding of the Icelandic Rimur Society in 1947. He served for long periods as president or council member of a number of other famous learned societies in England and in Scotland. All his great academic prestige and his extensive range of contacts he placed at the service of these and other good causes of learning. 
Craigie possessed an amazingly retentive memory and an ability to grasp at sight the essence of a problem and to marshal facts and arguments with great speed. Even so, his erudition, and his prodigious output, he achieved only by utilizing his time to the utmost, working methodically for most of each day and evening throughout his long life. Yet he was always accessible and ungrudging of his time to others. To the numerous authors of scholarly works who sought it he gave encouragement, fruitful advice, and abundant practical help. 
The many honours awarded Craigie included honorary degrees from St Andrews (1907), Calcutta (1921), Oxford (1928), Cambridge (1928), Michigan (1929), Wisconsin (1932), and Iceland (1946); a knighthood in 1928 on completion of the 'New English Dictionary'; an honorary fellowship of Oriel in the same year; and a fellowship of the British Academy in 1931. The Icelanders' appreciation of his friendship and his service to their literature was shown in many different ways, including a knighthood (1925) and a knight-commandership (1930) of the order of the Icelandic Falcon. In 1952 his eighty-fifth birthday was honoured by a gathering held at Oriel College, Oxford, when he was presented with a commemorative memoir and list of his publications, and his portrait by Harold Speed, which now hangs in the college. He died at Watlington on 2 September 1957. 
A. J. Aitken', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32615


Craik, Sir Henry, first baronet (1846-1927), civil servant and author, was born in Glasgow on 18 October 1846. He was the fifth son and the ninth of the ten children of the Revd James Craik DD, minister of St George's Church, Glasgow, and at one time moderator of the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Walter Grieve, merchant, of Leith. From Glasgow high school he went, aged fourteen, to Glasgow University. In 1865 a Snell exhibition took him to Balliol College, Oxford, where he gained a first class in classical moderations (1867) and two years later a second class in 'literae humaniores' and a first class in law and modern history. In 1870 he was appointed a junior examiner in the education department, and became a senior examiner in 1878. He had married, on 17 December 1873, Fanny Esther (died 13 Dec 1923), daughter of Charles Duffield of Manchester; they had three sons. 
Craik's real opportunity came in 1885 when the Scotch education department (SED), a distinct entity since the 'Education (Scotland) Act' of 1872, was transferred to the political control of the new Scottish Office. Craik was chosen as secretary of the autonomous department, and continued to occupy the post with great distinction until 1904. He was created a CB (1887) and then a KCB (1897). In 1906 he became Conservative member of parliament for the universities of Glasgow and Aberdeen. After the four Scottish universities were combined into a single constituency in 1918, he retained his seat as one of their three representatives until his death. 
Perhaps inspired by his uncle George Lillie Craik, Craik combined a literary with an official career. He edited a series, the 'English Citizen', for Macmillan, which included his own 'The State in its Relation to Education' (1884). He was a frequent contributor to the 'Quarterly Review' and other periodicals; he published a 'Life of Swift' (1882), 'Selections from Swift' (1892), 'English Prose Selections' (1893-6), and 'A Century of Scottish History' (1901). Later publications included 'Impressions of India' (1908) and a 'Life of Edward, Earl of Clarendon' (1911). 
Craik's conspicuous success as a civil servant was not surprising, for he had a real aptitude for business and much practical sagacity, while his golden rule of 'look ahead' made him a master in the art of correspondence. Temperamentally irascible, he did not always find it easy to appreciate an opposite point of view. In his relations with his official chiefs he was a model of discretion and loyalty, and consequently his advice came to carry more and more weight with successive governments, whatever their political complexion; he was in especially close sympathy with Lord Balfour of Burleigh, Conservative secretary for Scotland from 1895 to 1903. By the end of Craik's period of office, many Scottish politicians and educationists were complaining of the 'despotic' methods of the SED, though his firm defence of Scottish interests was also widely appreciated. 
As head of a small department, under a minister with many other interests, Craik was able to play a remarkably creative role. Although Treasury constraints meant that Scottish and English educational policy could not diverge very far, Craik used detailed amendments to the annual school code to bring about many significant changes. While a senior examiner, he had written a widely noted report on highland education, and as secretary he improved the financial condition of highland education and gave some recognition to the teaching of Gaelic. In elementary education, he gained much personal credit for ending the discredited system of 'payment by results', and for the abolition of fees, from 1890 onwards. 
Perhaps Craik's most conspicuous achievement was the development of secondary education under the aegis of the state. The 1872 act had done little for secondary schools, but he successfully raised standards by bringing them under public inspection, by the creation of a leaving certificate linked to university entrance (1888), and by the department's control of state grants, which were extended to Scottish secondary education in 1892. Towards the end of his period of office, he also did much to encourage scientific, commercial, and technical education, though his personal preference was for the classics (he sent his own sons to Eton). He was a strong proponent of physical education and of military training for young men, and was a member of the royal commission on physical training in Scotland (1902). After leaving office, he abstained from direct criticism of his successors, but he opposed the public provision of school meals, which he thought undermined family responsibility, and remained attached to a rather narrow version of the Scottish tradition of the 'lad of parts', seeing educational opportunity as suited only to particularly able scholars. During the First World War, he chaired a committee on Scottish teachers' salaries which led to the introduction of a national scale in 1918. 
As a politician, despite his well-stocked mind and his ripe experience, widened in later years by visits to South Africa (1903), Egypt and the Sudan (1907), India (1907-8), and Canada (1912), Craik never overcame the disability attaching to one who begins parliamentary life at sixty with no previous practice in public speaking. Moreover, his relatively independent position as a university member induced a hardening of his innate conservatism. He sturdily refused to move with the times or to abate his dislike of new fangled devices from typewriters to cabinet secretariats. Nevertheless, he was popular in all quarters of the House of Commons, of which he ultimately became in years the oldest member. He was a man of exceptionally strong physique. His favourite recreation was hunting, and almost to the last he kept up the custom of taking morning exercise in the Row. On the outbreak of war in 1914, although then verging on seventy, he was one of the first to volunteer as a special constable. 
Craik was sworn of the privy council in 1918 and created a baronet in January 1926. He died at his house, 5A Dean's Yard, Westminster, London, on 16 March 1927, and was buried in Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. He was succeeded as baronet by his elder son, George Lillie Craik (1874-1929), chief constable, Metropolitan Police (1910-14). 


@@@@@


doc= 32616


Crane, Walter (1845-1915), illustrator, designer, and painter, was born on 15 August 1845 at 12 Maryland Street, Liverpool, the third child of Thomas Crane (1808-1859), a portrait painter well established in the north-west of England, and his wife, Marie Kearsley. When he was three months old the family moved to Torquay because his father was thought to be consumptive, and Walter Crane spent a happy childhood there. His earliest memories included the ships in the harbour and the times the circus came to town. He was good at drawing but school brought on nervous attacks, so he stayed at home, learning from his father's work, stocking his mind from illustrated books, and sketching in the fields. Animals were his favourite subject. Thomas Crane's health improved in Torquay, and in 1857 he moved his family to London, hoping to get more work. Seeing a career in art for his son, he took him to the National Gallery and to the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert). In January 1859 Walter Crane was apprenticed to the wood engraver W. J. Linton to learn the art of drawing on wood for illustration. He was thirteen. Six months later his father died. 
Crane came thus abruptly out of childhood, walking from his mother's house in Notting Hill to Linton's workshop off the Strand each morning and back again in the evening. At the end of his three-year apprenticeship he could help to support his mother, sisters, and younger brother. But he had his own ambitions as well. He had entered a world of publishers, printers, artists, engravers, and journalists where art and commerce sat down together. This was the golden age of Victorian illustration, and he might one day shine alongside D. G. Rossetti and Charles Keene. He was reading Auguste Comte, J. S. Mill, Herbert Spencer, and Shelley and catching heady glimpses of how humanity, free of the old theologies, might take the future into its own hands. And he was painting on his own account, subjects from Keats and Tennyson. In 1862 his 'Lady of Shalott' was hung at the Royal Academy. Though he was still in his teens and looking for work as a freelance illustrator, he seemed to have gone beyond his father. 
In 1865 Crane was asked to contribute illustrations to a series of books for very young children, nursery rhymes and fairy tales, to be printed by Edmund Evans, the leading woodblock colour printer in London, and published by Routledge. Over the next ten years Crane illustrated thirty-seven of these 'Toy Books', as they were known. After the first nine his work began to emulate Japanese prints, with decorative compositions in flat, or very deep, perspective; and he began to furnish his pictures with the fashions and domestic bric-a-brac of the aesthetic movement, then on the rise in London -- fans, blue-and-white china, and peacocks' feathers. Nursery rhymes and fairy tales are full of pigs going to market and dishes eloping with spoons. Crane had a taste for such fantasy, especially the anthropomorphic animals -- was his name not a bird? His peculiar sensibility wedged animal lunacy up against high fashion. Picture books for children which did not moralize and colour printing from wood both flourished in the mid-Victorian period. Evans's skill and Crane's imagination raised them to new levels, and the 'Toy Books' were an enormous success. 
On 6 September 1871 Crane married Mary Frances Andrews ('c'.1846-1914), the daughter of a country gentleman from Essex, and they spent the next eighteen months in Italy. Crane worked at his book illustrations, painted in the landscape, and made portraits of his demure-looking wife. He was also working, in these years, on allegorical paintings with themes of human life and destiny inspired by the positivism of Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer. He painted such allegories almost all his life, giving them such titles as 'The Bridge of Life' and 'The Roll of Fate', and he valued them above his other work. It was his ambition to show them at the Royal Academy, but he showed there only once after 1862. Instead they appeared each year at the Dudley and the Grosvenor and other London galleries, never to any acclaim. That was hard to bear, and the success of his children's books put salt in the wound. The public acclaimed him as 'the academician of the nursery', but he wanted to be known as a distinguished allegorical painter. Much of his life was spent in pursuing this difficult ambition and, at the same time, in creating tolerable substitutes for it. 
When the Cranes returned to London in 1873 they moved into a house in Wood Lane, Shepherd's Bush, then still on the edge of the city. Here, and later at Beaumont Lodge nearby, Crane lived and worked for almost twenty years. The couple entertained a lot and moved in the artistic and fashionable circles of Holland Park; George Howard, later twelfth earl of Carlisle, was a friend and patron, and so was Lord Leighton. Crane knew, and looked up to, William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones. At this time he widened the scope of his 'oeuvre'. He began to work as decorative artist, designing wallpapers, tiles, printed textiles, posters, stained glass, embroideries, decorative plasterwork. He was versatile and prolific. At first manufacturers wanted nursery tiles and nursery wallpapers, but he wanted to escape from the nursery. (Besides, he now had rivals there in Kate Greenaway and Randolph Caldecott.) He began to illustrate books for adults and works of literature. And in his decorative work he developed a versatile, linear style with scrollwork and emblematic, vaguely classical figures derived from his allegorical paintings. The aesthetic movement flourished in the 1870s, raising the status of decorative art, taking it seriously. That was what Crane wanted. It seemed as if decorative art might be a third way, between his success as an illustrator and his aspirations as a painter. 
In 1884, after some friendly argument with William Morris, Crane became a socialist. He joined the Social Democratic Federation along with Morris, and as Morris changed allegiance Crane followed, joining the Socialist League later in 1884 and the Hammersmith Socialist Society in 1890. This was more a matter of personal loyalty than of shared beliefs, for the sources of Crane's socialism were different from Morris's: the radicalism of his master W. J. Linton, the positivist belief in progress, memories of the Paris commune of 1871. He became the artist of the cause, designing posters, trade-union banners, cartoons, and newspaper headings, adapting the emblematic figures of his paintings to socialist themes. His 'The Triumph of Labour', drawn for May day 1891 and reproduced in Crane's 'Cartoons for the Cause, 1886-1896' (1896), is a Renaissance-style triumphal procession rendered in the gritty texture of wood-engraving and filled with sturdy workers, bullock carts, and banners. Morris said it was the best thing he had ever done. 
In the 1880s Crane also became active in the politics of art. The arts and crafts movement championed the claims of decorative art in the 1880s, as the aesthetic movement had in the 1870s, but it had more intellectual weight, and it had its own organizations. The Art-Workers' Guild, founded in 1884, brought architects and fine and decorative artists together under the banner of 'the unity of art'. Crane was a founder member. But the guild was a private club, not an exhibiting body, so Crane and the metalworker W. A. S. Benson led a movement to establish a separate exhibiting body for the decorative arts. The Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, founded in 1888, held large and successful exhibitions in London, at first annually and then triennially. Crane was president from 1888 to 1893, William Morris from 1893 until his death in 1896, and Crane again until 1912. The society was a public platform for Crane, and after Morris's death he was probably the best-known decorative artist in Britain. This was the kind of prominence he had wished to enjoy as a successful painter. 
In 1892 the Crane family moved from Shepherd's Bush to 13 Holland Street, off Kensington Church Street. They now had three children, Beatrice ('b'. 1873), Lionel ('b'. 1876), and Lancelot ('b'. 1880); two others did not survive their early years. Mary Crane was no longer the demure figure of the Italian portraits but a plump, slightly fantastic woman who drove herself alone round Kensington in a buggy, flouting propriety in a William Morris flower-patterned dress. They lived a life of self-conscious bohemianism. The house was full of pewter and china, carved figures, Indian idols, a live alligator, model ships, a marmoset that slept in the fireplace, Crane's unsold paintings, all higgledy-piggledy and gathering dust. Amid all this Crane played the part of the artist, a small, dapper man with carefully curled moustaches and a little beard, a flowing yellow silk tie, and a velvet coat. Colleagues were apt to laugh at him, and they mostly thought his earliest works, the 'Toy Books', were the best. But he was a lovable figure, and they indulged his staginess. Both he and Mary Crane loved dressing up and they threw enormous parties. For Lionel's twenty-first birthday they invited seven hundred people. Crane dressed up as a crane and Mary as an enormous sunflower. 
In the 1890s and 1900s Crane enjoyed fame and public honours. In 1891-2 a major retrospective exhibition of his work toured the United States. In 1893 he was appointed director of design at Manchester School of Art. From 1893 to 1896 his exhibition toured Europe, and he was delighted to find that German collectors and museums bought his allegorical paintings, which chimed with German symbolist work. In 1898 he was appointed principal of the Royal College of Art. Three separate monographs were published on his work. A new and much larger retrospective opened in 1900 at the Applied Arts Museum in Budapest, where he and Mary Crane were feted. It then toured Austria and Germany. At this point the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, of which he was still president, was invited to assemble the English contribution to the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative Art, due to open in Turin in 1902. Lacking financial resources, Crane and others simply moved his exhibition to Turin and added other arts and crafts exhibits. Crane was decorated by Victor Emmanuel III for his part in the exhibition, and from then on called himself Commendatore Crane. 
In these decades Crane published an autobiography and a half-dozen books in which, among various technical subjects, he set out his conviction that decorative art had a distinguished history and wide intellectual scope; that it was the art of the people and would flourish only when the people were free; and that the arts and crafts movement was its modern champion against the threat of commercialism and the machine. These were typical arts and crafts arguments and were learned mostly from Morris, though they lacked Morris's passionate medievalism and mature socialism. Some of these books were translated into Dutch, German, and Hungarian. The boy who found school difficult, the young man who illustrated children's books, was now an authority, a writer on art. 
Crane loved appearing on the public stage, but there were flaws in his performance. At Manchester he failed to steer the school towards a more practical, arts and crafts kind of teaching as was hoped, and he resigned after three years. At the Royal College he resigned after only one year. At Turin the English contribution was criticized in the press as old-fashioned, ill-displayed, and dominated by one man. The truth is that Crane was not a good chairman and that he hung on to the presidency of the Exhibition Society too long. Around 1910 the society was in trouble, losing money on exhibitions and shaken by the discontent of younger members. The arts and crafts architect C. R. Ashbee, who was younger than Crane but had been with the society since the beginning, wrote after Crane's death: 'He failed us in the crisis... He could not give the younger men the lead they needed. That failure of his has I think destroyed the Society as a vital force... Perhaps he was too gentle, too much a creature in a fairy story. (Ashbee, 266)' Ashbee was right. Crane's talent lay far from the public world, and by this time far in his past, with little children and domesticity. His best things were his lightest things. In the Beinecke Library at Yale University, and in the Houghton Library at Harvard University, are twenty-nine shiny black notebooks, in addition to which there are three notebooks in the Senate House Library, University of London. These are some of the stories he made up for his own children at bedtime, telling them in pictures. They were known in the family as the black books. There is not much in his work that is finer than the visual wit and tenderness of these books, which were the work, Crane tells us, of the odd half-hours of winter evenings. 
On 18 December 1914 Mary Crane was found dead on the railway line near Kingsnorth in Kent. The coroner's jury returned a verdict of suicide during temporary insanity. Walter Crane did not long outlive his wife: he died at Horsham Cottage Hospital, in Sussex, on 14 March 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 32617


Craven, Hawes (1837-1910), scene painter, was born Henry Hawes Craven Green on 3 July 1837 at Kirkgate, Leeds. His parents, James Green (died 1881), a comedian, and Eliza Craven Green (1803-1866), an actress and, later, a poet, were performers on the York circuit. Young Henry acted with his father, and shortened his name to Hawes Craven. In his youth he was also a keen observer and recordist of nature. Fascinated by scene painting, Craven attended the Government School of Design in London from 1851 to 1853 where he won many prizes. Apprenticed in 1853 to John Gray, scene-painter of the Britannia Theatre, Hoxton, London, he later moved with his master to the Olympic. In 1857 Craven had his first success. Gray had rheumatic fever, so Craven was asked to provide the Eddystone lighthouse set for Wilkie Collins's 'The Lighthouse' (not Collins's 'The Frozen Deep', as most obituaries state). He worked from a painting by the noted seascape artist Clarkson Stanfield, so accurately that, in reward, Stanfield gave him his original and the Olympic raised his salary. Later (1867-75) Craven exhibited seven seapieces at the Suffolk Street Galleries, London. 
In the late 1850s and early 1860s, Craven assisted William Roxby Beverley, the great transformation-scene exponent, on Drury Lane pantomimes and Covent Garden opera seasons. Richard's great grandfather was the collector and consul in Smyrna, Samuel Crawley. From 1862 to 1864 he was principal scene-painter for Dublin's Theatre Royal, where, according to Percy Fitzgerald, an eyewitness, his work possessed all 'the breadth and effect of rich water-colour drawings somewhat of the Prout school'. In the summer vacation of 1863 and again in 1864 he worked for Charles Fechter at the Lyceum on some elaborate set scenes, after the new mode of mounting plays which Fechter inaugurated. 
From Dublin, Craven passed successively in London to the Olympic (under Horace Wigan), where he distinguished himself by his scenery for 'The Frozen Deep' (October 1864), and to the Adelphi (under Benjamin Webster). He soon increased his reputation by his work for 'Play' and 'School', both produced at the Prince of Wales's Theatre (15 February 1868, and January 1869), and by 'The Enchanted Isle' in the Covent Garden pantomime 'Robinson Crusoe' (December 1868). On 3 June 1866 Craven married a principal dancer, Mary Elizabeth Watson Tees (1838-1891), daughter of Alexander Tees, a civil servant; they had three sons and three daughters. 
From 1871 to 1901 Craven was principal scene-painter to the Lyceum, first under 'Colonel' H. L. Bateman, then his widow (1875-8), and finally under Henry Irving (1878 to 1899, when Irving sold the Lyceum rights). In Craven's early years the theatre employed him; latterly he was freelance and rented the Lyceum's paintshop. Irving was key to this theatre's success, with Craven creating many of his plays' settings. In the first season Leopold Lewis's 'The Bells' (1871), with its vision scene, was a triumph for both, and the work went to Sandringham for Queen Victoria (29 April 1889), with Craven painting 'scenery of suitable size' (Stoker, 375) for its drawing-room. In 1874 and 1878 Craven set Irving's two productions of 'Hamlet'. 'The Merchant of Venice' (1879), created with the scene-painters William Telbin and Walter Hann, was an 'artistic display which will never be seen again' (Darbyshire, 101-2). The 'unparalled beauty' of 'Romeo and Juliet' (1882) 'not even the sternest critic disputed' (Irving, 386), though Clement Scott did find settings and lighting 'all beautiful enough, but they are a trying background for the central figures' (Booth, 55). 
Irving believed in restraint, harmony, and archaeological accuracy, so would invite other artists to oversee plays' designs: Craven solved the problems of realization. The journal editor and architect Sir James Knowles supervised Tennyson's 'The Cup' (1881); the book illustrator and landscape painter Keeley Halswelle, 'Macbeth' (1888); the genre painter John Seymour Lucas, 'Henry VIII' (1892); Ford Madox Brown, 'King Lear' (1892); Sir Edward Burne-Jones, 'King Arthur' (1895), by Wills and Comyns Carr; and Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, 'Cymbeline' (1895) and 'Coriolanus' (1901). For 'The Cup''s temple of Artemis, Craven created 'a speciousness of proportion' (Terry, 154), while 'King Arthur''s pastoral scenes were of such 'transcendent beauty' (Stoker, 165) that Ellen Terry recalled Craven painting 'the flicker of golden sunlight... better than anyone' ('Daily Telegraph', 27 July 1910). Craven varied his style in keeping with the lighting at the various theatres in which he worked. For example, the Lyceum used subtly controlled gas and there Craven's sunset, fading over Martha's three-dimensional garden in Nuremberg, provided in 1886 'one of the most beautiful' scenes in Wills's 'Faust' (Booth, 110). By contrast, he adapted his technique for the electric-lit Savoy and Royal English Opera, where he worked on six Gilbert and Sullivan operettas (1884-93) and Sullivan's opera 'Ivanhoe' (1891) respectively. At Her Majesty's, also lit electrically, Craven produced sets for Herbert Beerbohm Tree's sumptuous Shakespearian productions, and, for Stephen Phillips's 'Ulysses' (1902), Craven 'used black velvet... to paint on with striking effect' ('South Eastern Herald', 27 July 1910) in his creation of Hades. 
Craven worked for over fifty years, and was remarkable for his Yorkshire grit, his care, his unflappability, and his good nature. Some design sketches are preserved in the Victoria and Albert and the Theatre museums, and an act drop at Craig-y-nos Castle, Brecknockshire. However, on 18 February 1898 the sets of over forty productions were burnt in Irving's Southwark scene-store fire. In 1905 Craven was appointed president of the Scenic Artists' Association. He died of acute bronchitis at his home, Fairlight, 246 Brockley Road, Brockley, London, on 22 July 1910 and was buried in Brockley protestant cemetery. Newspapers widely reported his death. The 'Manchester Guardian' suggested Craven was 'the greatest scene-painter' (27 July 1910); certainly he was the equal of William Telbin and the younger Joseph Harker. His 'scenes were real pictures, with the atmosphere and charm of fine paintings' ('The Standard', 27 July 1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 32618


Craven, Henry Thornton (1818-1905), playwright and actor, was born on 26 February 1818 in Great Poland Street, London, the son of Robert Thornton, a schoolteacher in Holborn. After working as a publisher's clerk in Paternoster Row, Henry was amanuensis to Bulwer Lytton, and began writing for 'Bentley's Miscellany'. In 1840 he made his first appearance on the stage, at York, and in 1841 he appeared on the Sunderland circuit, and at the Theatre Royal, Liverpool, Rochester, and Tunbridge Wells. In 1842 he made his London debut at Fanny Kelly's theatre in Soho, and his first play, 'Bertram the Avenger', was produced at North Shields. His second play, 'Miserrimus', was produced at Portsmouth late in 1843. 
From 1842 to 1850 Craven performed at the Adelphi, Strand, Covent Garden, Lyceum, City of London, Marylebone, and Princess's theatres. His plays were produced at the Theatre Royal, Liverpool, the Adelphi, Edinburgh, and the City of London, Strand, Grecian, and Adelphi theatres in London. In 1850 he was engaged at Drury Lane, where, at William Macready's farewell on 26 February 1851, he played Malcolm to Macready's Macbeth. On 12 June 1851 he appeared in his operetta, 'The Village Nightingale', at the Strand. 
In June 1854 the Cravens left for Australia. From 1854 to 1856 they were engaged at the Royal Victoria Theatre, Sydney. As well as performing in a standard repertoire of comedy and farce (including Craven's plays 'My Daughter's Debut', 'The Card Case', and 'Tic doloreux'), the Cravens appeared in special seasons with Australian theatrical manager George Coppin, and tragic actor Gustavus Vaughan Brooke. In April 1857 the Cravens made their farewell at Coppin's Theatre Royal, Melbourne. On their return to London, Eliza Nelson withdrew from performing, while Henry Craven continued to write and perform his own comedies, including the successful 'The Post Boy' (Strand, 1860) and 'The Chimney Corner' (Olympic, 1861), both written for Frederick Robson. Craven's plans for retirement were changed with the sudden death of Robson on 6 August 1864. His play 'Milky White' had opened at the Prince of Wales's, Liverpool on 20 June 1864 with Robson in the title role. Craven took over the part for the London production at the Strand (28 September 1864), and established the most memorable role of his career. In the dual role of actor and playwright Craven scored again at the new Royalty on 17 October 1866 with 'Meg's Diversion', which ran for 330 nights, with himself as Jasper Pidgeon. In 1873 he made his last provincial tour. His last play, a historical drama, 'Too True', was produced at the Duke's on 22 January 1876, and in this he made his final appearance on the stage. 
Henry Craven's career was typical of the theatre of the mid-nineteenth century. He was a versatile actor, performing in high and low comedy, as well as tragedy, and was prepared to travel extensively. He was a prolific playwright, producing twenty-nine plays between 1842 and 1876, many of them published by Lacy, Duncombe, and French, and a novel, 'The Old Tune' (1876). His plays, mostly domestic comedies with a strong love story, produce humour from differences in class and education between lovers. Eliza Nelson combined success in domestic comedy with abilities as a singer of popular songs and opera. 
Craven died at his residence, Thorntonville, Clapham Park, London, on 13 April 1905, and Eliza Nelson died at Eastbourne on 20 March 1908. Both were buried in Norwood cemetery, London. Two of their four children survived them, a daughter and a son, Tom Sidney Craven ('b'. 1864), who became a playwright and actor. 


@@@@@


doc= 32619


Crawford, Osbert Guy Stanhope (1886-1957), archaeologist, was born on 28 October 1886 at Breech Candy, Bombay, where his father, Charles Edward Gordon Crawford, was an Indian civil servant; he was later a judge at Ratnagiri. His mother, Alice Luscombe Mackenzie, died a few days after his birth, and his father in 1894. He was brought up by two of his father's unmarried sisters, first in London, then in Hampshire, near Newbury. He went to school at Park House, Reading, then Marlborough College, which he considered an internment, on one occasion running away. Despite this, it was his membership of the Marlborough natural history society and its archaeological section which first encouraged his interest in the countryside and its antiquities. 
Crawford went up to Keble College, Oxford, where he obtained a third class in honour moderations (1907), began reading for 'literae humaniores', but changed to the diploma in geography. By this time his interest in archaeology was developing strongly, and his change of course owed something to the influence of H. J. E. Peake, whom Crawford first met in the autumn of 1908. 'Going from Greats to Geography', he wrote, 'was like leaving the parlour for the basement; one lost caste but one did see life' (Crawford, 44). He rowed for his college and was captain of boats in his last year. He graduated in 1910 and was offered by A. J. Herbertson the post of junior demonstrator in the school of geography which he held until the end of 1911. At Oxford, J. L. Myres, R. R. Marett, Arthur Evans, and Herbertson were the main formative influences; outside, Peake and J. P. Williams-Freeman, whose 'solid commonsense and scientific outlook' Crawford greatly valued (ibid., 64). 
In 1913 Crawford set out on a three-year expedition to Easter Island led by Mr and Mrs Scoresby Routledge, but quarrelled with them and left the ship at St Vincent. In the same year he joined the excavation staff of Henry Wellcome in Sudan, working at Jebel Moya and Abu Geili. Crawford always retained an interest in Sudan, and particularly the Fungs, publishing in 1951 'The Fung Kingdom of Sennar'. In 1914 he excavated (with E. A. Hooton) an unchambered long barrow on Wexcombe Down, and was digging when the First World War broke out. He enlisted in the London Scottish, went to France in November 1914, and transferred in 1915 to the survey division of the Third Army, serving as a photographer. In 1917 he joined the Royal Flying Corps as an observer and was shot down and captured in February 1918. He was a prisoner of war at Holzminden, from which, as at Marlborough, he tried to escape, though he later claimed to have been happier at the former than the latter. 
After the war a period of uncertainty and odd jobs followed, which ended in October 1920 when Sir Charles (Arden-) Close appointed Crawford the first holder of the post of archaeology officer in the Ordnance Survey. It was a role for which he was pre-eminently suited, and which he held until his retirement in 1946. His job was to revise and compile the Ordnance Survey maps from the point of view of archaeological information; but in addition to this work on the standard topographical maps he started a special survey of megalithic monuments, and initiated a series of period maps beginning with the 'Map of Roman Britain' (1924). His megalithic surveys led him to write 'The Long Barrows of the Cotswolds' (1925). One of his many ideas was to publish geographical memoirs for the Ordnance Survey sheets, but this did not get beyond the first memoir: 'The Andover District' (1922), which he wrote himself. 
In and out of his professional occupation and throughout his life Crawford was a field archaeologist 'par excellence' in the sense defined by Williams-Freeman in his 'Field Archaeology as Illustrated by Hampshire' (1915): his prime interest was the face of the countryside in its archaeological aspects. He summarized his ideas on this subject in 'Field Archaeology' (1932) and 'Archaeology in the Field' (1953). A keen and very gifted photographer, he had taken panorama photographs during the war, and soon realized the value of air photography to archaeologists and historians. He gave an important lecture on this 'powerful new technique of discovery' (Crawford, 168) at the Royal Geographical Society in March 1922, illustrating his talk with a batch of aerial photographs taken mostly of Celtic field systems in Hampshire. The lecture helped to establish his reputation as an archaeologist and as a pioneer in the development of the civilian use of aerial photography, and he went on to write 'Air Survey and Archaeology' (1924), 'Air Photography for Archaeologists' (1929), and, with Alexander Keiller, 'Wessex from the Air' (1928). 
Crawford was particularly anxious to interest others in the remote past and archaeological remains of humankind, and to relate these studies to the whole general study of human existence. 'Man and his Past' (1921), which he began writing during the war, sets out his credo in these matters. In 1927 he founded 'Antiquity: A Quarterly Review of Archaeology' which he edited for thirty years until his death. It was, and remained, the only independent archaeological journal in the world. In 'Antiquity' he was able to publish many aerial photographs, articles on archaeology from all parts of the world, and examples of modern folk culture and the culture of modern primitive peoples to illumine the mute documents of the past. A man of strong character, likes and dislikes, prejudices and enthusiasms, he found in the editorial columns of his journal a place to vent his views, to the delight and fury of a wide circle of readers. 
Crawford was elected FBA in 1947 and appointed CBE in 1950; he received the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1940 and honorary degrees from Cambridge (1952) and Southampton (1955). He was president of the Prehistoric Society in 1938, and a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (England) from 1939 to 1946. His last two books -- 'Castles and Churches in the Middle Nile Region' (1953) and 'The Eye Goddess' (1957) -- reflect the width of his interests as an enthusiastic and untiring traveller. In 1951 he was presented with a Festschrift edited by W. F. Grimes, 'Aspects of Archaeology in Britain and Beyond', which included an account of his career by his former teacher, Sir John Myres, entitled 'The man and his past'. The foreword to this volume begins: 'No single scholar has done more than O. G. S. Crawford to place the study of the remoter past, and of the past of Britain in particular, on the secure and sound basis upon which it now rests' (Grimes, iii). Crawford was one of the handful of British archaeologists -- Sir Cyril Fox, Sir Mortimer Wheeler, Sir Thomas Kendrick -- who revolutionized and revivified British archaeology in the decade after 1918. Wheeler wrote of him: 'He was our greatest archaeological publicist, he taught the world about scholarship, and scholars about one another' ('Antiquity', March 1958, 4). 
In 1955 Crawford published 'Said and Done', a vivacious and amusing autobiography in which his character comes clearly through. A bachelor, he lived with a housekeeper and his cats at Nursling, Hampshire; one of his last acts was to give a broadcast entitled 'The language of cats'. He died at his home, Hope Villa, Nursling, in his sleep on the night of 28-9 November 1957 and was buried at Nursling. Crawford did not suffer fools gladly but had a great capacity for friendship, a genuine delight in encouraging and helping young archaeologists, and an infectious enthusiasm for anyone who shared his interest in aerial photographs and field archaeology, or his belief that archaeology, properly studied as a branch of world history and anthropology, was one of the most important subjects. To old and young alike, friends and foes, he was known as Ogs or Uncle Ogs. 


@@@@@


doc= 32620


Crawfurd, (John) Oswald Frederick (1834-1909), writer and diplomatist, born in Wilton Crescent, London, on 18 March 1834, was the son of John Crawfurd (1783-1868), diplomatist, and his wife, Anne Horatia (died 1855), daughter of James Perry, editor of the 'Morning Chronicle', and god-daughter of Horatio Nelson. Educated first at Eton College, Crawfurd then matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, in 1854 but left the university without taking a degree. Appointed on 23 January 1857 to a junior clerkship in the Foreign Office, he was sent in April 1866, having served in Madeira, as acting consul to Porto in Portugal. He became consul there on 13 January 1867 and filled the post competently, though not energetically, for the next twenty-four years. On 1 January 1890 he was made CMG. 
While in Porto, Crawfurd spent his leisure time mainly in sport and literary work. In addition to several novels he published three sympathetic but sketchy studies of Portuguese life which are of interest for their accounts of the Portuguese peasantry and rural customs: 'Travels in Portugal', under the pseudonym John Latouche (1875; 3rd edn, 1878), 'Portugal Old and New' (1880), and 'Round the Calendar in Portugal' (1890). 
Crawfurd's last two years in Portugal (1890-91) were a period of great controversy. The 'ultimatum' of Lord Salisbury to Portugal of 11 January 1890, the result of a dispute between Britain and Portugal over the territories known later as Zambia and Malawi, led to a wave of anti-British feeling, more violent in Porto than in other areas of Portugal. Crawfurd's house on the east side of the city was stoned, and there were demands for the withdrawal of his exequatur, co-ordinated by the Portuguese pressure group the Patriotic League of the North. He carried on with his duties until the demonstrations subsided, and then resigned on 17 June 1891. He then returned to England and spent his retirement in writing. 
Crawfurd married Margaret (died 1899), younger daughter of Richard Ford, author of the 'Handbook to Spain'; they had one son, who died in infancy. In 1902 he married again, this time to Amelia (Lita) Browne, daughter of Hermann von Flesch Brunningen. 
Although writing was for Crawfurd merely a recreation, his literary activity was diverse. A novelist, essayist, poet, and anthologist, the author of around forty volumes, he was also a frequent contributor under his own name and under pseudonyms to 'The Times' and leading reviews. He edited the 'New Quarterly Magazine' for some years, as well as 'Chapman's Magazine of Fiction'. He was also a publisher, being an original director of 'Black and White', founded in 1891, and, through his friendship with Frederic Chapman, was a director and then managing director of Chapman and Hall -- a post for which he lacked obvious qualifications. Of his novels, 'Sylvia Arden' (1877) was once the best-known. In others, such as 'The World we Live in' (1884), 'In Green Fields' (1906), and 'The Mystery of Myrtle Cottage' (1908), he dealt with political and social questions, and a penchant for settings in remote parts of Britain is often shown. In the 1870s he published some fiction under the pseudonym John Dangerfield, and he also used the pseudonym George Windle Sandys. His verse plays, 'Two Masques' (1902) and 'The Sin of Prince Eladane' (1903), show competence in diction and prosody but lack dramatic values. He also compiled 'Laws of Opposition Bridge' (1906). 
Crawfurd was a typical minor writer of the later Victorian era, who also played a small but significant role in diplomatic history. He died at Montreux, Switzerland, on 31 January 1909; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32621


Crawfurd, Sir Raymond Henry Payne (1865-1938), physician and medical historian, was born at East Grinstead, Sussex, on 9 November 1865, the sixth son of the Revd Charles Walter Payne Crawfurd, and his wife, Mary, daughter of James Adey Ogle, regius professor of medicine at Oxford. He was educated at Winchester College, New College, Oxford, and King's College Hospital, London, at all of which he gained scholarships or prizes. He qualified BCh (Oxon.) in 1894 and DM in 1896. After holding resident appointments at his hospital and at the Victoria Hospital for Children, Chelsea, he became in 1898 assistant physician to King's College Hospital and later (1905) full physician, as well as lecturer there and at the London School of Medicine for Women. He continued with active work at King's College Hospital until 1930. 
Crawfurd took a keen interest in the history of medicine and played a leading part in the foundation of the section of the history of medicine of the Royal Society of Medicine, of which section he became president. He contributed to the 'Proceedings' of the society many interesting papers such as 'Martial and medicine' (1913), 'Oliver Goldsmith and medicine' (1914), and 'Superstitions concerning menstruation' (1915). He also published 'The Last Days of Charles II' (1909). Besides his historical work he was the author of a thesis on exophthalmic goitre, and was joint editor with Farquhar Buzzard of Burney Yeo's 'Manual of Medical Treatment' (1913). 
Crawfurd took an active part in the affairs of the Royal College of Physicians, of which he was elected a member in 1894, a fellow in 1901, and registrar in 1925, holding this post until his death in 1938. He also gave the Fitzpatrick lectures in 1911-12, which were expanded and published as 'The King's Evil' (1911) and as 'Plague and Pestilence in Literature and Art' (1914), and he delivered the Harveian oration in 1919. His skill as an organizer, for which he was knighted in 1933, was shown by the active part which he took in the transfer of King's College Hospital from its position near the Strand to its new site on Denmark Hill. He was an effective chairman of the council of Epsom College (1923-36), though permitting 'undue prolixity in debate' ('BMJ', 652). 
Crawfurd married in 1898 Ethelberta Ormrod, youngest daughter of Colonel Arthur Bailey JP, of Bolton; they had three sons. He died at 11 Beaumont Street, London, after a few days' illness, on 9 March 1938, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32622


Creagh, Sir Garrett O'Moore (1848-1923), army officer, the seventh son of Captain James Creagh RN and his wife, Grace Emily, daughter of Garrett O'Moore of Cloghan Castle, co. Kerry, was born at Cahirbane, co. Clare, in Ireland, on 2 April 1848. He was educated privately, at the Royal Naval School, New Cross, and finally at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He married twice: first, in 1874, Mary Letitia Longfield, daughter of John Brereton of Oldcourt, co. Tipperary, who died two years later; second, in 1891, Elizabeth (died 1945), daughter of Edward Reade of Kelverton, Buckinghamshire, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
Creagh was commissioned ensign in the 95th foot in October 1866 and went to join the regiment in India in 1869. In February 1870 he transferred to the Indian army, taking up an appointment on the Bombay staff corps as a lieutenant. He served briefly with the marine battalion, 25th Bombay light infantry, Deoli irregular force, and the Merwara battalion. He was promoted captain in 1878 and served during the Second Afghan War of 1879-80. He was sent with 150 men to protect the village of Kam Dakka on 21 April 1879, where he was attacked by 1500 Mohmands. He retired to a position in a nearby cemetery where his men repulsed every enemy assault until they were relieved late in the afternoon. He was awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions. The commander-in-chief in India, General Sir Frederick Haines, reported that but for Creagh's coolness and gallantry his detachment would probably have been destroyed. He was mentioned in dispatches, and promoted brevet major. 
Between 1882 and 1886 Creagh commanded the Merwara battalion and in the latter year was promoted major. In 1890 he participated in the Zhob valley expedition on the north-west frontier of India. He assumed command of the 29th Bombay infantry later the same year and was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1892. In 1896 he was promoted colonel and became assistant quartermaster-general at Bombay. Creagh was promoted brigadier-general in 1898 and appointed political resident and general officer in command at Aden. In 1900 he led the 2nd brigade during the China expedition, and in the following year became general officer commanding the British expeditionary force in China. 
Creagh then commanded a first-class district in India. He was promoted major-general in 1902 and in the same year became a KCB. In 1904 he took over the command of the 5th division and was promoted lieutenant-general. In 1906 Creagh assumed command of the 2nd division, but the following year returned to England on special duty, and in July 1907 was appointed military secretary at the India Office. Creagh, promoted general in November 1907, remained at the India Office until 1909, when he was appointed to succeed Lord Kitchener as commander-in-chief in India. During his tenure of command Creagh did not introduce many new reforms, being primarily occupied defending changes made by his predecessor in the organization and deployment of the army in India as pressure for retrenchment in the military budget mounted following the 1907 Anglo-Russian convention. In 1911 he was appointed GCSI and was made aide-de-camp to George V. He retired in May 1914 and lived in London. He died at his residence, 65 Albert Hall Mansions, Kensington Gore, on 9 August 1923, and was buried in East Sheen cemetery two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 32623


Creagh, William (1828-1901), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 1 June 1828 at Newry, co. Down, the second son of the seven children of General Sir Michael Creagh (1787-1860), and his wife, Elizabeth, only daughter of Charles Osborne, judge of the king's bench, Ireland, and niece of Sir Thomas Osborne, eighth baronet, of Newtown Anner, co. Tipperary. He came of an old Roman Catholic family, and his father, who entered the army at the age of fourteen, saw much service with the 86th regiment, and was at his death in 1860 colonel of the 73rd regiment; he was the first in the family to become a protestant. His eldest brother, General Charles Creagh-Osborne (died 1892), after service in India, was commandant of the Staff College, Camberley, from 1878 to 1886; his youngest brother, Major James Henry Creagh (died 1900), served in the 27th regiment during the Indian mutiny, and retired as a result of illness contracted at that time. 
William Creagh was educated for six years at Mr Flynn's private school in Dublin. After attending the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from January 1842 to December 1844, he became a cadet in the East India Company's service, and joined his regiment, the 19th (later the 119th) Bombay infantry, in June 1845. In 1847, being then stationed at Karachi, he was placed by General Walter Scott RE in charge of a district in Upper Sind. He was recalled from administrative duties by the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Sikh War in the Punjab (April 1848), and served with his regiment through the campaign of 1848-9. His regiment, the 119th Bombay infantry, was called the Mooltan regiment (later the 2nd battalion 9th Jat regiment). Creagh came home early in 1856, and on 29 April 1857 married Haidee Sarah Rose, daughter of John Dopping, of Derrycassan, co. Longford; they had five sons and two daughters. She predeceased him. On his wedding trip in 1857 at Killarney, Creagh learned of the uprising and returned to duty, but sailed round the Cape and so did not reach India until Delhi had fallen. However, with his regiment, under Sir Hugh Rose in central India, he took part in the pursuit of Tantia Topi and was present at Tantia's defeat near Jhansi on 1 April 1858, and, a year later, at his capture. 
Gazetted captain on 3 February 1860, Creagh successfully administered, by commission from Sir Richmond Shakespear, resident at Indore, the princely state of Dhar, during the minority of its raja (1861-2). On 10 November 1877 Creagh married Dora, younger daughter of Edwin Sturge of Gloucester; they had one son and two daughters. Having been promoted major in 1865, lieutenant-colonel in 1871, and colonel in 1876, he was in command of his regiment when the Second Anglo-Afghan War broke out in 1878. He had earlier shown an aptitude for engineering and had made the first road up to the hill station of Matheran, near Bombay. From 16 December 1878 to 26 February 1879 he was employed with his men in making a military road from Jacobabad to Dadhar, a distance of 109 miles; he then built a further roadway, to the Bolan Pass and on to Dadhar. 
For private reasons, Creagh retired in December 1879, with the rank of major-general. He returned to England early in 1880, where he lived at St Leonards, Sussex. Anglican and Conservative, he took an active though unostentatious part in religious, philanthropic, and political affairs. He died at his home, 6 Charles Road, St Leonards, on 23 May 1901, and was buried in the Hastings borough cemetery. He was survived by his second wife. His four sons who reached manhood all entered the army. The eldest, Ralph Charles Osborne, Royal Marines and 5th Punjab infantry, served with distinction in Burma, in Manipur, at the relief of Chitral, in the Kurram valley, and in South Africa, and died at Netley on 27 January 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 32624


Creed, John Martin (1889-1940), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born in All Saints' parish, Leicester, on 14 October 1889, the eldest son of Colin John Creed, vicar of All Saints' Church, and his wife, Etheldreda Wright, daughter of Frederick Robert Spackman, a doctor of Harpenden, Hertfordshire. Sir Thomas Percival Creed was his brother. John Creed was educated at the Wyggeston grammar school, Leicester, and, from 1908, at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a scholar and obtained first classes in part one of the classical tripos (1911) and in part two of the theological tripos (1912). In 1913 he was ordained as assistant curate at St Paul's Church, Manningham, Bradford, and in 1914 was elected a fellow of Caius, where he returned as chaplain in 1915. From 1917 to 1919 he was a chaplain to the British forces in France. 
After the First World War, in 1919, Creed was elected a fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and appointed dean and lecturer in theology. Although not good with students, in 1926 he succeeded A. E. Brooke as Ely professor of divinity and honorary canon of Ely Cathedral. In 1927 Creed married May Geraldine, the younger daughter of Alfred Leslie Lilley, canon of Hereford. They had one son and three daughters, the youngest of whom died in childhood. Creed held his post as Ely professor and canon of the cathedral until his death, at the Evelyn Nursing Home in Cambridge, on 17 February 1940. He had been elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1939. 
Creed's historical and theological outlook was very much that handed down by the so-called Cambridge 'triumvirate' of J. B. Lightfoot, B. F. Westcott, and F. J. A. Hort. His main scholarly contributions were in the field of 'New Testament' studies and the early Christian age; they included his 'The Gospel According to St. Luke: the Greek Text with Introduction, Notes, and Indices' (1930), a critical commentary concerned especially with the composition of St Luke's narrative and its stage in the development of the gospel tradition, and journal articles, especially in the 'Journal of Theological Studies', which he edited from the end of 1935. One of his more noteworthy articles was a discussion of the early Christian document known as the 'Didache' ('Journal of Theological Studies', 39, 1938, 370-87). He was also increasingly interested in the history of religious thought of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries which, although widely separated from the early Christian era, shed light upon it in his view, as was shown in his 'Religious Thought in the Eighteenth Century Illustrated from Writers of the Period' (1934, written in collaboration with J. S. Boys Smith), and his Hulsean lectures delivered at Cambridge in 1936 and published in 1938 as 'The Divinity of Jesus Christ: a Study in the History of Christian Doctrine since Kant'. 
Creed was deeply interested in the history of the Church of England and in the meaning of Anglicanism and was considered a sound representative of Anglican values. He believed that a national church was a natural counterpart to the political and social order of a world in which the nation was the fundamental political and cultural unit. Being strongly pro-monarchist, he also thought that the association of church and state in England had fostered a wholesome contact between the sacred and the secular. This position, stated in a number of published articles and sermons, gave added weight to his views as a member of the archbishops' commission on Christian doctrine, the report of which was published in 1938 as 'Doctrine in the Church of England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32625


Creed, Sir Thomas Percival (1897-1969), lawyer and educationist, was born in Leicester on 29 January 1897, the third son in the family of five children of the Revd Colin John Creed, curate of St Peter's, Leicester, and later rector of Farthinghoe, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Etheldreda Wright, daughter of Frederick Robert Spackman MD of Harpenden, Hertfordshire. He was educated at Wyggeston School, Leicester, joined the Artists' Rifles in 1915, and served in France with the Leicestershire regiment, being twice wounded and winning the MC (1917). 
After demobilization in 1919 Creed was awarded a classical scholarship at Pembroke College, Oxford, taking third-class honours in 'literae humaniores' in 1922. He then entered the Sudan political service, and read for the bar while serving as assistant district commissioner in Berber Province (1923) and Darfur (1925). In 1926 he was seconded to the legal department of the Sudan government as district judge of the first grade and permanently transferred to this post in 1929, having in 1928 been called to the bar (Lincoln's Inn). In 1928 Creed married (Agnes) Margaret, elder daughter of Arthur Brewis, solicitor, of St Helens in Lancashire; they had one son (who also went into practice as a solicitor) and two daughters. 
Creed was seconded to the Iraqi government under the Anglo-Iraqi judicial agreement in 1931. There, after a short period as additional judge in Baghdad, he served as president of the courts in Kirkuk (1932) and Mosul (1934) before returning to Sudan as a judge of the high court, Khartoum, in 1935. He was appointed chief justice of Sudan in 1936, and legal secretary, with a seat on the governor-general's council, in 1941. He was awarded the order of the Nile, second class, in 1939, appointed CBE in 1943, and KBE in 1946. In 1947 he was chief representative of the Sudan government at the hearing of the Anglo-Egyptian dispute by the Security Council at Lake Success. 
Shortly before his retirement from Sudan in 1948 Creed took silk, but preferred to seek an educational career, like other members of his family. One of his brothers, John Martin Creed, had been Ely professor of divinity at Cambridge, and another, (Richard) Stephen, a fellow of New College, Oxford. Their sister, Mary, was a lecturer at Aberystwyth College (University of Wales), and the fourth brother, Edward, a senior pathologist at King's College Hospital. Thomas Creed became secretary to King's College, London, in 1948, and principal of Queen Mary College in 1952, a post he was to hold for fifteen years. From 1964 to 1967 he was vice-chancellor of London University. 
During this period Creed also served as chairman of the Medical Appeal Tribunal under the 'National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act', chairman of the committee of inquiry into the administration of the Forest of Dean (1955), chairman of the Burnham committee for the assessment of pay scales for teachers (1958-64), and chairman of Oxford House social settlement in Bethnal Green. He was made an honorary fellow of Pembroke in 1950, a freeman of the Drapers' Company (with which Queen Mary College had close ties) in 1963, an honorary LLD of Leicester in 1965, and an honorary bencher of Lincoln's Inn, a distinction which he prized especially highly, in 1967. He was also a member of the education committee of the Goldsmiths' Company. 
The key to Creed's character lay in his unswerving integrity. As chief justice he could forgive an error of judgement but admit no excuse for careless or slipshod behaviour in a magistrate, however hard-worked he might be. As legal secretary he regarded himself as a watchdog for the Sudanese people, ensuring that their constitutional rights were not infringed and firmly refusing to agree to any project, however well-intentioned, for which no clear legal authority existed. As adviser to the governor-general, and as his representative from time to time in his absence, he would not tolerate evasion, or failure to clarify the true nature and purpose of any proposed act or policy. He would have disliked being a professional diplomat or a politician, and to the end of his life he was accustomed to use the correspondence columns of 'The Times' to convey trenchant and uninhibited criticism of the policy of the British government in Middle Eastern affairs. 
Creed's headship of Queen Mary College happily coincided with a period of expansion; he took full advantage of this, trebling the size of the student body and providing the college with a whole range of new buildings. He resisted for some time pressure to let his name go forward for the vice-chancellorship, although he served as deputy vice-chancellor from 1958 to 1961, but his supporters finally convinced him, in 1963, that his leadership and wisdom were needed at a time when the future of London University had become a live issue. Creed firmly believed that the particular excellence of the university lay in retaining its broadly based federal structure. He was among those who feared that the threat of an independent commission of inquiry into the future of the university might lead to its premature dismemberment or to a regrouping which would result in a loss of the identity of some of its smaller institutions. The threat was not averted, but Creed's work, in close accord with the officers of the Senate House, did not go unrewarded, for the outcome of the independent inquiry left the federation intact. 
As 'The Times' said on his death, Creed: 'seemed to embody everything that is excellent in the law... He was the embodiment of impartiality; he had a deep and abiding concern for the rights of individuals; yet he was determined that decisions, once taken, should be strictly and honourably carried out. (13 May 1969)' He seldom minced his words. His strictures were devastating, without respect of persons, but where he considered praise deserved, he bestowed it unstintingly. Creed died at his home, 18 Wynnstay Gardens, Allen Street, London, on 11 May 1969. 
K. D. D. Henderson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32626


Creighton, Mandell (1843-1901), bishop of London and historian, was born in Carlisle on 5 July 1843, the elder son of Robert Creighton (died 1878), who built up a family business in Carlisle, and Sarah Mandell (died 1850/51), of a farming family in Cumberland. He had a brother and two sisters. Of the sister who survived infancy little is known, but Creighton kept in touch with his brother, James, who continued the family's prominence in Carlisle, and on the latter's death in 1896 Creighton and his wife opened their home to his children. Creighton's own mother had died when he was seven. His father was a stern parent and, despite companionship at school, Creighton seems to have had a solitary adolescence, taking long walks, a relaxation that he enjoyed throughout his life (in his youth he walked from Oxford to Durham in three days), and forming decided, independent opinions. He went first to the cathedral school in Carlisle in 1852 and in 1858, with a scholarship, to the grammar school of Durham. 
In October 1862 Creighton went into residence at Merton College, Oxford, with a classical postmastership. In a small college he was one of a handful who did not come from a leading public school and who took their studies seriously. His intellectual prominence and his moral convictions provoked criticism from some of his contemporaries and won admiration from others, among them 'athletes' with some of whom he made lasting friendships. His powers of concentration and flair for literary composition were already evident. He took a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1866 and was elected as probationer for a Merton fellowship in December that year. After a mere few months of preparation he was tutoring undergraduates in modern history in 1867. 
Throughout the seven years of Creighton's fellowship, Merton was experiencing the stresses of the recent reforms which affected the whole university. At the same time Oxford was absorbing the controversies over ritual and doctrine brought about by the Tractarians and Darwin. His appointment was part of a steady improvement in the intellectual quality of Merton's governing body in line with reforming interests; as tutor and, shortly afterwards, principal of the postmasters responsible for undergraduate discipline and performance, he promoted the raising of standards in accordance with the college's policy. By helping to initiate the sharing of lectures among like-minded colleges, and as an examiner, he promoted these improvements more generally. The minutes of college meetings show the continuing preoccupation with the character of chapel services and the requirement on undergraduates to attend. Changes in the status of clerical fellows in these years were even more directly related to Creighton's own position. The changing environment in the university was matched by significant changes in his own life. In 1870 he was ordained deacon, as required by his fellowship but also fulfilling a long-settled purpose: as a schoolboy at Durham he had told the wife of the headmaster that he intended to become a bishop. He was priested at Christmas 1873. In 1871 he had met his future wife, Louise (1850-1936) ['see 'Creighton, Louise Hume], daughter of Robert von Glehn (died 1885), a naturalized merchant from Estonia, and Agnes Duncan (died 1881). They were married on 8 January 1872, and Creighton applied to retain his fellowship. The change required in the statutes to retain a fellowship after marriage was duly conceded, not without opposition although it accommodated other members of the college. In these same years Creighton showed his ability as a popularizer of the study of history, partly in extramural lectures to non-academic audiences. The scholarly standards which he brought to this new discipline from his earlier studies in classics led to his wish to give more time to writing history than his college duties allowed. In 1874, not without misgivings and in the face of a petition from all the senior undergraduates, he and his wife decided to accept the college living of Embleton in Northumberland. There he expected to have leisure to write a history of the papacy on the eve of the Reformation, a theme which had become the main preoccupation of his university lectures because other tutors chose to offer more attractive topics. 
Embleton was a remote rural parish on the Northumbrian coast close to Dunstanburgh Castle. Yet it provided a more than comfortable stipend and all the time that he was there Creighton had a curate. Despite being urged to stay in Oxford, Creighton anticipated that the burden of university business, combined with the business of his college and teaching, would prevent him completing the extended piece of work which he had in mind. In his view Embleton offered 'the opportunity for uninterrupted work... and concentration of intellectual energy on one subject'. In March 1875 the Creightons settled into the large vicarage with its garden full of trees. Parochial responsibilities were a challenge because they were unfamiliar. Apart from one or two landed families like the Greys at Fallodon and Howick, Creighton moved among poorly educated parishioners: quarrymen in Embleton village, farmers and labourers in the surrounding countryside, and the families of the fishermen on the coast. A northerner himself, he knew better than to take his people for granted and in the course of his incumbency he won their friendship and trust. He set a pattern for his later ministry by forging confident relations with successive Presbyterian colleagues and encouraging the largely Methodist fishermen to be active in their church. As early as May 1875 he had established the routine of working in his study in the mornings and spending the afternoon until seven visiting parishioners, taking them as he found them at home or at work. There were not so many of them (Mrs Creighton estimated seventeen hundred), but Creighton preferred to cover the 7 miles of his parish on foot. From Embleton he published the first two volumes of the 'History of the Papacy' (1882) and upwards of half a dozen of the papers reprinted in 'Historical Essays and Reviews' (1902), mainly on figures of the Italian Renaissance. To complete this work he depended largely on books which he bought himself, emphasizing original sources, such as his valued copy of Muratori's 'Rerum Italicarum scriptores' (1723-51), and others to be found in the citations and appendices of his volumes on the papacy. 
Surrounded by his growing family (four daughters and three sons), producing work of historical and literary merit to satisfy both scholarly and general readers, Creighton's years at Embleton were happy; but he knew that they would not and should not last, and he was thinking of moving as he became increasingly involved in the administration of the new diocese of Newcastle. Nevertheless, the summons from Cambridge to be the first Dixie professor of ecclesiastical history in May 1884 came out of the blue. He doubted his qualifications for the position, although he had been enquiring about the succession to William Stubbs in Oxford when the invitation reached him. In accordance with the new foundation, his purpose was to establish the history of the church as a subject with appeal to students of politics, to lawyers and theologians, and to the merely curious, as much as to budding historians. His aim was to treat this field in the same fashion as any other historical topic, without prejudice or ulterior purpose. 'I turn to the past to learn its story', he wrote, 'without any preconceived opinion what that story may be' ('Life and Letters', 1.280). As a historian he was concerned with what the past had to tell about the character of the actors and their times rather than with the accumulation of information. 
Being a newcomer to Cambridge, Creighton did not push himself forward. However, he was sought out for his advice and political sense, contributing from his arrival to changes in the historical tripos and its examination, with more choice and more open-ended questions. His standing among his colleagues was shown when, in 1885, prolonged discussions about the publication of an English journal of history came to fruition and he was invited to be the first editor of the 'English Historical Review'. Creighton had no illusions about the work this would entail, and he accepted out of duty, before any editorial policy had been framed, quite apart from his goal of promoting interest in the discipline and improving research. The 'Review' took a lot of time and energy, finding and corresponding with contributors on subjects from Homer to recent British politics and keeping in close touch with Longmans, who undertook its publication and were concerned about the early failure to recover their costs. Among others, articles were obtained from celebrities such as Gladstone, Viscount Bryce, and Lord Acton without evident results in increased circulation. As far as possible Creighton avoided university duties, but he was an active member of his college, Emmanuel, which had provided the endowment for the Dixie chair. In 1886 he was chosen as its representative to contribute to the 250th anniversary of Harvard College, since John Harvard had been at Emmanuel before emigrating. In a sense, though, Creighton was but a part-time Cambridge man. In June 1885 he was appointed a canon of Worcester Cathedral and he and his household lived in the close there during university vacations, until his appointment as bishop of Peterborough. He contributed actively to the intellectual and liturgical life of the cathedral, lecturing himself, bringing visiting scholars to lecture to the clergy, preaching, leading the three-hour devotion on Good Friday (a practice which he brought to Peterborough and St Paul's, London), and as examining chaplain. 
Worcester rather than Cambridge prepared Creighton for the remainder of his career, as a bishop. He was nominated to Peterborough in March 1891: at the age of forty-eight he entered once more into an unfamiliar dimension. Bishops at all times are of uneven quality; none gains universal approval. Of those whom he had encountered earlier in his career only Lightfoot at Durham and Wilberforce at Newcastle had impressed Creighton. He saw himself as more than the bishop of a diocese: he was a bishop of the Church of England with a historic sense of the identity of church and nation. Beyond that nation, he came to office at a time when the Anglican church was becoming aware of itself as a worldwide communion. While not wholly enthusiastic about them, Creighton was in demand at the sequence of church congresses in the 1880s and 1890s where, as well as being secretary for a time, he delivered many of the addresses which reflect his view of the church's role in national affairs in the past and in the present. As a bishop he was a regular participant at the informal council of bishops which met regularly under the chairmanship of archbishops Benson and then Temple. Little of Creighton's experience in Oxford, Embleton, Cambridge, or even Worcester had prepared him for episcopal office. On the other hand, the formation of his character had equipped him very completely. 
As a schoolboy Creighton's brother gave him the nickname Homer; friends of his undergraduate days knew him as the Professor (or the P) and deferred to his intellectual and moral judgement for the most part; after marriage he was known in the family circle as Max. These bynames reflect different aspects of Creighton's character: the scholar concerned with achievements of the past and the man of the world comfortable in dealing with the present. After leaving school he wrote a guide for his successor as head monitor of remarkable authority and moral certainty. He was a sophisticated and opinionated undergraduate of aesthetic tastes, in sympathy with the high-church interest. His assurance about standards of behaviour, which won both respect and opposition as an undergraduate, continued as a young fellow charged with college discipline; and this moral earnestness and certainty were not lessened by ordination. There were grounds for his self-accusation that as a young man he was a prig. His conviction of the church's position as the soul of the nation, and the place of the church by law established as that soul's keeper, governed his political views, which veered from moderate Liberal to moderate Conservative, as Gladstone's policies seemed to threaten the established church. It gave rise, too, to misguided views about the independence of the medieval English church from Rome, which were widespread among the clergy of his time. The necessary identity of church and nation, a topic for many of his addresses, was complemented by his belief in his country's mission at home and overseas in guarding and promoting the humane values of civilization which had been revived in the Renaissance, the historical period to which he was most attached. He was a man of his time: the Victorian head of his family who lectured his young bride with a kindly patronage on intellectual and aesthetic taste; or who wrote offhandedly to his mother-in-law that the interruptions from the birth of a second child were now over and, as an afterthought, that he had another daughter. He could be very direct, as when he had written earlier to the same lady that she should only expect to hear from him when there was a precise purpose in writing. In another aspect this was perhaps a reflection of his concentrated efficiency and disciplined use of his time. As bishop he kept up with personal correspondence during meetings while contributing effectively to the business at hand. He had great powers of absorption which served him both in scholarship and in practical affairs. From the time of his Merton fellowship contemporaries were impressed by his ability to isolate the central issues in a discussion, and without delay propose a moderate settlement which sized up both the situation and the parties involved in it. 
This sketch conveys an effective but hardly an attractive personality. Yet Creighton inspired as much affection as admiration. The other side of him was found in the romping parent who enchanted his own children and others with his boisterous play and fanciful imagination. On a visit to Sandringham the bishop alarmed bystanders by the freedom with which he repeatedly tossed the future Edward VIII into the air, to the child's delight. All his life he puzzled or shocked those of more conventional outlook by the paradoxes of his conversation, throwing off epigrams as they occurred to him in the exchanges of dialogue. He had a great sense of fun, he was approachable, and even in his reproofs he usually retained the victim's friendship. Despite these abilities he was modest in his own estimate of them: 'my reputation is always a surprise to myself', he wrote shortly before going to London, 'I never tried to make a hit, and never consider anything but the need for simplicity and straightforwardness. But I am writing a panegyric of myself' ('Life and Letters', 2.200). About the same time he wrote to a friend who had sought his advice: 'Life is a sum of relationships. There is no independent or self-centred existence... The Christian claim is that my life, my capacities, my relationships are part of an eternal order running through the universe, beginning and ending in God. Nothing short of this conception gives happiness or strength or reality. (ibid., 2.211)' At the centre of this far from simple man was his faith in his risen Saviour.The two sides of Creighton's personality may be discerned in his appearance. There were the striking head with its prominent brow and nose below the receding hair, the level gaze, the full but carefully nurtured beard. At the same time there was a playful quality in the expression of his refined mouth, in his lively eyes, and the positioning of the gold-rimmed lenses which are a feature of so many photographs. His eldest son recorded his father's capacity to overawe and enchant his children at the same time. He was tall enough to be imposing in clerical robes, erect and trim, and he was fully aware of the impression which he could make. He could project his voice without effort. 
The diocese of Peterborough, to which Creighton was consecrated on 25 April 1891, was a comfortable place to find his feet as a bishop. Not too large, it was homogeneous in its rural population with two considerable industrial towns, Leicester and Northampton, for variety. When he left for London in 1897 the bishop could justly recall the sense of solidarity which he and his clergy had shared. He gave a lot of thought and effort to guiding their ministries. He recognized the importance of their not being left behind in the currents of popular knowledge or theological change and he built up a library in the palace for their use. He brought them to Peterborough on retreat. He urged them to get to know their parishioners and identify with their hopes and problems. He emphasized the importance of the daily offices, the value of their regular and public observance having been evident to him during his time at Embleton. He gave close attention to ordinands and delighted in confirmations: not every bishop was careful about these standard duties. Recognizing the church's opportunity and its obligation to evangelize the industrial classes, he took up residence in Leicester for a period each year. He encouraged church extension and missions, although he had been doubtful about the value of the latter when he had a parish of his own. As at Embleton he had excellent relations with nonconformists, for he understood that the need for Christian ministry overwhelmed the resources available for it. Particularly, his concern and advice were instrumental in helping to settle the bitter strike of 1895 in the boot and shoe trades in Leicester and Northampton. 
This fortunate period was punctuated by the completion of his 'History of the Papacy' (volume five being published in 1894), the preparation and delivery of the Hulsean lectures at Cambridge, in 1893-4, the Rede lecture in 1895, and a short visit to Moscow in 1896 to attend the coronation of Nicholas II as representative of the Church of England, a visit from which he drew a favourable impression of the close association of church and state in Orthodox Russia. In an official visit, for which the tsar's minister responsible for the Orthodox was his guide, he did not get beyond surface impressions. 
Creighton was enthroned as bishop of London on 30 January 1897. If Peterborough was a tranquil charge, the bishopric of London was the opposite. Its problems, social and ecclesiastical, resulted from the unceasing growth of the capital: the churches of the City of London were too many and too rich, while those of the sprawling suburbs and crowded slums were too few and often too poor. Every form of ecclesiastical taste was represented amid its population, with church attendance ranging from crowded to deserted according to the charisma and capacity of the incumbent and the nature of the parish. Issues which troubled the national church at large were generally more acute in the metropolitan diocese. To the discussions at the council of bishops between 1897 and 1901, before whom Archbishop Temple laid the problem of keeping Anglican clergy loyal to the order prescribed in the prayer book, Bishop Creighton contributed his concerns about ritual, theological training, and the more manageable question of the conservation of episcopal and parochial records. By virtue of his office he had responsibility for Anglicans in parts of Europe and in the colonies overseas. He was too ill in the autumn of 1900 to conduct the routine visitation of his diocese himself; but the questions to which he sought answers indicate the wide range of his concerns. In addition to the inevitable questions about church order and discipline, he wanted to know about the state of parish schools and other parochial organizations, how his clergy and people got on with other denominations, their relations with labour organizations, and their contribution to the work of local authorities. His official act books record the continual preoccupations of his formal functions: ordinations, collations, resignations and institutions, grants of licences for various purposes, commissions to act on his behalf, and the appointment of diocesan officers. The unrelenting pressure of private correspondence is evident in the dozen or so large volumes in which inward letters are preserved and which his widow digested so effectively in the second volume of her memoir. London had more than its share of 'difficult' clergymen. Thirty folios of the collection of letters for 1898, for example, convey the successive grievances of one cantankerous priest, the Revd William Adamson of Old Ford. Quarrels, many provoked by the combative Protestant Truth Society and its leader John Kensit, and questions about ritual took much more of the bishop's time than he wished. His replies on these and other matters of pastoral guidance had to be fitted into the crowded calendar of functions which he could not refuse; and letters alone were frequently insufficient. 
In face of the burden of these daily trivialities Creighton strove to retain his settled vision of the church's purpose, his keen intelligence, his confidence in the capacities of human nature guided by Christian faith, his trust in common sense (his own and other people's), his sense of humour, and his service to a Lord who bade his followers to love one another. After earlier discomfort at the end of 1899, ulcers put him to bed in September 1900 for prolonged rest. Confined to Fulham Palace, he still conducted some diocesan business. Notably he brought together under his own roof those who held opposing views about the celebration of holy communion so that they might understand each other's positions. By Christmas he had undergone a second operation, and he died on 14 January 1901 at his palace, eight days before the death of Queen Victoria, when his wife had been writing to her sister of her hopes for his recovery. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral on 17 January. 
The memorial to Creighton in St Paul's carries two inscriptions: 'He tried to write true history', his own choice; and 'I determined to know nothing among you save Jesus Christ', which his widow also used on the title-page of her memoir. Creighton's reputation as a bishop was soon obscured by his more enduring reputation as a historian. Yet the mind of the churchman had fruitfully informed his historical work throughout his life. 
Creighton was a great figure of the late-Victorian Church of England -- when he went to London not a few thought that he was due to succeed Benson at Canterbury; but he is remembered as a historian. Fashion no longer gives pride of place to the subjects which interested Creighton; yet because his concern was with the discipline as much as with the content of his work, and because he avoided the advocacy of causes, his work as a historian has continued to be respected. Opinion about the quality of his contribution to historical studies therefore has not altered much since his death. His great Catholic contemporary, Lord Acton, attributed Creighton's detachment as a commentator to his 'serene curiosity'; and he criticized him for evoking the ephemeral personalities of fifteenth-century popes at the cost of appreciating the tradition of the institution. He looked for much more explicit censure on the Renaissance popes. Creighton's moral conviction was no less certain, but as historian he refused to stray far from contemporary sources and aimed for clear-sighted analysis of complicated issues, reducing them to connections which a general reader could follow. Lytton Strachey found the result a dry biscuit, but Canon Jenkins noted the 'zest and vigour' with which Creighton painted pictures of men and events in their contemporary setting. His repeated holidays abroad familiarized him with many of those places. His historical output was the result of a clear intellect and an artistic imagination, but his standards and methods were honed by his ability to read the work of the leading German historians of his time. He translated into English a volume of Ranke, and at Cambridge he introduced what Mrs Creighton demurely calls 'conversation classes' -- seminars on the German model -- as a regular part of his teaching. 
In 1893-4 Creighton delivered the Hulsean lectures on 'Persecution and tolerance' and in 1895, also in Cambridge, the Rede lecture on 'The early Renaissance in England'. A year later in Oxford he gave the Romanes lecture on 'The English national character'. In November 1896 he accepted the invitation to write an introductory chapter for the projected 'Cambridge Modern History'; but two years later he had to admit that the church's business left him no time for it. The five volumes of the 'History of the Papacy' are certainly his chief contribution, a work which stands up to critical scrutiny for its judgements, selection, and compression; but he was equally concerned with the impact of the Reformation in England. While far from confined to ecclesiastical questions, his successive studies of Wolsey (1888) and the reign of Elizabeth I (1896) -- a period which he noted as barely suitable for undergraduate study because everything in England was then undergoing such rapid change -- are limpid interpretations of those times, and influenced the understanding and curiosity of the generation which followed him. As well as editing the 'English Historical Review' for its first five years, he edited two series of historical outlines. By intention none of this historical production was beyond the range of the educated general reader. Outstanding as his abilities were, Creighton never lost sight of ordinary men and women. 


@@@@@


doc= 32627


Cremer, Sir William Randal (1828-1908), peace campaigner, born on 18 March 1828 at Fareham, Hampshire, was the son of George Cremer, a coach-painter, and his wife, Harriet Tutte, daughter of a local builder. Deserted by her husband, Cremer's mother, a devout Methodist, brought up William in great poverty. 
At the age of twelve Cremer began work as a pitchboy in a shipyard. Three years later he was apprenticed to a carpenter. In 1846 he moved to Brighton, where he came under the influence of Frederick Robertson at his Workmen's Institute. In 1852 Cremer moved to London as a carpenter and became involved in politics and trade unionism. A good speaker, he campaigned for the nine-hour day as representative of the building trades committee in 1858, and he led the lock-out of 70,000 men in 1859-60. Out of this dispute Cremer helped found both the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, on 4 June 1860, and the London Trades Council. In that year he married Charlotte (died August 1876), daughter of J. Wilson of Spalding. 
Cremer was secretary to the workmen's committee formed to support the north in the American Civil War, and organized the 1863 meeting in St James's Hall, addressed by John Bright, which attacked the British government's role in the 'Alabama' affair. He was appointed the first secretary of the British section of the International Working Men's Association (IWMA) in September 1864 and was a delegate to its 1865 Geneva conference. Although he supported the general council on the questions of unionism, strikes, and the eight-hour day and in its opposition to the Proudhonists, Cremer also opposed any revolutionary activity and Marx effected his removal from the secretaryship. Cremer left the organization, though in 1869 he urged the delegates at the second Trades Union Congress to affiliate with it and the same year joined the IWMA-dominated Land and Labour League. 
Cremer was a supporter of Mazzini and helped to organize the 1863 demonstrations in support of Garibaldi; he also addressed a meeting in London in July 1863 in support of Polish nationalism and in 1870 formed a committee of working men to press for British neutrality during the Franco-Prussian War. This committee became the Workmen's Peace Association in 1871 (later the International Arbitration League). Cremer was its secretary until his death, and he travelled on its behalf repeatedly to America and the continent, bearing petitions and appeals for international arbitration, and becoming a well-known international figure as a consequence. He was also on the executive of John Stuart Mill's Land Tenure Reform Association in 1873 and in 1889 became British secretary to the Inter-Parliamentary Union. For his tireless service in the cause of international arbitration (especially the 1897 Anglo-American arbitration treaty) he was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1903 and gave $7000 of the prize money in trust to the International Arbitration League. For his work in the cause of peace he also received the French cross of the Legion d'honneur, was made commander of the Norwegian order of St Olaf in 1904, and was knighted in 1907. 
A political radical, Cremer was a member of the Reform League from its inception in 1864, though also supportive of the National Reform Union and the reform bills of 1866-7, and as an executive committee member of the league he was a moving force behind the 1866 Hyde Park demonstrations. In 1868 he accepted an invitation to stand as radical parliamentary candidate for Warwick. He was defeated by the Liberal candidate, but received only 260 votes and lost there again as representative of the Labour Representation League in 1874, when he won only 183 votes. Twice he failed in his candidature for the London school board, in 1870 and 1873; but in 1884 he was elected to the St Pancras vestry. Under the widened parliamentary franchise Cremer was elected MP for the working-class Haggerston division of Shoreditch in 1885. He retained his seat in 1886 and 1892, but was defeated in 1895 by thirty-two votes. He recovered the seat in 1900 despite his unpopular hostility to the South African War, and kept it until his death. He vigorously opposed the rise of the independent labour movement and remained within the Liberal Party. Cremer was never endorsed by the Trades Union Congress or the Labour Representation Committee and let his membership of the carpenters' union lapse after it affiliated to the Labour Party. However, he continued to campaign on labour issues in parliament. 
Following the death in August 1884 of his second wife, Lucy Coombes of Oxford, Cremer lived in his office at 11 Lincoln's Inn Fields. He died at 59 Weymouth Street, London, on 22 July 1908, and was buried in Hampstead cemetery after cremation. He had no children. Cremer's autobiography remained in manuscript note form and his literary work was confined to the pages of 'The Arbitrator', a monthly peace journal which he edited from its appearance in 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 32628


Milnes, Robert Offley Ashburton Crewe-, marquess of Crewe (1858-1945), politician, was born at 16 Upper Brook Street, London, on 12 January 1858, the only son of Richard Monckton-Milnes, first Baron Houghton (1809-1885), and Annabella Hungerford (died 1874), daughter of the second Baron Crewe. He was educated at Winton House, near Winchester, Harrow School, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1880. In that year he was engaged to Sybil Marcia (1857-1887), daughter of Sir Frederick Graham, third baronet, of Netherby, and they married on 3 June. Milnes shared his father's Liberalism and was appointed assistant private secretary to Lord Granville, foreign secretary in Gladstone's second ministry, in April 1883. In 1884 he was adopted as Liberal candidate for Barnsley, but he never contested the seat, as the death of his father in August 1885 consigned him to the House of Lords as Baron Houghton. He was made a Liberal whip in the Lords and lord-in-waiting to Queen Victoria when Gladstone formed his third ministry in January 1886. He apparently inherited his father's view that England was responsible for Ireland's misfortune, and his loyalty to his party during the Irish home-rule crisis left him one of the few Gladstonian peers after 1886, ensuring his subsequent political influence. The death of his wife in September 1887, though, led him to seek to leave politics. He resigned as Liberal whip in order to study agriculture at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, only to be prevented by illness from taking up the course. Instead he devoted himself to travel (he visited Egypt in 1889) and to his literary interests: a volume of poems entitled 'Stray Verses, 1889-90' was written on the journey to Egypt and he produced a translation, 'The Songs of Beranger', in 1889. Further family tragedy struck in March 1890, with the death of Houghton's eight-year-old son Richard Charles Rodes (1882-1890). 
On the Liberals' return to office in 1892 Houghton, who had emphasized in print his commitment to home rule since the 1886 crisis, was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland and given the difficult task of conveying Gladstonian Irish policy to the unsympathetic Queen Victoria. He remained in office after Rosebery succeeded Gladstone in 1894. In that year Houghton's uncle the third Baron Crewe died; Houghton succeeded to the Crewe estates and, by royal licence, took the name of Crewe as a prefix to that of Milnes (8 June 1894). When the Liberals fell from power in 1895, he was created earl of Crewe (17 July). 
On 20 April 1899 Crewe married the eighteen-year-old Lady Margaret Etienne Hannah (Peggy) Primrose, daughter of the fifth earl of Rosebery. He was less critical than his father-in-law, though, of radical opposition to British involvement in the South African War: he acted as conciliator and healer of Liberal divisions and never joined Rosebery's Liberal League. As Rosebery distanced himself from the Liberals during the last months of the long Unionist ascendancy in 1905, Crewe was credited with devising the 'step-by-step' Irish policy which would limit the liability represented by the Liberals' commitment to home rule, and he became lord president of the council in the government formed by Campbell-Bannerman in December 1905. This appointment launched a long period of continuous cabinet office during which Crewe became a pivotal figure in the Liberal governments from 1905 to 1916, less because of his skills in policy making or public oratory, which were minimal, than because he won the trust of those who did lead. Campbell-Bannerman thought none of his cabinet colleagues straighter, wiser, or more helpful than Crewe, while Asquith considered him to have the best political judgement in the cabinet. Crewe would become the principal political aide and confidant to Asquith during the eight years of his premiership and a virtually automatic appointee to the many 'ad hoc' committees set up to handle specific crises before and during the First World War. 
When Asquith became prime minister in 1908 Crewe succeeded Lord Elgin at the Colonial Office, but his appointment in succession to Lord Ripon as Liberal leader in the House of Lords in the same year did more to secure his public prominence, by making him the principal defender of Liberal policy in a Unionist upper house which was becoming feverishly hostile to the Liberal government and increasingly ready to sabotage its measures. Crewe had resented the peers' wrecking of the 1906 'Education Bill', in which he took a strong personal interest, and which he had attempted to save by convening a cross-party conference of peers. He had been unable to prevent the damage done to subsequent education, licensing, and land bills by the Unionist majority in the Lords. The naturally conciliatory Crewe was thrust into the front line of constitutional conflict during the crisis prompted by Lloyd George's radical budget of 1909. Crewe was generally unsympathetic to the budget itself and privately resented the chancellor's demagogic language in his Limehouse speech of 1909, but he had no time for the nihilism of the Unionist peers. When the Liberals' qualified victory in the election of January 1910 led to the passage of the budget and shifted attention to the blocking powers of the Lords themselves, Crewe participated in the constitutional conference which sat for five months in 1910; characteristically, he was said to have sympathized with Lloyd George's proposals for a cross-party government to handle the crisis. When the conference collapsed, however, Crewe (who had earlier in the year been one of those on the right wing of the cabinet arguing for reform of the Lords' composition) participated, with Asquith, in the controversial meeting with the new king, George V, at which the monarch was persuaded to promise the creation of new Liberal peers, if necessary, to approve the curtailment of the Lords' right of veto should the Liberals win a second election. George V remained suspicious of Crewe thereafter, believing that advantage had been taken of his inexperience. Crewe none the less led the negotiations with Lord Cromer and the archbishop of Canterbury to secure sufficient Unionist support to pass the 1911 'Parliament Bill', which limited the Lords' veto powers. 
Amid the constitutional crisis, in September 1910, Crewe was appointed secretary of state for India; he was thus responsible for the Delhi durbar of 1911, when George V became the first reigning monarch actually to visit India and Crewe the first India secretary to travel through the country. In recognition of his work in preparing this masterpiece of imperial pageantry Crewe was made a marquess in 1911, with the additional title of earl of Madeley. This became the courtesy title of his short-lived second son, Richard George Archibald John Lucian Hungerford, known as Jack (1911-1922). Crewe also presided over the transfer of the raj capital from Calcutta to Delhi, and was responsible for the successful appointment of Lutyens to design New Delhi. 
In 1914 Crewe worked with Lloyd George in the negotiations with the Bank of England over currency and exchange arrangements in wartime which calmed the financial panic stimulated by the outbreak of war. He placed his London home, Crewe House, in Curzon Street, at the disposal of the government, and it became the centre for the production of war propaganda. On the formation of the Asquith coalition in May 1915 he became lord president of the council once again, before moving to become president of the Board of Education in 1916. Education interested him, and it is interesting to speculate what role he would have played in post-war educational reconstruction, but the break-up of the coalition and the Liberal split in December 1916 denied him the chance. Crewe, who had been loyal to his party leadership over Irish home rule, the South African War, and the constitutional crisis, remained loyal to Asquith when the prime minister fell victim to the coup promoted by Lloyd George and Bonar Law. Asquith's departure from office ended eleven years of continuous cabinet office for Crewe, and virtually ended his career as a national politician. His decision in 1917 to become chairman of the London county council (LCC) -- far more of an honorific post than when his father-in-law had held it in 1889 -- amounted to a recognition of the fact. So, more strikingly, did his acceptance of the post of ambassador to France in October 1922; he served for almost six years. He could not, of course, have anticipated the circumstances which led to his return to cabinet office for a ten-week stint as secretary for war in Ramsay MacDonald's first National Government in August 1931. Without a parliamentary constituency to defend, he did not, unlike his Liberal colleagues, feel trapped in the national coalition, and held no government post after the general election of November 1931. He supported the decision of the Samuelite Liberals to withdraw from the National Government over the issue of free trade in 1932, and from 1936 to the end of 1944 he led the independent Liberals in the House of Lords. 
The fourth marquess of Salisbury described Crewe in 1945 as 'perhaps the last of the Whig statesmen'; his biographer considered him more radical than whig (Pope-Hennessy, 54). Crewe's whiggishness was more temperamental than ideological. Disposed by nature and training to conceal all emotion, he recoiled from the fanaticism of Edwardian politics, involving himself in the attempts to resolve both the 1906 'Education Bill' dispute and the crisis over the House of Lords by mediation. In 1912 he sought to resolve the embittered party dispute over the future of Ulster over a round of golf at Deeside with the Unionist leader Bonar Law. He despised the platform demagogy of Lloyd George, whom he neither liked nor admired -- an attitude which perhaps reflected his own unease as a public speaker (Pope-Hennessy, 150). 'Slow of thought and slower of speech' (David, 120-21), according to Charles Hobhouse, Crewe was an uncomfortable orator, whose speeches were punctuated, as his biographer recalled, by 'prolonged moments -- almost minutes -- of hesitation while he fastidiously chose the correct word' (Pope-Hennessy, x). His cabinet colleague Edwin Montagu claimed to have a constituent whose wife had lost her sanity listening to Crewe speak for an hour and a half on the land question. It is questionable whether his radicalism amounted to much more than a loyalty to the touchstone policy of Irish home rule, though Hobhouse considered him, like Sir Edward Grey, to be more radical than was widely believed. But he was not whig enough to contemplate crossing the floor. In fact he remained a partisan, loyal to the Liberal Party in its moments of tension and division -- in 1886, in 1900-01, in 1909-11, and in 1916. Before 1914 his position as a patient and clear-sighted Liberal in a hostile House of Lords gave him political significance and influence, but the collapse of the Liberal Party as a party of government during the First World War made his supple skills otiose. 'War smothers all the aspirations of Liberalism', he wrote in 1940, and war certainly smothered his active political career (Crewe-Milnes, 481). After 1916 his public role became that of the elder statesman and 'safe pair of hands': he guided the London county council, filled the Paris embassy during a tense period in Anglo-French relations (without apparently doing much to shape policy), served in the first National Government during the emergency of 1931, and joined a group of 'half a dozen old stagers', in Austen Chamberlain's words ('Austen Chamberlain Diary', 518), to advise Baldwin on the handling of the abdication crisis in 1936. 
Crewe's hands were less safe in private than in public affairs. 'Both extravagant and poorly advised' (Crewe, 34), according to his grandson, he inherited 30,000 acres and died with 6000, having sold Crewe Hall in Cheshire and a family home in Yorkshire. He regarded money and business as 'unmentionable topics', and preferred reading (he inherited his father's library of 24,000 books, but disposed of the collection of 'pornographic and sadic literature and manuscripts' included in it), writing poetry -- his 'A Harrow Grave in Flanders' would find a place in several anthologies -- and country pursuits, including racing and the breeding of shorthorn cattle (Crewe, 34; Pope-Hennessy, 24). He published a leaden official biography of his father-in-law Rosebery in 1931. He was lord lieutenant of the county of London (1912-44), an elder brother of Trinity House, and chancellor of Sheffield University (1918-44). 
The tight self-control that made Crewe unfailingly courteous to strangers could also make him appear, according to his second wife, 'rather formal and aloof'. Asquith considered dining at Crewe's 'a great bore' ('Letters to Venetia Stanley', 51), while playing golf with him became a trial on account of 'the extraordinary deliberation of his methods' (ibid., 549). Conduct trying to his friends shaded into callousness towards his family: he embarked on a lengthy foreign tour in 1890, when his eight-year-old son, already motherless, was dying, and upstaged his first daughter on her 'coming out' by announcing his engagement to a woman a year her senior. His grandson remembered Crewe as 'a man of few feelings' (Crewe, 24). 
Crewe died at West Horsley Place, the house near Leatherhead which he had acquired in 1931, on 20 June 1945. As his two sons had died before him, his peerages became extinct. He was survived by his second wife and four daughters, Annabel Hungerford ('b'. 1881), Celia Hermione ('b'. 1884), and (Helen) Cynthia ['see 'Colville, Lady (Helen) Cynthia] by his first marriage and Mary Evelyn Hungerford ('b'. 1915) by his second. 


@@@@@


doc= 32629


Cripps, Charles Alfred, first Baron Parmoor (1852-1941), lawyer and politician, was born on 3 October 1852 at West Ilsley, Berkshire, the sixth of the eleven children of Henry William Cripps (1815-1899), a prominent ecclesiastical lawyer, and his wife and cousin, Julia (died 1912), daughter of Charles Lawrence, the agriculturist. Cripps had an impressive academic career as a scholar both at Winchester College (1865-71) and at New College, Oxford (1871-5), where he obtained four first classes in mathematical moderations, history, jurisprudence, and civil law. He also played for the university at Association Football. He held a fellowship at St John's College, Oxford, from 1875 until 1881, when he relinquished it on his marriage on 27 October to Theresa Potter (1852-1893), sister of (Martha) Beatrice Webb and Catherine Courtney; they had four sons and one daughter, the youngest son being (Richard) Stafford Cripps. 
Cripps followed his father into a professional legal career, winning a senior studentship to the inns of court in 1876. Called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1877, he published 'A Treatise on the Principles of the Law of Compensation' (1881), which long remained a standard work. He established a large and lucrative practice at the parliamentary bar (until he entered parliament) and in rating, patent, railway, and ecclesiastical cases. With Haldane and Asquith among his juniors, in 1890 he became a queen's counsel. He was made a bencher of his inn in 1893, was appointed attorney-general to three successive princes of Wales from 1895 to 1914, and created KCVO in 1908. He succeeded his father both as vice-chairman and, from 1910 to 1925, as chairman of Buckingham quarter sessions. 
Cripps was proud of a long ancestry, his memoirs printing a pedigree dating from 1207, and as heir to his father's estate of about 2000 acres he counted farming as his chief recreation. He began with conventional beliefs in the priorities of private property, individualism, and personal effort, and equally conventional disapproval of the socialism of his sister- and brother-in-law Beatrice and Sidney Webb. From a strongly religious background, he had a benevolent, tolerant, and optimistic outlook, judged by the Webbs to be the characteristic complacency of a wealthy lawyer. He also had a high-church attachment to existing institutions in church and state. In contrast to his father's political Conservatism his early political opinions were Liberal, but the 1886 home-rule crisis and fear for the church turned him into a Liberal Unionist and then a Conservative. He was elected Conservative MP for the Stroud division of Gloucestershire in 1895, but lost his seat to a Liberal in the 1900 general election. He was returned for the Stretford division of Lancashire at a by-election in 1901, but was again defeated by a Liberal in the 1906 general election. After being out of parliament for four years, he was elected for the Wycombe division of Buckinghamshire in January 1910 and held the seat until January 1914, when he entered the House of Lords. As an MP he served on the select committee on the Jameson raid and the royal commission on local taxation, and hoped for appointment to one of the government law offices. During the tariff reform controversy he remained a free-trader, and during the constitutional crisis of 1910-11 provided a moderating influence, helping to organize support for Balfour and Lansdowne against the Unionist radicals. 
Cripps was most prominent in ecclesiastical issues, becoming a leading lay churchman. A representative from 1890 in the house of laymen of the Canterbury convocation, he served as its chairman from 1911 to 1919. He was chancellor and vicar-general of York province from 1900 to 1914, and from 1902 to 1924 vicar-general of Canterbury province, in which capacity he resisted objections on doctrinal grounds to two controversial episcopal appointments, Charles Gore as bishop of Winchester in 1902 and H. H. Henson as bishop of Hereford in 1918. He was a leading campaigner in defence of church schools, in 1908 opposing Archbishop Davidson's proposed compromise on the Liberal government's 'Education Bill' and carrying a resolution in the Representative Church Council which effectively forced the bill's withdrawal. He also criticized what he considered to be Archbishop Davidson's temporizing attitude towards the government's proposals for Welsh church disestablishment. Dissatisfied, like other high-churchmen, with parliament's interference in church matters, he took a leading part in altering the relationship. In July 1913 he successfully moved a resolution in the Representative Church Council calling for measures to secure the church's 'spiritual independence'. From this emerged the archbishop's committee on church and state from 1913 to 1916, of which he was a member, and which recommended the establishment of the church assembly. After this had been established by the 1919 'Enabling Act', he served from 1920 to 1924 as first chairman of the assembly's house of laity. 
Although Cripps entered parliament as a Conservative, he received his peerage from a Liberal government and obtained office in a Labour government. Faced with a shortage of senior judges, Haldane and Asquith negotiated a special arrangement by which, in January 1914, Cripps was sworn of the privy council in order to serve as an unpaid member of its judicial committee, and was made Baron Parmoor of Frieth to enable him to undertake judicial work in the House of Lords, while retaining the freedom to continue as an active politician. During the First World War his judicial work included chairmanship of the committee to assess damage by enemy naval raids on the north-east coast, and membership of the appeal committee to hear Admiralty prize cases. But the war also began a shift in his political allegiances. He criticized Britain's entry into the war as unnecessary, disliked the war jingoism and its anti-German expressions, and came to regard the war as incompatible with Christian morality. He applied his legal expertise to assist the cause of conscientious objectors, and during 1917 publicly approved the Lansdowne letter and became chairman of a committee supporting the efforts of Archbishop Soderblum of Uppsala to restore peace by means of an International Christian Conference. A co-founder in 1915 of the League of Nations Society, in March 1918 he opened the House of Lords debate supporting the formation of a League of Nations. After the armistice he led deputations urging President Wilson and British ministers to establish the league. As chairman of a Fight the Famine council formed in January 1919, he campaigned around Britain for easier treatment of former enemy countries, visited Germany and Austria to view conditions for himself, and participated in three annual international conferences on economic recovery and world peace, as a result of which he advocated revision of the treaty of Versailles to alleviate the burden upon Germany. In 1920 he was appointed president of the Peace Society. His political reorientation was confirmed by his second marriage on 14 July 1919 to a member of a prominent Quaker family and a co-worker on his various peace committees, Marian Emily Ellis (1878-1952), daughter of John Edward Ellis, colliery owner and Liberal MP. Lady Parmoor was a vice-president of the World Young Women's Christian Association from 1921, and president during 1924-8. 
The 'horrors of the war, and the vengeful spirit' had turned Parmoor 'into something very like an international socialist' ('Diary of Beatrice Webb', 3.346). In the early 1920s he also criticized the coalition government's repressive policies in Ireland and, where discretion allowed, his judicial decisions revealed increased sensitivity towards social injustice and religious intolerance. In these respects he was 'an intriguing appellate judge' (Stevens, 259). Without becoming an economic socialist, his involvement in peace movements had brought him into contact with leading Labour politicians, notably MacDonald. When the opportunity of forming a Labour government unexpectedly arose after the 1923 election, MacDonald was hard-pressed to secure ministers in the House of Lords -- where the Labour Party had no recognized members -- and offered a choice of offices to Parmoor. After obtaining assurances on MacDonald's commitment to international reconciliation, he resigned his church positions and joined the cabinet as lord president of the council with specific responsibility for League of Nations affairs. He participated in the preparations for the London conference on German reparations, and was British representative on the League of Nations council. At the September 1924 meeting of the league assembly he strongly supported the Geneva protocol, the ultimately abortive Anglo-French proposal to establish mechanisms of international arbitration and collective security. After the government's defeat he did not return to judicial work but continued as a Labour spokesman in the House of Lords and remained active in Christian and peace movements, addressing Archbishop Soderblum's international Life and Work Conference at Stockholm in 1925. 
On Haldane's death in 1928 Parmoor was elected Labour leader in the Lords, so when reappointed as lord president in the second Labour government in June 1929 his additional responsibility was leadership of the House of Lords rather than his previous role in League of Nations affairs. Now in his late seventies, he was too old to keep pace with an increasingly aggressive Conservative opposition, and in debates tended to become prolix and confused. In early 1931 ill health disabled him for three months, and MacDonald would have replaced him had there not been an intractable problem of inadequate numbers of possible ministerial recruits in the Lords. During the August 1931 cabinet crisis, he was one of six ministers who resisted a revenue tariff as a means of bridging the budget deficit, but was absent when the fatal vote was taken over the alternative, a cut in unemployment benefits. After the cabinet's resignation, he retired from the leadership of the Labour peers and withdrew from public life. He died at Parmoor, Henley-on-Thames, on 30 June 1941, and was buried at nearby Frieth church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32630


Cripps, Sir (Richard) Stafford (1889-1952), politician and lawyer, was born at Elm Park Gardens, London, on 24 April 1889. He was the fifth and youngest child of Charles Alfred Cripps (1852-1941) and his wife, Theresa ('nee' Potter) (1852-1893). His father, a successful and prosperous barrister, became a Conservative MP and later (as first Baron Parmoor) a Labour cabinet minister. His mother was the sister of Beatrice Potter, who became Beatrice Webb. But for Stafford Cripps these political connections were, in his early years, much less significant than his parents' strong Christian values. His mother died suddenly when he was four; in line with her express wishes, he and his siblings were brought up to be 'undogmatic and unsectarian' (Estorick, 21) in their faith, and to take their religious inspiration directly from the spirit of the 'New Testament'. 
Cripps's high intelligence and capacity for hard work showed itself early. After attending preparatory schools at Reigate and Rottingdean, he moved on to Winchester College. He won a scholarship to New College, Oxford, in 1907, the first ever offered in chemistry. But instead of taking it up, he was persuaded by Professor Sir William Ramsay to study at University College, London. Cripps once more excelled, taking the MSc degree and subsequently co-writing a research paper published under the auspices of the Royal Society. He was also personally popular, as shown by his election as president of the Student Union. But he was not quite the youthful paragon that biographers have made out. He enjoyed gambling, and, as he later admitted, exaggerated his own illnesses in order to gain sympathy. 
During the first general election of 1910, when helping out with his father's campaign in South Buckinghamshire, he met Isobel Swithinbank (1891-1979) ['see 'Cripps, Dame Isobel], whom he married on 12 July the following year, and with whom he had four children, including Sir John Stafford Cripps and Peggy Appiah. He later accounted for his presence at the Conservative headquarters by saying that at this time he was 'almost entirely politically unconscious' (Estorick, 43-4). In fact, he was politically ambivalent. A patriotic, anti-Liberal imperialist, he was none the less sympathetic to the plight of 'the poor slum-beings' (diary, 26 July 1910, Cripps MSS) and had occasional emotional spasms in the direction of socialism. But he did not have any clear idea of how the problem of poverty could be solved, and he retained many strong conservative instincts, for example, against the suffragettes. 
His career was to be made in the law. He was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1913, but his progress was interrupted by the outbreak of war in August 1914. Still under medical treatment from a breakdown he had suffered in June, Stafford did not join up, accepting the view that married men were not yet needed. But he did become an active recruiter and in October crossed to France on a freelance mission to deliver winter comforts to the troops. Once there he determined on joining the Red Cross, and soon became driver of a lorry which Isobel persuaded her father to donate. After twelve months' arduous but unskilled ambulance service, evacuating wounded men through Boulogne, Cripps offered his expertise as a chemist to the newly created Ministry of Munitions, and was posted to Queensferry, near Chester. Here, during the illness of the superintendent in the early months of 1916, he took on full responsibility for one of the biggest munitions factories in Great Britain and worked very long hours. He consequently suffered a more significant physical breakdown, eventually diagnosed as colitis (inflammation of the colon), and spent much of the rest of the war as an invalid. 
This may have served to inhibit his inclination towards the Labour Party, given his sensitivity about his enforced dependence on unearned income. He noted: 'I could never go into Political life as a representative of Labour, being myself one who toils not neither does he spin!' (diary, 5 Oct 1918, Cripps MSS). After he returned to the bar in 1919, he thus concentrated his surplus effort not on politics but on religious work, most especially for the World Alliance for Promoting International Friendship through the Churches, of which he became treasurer. Work at the bar was initially slack, and the purchase and refurbishment of his country house, Goodfellows, in Gloucestershire, put him under financial strain. But his career soon took off, aided by an appearance for the London county council before the railway rates tribunal in 1924-6, and he became Britain's youngest king's counsel in 1927. 
Cripps's work before the tribunal had brought him to the attention of Herbert Morrison, the Labour leader in London. In 1929, with Morrison's encouragement, Cripps joined the Labour Party, now in office, and was soon adopted as prospective parliamentary candidate for West Woolwich. In 1930, however, he accepted an invitation to join Ramsay MacDonald's Labour government immediately as solicitor-general; he received the customary knighthood and in January 1931 won a by-election at Bristol East. Parachuted into a safe seat as a front-bencher, Cripps quickly showed strong parliamentary ability. When MacDonald formed the National Government in August 1931, he invited Cripps to continue as solicitor-general. Cripps declined politely, and, after the government's landslide election victory in October, was one of only three ministers from the previous administration left on the Labour benches in the Commons. Thrown into political prominence, he quickly became intimate with the other two, George Lansbury and Clement Attlee, who became party leader and deputy leader respectively. But the Commons atmosphere made him uncomfortable and he became a teetotaller 'as a protest against the alcoholism' of the Parliamentary Labour Party (Beatrice Webb, diary, 2 Sept 1934, Passfield MSS, BLPES). Although his initial impetus towards Labour had been born of the desire to act as a moderating influence, he now swung sharply to the left. The risk of isolation was mitigated, however, when he deployed his legal skills, without asking a fee, on behalf of the miners in the inquiry into the Gresford colliery disaster of 1934. 
As a prominent member of the newly formed Socialist League (and, after 1933, as its chairman), Cripps attempted to rally Labour's rank and file against the 'reactionary' policy of the trade unions and the party's national executive. He made numerous extreme statements, suggesting, for example, that a future socialist government would be unlikely 'to maintain its position of control without adopting some exceptional means such as the prolongation of the life of Parliament for a further term without an election' (Cripps, 'Can socialism come by constitutional methods?', in Addison and others, 39). He described the League of Nations as an 'International Burglars Union' ('Labour Party Annual Conference Report', 1935, 158) -- a position which even the Soviet ambassador wanted him to moderate -- and, although he bitterly opposed appeasement of Germany, he refused until 1938 to countenance rearmament. This was because he supposed the National Government 'far more likely to be the allies of Fascism than the allies of Russia or any working-class country' ('Hansard 5C', 18 Feb 1937). The German take-over of Austria and, in particular, the Munich crisis helped bring Cripps to the realization that, if war came, he would feel compelled to do whatever he thought he could for his country, whatever the political complexion of its government. In retrospect this appears as the beginning of his transition from the heedless (albeit well-heeled) class warrior of the 1930s to the detached national figure with cross-party authority that he would become later. 
In the immediate term, however, Cripps seemed bound on a trajectory of political self-destruction. His advocacy of a 'united front' with the Communist Party and the Independent Labour Party brought him onto a collision course with Labour's executive and led, in 1937, to the forcible winding up of the Socialist League. In January 1939, desperate to rid the country of the National Government, he put forward the idea of a 'popular front', now to include Liberals as well. He launched a highly personalized campaign to this end, in open defiance of the executive, which expelled him from the party. The annual party conference in May endorsed this decision by 2,100,000 votes to 402,000. 
The outbreak of war in 1939 caught Cripps off guard. He immediately threw up his practice at the bar and offered the government his services, presumptively in a technical or administrative role. With this offer spurned, and driven by a conviction that India, China, Russia, and the USA were the countries of the future, Cripps decided to embark on a world tour, undertaken with a young colleague, Geoffrey Wilson. In India Cripps was warmly received as the friend of Jawaharlal Nehru, an exact contemporary with a provokingly similar background to Cripps's own. Though unofficial in status, Cripps's visit was undertaken with the cognizance of the India Office and was intended to explore the prospects of an agreed plan for progress towards Indian self-government. Encouraged by his reception, and undoubtedly benefiting to some extent from Nehru's good offices in securing this, Cripps evidently hoped to enlist Gandhi's influence, writing after their first meeting: 'I feel there is a much better chance of solution of the problem while he is still alive and in control than there will be if and when he goes' (diary, 20 Dec 1939, Cripps MSS). The viceroy and the India Office, however, remained unmoved. 
From India, Cripps moved on to China, currently resisting Japanese invasion. He based himself for two months at the beginning of 1940 in Chungking (Chongqing), the nationalists' wartime headquarters, where he established some degree of rapport with their leader, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, whose influential wife apparently shared Cripps's reforming instincts. Indeed, Cripps was invited to stay on as a personal adviser to the generalissimo, an offer that briefly tempted him, although the nationalists' increasing friction with the communists was a problem that he could not ignore. From Chungking, Cripps launched his own exploratory visit to Moscow, where he was 'persona grata' as a rare Western apologist for the Soviet Union's actions in recent months, in first concluding its pact with Germany and then occupying Finland. His meeting with the foreign minister, Molotov, was the first British contact since the withdrawal of the ambassador at the end of 1939. Cripps made a report to the foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, with whom he maintained good relations, though without achieving much impression. 
Returning to London via the USA at the end of April 1940, Cripps resumed his efforts for what he called a government of national unity. Despite the fall of Chamberlain in May 1940, after a parliamentary debate on Norway to which Cripps had contributed critical comments, he found himself excluded from the Churchill coalition government, which was constructed on strict party lines. An official posting to the Soviet Union, however, was now offered by the Foreign Office, largely through the good offices of Halifax, supported by his junior minister, R. A. Butler. 
Cripps served as British ambassador to the Soviet Union from June 1940 to January 1942. He left Goodfellows, now too large a commitment once his legal income was gone, and subsequently lived in a more modest but comfortable country home at Frith Hill, near Stroud; Isobel joined him in Moscow, with their daughters Peggy and Theresa, from October 1940 to June 1941. Cripps had initially been charged with a special mission limited to possible economic or strategic co-operation, but the Russians forced the hand of the British government by agreeing to accept him only provided he were a full ambassador. Exceptionally, he remained a member of parliament, thus permitting his easy re-entry to British politics at a moment of his choosing. After one introductory meeting with Molotov, Cripps found himself officially snubbed. With Britain fighting for its very survival, the Russians chose to keep their distance, especially from an ambassador in whom the Foreign Office establishment betrayed some lack of confidence. 
Cripps saw himself as a major political figure with his own mission to accomplish -- to ease relations between Britain and Russia pending the eventual 'divorce' between Hitler and Stalin -- and proposed an initiative over the status of the Baltic states (Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia). Their occupation by Russia struck Cripps as evidence of Russia's security worries rather than of its own imperialist expansion. In the middle of October 1940 Halifax persuaded the war cabinet to support the proposals that Cripps now put forward. His optimism was soon deflated with the announcement on 9 November that the elusive Molotov was off to Berlin for the first top-level talks since the signing of the Nazi-Soviet pact, fifteen months previously. Having spent four months persuading the Foreign Office to offer concessions over the Baltic states, Cripps found that it could not abruptly be unpersuaded, even though by December his own line had changed. His critics erred, however, in putting down everything to 'disillusionment'. He had written at the outset: 'One thing has been proved here -- so far -- and that is that you cannot leap into Utopia in one bound' (letter to his daughter Diana, 8 Sept 1940, Cripps MSS). But perhaps his realism about the Soviet Union became infused with a degree of cynicism. Correspondingly, his conviction that his own government was doing the right thing, if often in the wrong way, was strengthened. 
One incident that has bulked disproportionately large is Churchill's charge that Cripps failed to ensure that Stalin received a personal warning of Hitler's plan ('Barbarossa') to attack Russia. The fact is that Cripps long sought unavailingly to alert the Foreign Office to such a possibility, without appreciable success, and that Stalin had a range of much more circumstantial intelligence reports available, which he ignored. 
Early in June 1941 Cripps was recalled to London, as a disciplinary step, since the Foreign Office had built up a formidable dossier against the behaviour of their eccentric ambassador. Vindication came with the launch of Barbarossa on 22 June. Churchill and Eden now found it easy to close ranks with Cripps, who was summoned at once to Chequers. The prime minister's broadcast that night, balancing emotion with realism in its support of Russia, tallied with Cripps's own analysis. On his return to Moscow, Cripps was joined by a British military mission, and an agreement on mutual assistance was finalized with unwonted speed. Its signature on 12 July was the high point of Cripps's diplomatic career. Though Cripps vigorously represented the demands of the Soviet government, he was by no means its creature. In economic negotiations, Cripps chided the Foreign Office as 'still imbued with the appeasement attitude and dont see that people respect you if you stand up to them in a dignified way' (diary, 11 Aug 1941). Cripps's tough tactics in handling the Russians went along with his strategy for forging a robust alliance of equals. 
Successful in pressing for an Anglo-American conference with the Russians, as finally convened in Moscow at the end of September, Cripps found that the entire discussion of supplies for Russia was to be kept in the hands of the visiting dignitaries: the British minister of supply, Lord Beaverbrook, and the American roving ambassador, Averell Harriman. His personal treatment by Beaverbrook left Cripps wary of him as a colleague and, more important, deplorably under-informed about the course of discussions from which he had been excluded. Moreover, within days, the whole war situation deteriorated in ways that further marginalized Cripps, with the enforced evacuation of the embassy on 15 October to Kuibyshev, 530 miles to the east on the River Volga. Worst of all, though the diplomatic corps was now in Kuibyshev, the Soviet government was not. 
For the first time since going to Russia, Cripps looked hard at his own political prospects. His increasingly sharp clashes with Churchill had a political undertone of which both men were aware. Cripps now saw himself as a political exile, and submitted what was virtually his resignation. With Eden now about to visit Moscow, Cripps was browbeaten or charmed, yet again, into staying at his post. The Moscow talks, starting on 16 December, saw him as a participant throughout, flanking Eden and facing Stalin and Molotov. But, following the dramatic entry into the war of the USA, Churchill came to think Cripps a bigger menace in Russia than at home and sent permission for him to return to London, which he did in January 1942. 
Cripps was now widely hailed as the man who had brought Russia into the war. Churchill, his own position weakened by a string of British set-backs, notably the fall of Singapore, sought to conciliate Cripps, and in late February 1942 brought him into the government as lord privy seal and leader of the House of Commons. A novice in the war cabinet, Cripps had neither a strong department nor a secure party base -- only the evanescent support of public opinion. He chose to invest his windfall political capital in an initiative to break the political impasse in India, now a crucial theatre of war in the path of Japanese advance. 
Cripps exploited US pressure to secure Churchill's reluctant agreement to the 'Cripps offer'. This was a promise of self-government for India via a post-war constituent assembly, subject only to the right of any province not to accede. Only a month after joining the war cabinet, Cripps flew out to Delhi. There he threw himself into a whirlwind of negotiation, in order to win consent from all sections of Indian opinion, reporting nightly to a sceptical viceroy (the second marquess of Linlithgow). Within days Gandhi's aphorism -- that the Cripps offer was 'a post-dated cheque' -- was in circulation. What Cripps offered was not only a post-war promise, however, but a substantial payment on account in the form of an immediate approximation to cabinet government. There were two provisos: that strategic defence issues would remain in British hands for the duration of the war and that the viceroy's co-operation in operating the new conventions would be forthcoming. 
The Muslim League under Mohamed Ali Jinnah was ready to accept the package, provided that Congress would too. Here agreement seemed tantalizingly close, the more so after intervention from President Roosevelt's representative in Delhi, Colonel Louis Johnson, who helped Cripps devise a formula on defence acceptable to Nehru and the Congress president, Abul Kalam Azad. Only Linlithgow failed to co-operate; but this proved enough to undermine Congress's faith in Cripps's assurances about how the conventions of cabinet responsibility would be operated by the viceroy. It was this, rather than sharp practice on Cripps's part or sabotage from London, that doomed the Cripps mission. 
The aftermath of the Cripps mission was piquant. The political vacuum was filled by Gandhi's Quit India campaign, soon accepted by Congress. Conversely, Cripps saw the opportunity to redeem his disappointment in Delhi by a propaganda triumph, aimed particularly at the USA, with the aim of unmasking Gandhi as the cause of failure. One result of the Cripps mission, then, was to embitter attitudes in India, not least towards Cripps himself, while influential sections of American opinion swung to a less critical view of British policy. In this respect, Churchill owed a substantial, if largely unacknowledged, debt to Cripps. 
Their working relationship in the war cabinet was not happy. Cripps chafed under a regime which he considered inefficient, while his own talents were largely wasted as leader of the house, a role in which he was weakened by his lack of either party allegiance or political finesse. That he seriously thought that he could displace Churchill remains unlikely, but he showed himself prepared to risk his career in an attempt to remodel the structure of government. Failing to carry his proposals by the autumn of 1942, Cripps patriotically deferred his resignation while the military outcome in the north African desert remained in doubt. Once the victory at El Alamein had strengthened Churchill's hand, a reinvigorated prime minister was ready for a showdown with Cripps, who left the war cabinet in November, accepting the less glamorous post of minister of aircraft production. 
Cripps's dedication and powers of rapid comprehension suited him well for the technical tasks that faced him at his new ministry, in spite of early clashes with its highly able chief executive, Sir Wilfrid Freeman. Cripps's time at the Ministry of Aircraft Production alerted him to the complexities of industrial planning. In contrast to his pre-war dogmatism, he now became convinced of the need for varying degrees of nationalization and control in different industries. One significant innovation was the idea of joint production committees of workers and employers, an experiment in industrial democracy which contributed to his new-found belief in 'democratic planning', dependent for its success on all social classes working together voluntarily in the national interest. It was this kind of emphasis on common efforts to tackle economic problems that became his great theme upon his return to the Labour Party in 1945. Appointed president of the Board of Trade by Attlee after Labour's victory of that year, his emphasis on collective self-denial -- by restraining consumption to promote economic recovery -- made his name a byword for austerity. 
For eighteen months the Board of Trade had to compete for Cripps's attention with India, now being extricated from the thralls of empire. It is striking here how far the historiography has diminished Cripps's role. For it was Cripps who arguably offered India its last chance to avert partition and bloodshed, as Indian politicians as diverse as Vallabhbhai Patel and Chakravarti Rajagopalachari came to appreciate. From March to June 1946 Cripps made his third and longest visit to India charged with seeking agreement on the transfer of power from Britain to an independent government. Though part of a cabinet delegation with two colleagues (Lord Pethick-Lawrence as secretary of state and Albert Alexander as first lord of the Admiralty), Cripps was seen as the man in charge. 
It was Gandhi's proven ability to thwart a settlement that made his position pivotal. Cripps decided that no trouble was to be spared in courting him, despite the qualms of the viceroy, Lord Wavell, who sat with the ministers through protracted formal meetings with all parties. Cripps saw the alternatives starkly: either a negotiated settlement or bloodshed. When the talks adjourned to Simla, in the cool of the hills, hopes of a rapprochement between Nehru and Jinnah seemed to blossom, only to be blighted by a sudden frost. Back in Delhi, everyone waited instead upon an initiative from Cripps. 
The cabinet delegation's statement of 16 May was essentially Cripps's attempt to build on the measure of agreement revealed at Simla and to erect this into a system of government. His strategy was to accommodate the Muslim demand for some kind of self-government by means of a three-tier structure, in which provinces could opt for grouping at an intermediate level below that of a union of all India, which would be responsible for certain common functions, including defence. The underlying problem was that Congress found the notion of grouping repugnant, and therefore refused to grant it the sort of legitimacy necessary to entice the Muslim League into such constitutional arrangements. Within days of this statement, Cripps faced a crisis that was both political and personal. Having set great store by gaining Gandhi's approval, Cripps suddenly found that he could not rely upon it; and his own physical collapse at this point was hardly coincidental. On his sickbed Cripps sent a personal appeal to Gandhi, only to find it rebuffed with a clear imputation on his probity. 
Securing the Muslim League's acceptance of a scheme for an all-India union was actually the cabinet delegation's greatest achievement. Despite the league's commitment to Pakistan, it was induced into a constitutional scheme providing for a united India -- on certain conditions, the most important of which was a recognition of grouping. Cripps trusted Congress to make a reality of that inducement; the league soon concluded that the behaviour of the Congress leaders left it with no basis for such trust, and thus with no reason to compromise its own aim of Pakistan. At the time neither Nehru nor Patel, much to Cripps's exasperation, was prepared to counter Gandhi's influence, which was crucial in determining this outcome. Wavell, for his part, blamed Cripps for dishonesty and duplicity in accepting Congress's qualified assurances as consent. The issue was really how far political finesse could be justified in brokering a messy compromise from which each side naturally hoped to gain different advantages. Like early steps in any peace process, the cabinet delegation's scheme did not tie up all the historically generated loose ends at once, but opened the way to incremental co-operation in creating, building, and sustaining trust. 
The fact that the crux of the whole issue now lay within the ambit of Indian politics was recognized by Cripps. By the end of 1946 Indian policy had reached an impasse which was broken only when Attlee made a striking move: the appointment of the glamorous figure of Admiral Lord Mountbatten as the last viceroy (in place of Wavell), combined with setting a date for British withdrawal. It was not, contrary to his later claims, Mountbatten himself who imposed a deadline for British withdrawal; at most he tinkered with the date itself. Attlee had already fixed on this plan by the time he decided to appoint Mountbatten, as is now generally accepted. But the records suggest that this proposal actually came from Cripps, who was also largely responsible for bringing forward the name of Mountbatten, to whose subsequent efforts he gave unwavering support throughout the transfer of power in 1947. 
Getting back into his stride at the Board of Trade, Cripps emerged as an increasingly strong figure in an increasingly beleaguered government. He introduced legislation which allowed the creation of development councils, intended to facilitate 'tripartite' co-operation between government, employers, and workers at an industry-wide level, although the innovation proved largely unsuccessful. He also played a key role in drafting the landmark 'Economic Survey for 1947', a government white paper in which he reiterated his belief that planning should be reconciled to the maximum possible extent with free individual choice. 
The fuel and convertibility crises of 1947, however, contributed to a sense that the government was drifting, perhaps sinking. Eager to see control restored, Cripps attempted that September to replace Attlee with Ernest Bevin as prime minister. Attlee coolly faced Cripps down, offering him instead a new post as minister for economic affairs, independent of the Treasury, and responsible for economic planning. Cripps accepted, but the arrangement lasted only six weeks. Hugh Dalton resigned as chancellor after a budget leak, and Cripps replaced him, while retaining the economic affairs portfolio -- a unique concentration of authority in determining economic policy. 
Cripps's priorities were: exports first, capital investment second, and the needs, comforts, and amenities of ordinary consumers last. However, his belief in 'democratic planning' made him reluctant to achieve his ends via compulsion, so he increasingly relied on exhortation, both of workers and employers. This had some notable results, in particular the Trades Union Congress's acceptance of a two-year wage freeze after 1948. But, as the war-weary public's forbearance dimmed, it was hardly surprising that this proved to be a strategy of progressively diminishing returns. Moreover, owing to the inadequacies of its propaganda, the government had difficulty getting its message across. 
Cripps and his colleagues had, then, failed to create the detailed and effective system of physical planning that Labour thinkers had envisaged before 1945. It was logical, therefore, to try another policy -- a less 'dirigiste' form of economic control based on the restraint of aggregate demand. Cripps thus deliberately and explicitly achieved large budgetary surpluses as a means to this end; his 1948 budget is generally considered a landmark of applied Keynesianism. Arguably the real architects of this policy were two of Cripps's key officials, Edwin Plowden and Robert Hall. Hall believed that Cripps's skill as a barrister enabled him to make more of the arguments of his subordinates than they ever would themselves, leading to the paradoxical judgement: 'He did not really understand the basis of economic planning as we developed it under his regime, but he was entirely responsible for its development' ('Hall Diaries', 222). Never a bookish man, Cripps had neither read Keynes nor assimilated his theoretical analysis. 
The chancellor's authority was undermined by the devaluation crisis of 1949. The decision to devalue sterling -- which Cripps announced on 17 September -- was in fact taken by a triumvirate of less senior ministers, approved by the cabinet, and conveyed to him in Zurich, where he was convalescing. He acquiesced, although he was by no means convinced of the rightness of the action. The episode also led to a breach with Churchill, who accused Cripps of dishonesty, given that he had previously stated that devaluation would not take place. Cripps, of course, had had little other option. 
Now gravely ill, and with his reputation damaged, Cripps found his macroeconomic strategy being increasingly questioned by his colleagues, including even the prime minister. The most serious challenge came from Hugh Gaitskell, who had played a key role in the decision to devalue. Early in 1950 Gaitskell wrote a memorandum that criticized the tendency to move from direct physical controls to indirect budgetary methods of economic management. This view won wide support from other ministers, and Cripps was obliged to endorse Gaitskell's general line. This is not to say that there was any immediate threat to Cripps's position; but, with Gaitskell emerging as an obvious successor, Cripps was no longer clearly indispensable. 
Sickness finally forced Cripps's resignation, both as chancellor and as an MP; this was announced on 20 October 1950. He travelled to his habitual retreat, the Bircher Benner clinic in Zurich, and also received treatment in Lausanne. Not only was he suffering from tubercular spondylitis, a spinal infection, but he also developed stomach tumours and was later diagnosed as having a form of bone marrow cancer, which ultimately proved fatal. He put up a remarkable physical fight, and in the autumn of 1951 was briefly able to return to Britain. A relapse early in 1952 compelled him to go back to Switzerland; he died at the Bircher Benner clinic, Keltenstrasse 48, Zurich, on 21 April of that year, and was cremated in Zurich three days later. 
There were many contradictions or at least paradoxes. Latterly Cripps's public image was constructed, especially through the press, in ways that positively emphasized his leadership potential during the war but rebounded negatively against him afterwards. In the 1940s his lean appearance, his rimless spectacles, his well-known vegetarianism, and his teetotalism contributed to an impression of asceticism; and he ultimately gave up his only 'vice', heavy smoking, on doctor's orders. Yet Cripps had another side -- personally warm and privately tolerant -- which suggests that he was no narrow-minded killjoy. It was a major propaganda coup for the Conservatives to suggest that post-war privations were imposed on the hard-pressed British people not through necessity but through choice: that Cripps as economic supremo relished the hair-shirt measures that he preached with such high-minded fervour. In death as in life, his reputation hinged on one inescapable word: austerity. 
Cripps was a man from a background of established wealth, who gave up an income of $30,000 a year in 1939; whose early political career was as a prominent left-wing rebel and fellow-traveller of the communists. Conversely, in the 1940s he emerged as a central figure in the establishment of a new post-war consensus, especially in economic policy. His wartime role as ambassador in Moscow propelled him into the top rank of British politics, alone able to rival Churchill as a wartime leader, albeit briefly and perhaps not wholly deservedly. Yet Cripps's insight into the great unresolved problem of India was far less blinkered and flawed than that of Churchill, and here Cripps surely deserved better for his tireless commitment in pursuit of a peaceful resolution of the impasse. In many ways he is remembered for the wrong reasons. 


@@@@@


doc= 32631


Cripps, Wilfred Joseph (1841-1903), writer on silver, was born on 8 June 1841 in London, the eldest surviving child of William Cripps (1804/5-1848), barrister and MP for Cirencester, and his wife (and cousin), Mary Anne Harrison, daughter of Benjamin Harrison (1771-1856), treasurer of Guy's Hospital. The Cripps family, whose wealth came from the wool trade, had been prominent citizens of Cirencester since the sixteenth century. Cripps's grandfather Joseph Cripps (1765-1847) sat as an independently minded MP for the town in 1806-12 and 1818-41. He was succeeded in the representation by his son William Cripps (Wilfred's father). A Conservative, he was made a lord of the Treasury in 1845, supported Peel over the repeal of the corn laws, and died on 11 May 1848. 
Wilfred Joseph Cripps was educated at Kensington grammar school and at King's College, London, and Trinity College, Oxford, where he was admitted in 1859 and graduated BA in 1863 before proceeding MA in 1866. He took an active part in the volunteer movement, frequently attending the rifle competitions at Wimbledon. In May 1865 he was called to the bar at the Middle Temple and, like his father, practised for a few years on the Oxford circuit. On 31 May 1870 he married Maria Harriet Arabella Daniel-Tyssen (died 1881), second daughter of John Robert Daniel-Tyssen. 
It is for his research and publications in the field of decorative arts, specifically silver studies, that Cripps deserves to be remembered. His interest in old silver began in the early 1870s, when he was introduced by William, fifth Earl Bathurst, to Charles Octavius Swinnerton Morgan, the antiquary, who entrusted Cripps with his notes on the subject. In 1878 Cripps published 'Old English Plate', his major scholarly work. This drew on the researches of Sir Augustus Wollaston Franks, Morgan himself, William Chaffers, and others, but brought them to a wider audience, and thereby greatly stimulated the demand for antique silver. Nine editions of the manual appeared between 1878 and 1906, with each new edition containing fresh material; there were subsequent reprints in 1927, 1967, and 1977. Cripps's interest in the subject was broad: in 1880 he published 'Old French Plate' (2nd edn, 1893), and in 1881 he produced 'College and Corporation Plate: a handbook to the reproductions of silver plate in the South Kensington Museum, from celebrated English collections'. His paper on the old church plate of Northumberland and Durham, read before the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne, was later published ('Archaeologia Aeliana', 1st ser., 16, 249-67). 
Cripps was recognized as a leading authority on silver, and became an adviser to the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum). In October 1880, with the museum's director, Sir Francis Philip Cunliffe-Owen, he persuaded the Russian government to allow the reproduction of plate from the magnificent imperial collection using the electrotyping process. The success of their enterprise did much to advance the study of silver, through the copies that were lent to art schools and used to illustrate textbooks. He also helped to acquire important silver for the museum, notably Elizabethan plate from the Mostyn family in 1885. In 1880 Cripps was a member of the English subcommission connected with the exhibition of gold and silver work at Amsterdam ('The Athenaeum', 28 Feb 1880, 289). 
Cripps was also interested in archaeology. He excavated Roman sites in Cirencester and reported on them to the Society of Antiquaries, of which he became a fellow in 1880. He served in the Royal North Gloucester militia, from which he retired with the rank of major, and completed the regimental history begun by Sir J. Maxwell Steele-Groves (published in 1875). He was made a CB in 1889, and in 1894 received the honorary freedom of the Goldsmiths' Company. He took in a keen interest in local affairs, especially education, and in politics he was active in the Conservative cause. 
Following the death of his first wife in 1881, Cripps married, on 2 December 1884, Helena Augusta Wilhelmine, Countess Bismarck, daughter of Count Bismarck of Scherstein, Prussia, a relative of the Iron Chancellor. There were no children of either marriage. Cripps died at his residence, Cripps Mead, Cirencester, on 26 October 1903, and was buried in Cirencester cemetery. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32632


Crockett, Samuel Rutherford (1859-1914), Free Church of Scotland minister and novelist, was born Samuel Crocket on 24 September 1859 at the farm of Little Duchrae, Balmaghie, Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, natural son of Annie Crocket (1828-1879), dairymaid, daughter of William Crocket (1784-1875), tenant farmer, and his wife, Mary Dickson (1802-1884). Crockett gave his father's name as 'David Blaine Crockett, farmer' on his marriage certificate. His grandparents, although Cameronians, made his country childhood very happy. Stories of covenanting forebears were adventures to him: he acted them out like cowboys and indians. From the Free Church school at Castle Douglas he won in 1876 an annual $20 bursary to Edinburgh University, supplementing it by miscellaneous journalism. 
Thereafter Crockett explored Europe as a travelling tutor, and in 1881 entered New College, Edinburgh, as a Free Church divinity student, evangelized in slums, added Rutherford to his name, and continued his ever-increasing journalism. In 1886 he was called to the Free Church in Penicuik, Midlothian, and published 'Dulce cor', his poems. On 10 March 1887 he married Ruth Mary Milner (1861-1932), daughter of a Manchester philanthropist and mill owner, whom he had met through his writing. They had four children, on whom Crockett based his six humorous books for children. 
Crockett continued his journalism, rising early to write before starting his pastoral duties, which included literary and scientific talks to his congregation, following Free Church policy. Missions to miners and paper mill workers increased his warm sympathy for the poor; he was a leader in relief work after the 1889 Mauricewood pit disaster, and a hard-working, well-liked minister. Sketches of ministers and congregations, slyly mocking humbug in both, which he contributed to a Glasgow religious weekly, were so popular that twenty-four, published in 1893 as 'The Stickit Minister', brought Crockett immediate fame. The success in 1894 of 'The Raiders' and 'The Lilac Sunbonnet', an adventure story and a romance, both evoking Galloway's wild beauty, encouraged him, impatient with Free Church narrowness, to risk full-time writing. 
Often dismissed as merely a kailyard writer of sentimental, old-fashioned tales of Scottish rural life, Crockett inclined rather to the sensational, borrowing plots from experience, tradition, and his enormous library, taking liberties with history and exaggerating. He called himself a romancer but his hatred of cruelty, his sardonic humour, and his vigorous description and characterization in Scots and English came through with gusto, whether about covenanters ('The Men of the Moss Hags'), sixteenth-century Ayrshire feuds and Sawny Bean the macabre Scottish cannibal ('The Grey Man'), Edinburgh slums ('Cleg Kelly'), the tragic fifteenth-century Douglases ('The Black Douglas', 'Maid Margaret'), his own childhood melodramatically heightened ('Kit Kennedy'), or nineteenth-century Italian banditti ('The Silver Skull'). His range was wide and varied -- sixty-three books in twenty years, mostly novels and collections of short stories -- but every Crockett was different; many readers were disappointed. 
Of immense stature, an alpine climber, golfer, and far-travelled photographer, Crockett was, however, never strong; weakened by recurrent malaria and enteritis, he nevertheless had to write, wintering abroad and returning home to Penicuik, Peebles, or Auchencairn in summer. His letters show cheerful courage, but his novels display strain and flagging power. He died suddenly at Villa Philip, Tarascon, near Avignon, southern France, on 16 April 1914, and was brought home to Balmaghie churchyard for burial on 23 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 32633


Croft, Henry Page, first Baron Croft (1881-1947), politician, was born at Fanhams Hall, Ware, Hertfordshire, on 22 June 1881. He was the second son and youngest of the eight children of Richard Benyon Croft (1843-1912), an officer in the Royal Navy from 1858 to 1873, who later joined the business of Henry Page (1843-1912), a prosperous Hertford grain trader and maltster, after marrying Page's only child and heir, Anne Elizabeth (1843-1921), Henry Page Croft's mother. On his father's side, he was descended from the Croft family of Croft Castle, baronets. Raised in relative luxury, he attended St David's School, Reigate, Eton College, and Shrewsbury School, where he showed plenty of prowess in rowing but more modest academic ability. With his father's encouragement he went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, to study chemistry. He captained the boat club, but left to join the family business in 1902 without taking a degree, his elder brother, Richard Page Croft (1872-1961) having been severely wounded in the South African War. Quickly mastering the demands of both the corn trade and the brewing industry, he also gained valuable political insights into many of the problems then facing British commerce. On 10 July 1907 he married Nancy Beatrice (died 1949), daughter of Sir Robert Hudson Borwick (later first Baron Borwick), a businessman, and had three daughters and a son. 
Like so many other young Conservatives of his generation, Croft was drawn into the world of politics by Joseph Chamberlain's tariff reform campaign. His memoirs liken his frequent trips to Highbury to a 'pilgrim going to Mecca' (Croft, 'Life of Strife', 46-7); and the combination of Joe's organizational crusading zeal and intense imperial patriotism was to leave an indelible imprint on him. Thereafter, enthusiasm for empire (in particular for its self-governing regions), a fear of at first the dominions and then later India spinning out of the imperial orbit, and a deeply rooted belief in the capacity of the colonies to contribute to Britain's economic and spiritual well-being, were consistently at the centre of his political outlook. 
But Croft's imperialism was of the constructive variety: for idle imperialists he had no time at all. Like a thriving business, the empire needed close attention, careful management, and an eye constantly on the future. The passivity of the state, or of its political leaders, was thus to be condemned. What was required was creative and dynamic government, with administrative and legislative programmes aimed at furthering 'imperial unity'. Bringing the self-governing dominions into closer contact with Britain was the major theme of his 'The Path of Empire' (1912), which had an introduction by Joseph Chamberlain. This, in turn, demanded attention to the form as well as the substance of political life, and it was here that Croft was to excel. His organizational and campaigning skills were harnessed to a variety of pre-war right-wing political movements -- the Tariff Reform League (TRL), the Confederacy, Reveille, and the Imperial Union -- all of which saw the Chamberlainite policy of preferential tariffs as crucial to the ability of Britain and the empire to survive in an increasingly competitive and hostile international environment. Possibly for the first time in British politics, here was a cause which could so inspire a group of men (and women) that they would make party serve the interests of empire, not the other way round. Whether within or beyond the pale of the Unionist Party, Croft showed throughout his life a facility for experimenting with new types of political organization which made for a turbulent and tortuous but not entirely unrewarding parliamentary career. 
Before the First World War, Croft's contribution to the tariff reform campaign was immense. He began by traversing east Hertfordshire -- in a dog cart with a stout cob belonging to his father -- to set up local branches of the TRL. Within months fifteen branches were established with a combined membership of 2036. These branches remained among the most active within the league a decade later. In 1906 he contested the parliamentary constituency of Lincoln, whose sitting member, Charles Seely, was a strong Unionist free trader. Croft came bottom of the poll, but Seely was also defeated, the split Conservative vote letting a Liberal in. Defending his stand Croft stated, 'I much prefer an open enemy as a member for Lincoln than a professing friend who will stab me in the back' (Witherell, 43). This intransigent attitude thrust Croft to the centre of the Confederacy, a secret society of fifty or so youthful and ardent tariff reformers who from 1907 to 1909 pressed the party leader, Arthur Balfour, to commit himself to their cause, while trying to purge or purify the parliamentary party of free trade MPs and candidates. In 1910 Croft was elected by a narrow majority to the Christchurch division of Hampshire (having campaigned there vigorously for the previous three years). He remained in the House of Commons for thirty years, retaining the Bournemouth half of his constituency when it was divided in 1918. 
The successors to the Confederacy were the Reveille movement and the Imperial Union. The former was founded by Croft in the summer of 1910 out of frustration with 'the sleeping sickness' to which he felt the Unionist Party had succumbed. Its aim was to shift party policy from a negative defence of the 'status quo' to a positive programme of national defence, tariff reform and imperial union, small ownership, and poor law reform. In effect, this amounted to a frontal attack on Balfour as party leader. Indeed, Balfour's tactical pledge in December 1910 not to impose food duties until submitting them to the verdict of a referendum had so incensed Croft and his co-organizer, Lord Willoughby de Broke, that, like Leo Maxse, they were convinced that he 'must go'. The Imperial Mission, an empire-wide movement active from 1911 to 1913, which Croft chaired, was particularly concerned with the danger of a trade reciprocity agreement between Canada and the USA (Croft visited Canada to support Robert Borden's campaign against such an agreement), but also organized rallies in England, especially in the north. In 1912 Croft became vice-chairman of the Tariff Reform League's organizing committee (he became its chairman in 1916), and in 1913 he succeeded George Wyndham as head of the league's Lancashire, Cheshire, and north-west counties federation, and was one of the few Unionist MPs to refuse to put his name to the memorial stating full confidence in Bonar Law's tariff policy. Croft believed that the tariff reform campaign would best be advanced by grass roots political activism, and that constituency work was vital in proving that preference was potentially a popular cause. 
In November 1914 Croft went to France with the 1st volunteer battalion of the Hertfordshire regiment, which he had joined as an undergraduate, and which he was to command within a year. He had previously written on national defence, arguing for the necessity of a 'national citizen army' as an integral part of military policy (H. P. Croft, 'A citizen army', in Lord Malmesbury, ed., 'The New Order: Studies in Unionist Policy', 1908, pp. 255-68). He fought on the Somme in 1916 as commander of the 68th infantry brigade and was twice mentioned in dispatches. After spending twenty-two months at the front -- longer than any other MP -- he returned to Britain to take up his seat in the House of Commons. His wartime experience hardened the political opinions which he had formed over the previous decade. Having witnessed the selflessness and bravery of men at the front he became more intolerant of the pragmatism and opportunism of politicians at home. Having felt at first hand the spirit of patriotism in the trenches, he was outraged at the pettiness and sordidness of the party system, not least at Lloyd George's sale of honours for party funds. Having watched the damage inflicted by German U-boats on Britain's food supplies, he was more than ever convinced of the need for an economic policy which would secure the greatest possible production of all the necessities of life under the British flag. And having seen the soldiers of Britain's dominions spill their blood on the battlefields of France he insisted that this be recognized by increasing the involvement of their political leaders in the management of the empire's affairs. 
Determined that Britain should learn the lessons of the war, Croft resigned from the Tariff Reform League (along with its chairman, Viscount Duncannon) in August 1917 to form a new National Party, in order to oppose the 'corrupt compromises' of the coalition, and to strive for the principles of 'National Production and Imperial Unity'. In addition to tariffs, the National Party advocated neo-corporatist ideas (for example trade associations and a 'standard comfort wage') to deal with unemployment and poverty; a strict peace treaty with Germany; stiff restrictions on alien immigration; and publication of the details of party funds. It briefly claimed seven MPs and eighteen peers, as well as press support from the 'Morning Post', 'The Globe', and its own monthly journal, 'National Opinion' (published from October 1917 to November 1922). Twenty-five candidates were fielded at the 1918 election, but only two (Croft and Sir Richard Ashmole Cooper) were returned. None the less, the National Party received just over 94,000 votes -- one of the highest polls (in percentage terms) achieved by any minor party in the twentieth century. In January 1921 it was decided not to contest any more seats, and shortly afterwards the National Party was absorbed into the ranks of the Conservative 'die-hards' who, while divided over domestic policy, were united against the coalition's policy of buying off Irish, Indian, and Egyptian nationalists with constitutional concessions. Following the fall of Lloyd George, the die-hards lost momentum and Croft returned to the Conservative fold (his Bournemouth constituency association had remained loyal to him throughout this period). He was created a baronet in February 1924. 
As chairman of the influential Empire Industries Association (EIA), Croft took a leading part in the revived agitation for tariffs from 1927 to 1931. Like the TRL, the EIA's propaganda emphasized the importance of developing the resources of Britain's colonies and expanding trade within the empire -- 'Empire Trade saves Great Britain', as he was apt to declare (H. P. Croft, 'The Crisis: How to Restore Prosperity', 1931, 1). But it also made even greater play of the need to safeguard home industries and to prevent the domestic market from being 'exploited' by foreign producers. Its campaigning on this issue was unremitting, and often took the form of protests on behalf of specific industries: iron and steel, lace and embroidery, motor vehicles, for example. Under his guidance the EIA quickly became a force to be reckoned with. Little attempt was made to enlist the support of the trade unions, his attitude to organized labour having hardened since the war. The EIA was also more accommodating towards the Conservative Party leadership: its message was disseminated by the press and platform, but it decided to work locally through existing party organizations rather than to form rival EIA branches. The EIA likewise avoided a confrontation with the Conservative leadership on the issue of food duties and preference, despite its frustrations with the limitations imposed by Baldwin's election pledge. Croft's own contribution to this campaign was huge, and it was partly owing to him that pro-tariff resolutions were secured at Conservative Party conferences in Scarborough (1926), Cardiff (1927), and Yarmouth (1928). By late 1928 an EIA memorial on the steel industry attracted the signatures of 200 MPs. Of course, the Ottawa tariff agreements (1932) -- a series of bilateral agreements between Britain and the dominions establishing a system of imperial preference -- were ultimately a response to world depression. But the vigorous lobbying and propaganda activity of the EIA had helped to promote the idea that a solution to Britain's economic problems lay in the empire. Croft, who was a key figure in this process, later reflected that the decisions of the Ottawa conference had placed a seal on the great policy which Joseph Chamberlain had given to the empire, and completed the main objective of his own political life. 
In the early to mid-1930s Croft joined Churchill in the fight against Indian constitutional reform -- what was the use of campaigning for thirty years to promote imperial unity, he asked, only to stand by and watch the end of British rule in India? To Croft, the policy of granting India greater self-government was a total anathema, a betrayal of the providential mission bestowed by God on the British nation in the form of its empire. His faith in Britain's right and duty to govern India was unshakeable: 'our ideal of government is the nearest approach to Christianity, and to exchange it for government which may lean towards the precepts of the Hindu religion and the ideals of the worship of Shiva or Kali is quite definitely, in my view, a 'spiritual abdication'. (Studdert-Kennedy, 349)' He also firmly believed that India's problems were economic, not political, and that the reforms would 'sharpen not soften communal strife' (Croft, 'Life of Strife', 237). These convictions brought him into conflict yet again with the Conservative leadership. Before its annual conference in Birmingham in 1933 he circulated a pamphlet entitled 'The Salvation of India' to every delegate of every constituency body, an infringement of an unwritten rule that MPs must not attempt to interfere with constituency affairs. He was typically unapologetic, stating that he would 'never hesitate personally to address any communications to Conservatives at any time when I consider that there is a danger to British or Imperial interests' ('Memoirs of a Conservative: J. C. C. Davidson's Memoirs and Papers, 1910-37', ed. R. R. James, 1969, 396). 
Even with Churchill's emergence as their leader, however, the die-hards of the 1930s fared little better than their predecessors a decade before. The more liberal direction of Baldwin's and Hoare's India policy was not to be changed, and the 'Government of India Act' was passed in 1935, Croft having spoken against it in parliament nearly 300 times. He never wavered in his belief that the British empire was 'the greatest instrument for the advancement of Christian ideals in the world' (Studdert-Kennedy, 350). From 1936 to 1939 he continued to agitate on imperial affairs, along with Amery, George Lloyd, Alan Lennox Boyd, and Austen Chamberlain. A mass meeting was staged at the Albert Hall in July 1936 to mark the centenary of Joseph Chamberlain's birth, and to launch a new national campaign for empire unity. 
Though Croft found himself temporarily estranged from Churchill and his friends when he supported the Munich agreement in 1938, his contribution to the India Defence League, and his earlier co-operation with the anti-appeasement rebels, were not forgotten, and after Churchill became prime minister, Croft was elevated to the peerage as Baron Croft of Bournemouth in May 1940, and was made joint parliamentary under-secretary for war (with Edward Grigg), answering for the War Office in the House of Lords. His earlier advocacy of a citizen army made him 'a true believer' in the Home Guard, formed in May 1940 in response to the German invasion threat. He attracted ridicule, though, for his defence in the House of Lords (4 February 1942) of distributing pikes to the Home Guard in the absence of sufficient firearms; these became known as 'Croft's pikes' (Mackenzie, 179, 100). He retained his post in Churchill's short-lived caretaker government of 1945. He died at the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 7 December 1947. 
Croft was described as a 'tower of strength', 'indefatigable worker' and 'stalwart fighter' by Leo Amery, who lamented that Croft had never received the recognition that he deserved (Amery, vol. 3). His boundless energy, organizational flair, and passionate commitment to the empire helped to sustain a succession of right-wing movements; these encountered mixed fortunes but are integral to the history of twentieth-century Conservatism. This left little time for recreation or even, perhaps, for his family; his son-in-law, Manfred Uhlman, described Croft's attitude toward his children as 'correct, cool and reserved' (Uhlman, 208). Not surprisingly, Uhlman, a socialist and Jewish refugee from Germany, who married Croft's second daughter, Diana (1912-1999) ['see 'Uhlman, (Nancy) Diana Joyce, 'under' Uhlman, Manfred], was not welcomed into the family. Croft apparently considered the union tantamount to 'social suicide', though, to his credit, he subsequently visited the couple and their children. Croft was succeeded as second baron by his son, Michael Henry Glendower Page Croft (1916-1997). 


@@@@@


doc= 32634


Croft, John (1833-1905), surgeon, son of Hugh and Maria Croft (died 1842), was born on 4 August 1833 at Pettinghoe, near Newhaven, Sussex. His grandfather Gilmore Croft, a successful medical practitioner in the City of London, had left Hugh Croft a competence, much of which was spent in farming. After the death of his first wife, Croft's father married again and moved to Lower Clapton, London. John Croft was educated at the Hackney Church of England school, and throughout his life held earnest religious views. He served a short apprenticeship with Thomas Evans of Burwash in Sussex, and entered St Thomas's Hospital in 1850. He was appointed dresser to Le Gros Clark in 1852. 
Admitted MRCS and in 1854 made a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries, Croft served as house surgeon at St Thomas's Hospital. After spending five years (1855-60) as surgeon to the 'Dreadnought' hospital ship, he returned to St Thomas's to become demonstrator of anatomy and surgical registrar. He became resident assistant surgeon in December 1863 and in the following year he married Annie Douglas, daughter of Alexander Douglas Douglas; they had no children. On 1 January 1871 Croft became both assistant surgeon and surgeon, when the new buildings of the hospital were opened on the Albert Embankment. In the medical school he was in succession demonstrator of anatomy, lecturer on practical surgery, and lecturer on clinical surgery. Croft resigned his appointments in July 1891, when he was elected consulting surgeon. He was also surgeon to the Surrey Dispensary, the National Truss Society, the Magdalen Hospital at Streatham, and the National Provident Assurance Society. Croft was elected FRCS in 1859, and was a member of the council from 1882 to 1890, vice-president in 1889, and a member of the court of examiners from 1881 to 1886. 
Croft was one of the earliest hospital surgeons in London to adopt Listerian methods. His name is chiefly associated with the introduction of 'Croft's splints', which were plaster of Paris cases made with scrubbing flannel and shaped to the limb. They were employed in place of the ordinary splints and the 'gum and chalk' bandages which had previously been used in the treatment of fractures of the leg. Croft strongly advocated the early excision of the joint in cases of hip disease. Throughout his career, Croft contributed numerous articles to 'St Thomas's Hospital Reports' and the 'Transactions' of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, the Clinical Society, and other societies. 
Croft died on 21 November 1905 at his home, 1 Fitz James Avenue, West Kensington, London, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32635


Crofts, Ernest (1847-1911), history painter, was born in Leeds, Yorkshire, on 15 September 1847. He was the second son of John Crofts JP, a manufacturer, and his wife, Ellen Wordsworth. Crofts attended Rugby School and was also schooled in Berlin. Having decided to become a professional artist he remained in Germany, studying in Dusseldorf under Professor Hunten, who was himself a pupil of the history and military painter Horace Vernet. It was also in Dusseldorf that Crofts met his future wife, Elizabeth Wusthofen, whom he married in 1872. They had one daughter. After returning to London, Crofts studied under another painter of military scenes, Alfred Borron Clay. Given such tutelage, it is hardly surprising that by the time Ernest Crofts ended his studies he, too, had come to specialize in military and historical subjects. In this field he found financial success, if not universal artistic acclaim. 
The paintings of Ernest Crofts can be grouped into three main subject areas, the first of which is English civil war scenes. These include 'Cromwell at the Sign of the Blue Boar' (1883; Dudley Museum and Art Gallery), 'The Funeral of Charles I' (Bristol Art Gallery), and 'Cromwell after the Battle of Marston Moor' (Towneley Hall Art Gallery, Burnley). His second area of interest was the Napoleonic era; his paintings in this category include 'On the Evening of the Battle of Waterloo' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). His third theme comprised military, political, and civic scenes, both historical and contemporary, such as 'King Edward VII Distributing South African War Medals' and 'The Funeral of Queen Victoria' (1903), and Crofts's largest work, 'Queen Elizabeth Opening the First Royal Exchange' (Royal Exchange, London). 
Crofts was a fine draughtsman, and his paintings reveal his keen interest in the most minute accuracy of costume detail. Yet his work was neither dry nor academic. Indeed his particular talent lay in the way that he imbued his imagined historical scenes with dramatic intensity: they are feasts of action-packed theatre, and proved tremendously popular. The numerous internet sites that sell reproductions of his paintings testify to his continued popularity among military enthusiasts. 
Crofts exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy from 1874, his first painting accepted there being 'A Retreat: Episode in the Franco-German War'. He followed this with numerous submissions on his favoured themes, such as 'Napoleon and the Old Guard at Waterloo', exhibited in 1895. Crofts was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy in 1878 and a full academician in 1896. His diploma work was entitled 'To the Rescue'. Succeeding Phillip Hermogenes Calderon, who died in 1898, Crofts was appointed keeper and trustee of the Royal Academy; he is included in Sir Hubert von Herkomer's large portrait group of the Royal Academy council of 1908 (Tate collection). Crofts was also elected a fellow of the Society of British Artists on 1 March 1900. In later life such administrative duties took up much of his time and his paintings perhaps suffered as a result. They lacked the colour and vitality of his earlier work. 
Crofts died in London, on 19 March 1911, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery; his wife survived him. Exactly nine months later Christies salesrooms in London held a sale of the contents of his studio. 


@@@@@


doc= 32636


Croke, Thomas William (1823-1902), Roman Catholic archbishop of Cashel, was born on 19 May 1823 at Dromin, Castlecor, co. Cork, the third child of William Croke (1792-1834), estate agent, and his wife, Isabelle Plummer (1796-1854). His father was a Roman Catholic, but his mother, who was descended from Thomas Fitzgerald, sixteenth knight of Glin, Glin Castle, co. Limerick, was a protestant until a few years before her death, when she became a Roman Catholic. There were eight children, two daughters and six sons: the girls and three of the boys entered the service of the church. After the death of Thomas's father in 1834 the family moved to Charleville, co. Cork, where Thomas spent five years in the endowed school (1834-9). He was a fine sportsman and excelled in handball, a game he continued to play in adult life. In 1839 he successfully gained a scholarship to the Irish College, Paris, and spent the next six years there studying philosophy and theology. In 1845, being too young for ordination, he was sent for a few months to teach English and mathematics in the diocesan seminary at Menin, Belgium. He then went on to Rome, where he spent the next two years studying theology at the Gregorian University (1845-7). He was ordained priest on 29 May 1847, for the diocese of Cloyne, and awarded a doctorate in theology on 15 July of that year. 
Croke returned to Ireland in November 1847, and spent one year on the staff of Carlow College before being recalled to teach theology in his former alma mater, the Irish College, Paris. In August 1849 he returned once more to Ireland, this time as curate of Charleville, succeeding his older brother William, who had died from famine fever. For the next nine years Croke served as curate in various parishes in the diocese of Cloyne: Charleville (September 1849 to June 1853), Midleton (June 1853 to July 1857), and Mallow (August 1857 to September 1858). During these years he became well-known throughout Ireland as a preacher of charitable sermons and a champion of the poor. He also became involved in Irish politics, writing articles for 'The Nation' newspaper. In 1857 he inherited a large fortune from an uncle, James Croke, who had been crown solicitor in Port Melbourne, Australia. In 1858 the bishop of Cloyne, William Keane, appointed Croke first president of the newly established diocesan seminary of St Colman's, Fermoy, co. Cork, a position he held until February 1866, when he became parish priest of Doneraile and vicar-general of the diocese of Cloyne. Croke was in Rome from December 1869 until June 1870, acting as theological adviser to Bishop Keane during the First Vatican Council. 
While Croke was in Rome the diocese of Auckland, New Zealand, became vacant. Croke's name had been proposed to the Roman authorities by Cardinal Paul Cullen, the archbishop of Dublin. His official appointment to Auckland is dated 15 June 1870. He apparently made an agreement with the Roman authorities that he would stay in Auckland only for as long as was needed to put the diocese on a sound financial footing. He was consecrated bishop of Auckland in Rome on 10 July 1870, and arrived in Auckland on 17 December 1870. Almost immediately he set about putting the affairs of the diocese in order, as can be seen from the detailed diary which he kept of his administration. Within two and a half years he had bought back the property which had been mortgaged, and is said to have restored discipline and religious fervour among his priests and flock. He departed from Auckland on 28 January 1874 and arrived back in Ireland at the end of May. The Roman authorities were somewhat surprised at Croke's sudden departure from Auckland, but were forced to accept the 'fait accompli'. 
When Patrick Leahy, the archbishop of Cashel, died on 26 January 1875, Croke's name was among those mentioned as a possible successor. He was appointed archbishop of Cashel on 25 June 1875, and administered the diocese until his death in 1902. He was a very able administrator, and soon became the leading spokesperson for the Irish Catholic church. He became deeply involved in the Irish Land War (1879-92), the struggle for home rule, and the founding of the Gaelic Athletic Association in 1884. He counted among his friends many eminent public figures, including William Gladstone, Cardinal Manning, Charles S. Parnell, and Michael Davitt. In 1895 Croke celebrated his silver jubilee as a bishop amid great festivities throughout Ireland. He died in Thurles, co. Tipperary, on 22 July 1902. His funeral took place on 26 July 1902, and he was buried in a vault in his cathedral at Thurles. 
Croke was a well-built man, well over 6 feet tall, with a cheerful and impressive appearance, as can be seen from his portrait, in Archbishop's House, Thurles. He maintained a special interest in sport throughout his life, and the national stadium for Gaelic games in Dublin, Croke Park, was named after him. But it was in the political and social life of his day, and in the creating of an Irish national identity, that he made his real mark. He had a very independent mind, and on many issues was reputed to be 'unchanged and unchangeable'. His only publications were a few pastorals, and the letters and poems written for 'The Nation' newspaper. He was greatly admired and loved throughout his life and familiarly referred to as Croke of Cashel. 


@@@@@


doc= 32637


Crompton, Henry (1836-1904), barrister and positivist, was born at Liverpool on 27 August 1836, the second of five sons and three daughters of Sir Charles John Crompton (1797-1865), judge of the queen's bench, and his wife, Caroline Fletcher. The eldest son, Charles Crompton (1833-1890), QC, was briefly a Gladstonian Liberal MP for Staffordshire (Leek division), and the fourth son, Albert Crompton (1843-1908), manager of the Ocean Steamship Company, was the founder of the positivist church at Liverpool. Of his sisters, the eldest, Mary, married the Christian socialist clergyman John Llewelyn Davies; the second, Caroline Anna ['see 'Robertson, Caroline Anna Croom], married the philosopher George Croom Robertson; and the third, Emily, married the positivist Edward Spenser Beesly. The Crompton parents were Unitarians but brought up their children as Anglicans. 
Crompton attended University College School, London, and then a private school at Bonn, before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1854. He graduated BA as junior optime in the mathematical tripos in 1858. Through his father's influence he was appointed in 1858 clerk of assize on the Chester and north Wales circuit, a post he held until retirement in 1901; he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 6 June 1863. His familial legal connections were strengthened by marriage, on 8 November 1870, to the Hon. Lucy Henrietta (died 1923), daughter of John Romilly, first Lord Romilly, master of the rolls. They had two sons. 
During a long period of illness in 1861, Crompton read Harriet Martineau's edition of Comte's 'Philosophie Positive' and became a convert to the secular religion of positivism. After meeting E. S. Beesly in 1864, and through him Richard Congreve, he joined the positivist community in London. Like other followers of Comte, he studied medicine and biology, attending classes at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. He was active in denouncing the oppression of subject races, and became a member of the Jamaica committee in 1867 to prosecute Governor Eyre; he also signed the petition on behalf of the Fenian prisoners in the same year. He later urged British intervention to protect the French republic in 1871, and attacked the immorality of wars of colonial conquest in a pamphlet edited by Congreve and published in 1879. His 'Letters on Social and Political Subjects' were published in 1870. He was active in the movement in 1868 to establish lectures open to women at University College, London, his mother, Lady Crompton, being a founder member of the London Ladies' Educational Association. He belonged to the circle of John Russell and Katherine Russell (Lord and Lady Amberley); one of their more conservative relatives, deploring Crompton's defence of the Paris commune, pronounced him 'one of the biggest fools I ever met' (Russell and Russell, 2.462). 
Crompton's particular contribution to the positivist project of social reconstruction lay in his assistance to the Trades Union Congress in its campaign between 1871 and 1875 to place employers and workers in a position of equality before the law and to remove the criminal law from the conduct of industrial relations. His numerous publications during the controversy included articles in the trade union paper 'The Beehive' and pamphlets on the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' (1871) and the law of conspiracy in the TUC's series of 'Tracts for Trade Unionists'. At the Congress held in Leeds in 1873 he contributed to the drafting of the TUC legislative programme, and later described its successful outcome in an article on 'The workmen's victory', published in the 'Fortnightly Review' (1875). His professional insight into the criminal law and its administration made his counsel particularly valuable, but his influence lay as much in his even-tempered and sympathetic character. Unlike the more abrasive and outspoken positivists Beesly and Frederic Harrison, he established good relations with the secretary to the TUC parliamentary committee, George Howell, who regarded him as a personal friend. After 1875 he encouraged the TUC to support the extension of trial by jury and the codification of the criminal law. His articles on the subject, published during 1875-6 and reprinted after his death as 'Our Criminal Justice' (ed. K. Digby, 1905), though critical in detail, were ultimately preservative in their intent, namely, to stimulate popular interest in and loyalty to the law. His failure in 1881 to persuade the TUC to oppose the government's policy of coercion against the leaders of the Irish Land League led to a more distant relationship with the labour movement. 
Crompton was a well-informed and influential analyst of contemporary trends in industrial relations. His pamphlet 'The Labour Laws Commission' (1875) sharply exposed the divergence between legal assumptions and the facts of industrial life, and this approach was developed in his 'Industrial Conciliation' (1876), an optimistic account of the development of collective bargaining in British industry. It was described by Sidney and Beatrice Webb as 'the classic work' on the subject ('The History of Trade Unionism', 1920 edn, 338 n.), and its evolutionary approach was drawn upon by Arnold Toynbee in his account of the industrial revolution. His methods also helped to inspire his cousin Charles Booth to embark upon a programme of social investigation. 
Crompton was among those who followed Congreve after the schism in the English positivist movement in 1878, and assumed responsibility as his successor as director of the Church of Humanity at Chapel Street, London, where he was known for his piety and religiosity. His leadership was challenged by Malcolm Quin, the positivist leader in Newcastle and, in poor health, he resigned in 1901, despairing at the divisions within the movement. Crompton died on 15 March 1904 at his home, Churt House, near Farnham, Surrey. His widow, also a positivist, published a volume of 'Selections of Prose and Poetry by Henry Crompton' in 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 32638


Crompton, Rookes Evelyn Bell (1845-1940), engineer, was born at Sion Hill, near Thirsk, on 31 May 1845, the fourth son and youngest child of Joshua Samuel Crompton and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Sir Claud Alexander, and a friend and pupil of Mendelssohn. The names Rookes Evelyn record his kinship through the Rookes, his grandmother's family, with the diarist John Evelyn. 
During the Crimean War, Crompton, aged only eleven, was enrolled as a naval cadet and allowed to accompany Captain William Houston Stewart, his mother's cousin, commander of the 'Dragon'. Since the 'Dragon' went to the Crimea in the summer of 1856, after the conflict had ended, Crompton's later claims to have visited his elder brother in the trenches and actually come under fire, thus earning himself the Crimean medal and Sevastopol clasp, have been disputed. 
School at Elstree (1856-8) prepared Crompton for Harrow (1858-60). During his holidays he built, in a workshop at home, a full-size steam-driven road engine; but before his true engineering career began he served for four years in India (1864-8) as an ensign in the rifle brigade. Even there, however, he equipped a travelling workshop, and had his machine tools sent out from England. His strong views on the inefficiency and slowness of the bullock trains impressed R. S. Bourke, earl of Mayo, then viceroy, and within a short time Crompton introduced steam road haulage, receiving a government grant of $500 for his services. 
Crompton married, on 16 June 1871, Elizabeth Gertrude (died 1939), daughter of George Richard John Clarke, of Tanfield, near Ripon; they had two sons, one of whom predeceased his father, and three daughters. His wife was his constant companion, keenly interested in all his enterprises. 
In 1875 Crompton retired from the army and bought a partnership in a Chelmsford engineering firm. While adviser at the Stanton ironworks belonging to the Derbyshire branch of his family, he purchased some of the new Gramme dynamos in order to improve the lighting of the foundry. Their success provided a turning point; from that date (1878) electricity and engineering became for him almost inseparable. Co-operating with Emil Burgin, of Basel, who was then working on dynamo design, Crompton obtained the rights of manufacture and sale of Burgin's machine, improved it, and developed it to commercial success. From 1878 to 1882 he restricted his business to the manufacture of electrical-arc plant. One of his early contracts was to light St Enoch's Station, Glasgow. This was followed in due course by contracts at the Mansion House and Law Courts in London and the Ringtheater in Vienna. At the Paris Electrical Exhibition of 1881 the firm of Cromptons was awarded the first gold medal ever given for electric lighting plant. 
Towards the end of 1886 Crompton formed the Kensington Court Company, financed by a few friends, for electricity supply to neighbouring premises. This pioneer enterprise, one of the first of its kind, became the Kensington and Knightsbridge Electric Supply Company. Crompton advocated the direct current system; S. Z. de Ferranti, engineer of the London Electric Supply Corporation, believed in alternating current and led the opposing school. The resulting 'battle of the systems', with these two as friendly antagonists, has its place in electrical history. 
Between 1890 and 1899 Crompton revisited India, advising the government on electrical projects. On his return he took charge of a volunteer corps of electrical engineers, and by May 1900 was in South Africa with his men, whose efficiency in maintaining communications and skill in emergencies won high praise. Crompton had gone out as captain; on his return, later that year, he was promoted lieutenant-colonel, appointed CB, and retained as consultant to the War Office on the development of mechanical transport. 
Although electrical matters still claimed much of his time, Crompton became increasingly occupied with road transport. He had been a founder member of the Royal Automobile Club in 1896, and was one of the judges in 1903 at the first motor show; as engineer member of the road board appointed by the government in 1910, he improved road construction practice and materials. In the early part of the First World War, Churchill consulted Crompton upon the design of an armoured vehicle capable of crossing trenches, and he was responsible for producing a type of 'landship' which later evolved, under various hands, into the tank. 
In his laboratory at Thriplands, his Kensington home, Crompton spent many hours at research. He served on the committee of the National Physical Laboratory, and his advocacy of a closer understanding between all countries on electrical affairs resulted in the founding of the International Electrotechnical Commission in 1906, of which he was the first secretary. 
In 1927 Cromptons merged with another firm under the title Crompton, Parkinson, & Co. Ltd. 'The Colonel' was then over eighty, but still active, and he retained a directorship in the new concern. A dinner in his honour, held in London in 1931, was attended by probably the largest gathering of distinguished scientists and engineers ever recorded at a personal function. Each of the three principal engineering bodies, the Civil, Mechanical, and Electrical, made him an honorary member; he was twice president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, in 1895 and again in 1908. He was awarded the Faraday medal in 1926 and was elected FRS in 1933. His ninetieth year was celebrated by another banquet, at which Sir James Swinburne presented him with his portrait by George Harcourt, later in the possession of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. 
Professionally, Crompton was the expert, commanding respect and admiration; socially, a host of friends regarded him with affection. Young men benefited by his cheerful attitude to life, his resource and originality, and often by his generous help. He died at Azerley Chase, Kirkby Malzeard, near Ripon, on 15 February 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 32639


Crookes, Sir William (1832-1919), chemist and science journalist, was born on 17 June 1832 at 143 Regent Street, London, the eldest son of the sixteen children of Joseph Crookes (1792-1884), a tailor from Yorkshire, and his second wife, Mary Scott of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire. (There were another five children from Joseph's first marriage.) He regarded himself as a family 'sport', since no other sibling showed the slightest interest in science. He was educated at Prospect House School, Weybridge, and began his scientific career at the age of sixteen when he entered the Royal College of Chemistry in Oxford Street, London, under the directorship of August Wilhelm Hofmann. By then his father, having established a successful gentlemen's outfitters in Regent Street, had moved to Hammersmith, and Crookes commuted to Oxford Street every day from there. 
From 1849 to 1854 Crookes was one of Hofmann's personal assistants, in which capacity he was able to begin an original investigation of new compounds of selenium, the selenocyanides. These formed the subject of his first publications in 1851. Hofmann's connections with the Royal Institution, however, brought Crookes to the notice of Faraday, who, with his friends Charles Wheatstone and George Stokes, turned him away from Hofmann-type organic chemistry towards chemical physics, then exemplified by the optical problems of photography and, later, spectroscopy. 
Crookes left the Royal College and became in 1854 superintendent of the meteorological department of the Radcliffe (Astronomical) Observatory in Oxford, where his photographic skills were fully deployed; the following year he was appointed lecturer in chemistry at the Chester Anglican teachers' training college, and on 10 April 1856 he married Ellen, daughter of William Humphrey, of Darlington, with whom he had ten children, though only three sons and a daughter survived into adulthood. Soon afterwards the couple moved back to London, and from then on, apart from extensive European travels, his life was spent in the capital and was devoted mainly to independent research, journalism and consultancy. In 1854, with John Spiller, he had devised the first dry collodion process and for some ten years he worked enthusiastically at photography, editing journals on the subject, investigating the spectral sensitivity of the wet collodion process, and attempting to apply photography to the scientific recording of polarization, astronomical objects, and spectra. 
Shortage of money as a young man does much to explain the catholicity of Crookes's interests, many of which were clearly motivated by the possibility of commercial rewards. Science and business were integrated activities throughout his life. In the world of commerce he drove many a hard bargain, but although he eventually made a comfortable living from such ventures as the sodium amalgamation method of gold extraction (which he worked in north Wales) and the chemical exploitation of sewage as a fertilizer (which he exploited at Crossness), as well as electric lighting, achieving this financial success was hard. By the early 1880s he was comfortably off, and could afford to entertain on an impressive scale. Apart from running a successful analytical consultancy from a laboratory at his home at 20 Mornington Road (where the Crookes family lived until 1880, when they moved to 7 Kensington Park Gardens, the first house in England to be lit by electricity), the foundation of his financial success came through the launch of the weekly 'Chemical News' in 1859, and journalistic ventures with James Samuelson's 'Popular Science Review' in 1861 and, three years later, with the 'Quarterly Journal of Science'. 'Chemical News', which he edited regularly himself until 1906, was conducted on much less formal lines than other commercial journals; it eventually closed in 1932. 
That Crookes took some years to abandon the idea of an academic position is clear from his abortive attempt in 1862 to obtain a chair of chemistry at the Royal Veterinary College in London. Ironically, he would have been in a better position three years later when his efforts to promote carbolic acid (phenol) as a germicide during the great cattle plague (rinderpest) of 1865-6 brought him considerable prominence in government and veterinary circles. His growing family and his increasingly complex instrumental researches in the 1870s were sustained by relentless hard work in journalistic ventures, and his success in obtaining analytical contracts as sanitary and food adulteration legislation provided increasing business. In particular, the water companies, besieged by criticisms of water quality, provided handsome retainers and regular consultancy work. 
Crookes's life was one of unbroken scientific and business activity. He worked regularly in his laboratory in the mornings, and after dinner through the evening into the early hours. He was eclectic in his interests, ranging over pure and applied science, economic and practical problems, and psychic research. All of these interests collectively made him a well-known personality within the late Victorian scientific community. He received many public and academic honours. He was knighted in 1897 and in 1910 appointed to the Order of Merit. At various times he was president of the Chemical Society (1887-9), the Institution of Electrical Engineers (1890-94), the Society for Psychical Research (1897), the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1898), and the Society of Chemical Industry (1913). Each of his presidential addresses proved a 'tour de force', gaining him worldwide publicity. He was a Davy and Copley medallist of the Royal Society (1888, 1904), its foreign secretary (1908-13), and its president (1913 to 1915), having been elected FRS in 1863. He was also closely involved in the affairs of the Royal Institution until 1912, when a quarrel with its director, Sir James Dewar, over his son, Henry Crookes, led to his resignation. 
The work of Crookes extended over the regions of both chemistry and physics. Its salient characteristic was the originality of conception of his experiments, and the skill of their execution. Frequently aided at the theoretical level by colleagues such as George Stokes, his speculations were equally imaginative and stimulating. He was an able syncretist of other scientists' hints and suggestions, and by weaving these together imaginatively he acquired a well-deserved reputation as a Victorian sage. Nevertheless, he was always more effective at experiment than in interpretation. Spectroscopy, introduced by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1859, was received by Crookes with great enthusiasm, and, on applying it to the examination of the seleniferous chimney deposits from a sulphuric acid factory, he discovered an unknown green line in the spectrum. The isolation of the new metallic element, thallium, followed in 1861. Through this work and the controversy with French scientists over C. A. Lamy's claim to have discovered the element at the same time, his reputation became firmly established. A decade's work produced the atomic weight of thallium which confirmed his reputation for meticulous analytical precision in 1873. 
Two lines of research then occupied Crookes's attention for many years. These were the properties of highly rarefied gases, with which he began to occupy himself immediately, and the investigation of the elements of the 'rare earths', upon which he embarked shortly after 1880. His attention had been attracted to the first problem in using a vacuum balance during the course of the thallium researches. Believing, erroneously, that he had uncovered a relationship between gravity and heat, he was led to the phenomenon upon which depended the action of the 'lightmill' or radiometer. In this popular instrument a system of vanes, each blackened on one side and polished on the other, is set in rotation on a pivot in an evacuated space when exposed to radiant energy. This apparent attraction and repulsion resulting from radiation, which Crookes initially attributed to a psychic force, was explained in terms of the kinetic theory of gases by Stokes, Maxwell, and others. His work on this phenomenon led Crookes to investigations of fundamental importance in understanding the nature of matter, for in seeking a mechanism for the rotation, he passed electrical discharges through the rarefied gases. He then quickly discovered, with the aid of his young assistant, Charles Gimingham (died 1890), that as the attenuation of the gas was made greater the dark space around the cathode (negative electrode) extended, while rays (soon termed cathode rays) proceeded from the anode (positive electrode). 
In a series of spectacular and ingenious experiments Crookes showed that these rays travelled in straight lines, cast shadows, caused phosphorescence in objects upon which they impinged, and produced heat by their impact. Following an earlier hint of Michael Faraday's, he believed that he had discovered a fourth attenuated state of matter, which he called radiant matter. It remained for J. J. Thomson in 1897 to demonstrate that the rays were not streams of particles of ordinary molecular magnitude, but subatomic particles of negative charge whose mass was only 1/1800 that of an atom of hydrogen. However, it was Crookes's success in producing a vacuum of the order of one millionth of an atmosphere that made possible the discovery of X-rays as well as of the electron; his experimental work in this field was the foundation of nuclear physics and of the electronic theory that altered the whole conception of chemistry and physics at the beginning of the twentieth century. 'Crookes's dark space' and the 'Crookes tube' have become part of the vocabulary of modern physics. It was characteristic of Crookes that, though already in his sixties, he readily and enthusiastically accepted the new interpretation of his work. 
For many years Crookes conducted laborious experiments on the rare earth elements (lanthanides), elements so similar to one another in chemical properties that special methods for their separation had to be devised. Throughout this exacting work with his assistant, James H. Gardiner, he employed spectroscopic methods for following the course, and testing the completeness, of the separation of one element from another. What had been one of the most obscure regions in inorganic chemistry gradually became clear. In the course of these years Crookes was increasingly led to speculate on the existence of 'meta-elements', clusters of elements resembling one another so closely that in most ways the cluster behaved like a single individual or element. Further stimulated by Darwin's theory of evolution and N. J. Lockyer's speculations concerning the dissociation of the elements in the sun and stars, Crookes daringly speculated that he had found evidence of the evolution of the elements, which was the theoretical underpinning of Mendeleyev's periodic law and table. 
Crookes's 'meta-elements' bear a superficial similarity to isotopes, a concept which arose in 1912-13 from the phenomenon of radioactivity -- another field into which Crookes threw himself wholeheartedly. In 1900 he achieved the separation from uranium of its active transformation product, uranium-X. He observed the gradual decay of the separated transformation product, and the simultaneous reproduction of a fresh supply in the original uranium. His own explanation, in terms of energy gained from the atmosphere, was soon superseded by that of Rutherford's and Soddy's disintegration theory. Crookes also observed that when alpha particles, ejected from radioactive substances, impinge upon zinc sulphide, each impact is accompanied by a minute scintillation. This observation became the basis of a detection instrument (spinthariscope) that played an invaluable role in early work on radioactivity until the invention of the Geiger counter in 1908. 
Crookes published numerous papers on spectroscopy, a subject which always held a great fascination for him, and he made researches on a host of minor subjects. In addition to various technical books and translations, he wrote a standard treatise, 'Select Methods in Chemical Analysis' (1871), and a small book, 'Diamonds' (1909), a subject to which he had devoted some study during two visits to South Africa in 1896 and 1905. He frequently served the government in an advisory capacity, and his work on the production of an anti-polarising glass for safety spectacles in 1909-14 (the basis of sun-glasses) was one of many contributions to public welfare. 
The most controversial aspect of Crookes's career was his investigation of mediums in the 1870s and 1880s. Following the death of a much-loved brother at sea (which also led him into a libel action) Crookes attended seances, becoming interested in the kinetic, audible, and luminous phenomena that could be witnessed in fashionable seances of the period. To the disgust of members of the scientific community such as W. B. Carpenter, J. Tyndall, and T. H. Huxley (but supported by A. R. Wallace), Crookes was persuaded that the mediumship of some practitioners was genuine. In 1870 he subjected D. D. Home to a number of tests, and convinced himself that Home possessed a psychic force that could be used to modify gravity, produce musical effects, and perform feats unknown to science or conjuring. When the Royal Society rejected his papers on the subject on the grounds that the experimental conditions were insufficiently exacting, Crookes reported them in his own 'Quarterly Journal of Science'. Even more sensational was Crookes's support for the pretty young medium Florence Cook, who materialized a phantom called Katie King. Contemporary debate, that has continued to the present day, questions whether Crookes lied under the spell of infatuation. Was he duped; and, if he ever understood this, was he too embarrassed to confess? There can be no doubt of Crookes's sincerity or that he staked his very considerable scientific reputation on the validity of the extraordinary phenomena he described. He genuinely believed that a scientific investigation of psychic phenomena held out the promise of data and theories that were unseen and unknown in contemporary natural philosophy. 
Crookes was a great experimentalist. His material discoveries were of lasting and fundamental value. His ventures into psychical research were strongly criticized by contemporaries and certainly led him into some curious company, but they demonstrate that he thought all natural phenomena worthy of investigation, and that he refused to be bound by tradition and convention. Although Lord Kelvin believed Crookes started more hares than any other scientific contemporary, he was a man of science in the broadest sense, an influential personality, and a doyen of his profession. 
Crookes died at 7 Kensington Park Gardens, London, on 4 April 1919, less than three years after his wife, to whom he had been devoted, and was buried in Brompton cemetery six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 32640


Crooks, William (1852-1921), politician, was born on 6 April 1852 at 2 Shirbutt Street, a one-roomed house near the docks at Poplar in the East End of London. He was the third of seven children of Caroline, 'nee' Coates ('b'. 'c'.1821), and George Crooks ('b'. 'c'.1821). The family experienced extreme poverty after George, a ship's stoker, lost his right arm in an accident and was reduced to occasional casual work. At one time they were forced into Poplar workhouse. Will Crooks recalled that his mother took in additional sewing to maintain the family, but could not afford the fare to deliver it. The bitter experience of poor-law schooling and separation from his parents never left him. Crooks was baptized a Congregationalist and briefly attended George Green elementary school, Crisp Street. From the age of seven he worked at labouring jobs until his mother insisted on his apprenticeship to a cooper. In 1871 Crooks married Matilda South (1854-1892), a shipwright's daughter. They endured difficult times; of their ten children only six survived. He tramped twice to Liverpool to find work as employers in Poplar victimized him as a political agitator. 
By the 1890s, with his broad-shouldered figure, long sinewy arms, and full-bearded face, Crooks was a familiar and beloved personality in his locality. He spoke every Sunday morning outside the East India Dock gates. These well-attended democratic gatherings, known as 'Crooks College', inaugurated various campaigns for a free library, tunnels under the Thames, and poor-law reform. He was an unsung hero during the London Dock strike, while continuing to work his own trade, but the strain of his dual endeavours led to illness, and he afterwards spent three months in the London Hospital close to death. 
In 1892 Matilda died, aged thirty-eight. The following year Crooks married a widow, Elisabeth Coulter, 'nee' Lake (1854-1932), and their home (28 Northumberland Street and later 81 Gough Street) became a haven of local politics. His remarkable appeal as a people's politician was exemplified by his matchless skill in public speaking: his power to sway audiences combined the inspiration of the evangelist and the everyday humour of the cockney comedian. Although he was against drink and gambling, he once jested memorably to a priest that all ordinary folk wanted to hear about in sermons was 'beer, work and football' (Jones, 105). He was no intellectual, but was an omnivorous reader of Dickens, Scott, and Bunyan. Instead of visiting the pub, he purchased Homer's 'Iliad' for 2died at a bookstall. He wrote several tracts on politics and religion, as well as one on cask making (1896). 
Before the First World War, Will Crooks and George Lansbury were leading pioneers of the labour and socialist movement in Poplar. Crooks joined the Fabian Society in 1891, but his main backing for his election to the London county council (1892) and the Poplar board of guardians (1893) came from the Poplar labour electoral committee, formed by representatives from the new unions and progressive clergy. Later named the Poplar Labour League, this body established a voluntary Crooks wages fund, which gave him financial independence as a working-class politician. A Poplar councillor from 1900, he became mayor in 1901, the first Labour mayor in London. On the London county council up to 1910, he formed a Labour bench, which included Will Steadman and John Burns, and co-operated with middle-class Progressives. His causes included fair wages, open spaces, technical education, and the construction of the Blackwall Tunnel. 
As Poplar guardians, despite being in a minority and sometimes at odds over policy, Lansbury and Crooks (who was chairman from 1897 to 1906) dominated the proceedings. Their radical measures, which used the poor law to reform the workhouse system and defend working-class living standards, marked the beginnings of 'Poplarism' in the deprived East End. The resultant conflict with the municipal alliance of local ratepayers led to an official inquiry by the Local Government Board in 1906. In 1903, as the Labour Representation Committee candidate, Crooks won a sensational by-election at Woolwich, a tory constituency. Though he had enjoyed official Liberal support, his victory demonstrated the electoral potential of the newly founded Labour Party. Crooks was a hard-working constituency MP, interested in poor-law schooling, old-age pensions, and Woolwich arsenal issues. In 1905 Will and Elisabeth Crooks organized a march of 6000 working women to Westminster to lobby for unemployment assistance. He retained his seat in 1906 but lost it in January 1910, having arrived home on the eve of poll from New Zealand after a five-month recuperative world tour. Though victorious in December 1910, Crooks was now a controversial Labour politician, criticized by socialists for his continued links with Liberalism. In 1911 the Trades Union Congress roundly censured Crooks for not consulting the movement about his support for the 'Labour Disputes Bill' to curtail strikes. 
Although he had been a vigorous opponent of the South African War, the patriotic Crooks greeted British entry into the First World War by leading the singing of the national anthem in the House of Commons. A vice-president of the British Workers' National League, he toured extensively for recruitment and visited front-line troops. In 1916 George V made Crooks a privy councillor and visited him in hospital. He was re-elected unopposed in 1918, but extreme ill health ended Crooks's parliamentary career in February 1921, when he resigned his seat. He had never recovered from the horror of the bombing of a Poplar school in June 1917, when eighteen pupils perished. He died in Poplar Hospital on 5 June 1921 and was buried four days later in Tower Hamlets cemetery, after an impressive funeral service at All Saints' Church. 
Popular with different social classes, Will Crooks was more typical of the early Lib-Lab MPs in Labour history than his independent socialist contemporaries. No revolutionary theorist, he upheld the monarchy and empire. With a deep religious faith, he extolled the Victorian values of self-improvement and gradual reform. Above all, as an indefatigable and respected pioneer of working-class representation, he remained quintessentially an East End politician moulded by his practical experience of working life. In 1995 his neglected grave, with the original epitaph to the Labour servant of Poplar and Woolwich, was restored with a council grant of $540. 


