@@@@@


doc= 32641


Crookshank, Harry Frederick Comfort, first Viscount Crookshank (1893-1961), politician, was born in Midan Bab-al-Louk, Cairo, Egypt, on 27 May 1893, the only son and first child of Harry Maule Crookshank (1850-1914), a physician and surgeon, and director-general of the Egyptian prisons administration, who was created pasha in 1890, and his wife, Emma Walraven (died 1954), daughter of the American businessman Samuel Comfort. In 1897 Crookshank Pasha was made controller of the Daira Sanieh administration; he retired in 1907. After his father's death in March 1914 Harry, his mother, and his sister, Betty, continued as one household, from 1937 at 51 Pont Street, London. 
After two years at Summer Fields School, Oxford, Crookshank went to Eton College in 1906. At Eton, where he was a king's scholar, Crookshank excelled in most areas with the exception of games. In 1912 he went up to Magdalen College, Oxford. Owing to a weakness in Greek he narrowly missed a first in honour moderations in 1914. Following in the footsteps of his father he became a passionate freemason, joining the Apollo Lodge as soon as he arrived in Oxford. 
In summer 1914 Crookshank was studying in Germany, and narrowly escaped internment. On repatriation he volunteered for the Hampshire regiment but soon transferred to the Grenadier Guards. In August 1915, while serving with the 2nd battalion, he was buried alive by the explosion of a mine in an orchard near Givenchy. In October 1915, as he prepared to go out on a wiring party, he was shot in the left leg by a German sniper. He rejoined his unit in August 1916. He commanded the battalion's Lewis guns at the attack on Lesboeufs on 15 September 1916, when he was seriously wounded by a shell explosion. He returned to active duty between September 1917 and June 1918 at Salonika as aide-de-camp to General Charles Corkran, head of the British military liaison mission to the Serbian army. 
In February 1919 Crookshank sat the Foreign Office examination, passing with ease. In October 1920 he was offered a permanent commission in the grenadiers. Despite his own desire to return to the army the Foreign Office refused to release him. In 1921 he was posted to the high commission in Constantinople. In September 1922 he was co-author of a pro-Turkish memorandum that was considered by the cabinet. In the following month he refused to entertain the visiting Ramsay MacDonald. The Chanak crisis convinced Crookshank that important decisions were made by politicians rather than by diplomats. In September 1924 he was adopted as candidate for Gainsborough, Lincolnshire; he won the seat in the general election held in the following month, and retained it until 1956. 
Crookshank soon established himself as a Commons 'character'. He was thought closely to resemble William Shakespeare, was a natty dresser, and was drawn to quixotic affairs. His first parliamentary set piece was an attempt to wreck a government bill relieving MPs from seeking re-election when they became ministers. He was also associated with the parliamentary revolt in 1927 against the revised 'Book of Common Prayer'. In the early 1930s he served as Sir Austen Chamberlain's representative to the League of Nations Union. He was parliamentary under-secretary at the Home Office from July 1934 until June 1935, when he was appointed minister of mines. 'Promotion of course,' he recorded, 'but just about the least pleasant department and one in which I start with no interest at all' (Bodl. Oxf., Crookshank papers). Nevertheless, in December 1935 he persuaded the miners and mineowners to agree on a pay deal. His 'whole-hogging' 'Coal Bill', which aimed to give the state extensive control over the industry, was, however, howled down in the House of Commons in May 1936. At the end of 1937 the bill was re-introduced; although it became law its provisions were overtaken by the outbreak of war. 
Crookshank considered resigning from the government when Anthony Eden was forced out of the Foreign Office in February 1938. He had a private meeting with Neville Chamberlain to express his qualms at the direction of British foreign policy but agreed to remain in office. He did submit his resignation over Munich. Following another private meeting, however, Chamberlain persuaded him to withdraw that resignation. In December 1938 his private criticisms of Leslie Hore-Belisha were leaked to the press, and he apologized to Chamberlain for becoming involved in the so-called 'under-secretaries plot'. In April 1939 Crookshank was transferred to the Treasury as its financial secretary, in peacetime a plum job but in wartime a backwater. 
Crookshank's combination of carping and caution meant that he was trusted by neither Chamberlain nor Churchill: he voted with the government in the Norway division in May 1940. In February 1942 Churchill asked him to go to the Lords as minister of works. Believing this to be a deliberate insult (the wounds he had sustained at the Somme precluded his fathering an heir to the peerage), he refused. In May 1942 Churchill offered him the post of minister resident in West Africa; this offer too he turned down. In December 1942 he accepted the office of postmaster-general, in war little more than a sinecure. Churchill declined to offer him a senior position in the administration he formed in May 1945: they viewed each other with mutual dislike. It was to 51 Pont Street that James Stuart was summoned in 1947 to hear demands for Churchill's resignation from a group of senior Conservatives. 
For Harry Crookshank the Conservative election debacle of July 1945 was most fortuitous. He was first and foremost a House of Commons performer and the Conservatives badly needed such talents in opposition. He made a number of high profile attacks on left-wing ministers such as Bevan, Strachey, and Shinwell. He enjoyed his greatest success in exposing the government's incompetence in securing food supplies, particularly the gullibility of ministers in dealing with the Peronist tyranny in Argentina. 
Crookshank entered the cabinet in October 1951 as minister of health and deputy leader of the House of Commons. He had little interest in the health portfolio and his tenure was not considered a success. In May 1952 he became lord privy seal and leader of the House of Commons. His transition into full-time parliamentary management was not altogether smooth, and he was criticized for allowing the 'Steel Bill' to be counted out. He continued to search for opportunities to unseat Churchill. In July 1954 he led a walkout of ministers from the cabinet in response to Churchill's decision to build a British H-bomb after consultation with selected ministers only. He supported Lord Salisbury when the latter accused the prime minister of deliberately flouting constitutional norms in his pursuit of a summit with the Soviet Union. Churchill subsequently failed in his attempt to persuade Harold Macmillan to replace Crookshank as leader of the house. In the end it was Anthony Eden, in whom Crookshank had invested much hope for advancement, who sacked him in order to install R. A. Butler as leader of the house at the end of 1955. In compensation Crookshank was offered a seat in the cabinet as deputy leader of the House of Lords: he accepted the peerage (he was created a viscount in January 1956) but refused further political office. He was appointed CH in 1955. 
Although his career was not lacking in worldly success Harry Crookshank remained disappointed in his own progress. Even in the freemasons, who had installed him as a provincial grand master in September 1954, he felt he might have risen higher. His career testifies to the declining importance of the House of Commons as a power base, though his own propensity to be troublesome to the party leadership without ever sticking to a principle and resigning, retarded his own political advancement. 
Following the death of his sister in 1948 and of his mother in 1954, Crookshank was a lonely man. He established the Crookshank lectures at the Royal College of Radiologists in his sister's memory. He too was to be killed by cancer. The whiff of scandal was brought to his door in 1958 when his lover was adopted, then ejected, as prospective Conservative parliamentary candidate for Grimsby at a time when Conservative anxieties about homosexuality in the party were particularly acute. Crookshank died at his London home on 17 October 1961. As he had since 1960 been high steward of Westminster, his funeral took place in Westminster Abbey; he was buried in Lincoln Cathedral, where a simple plaque is his memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 32642


Cross, Charles Frederick (1855-1935), industrial chemist, was born on 11 December 1855 at Brentford, Middlesex, the second son of Charles James Cross JP, of Brentford, who was at first a schoolmaster and later a director of T. B. Rowe & Sons, soap makers, of Brentford, and his wife, Ella Mendham. He was educated at King's College, London where he graduated BSc in 1878, and spent some time at Zurich university and polytechnic and Owens College, Manchester. He thus had two outstanding teachers -- Georg Lunge in Zurich and H. E. Roscoe in Manchester. Thereafter he devoted his life to the field of cellulose technology. After early work on jute fibre in Barrow in Furness and Kew, in 1885 he set up in business in Lincoln's Inn in partnership with Edward J. Bevan, his fellow student at Manchester, as analytical and consulting chemists. In 1890 he married Edith Vernon, daughter of Major-General Charles Roper Stainforth, Madras cavalry. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Cross's popular reputation was based upon his discovery in 1892 of viscose, which made possible the manufacture of artificial silk, afterwards called rayon, and was also used in the manufacture of photographic film. His achievement was no less esteemed by chemists. The discovery consisted in treating cellulose with aqueous caustic soda and then with carbon bisulphide, producing a golden yellow viscous liquid. This liquid when projected or spun through fine nozzles into a precipitating bath of sulphuric acid yielded fibres. These, after further treatment to remove the sulphur, left a pure regenerated cellulose. Initially, his interest in the fibre was not as a new textile but as a basis for the fine filaments needed for the newly developed electric lamp. Cross's patent remained a chemical master patent for its full term of years and was extended for a further term in view of its outstanding merit. It was soon worked throughout the world, and over the years 1893-1900 his process was developed through proprietary companies in London, Breslau, and Paris. With C. H. Stearn he founded the Viscose Spinning Syndicate, which developed the spinning of artificial silk. This was later acquired by Courtaulds. 
Cross was also a pioneer in the production of transparent viscose films (cellophane), used in huge quantities by the packaging industry. In addition he initiated the production of cellulose acetate, later associated in the public mind with the name Celanese: he took out the first industrial patent for its manufacture in 1894. Although less spectacular than his discovery of viscose, this work was likewise of remarkable influence, in the development of the paper trade. 
Cross, who was far ahead of his time in working with a substance so unusual in its chemical behaviour, never ceased to be actively interested in the theoretical as well as the practical chemistry of cellulose. When he began his research its chemical identity was obscure: by the 1920s his work had contributed largely to elucidating the basic features of its structure. He published his researches in book form as well as in contributions to scientific journals. His book 'Cellulose' (written in collaboration with Bevan, 1895) is unique, full of imagination and stimulating ideas. He also published four volumes of 'Researches on Cellulose' (1901-22), the first three in collaboration with Bevan, the last with Charles Doree. Although he achieved so much on the technical side, at heart he was a scientist, chiefly interested in the pursuit of pure knowledge. 
Cross was elected FRS in 1917, with the unusual citation, 'as the founder of a great industry... based on scientific work' (Royal Society Election Certificate). He was awarded the medal of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1916, the research medal of the Dyers' Company in 1918, and in 1924 the Perkin medal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists, of which he was president (1918-20). Owing to ill health he retired to Hove about eight years before his death. He was fortunate in his artistic temperament and happy in his musical gifts -- he was an organist of ability. A man of striking appearance, cultured, and with broad interests, he was widely popular. He died at his home, 4C King's Gardens, Hove, Sussex, on 15 April 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 32643


Cross, Kenneth Mervyn Baskerville (1890-1968), architect, was born at 71 Parliament Hill Road, Hampstead, London, on 8 December 1890, the eldest son of Alfred William Stephen Cross (1858-1932), architect, and his wife, Emily Thursfield. A. W. S. Cross was himself the son of an architect, Alfred Cross, of Greenwich, and practised in Hastings, Weston-super-Mare, and London. He specialized in the design of swimming baths, public libraries, and schools, including baths in Dulwich, Hoxton, and Hampstead. In 1906 he restored Shoreditch town hall following a fire. Kenneth was the cousin of the judge Geoffrey Cross, Baron Cross of Chelsea, and Sir Rupert Cross, who were sons of his father's younger brother. 
Kenneth Cross was educated at Felsted School (1902-9), where he captained the cricket eleven. He then went up to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He obtained a third class in both parts of the historical tripos (1911 and 1912) and proceeded MA in 1921. He studied at the university school of architecture, in the founding of which his father had played an important part. He completed his professional training in articles to his father, setting up in private practice in 1919, and becoming his father's partner in 1922. In a wide-ranging general practice he acted as architect for a number of local authorities including Westminster city council, Newcastle upon Tyne council, and Bournemouth council. He also carried out commissions for the Barbers' Company and for the Grocers' Company, the London Hospital, St John's College, Cambridge, and Barclays Bank. 
By the late 1930s Cross had, like his father before him, earned a reputation as a specialist in the design and construction of swimming baths, and, with his father, had written a book on the subject: 'Modern Public Baths and Wash-Houses' (1930), of which a new edition appeared in 1938. He had previously revised his father's 'Practical Notes for Architectural Draughtsmen' (2nd and 3rd series, 1922, 1923), a useful guide for students, in whom he was always interested. In architecture he was a solid traditionalist with a good appreciation of modern structural techniques. Cross was best-known for his devoted work for the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), of which he became a fellow in 1931 and was president from 1956 to 1958, having previously served as honorary secretary (1952-5) and as vice-president (1955-6). He was chairman of the board of architectural education from 1950 to 1952, chairman of the competitions' committee from 1937 to 1949, and served on a number of the royal institute's other committees. He was chairman of the committee on the constitution of the council, and also of the committee on the architects registration acts. 
Kenneth Cross was a quiet, soft-spoken, and unassuming man of friendly aspect. In private life he was interested in English literature, gardening, and walking. He seemed to come from a generation older than himself, and, although somewhat diffident in conversation, below the surface his standards were high and his opinions firmly based. He became president of the RIBA at a time when the senior members, who had seen the royal institute through the Second World War, attempted to re-establish it as it had been, predominantly a learned society, inward-looking and comfortably unaware of the changes taking place in architecture and the building industry. They were, above all, unaware of, or perhaps just not interested in, the aspirations of the generation of architects trained after the war, which felt that the older generation was essentially out of date and that the profession needed total reorganization within an efficient and aggressive institute. It fell to Cross as honorary secretary to attend, and afterwards as president to preside over, meetings at which these views were forcefully made known. The annual general meeting of the RIBA changed during Cross's time from a peaceful, badly attended, and unquestioning affair to a crowded battlefield where officers of the institute were attacked and received little support from the floor. Few regretted the passing of the old order and the introduction of important electoral, educational, and administrative reforms which followed. The importance of Kenneth Cross's part in these reforms should not be underestimated. His manner in the chair was impeccable. He was urbane but firm, tolerant, even-tempered, and procedurally correct. He could be witty but sometimes there was a glint of steel in his remarks. He retained control at all times, and his wisdom ensured the introduction of constructive change. Whatever his personal feelings were, he met the storms graciously and with understanding. During his presidency and largely on his own initiative, he made a world tour of the royal institute's allied societies which much improved relations between the RIBA and its overseas members. 
Cross was an honorary DCL of Durham University, an honorary fellow of the Royal Architectural Institute of Canada, the American Institute of Architects, and the New Zealand Institute of Architects, and a life fellow of the Royal Australian Institute of Architects. He died at Chelmsford Hospital on 16 January 1968. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 32644


Cross, Richard Assheton, first Viscount Cross (1823-1914), politician, was born at Red Scar, near Preston, Lancashire, on 30 May 1823, the fifth of six children of William Cross (1771-1827), of Red Scar, and his wife, Ellen, eldest daughter of Edward Chaffers, of Liverpool and Everton, a collateral relative of Richard Chaffers, the well-known potter and rival of Josiah Wedgwood, and of William Chaffers, the authority on hallmarks and potters' marks. Cross was educated at Rugby School under Thomas Arnold, and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he rowed in the first Trinity eight at the head of the river, and in 1845 was president of the Cambridge Union. Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1849, he went on the northern circuit. As his father and grandfather had held legal office in the county palatine court of common pleas at Preston, he started with the advantage of a well-known name, and quickly built up a substantial practice. In 1852 he married Georgiana (died 1907), third daughter of Thomas Lyon of Appleton Hall, near Warrington. They had four sons and three daughters. 
Cross became leader of the Preston and Salford quarter session bar; wrote a book on pauper settlement (1853); and collaborated in a work on the jurisdiction of quarter sessions in non-criminal matters (1858), which remained the standard manual for practitioners until that jurisdiction was almost completely abolished on the creation of county councils. In 1857 his position was sufficiently assured to allow him to stand for parliament. He won Preston as a Conservative and held the seat until 1862. The only pledge on which his supporters insisted was that he would not join the Carlton Club; and he signalized his independence by being the only Conservative member to vote in favour of Gladstone's repeal of the paper duties, as well as by voting against the same proposal when Gladstone unconstitutionally, as he held, tacked it to a money bill in order to circumvent opposition in the House of Lords. 
In 1860 the death of his father-in-law led to Cross's becoming a partner in Parr's Bank at Warrington, a step which involved giving up both his practice at the bar and his seat in parliament. But the years 1862-8 were of great importance in his career; for to the legal ability which he had already shown he was now to add financial experience as partner in a great bank in times of exceptional difficulty (the 'cotton famine'), and an intimate knowledge of the problems of local government. In 1865, when Parr's Bank was one of the pioneers of limited liability as applied to banking, Cross became deputy chairman, and he succeeded to the chairmanship in 1870. During these years he also became chairman or deputy chairman of every local-government body then existing in his neighbourhood, including two courts of quarter sessions, a highway board, a board of guardians, and the governing bodies of many charitable institutions. The eminent services which he afterwards rendered to the state were based on the intimate knowledge thus gained of local conditions in an industrial area. 
In the general election of 1868 Cross again stood for parliament, this time for the new constituency of South-West Lancashire, where he achieved a sensational success by defeating Gladstone, then at the height of popularity and power, and heading the poll. Family connections and the influence of his old school and college friend, the fifteenth earl of Derby, had their share in this, but Cross's personal popularity was the decisive factor. Returning to parliament a marked man, he was active with W. H. Smith and Viscount Sandon in harrying Gladstone's government, and, with fellow Lancashire members, in pressing in 1871-2 for a more positive Conservative policy based on social, administrative, and economic reform and on colonial questions. Yet he lacked sparkle in debate, and Disraeli performed, as he said, an 'act of almost unexampled confidence' in 1874 in making Cross home secretary without his having undergone a probation in some minor post. 
From the very start, however, Cross was an unqualified success as home secretary. Disraeli had shown in his early novels, and in his Manchester speech of 1872, an appreciation of the need for social reform; but he had little idea what direction it should take, and the only promise on the subject made in his election address of 1874 was that he would give the country a rest from 'incessant and harassing legislation'; moreover, he not only allowed but expected his colleagues to have policies of their own. It is certain, therefore, that Cross was not merely responsible for the details, but had a large part in shaping the principles of the social reforms which are perhaps the greatest achievement of the ministry of 1874-80. 
Cross's first measure, the 'Licensing Bill' of 1874, seemed too obviously framed to conciliate the drink interest and had to be substantially modified: 'not much to be proud of' was his own admission in after years. A measure more congenial to him was the 'Artisans' Dwellings Act' of 1875, which empowered municipal authorities, by compulsory purchase if necessary, to clear slums and to let or sell the land for the provision of new working-class housing. It forbade the enhancement of compensation on the ground of compulsion; and it substituted the award of a departmental arbitrator for the proprietary and local sympathies of juries. At the same time a Home Office order was issued requiring all local authorities to appoint medical officers of health and sanitary inspectors. Cross was anxious, however, to forestall the charge of collectivism, insisting that 'it is not the duty of the Government to provide any class of citizens with any of the necessaries of life'. The costs of implementing the act restricted its impact, though Joseph Chamberlain afterwards said that the reforms which made a model city of Birmingham would have been impossible without it. Cross was subsequently regarded as an authority on housing problems, and published articles on the subject in the 'Nineteenth Century' in 1882 and 1884. 
The 'Factory Act' of 1874 dealt with the employment of women and children in textile factories; and the 'Factories and Workshops Act', 1878, consolidated and codified the mass of legislation on this subject. The latter embodied the recommendations of a royal commission appointed in 1876. The 'Employers and Workmen Act', 1875, and its associated 'Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act', on the other hand, owed little to the royal commission which preceded them. It was Disraeli who said that the policy of these acts was initiated by Cross and would have been vetoed by the rest of the cabinet but for his own support. Largely relieving workers of the threat of imprisonment for breach of contract, and trade unions of the possibility of prosecution for conspiracy and restrictions on peaceful picketing, the measures were warmly welcomed by the labour movement. Cross also legislated to preserve open spaces near large towns, and transferred the management of prisons and the cost of their upkeep from local to central government. His last proposal, to acquire and transfer to a single authority all the undertakings which supplied London with water, was sharply criticized on the ground of excessive compensation and had to be dropped; but the idea was sound. 
In opposition (1880-85) the school of businessmen in politics to which Cross belonged was speedily thrown into the shade by Lord Randolph Churchill, whose dislike for them was open and violent. Accordingly, although Cross returned to the Home Office in the short-lived ministry of 1885, it was no surprise when in 1886 that department was given to Lord Randolph's nominee, and Cross received the lighter India Office, being at the same time raised to the peerage as Viscount Cross of Broughton in Furness. His tenure of the India Office, which lasted until 1892, was uneventful, its only important piece of legislation being the 'Indian Councils Act', 1892, which enlarged the membership of the Indian legislative councils -- though without formally introducing the elective principle, which Cross opposed -- and proved highly successful. In 1895 he accepted the office of privy seal, which he retained until 1900, and he finally retired in 1902. After this his appearances in parliament were few, and he does not appear to have spoken in the Lords after 1909. He died on 8 January 1914, following a bronchial attack, at Eccle Riggs, Broughton in Furness, his family home since 1860. 
Cross was a fellow of the Royal Society, a bencher of the Inner Temple, and an ecclesiastical commissioner, and was keenly interested in the affairs of the church. His honours included, besides the viscountcy, the GCB (1880) and GCSI (1892). He was among the small band of her ministers to whom Queen Victoria gave her close personal friendship, and he was a trustee of more than one royal marriage settlement. But the story that he was the queen's confidential business agent is unfounded. Very far from being a brilliant man, Cross was yet gifted with unfailing good sense; and he had the knack of securing the affection and trust of his subordinates. His speeches were of a type which the House of Commons listened to with respect rather than enjoyment, well-documented and clear statements such as might be made at a meeting of a business company. Only twice did he rise to a note of passion in oratory -- when introducing the 'Artisans' Dwellings Act' (1875) and when repudiating on behalf of the cabinet the charge of indifference to the sufferings of Bulgaria. The latter speech (7 May 1877) contained a cogent defence of the whole policy of the government in the Eastern crisis, and created a widespread impression. 
To Cross's reputation as an outstanding home secretary and a model of the hard-working, efficient departmental head has been added the suggestion that he and his Lancashire associates built on their local experience to pursue a version of tory democracy based on combination between the middle classes and the aristocracy to supply such social and administrative reform as would preserve paternalistic government against popular pressure. Cross however, was too pedestrian and, in Disraeli's and Salisbury's cabinets, too middle-class a figure to achieve more than moderate influence in the inner councils of his party. 


@@@@@


doc= 32645


Crossman, Sir William (1830-1901), army officer, born at Isleworth, Middlesex, on 30 June 1830, was the eldest son of Robert Crossman of Cheswick House, Beal, and Holy Island, Northumberland, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of E. Douglas of Kingston upon Thames. After education at Berwick upon Tweed grammar school and Mr Jeffery's at Woolwich, he entered the Royal Military Academy at the head of his batch in January 1847. He was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 19 December 1848. After serving at Woolwich, he was employed on the organization of the Great Exhibition of 1851, and the next year was sent to Western Australia to superintend the construction of public works by convicts. He was a police magistrate there and visiting magistrate for the ticket-of-leave stations, being stationed principally at Albany in King George's Sound and at Perth. He was promoted lieutenant on 17 February 1854. He married at Albany, on 3 March 1855, Catherine Josephine (died 1878), daughter of John Lawrence Morley of Albany; they had two sons and three daughters. His services were commended by the governor, but the Crimean War necessitated his recall in February 1856. 
After employment at Aldershot and Chatham, Crossman served at the War Office under the inspector-general of fortifications, working on surveys and designs for new defences of dockyards and naval bases (nicknamed Palmerston's Follies). He designed several of the coastal defences of Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, of Hilsea lines and the detached forts of the Gosport advanced line, of the Verne Citadel at Portland, and Scraesdon and Tregantle forts at Plymouth. Meanwhile he was promoted captain on 12 May 1858, and was a member of the committee on the equipment of coast batteries (January 1860). In December 1861 he went to Canada to help with military preparations at the time of the 'Trent' crisis, and afterwards was secretary to the royal commission, led by Sir J. W. Gordon, on the defences of Canada, visiting every post on the frontier. 
Between 1866 and 1870 Crossman was engaged by the Treasury to report on the legation and consular buildings in Japan and China, and to arrange for new buildings where necessary. In the course of his mission he secured for the Admiralty the site for a new dockyard at Shanghai; he accompanied both the naval expedition to Nanking (Nanjing) and Lingling in 1869 and the force of sailors and marines which was landed in Taiwan and at Swatow (Shantou) in 1868 and 1869. Varied service occupied him after his return to England. Promoted major on 5 July 1872 and lieutenant-colonel on 11 December 1873, he became assistant director of works for fortifications at the War Office on 1 April 1875, but on 6 September he joined a special commission appointed by the Colonial Office to inquire into the resources and finances of the western Griqua country, South Africa. He was made CMG in May 1877. From 1876 to 1881 he served as the first inspector of submarine mining defences and as member of the Royal Engineers committee for submarine experiments and stores, visiting all the defended harbours at home and some overseas. Under his auspices mines became an important part of harbour defence. During 1879 and 1880 he was also president of an important committee on siege operations, which conducted many experiments with a view to remodelling siege operations in line with improved artillery. In 1881-2 he visited Esquimalt and various colonies and reported on their defences. On his return (July 1882) he was commanding royal engineer of the southern military district, but was absent in 1883 on a commission of inquiry with Sir George Smyth Baden-Powell into the financial condition of Jamaica and other West Indian islands. The report was published in March 1884, and in May he was made KCMG. 
Crossman, who had been promoted brevet colonel on 11 December 1878 and colonel on 6 May 1885, resigned his command to stand for parliament. In June 1885 he was elected Liberal MP for Portsmouth. Rejecting home rule he joined the Liberal Unionists, and retained the seat until 1892. He retired from the army with the honorary rank of major-general (6 January 1886). In January 1883 he had succeeded to his father's estate in Northumberland, and was a JP and alderman for the county, and served as sheriff in 1894-5 and as chairman of the River Tweed commission. He married in London, on 29 June 1899, Annie, eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General R. Richards, Bombay staff corps, who survived him. Crossman died at the Hotel Belgravia, in London, on 19 April 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 32646


Crosthwaite, Sir Charles Haukes Todd (1835-1915), administrator in India and Burma, was born at Donnybrook, co. Dublin, on 5 December 1835, the second son of John Clarke Crosthwaite, vicar-choral of Christ Church, Dublin, and later rector of St Mary-at-Hill, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Haukes, daughter of Charles H. Todd MD of Sligo and Dublin. After education at Merchant Taylors' School and St John's College, Oxford, he entered the Indian Civil Service in August 1857, and served in various revenue and judicial posts in the North-Western Provinces and the Central Provinces. In these early years Crosthwaite acquired a large family and thereafter his career was dominated by the concern to provide adequately for his children. He married, first, in 1863, Sarah, daughter of William Graham, of Lisburn, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. Sarah died in 1872 and Crosthwaite married, secondly, on 29 December 1874, Caroline Alison (died 1893), daughter of Sir Henry Lushington, fourth baronet, of Aspenden Hall, Hertfordshire, with whom he had two sons and one daughter. 
In March 1883 Crosthwaite became acting chief commissioner of Burma. He returned to the Central Provinces in the following March, again as acting chief commissioner, and was subsequently confirmed in the post. In March 1887, after four months with the public service commission, he readily returned to Burma as chief commissioner in succession to Sir Charles Bernard. 
Crosthwaite found that Upper Burma, annexed only two years previously, remained in a state of rebellion. Alert to the unpopularity of the British and their imported Indian police force, he concentrated on strengthening village-level administration and traditional village headships in an attempt to restore a sense of familiar government to the Burmese. At the same time he cracked down hard on guerrilla warfare and arson, thereby easing the embarrassment Britain had suffered over her latest imperial acquisition. He had already been made a CSI in February 1887; in June 1888 he was promoted to KCSI. 
Crosthwaite was home member of the executive council from December 1890 until February 1891 and again from April to November 1892, at which latter date he succeeded Sir Auckland Colvin as lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces and chief commissioner of Oudh. His politics were those of gruff conservatism; he saw sedition lurking in many vernacular publications and scorned the political ambitions of Western-educated Indians. When anti-cow-killing disturbances flared up in his province in 1893, he advocated repressive legislation; fortunately for his reputation, however, the less alarmist counsels of Lord Lansdowne prevailed. 
Crosthwaite went home on leave in early 1895, and in the following March was appointed to the Council of India, where he served the customary ten years. In retirement he published a memoir of his Burmese years, 'The Pacification of Burma' (1912), and 'Thakur Pertab Singh and other Tales' (1913). In a series of articles in 'The Times' he condemned the Morley-Minto reforms for abandoning the Indian masses to the machinations of a few irresponsible and over-educated Indian politicians. He died at his home at Long Acre, Shamley Green, Surrey, on 28 May 1915 and was buried on 2 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 32647


Crowdy, Dame Rachel Eleanor (1884-1964), social reformer, was born on 3 March 1884 at 28 Craven Hill Gardens, Paddington, London, the daughter of James Crowdy (died in or before 1939), solicitor, and his wife, Mary Isabel Anne, 'nee' Fuidge. One of four sisters including Edith Frances Crowdy, who were all to develop an active interest in social service in their adult lives, she was educated at Hyde Park New College in London, and at Guy's Hospital where she completed her training as a nurse in 1908. In 1911 she joined the newly formed Voluntary Aid Detachments (VADs), volunteer nursing units attached to the Territorial Army. With characteristic thoroughness, she immediately began to study at Apothecaries' Hall for a certificate to serve as dispenser to her unit, VAD 22, London. Between 1912 and 1914 she was also a lecturer and demonstrator at the National Health Society. 
It was through her work for the VADs during the First World War that Rachel Crowdy made her name. With her friend Katharine Furse she broke down the prejudices of both male administrators and professional nurses, setting up first aid and home nursing classes all over the country. The VADs had been trained for the eventuality of invasion, but they managed to send a small group to Boulogne, where they set up a rest station for wounded soldiers in a railway siding. There, during the first battle of Ypres, about twenty nurses ministered to 30,000 men. At the end of 1914 Katharine Furse returned to London and for the rest of the war Rachel Crowdy was in charge of the VADs on the continent. She set up rest stations along the lines of communication in France and Belgium, and established ambulance depots, hostels for nurses and for relatives of the sick and wounded, and hospitals and sickbays wherever they were needed. Before long the VADs had proved themselves so well that the two Crowdy sisters Rachel and Mary could set up an office in the joint war committee centre in the Hotel Crystal in Boulogne. 
Rachel Crowdy was mentioned in dispatches several times, and received the Royal Red Cross, second class, in 1916 and first class in 1917; in 1919 she was created DBE. Her experiences had tested her courage to the full. They had also helped to make her into an exceptionally firm and determined administrator. In 1919 she became chief of the social questions and opium traffic section at the League of Nations, the only woman to head a section at the league. During her twelve years there she considered a wide range of social problems, becoming best known for her inquiries into the traffic in women and children and into the opium trade. Her work won international acclaim. In 1920-21 she went with the International Typhus Commission to Poland when the epidemic was at its height, and in 1922 she was made a commander of the order of Polonia Restituta. In 1926 Smith College in the United States made her an honorary doctor of laws, and in 1931, at the end of her work for the League of Nations, the Spanish government made her a commander of the order of Alfonso XII 'for services of outstanding value in the international field of social reform'. 
During the 1930s Dame Rachel's career as a 'social worker' (her own description) continued unabated. She was a member of the British delegation to the Conference on Pacific Relations at Shanghai in 1931, having attended the Conference on Pacific Affairs in Honolulu the previous year. She travelled alone to Shanghai, as she did again in 1936, when she returned to Manchuria. She revelled in the freedom to go where she wished and see what she pleased. In 1935-6 she was a member of the royal commission on the private manufacture of and trading in arms. The commission's report concluded that nationalization was impracticable, but recommended some far-reaching British and international regulations, which were not implemented. In 1937 Dame Rachel went with a parliamentary commission to observe the war in Spain. In 1938-9 she served on the West Indies royal commission, whose recommendations included the establishment of a West Indian Welfare Fund. From 1939 to 1946 she served as regions' adviser to the Ministry of Information, her last major appointment in a long and remarkably varied career. 
Dame Rachel Crowdy belonged to a generation in which women had to possess very obvious strength of character if they were to attain recognition. She certainly could have been described as 'formidable', but those who knew her found much more besides. Strikingly good-looking and always well turned out, she impressed her colleagues with her incisive mind and quick wit. Her orderliness and other administrative talents tempered an abiding zest for life, a curiosity about people and places which seemed to be insatiable, and a feeling for poetry and visual beauty which was reflected in the vivid and graceful language of her many lectures to audiences all over the world. On 13 December 1939 she married Colonel Cudbert John Massy Thornhill CMG DSO (1883-1952), the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Henry Beaufoy Thornhill. Dame Rachel died of coronary thrombosis at her home, Sheppards, Outwood, Surrey, on 10 October 1964, at the age of eighty. 
Alice Prochaska', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32648


Crowe, Sir Edward Thomas Frederick (1877-1960), public servant, was born at Zante in the Ionian Islands on 20 August 1877, the son of Alfred Louis Crowe, who later became vice-consul for the island, and his wife, Matilda Fortunata Barff. He was educated at Bedford grammar school and in 1897 joined the consular service as a student interpreter in Japan. In 1901 he married Eleanor (died 1947), daughter of William Hyde Lay, British consul at Chefoo (Yantai), China. They had two sons and one daughter. 
During the Russo-Japanese War Crowe was in charge of the consulate at Tamsui (Danshui), Taipei (Tabei), then a Japanese possession, where his ability attracted attention at Tokyo, and in 1906 he was assigned to the legation as commercial attache. He was appointed CMG in 1911. In 1918, after the creation of the department of overseas trade and the commercial diplomatic service, he was confirmed as the first commercial counsellor at the new embassy in Tokyo. He was knighted in 1922, and was recalled to London in 1924. He never returned to the Far East, but his admiration and affection for the Japanese people remained a feature of his life. For seven years he was vice-president of the Japan Society in London, the Japanese ambassador being traditionally its president, and he took an active part in its work, on the council and at its lectures. After the Second World War he led a movement for the submission of a petition for clemency to the war crimes tribunal at Tokyo for Mamoru Shigemitsu, the former ambassador in London and later Japanese foreign minister. In 1950 Crowe became the first president of the Japan Association, formed to promote British trade interests in Japan. In 1955 he was decorated with the Japanese order (first class) of the Sacred Treasure. 
From 1924 to 1928 Crowe served as director of the foreign division of the department of overseas trade, and in April 1928 he was chosen to succeed Sir William Clark as comptroller-general of the department. During his term of office, which lasted until the autumn of 1937, he did much to foster British trade with the Far East, and to reconcile the interests of British and Japanese cotton-goods exporters. His nine years as comptroller-general marked the period of widest influence for the department. He brought to the post a practical and sympathetic experience of the problems facing exporters and he was endowed with boundless energy, an inquisitive mind, and a remarkable capacity for winning people's confidence. Not content with the current administrative duties of his office, he got to know intimately each member of his staff, at home or overseas; he was in personal contact with the leaders in banking, industry, and commerce in London; and, unusually for a government official, he frequently took the initiative to visit the centres of industry in the provinces and to address their chambers of commerce. Single-handed he did much to reverse the previous apathy or indifference of government departments to the difficulties of exporters. Above all, he strove for the expansion of the annual British Industries Fair which provided an important showcase for British exports. For nine years he was vice-president of the International Exhibitions Bureau at Paris, and vice-president of the board of governors of the Imperial Institute. In recognition of his services he was advanced to KCMG in 1930. 
Crowe retired from government service in 1937, and took up the chairmanship of Croda Ltd and directorships of W. T. Henley's Telegraph Works Company, Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company, and the English Electric Company Ltd. He became an ardent supporter of the Royal Society of Arts, serving as vice-president (1937-60), president (1942-3), and chairman of the council (1941-3). He identified himself particularly with the society's work for the vocational education of young people and for sixteen years was chairman of its examination committee. He also served on many government committees, including Lord Goschen's on the law relating to trade marks, Lord Gorell's on art and industry, and Lord Fleming's on public schools. 
Crowe was one whose character found its happier development only after his release from the ties of official life. He was not a scholar and he disliked being alone; his delight was in meeting people and drawing them to him. After his death, Sir Harry Lindsay recalled 'his sense of human neighbourliness', which 'endeared him to all with whom he came into contact' ('Journal of the Royal Society of Arts', 298). He had a graceful facility for public speaking, enjoyed abundant health, and appeared to be incapable of fatigue. In his old age, with his mass of white hair, his monocle, and his blue beret, he was a respected and popular figure. He died on 8 March 1960 at 10 Sharia Willcocks Zamalek, Cairo, during a visit to his son Colin Tradescant Crowe, then British charge d'affaires in Cairo. A memorial service was held in his honour at Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, on 20 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 32649


Crowe, Eyre (1824-1910), painter, was born on 3 October 1824 at 141 Sloane Street, London, the eldest of the six children of Eyre Evans Crowe (1799-1868), author and journalist, and his first wife, Margaret (died 1853), daughter of Joseph Archer of Newtown Mount Kennedy, co. Wicklow, and his wife, Hester. His younger brother was the journalist and art historian Sir Joseph Archer Crowe (1825-1896). His childhood was spent largely in Paris, where his father was correspondent for the 'Morning Chronicle'. He was educated at home by his father and was taught drawing by William Darley and one M. Brasseur. In 1839 he enrolled at the celebrated atelier of Paul Delaroche, where he associated with many rising artists, including Jean-Leon Gerome, with whom he formed a lasting friendship. Both were among the pupils who accompanied Delaroche to Rome after the atelier closed in 1843. 
In the following year Crowe rejoined his family, now settled in London. His early work was rejected by the Royal Academy and he registered at the Academy Schools for further study. In 1846 he made his debut at the academy with 'Master Prynne Searching Archbishop Laud's Pockets in the Tower'. This impressed W. M. Thackeray, a close family friend, who employed Crowe to transfer his sketches for 'Notes of a Journey from Cornhill to Grand Cairo' (1846) to woodblocks and to conduct research for his commentary on Louis Marvy's 'Sketches after English Landscape Painters' (1850). 
When his father ceased to be editor of the 'Daily News' and returned to Paris in 1852, the indigent Crowe was engaged by Thackeray as his secretary and as drawing-master for his daughters. After preparing 'The History of Henry Esmond Esquire' for publication Crowe was persuaded to accompany the author on a six-month (November 1852 to April 1853) lecture tour of the United States as his 'factotum and amanuensis' (Crowe, 'With Thackeray in America', 1). He did not always prove competent in this capacity but Thackeray appreciated his company as 'the kindest and most affectionate henchman ever man had' ('Letters and Private Papers', 3.184). Crowe's American sketches, some of which appeared in the 'Illustrated London News', show a strong interest in the appearance and condition of the black community, later expressed in the painting 'Slaves Waiting for Sale, Richmond, Virginia' (exh. RA, 1861; Heinz Collection). 
After his return to England Crowe gradually achieved success as a painter of genre and historical subjects, often reflecting an extensive knowledge of eighteenth-century literature, for example 'The Penance of Dr Johnson' (exh. RA, 1869; Dr Johnson's House). His 'Defoe in the Pillory' (exh. RA, 1862) won the silver medal of the Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts. Modern criticism has paid greater attention to his unsentimental excursions into social realism, such as the depictions of foundrymen in 'The Foundry' (exh. as 'Shinglers' RA, 1869; Milwaukee School of Engineering) and women millworkers in 'The Dinner Hour, Wigan' (exh. RA, 1874; Manchester City Galleries). From 1859 he acted as occasional examiner and inspector of the government schools of art. He was commissioned by the South Kensington Museum to design mosaics of William Hogarth (1867) and Sir Christopher Wren (1869) for the south courts and to paint the lunette 'Modelling from Life' (1869) for the National Competition Gallery. He exhibited annually at the Royal Academy from 1857 to 1908, was elected an associate in 1876, and lived to become its oldest member, but never attained the rank of academician. 
Crowe was a sociable bachelor, from 1861 frequenting the Reform Club, which owns his painting 'John Bright at the Reform Club, 1883'. He was also welcomed by the St John's Wood clique of artists as an 'honorary member' whose 'hearty laugh was... more exhilarating than champagne' (Leslie, 194-6). However, his nature grew more retiring as he outlived contemporaries and his artistic reputation. Having published two illustrated memoirs of his mentor, 'With Thackeray in America' (1893) and 'Thackeray's Haunts and Homes' (1897), he was himself remembered by Henry James as: 'a Thackerayan figure, but much as if the master's hand had stamped him with the outline and the value, with life and sweetness and patience -- shown, as after the long futility, seated in a quiet wait, very long too, for the end. (H. James, 'Autobiography', 1956, 53)' Crowe died, unmarried, of heart failure on 12 December 1910 at his home, 88 Hallam Street, Portland Place, London, following a hernia operation; he was buried on 15 December at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32650


Crowe, Sir Eyre Alexander Barby Wichart (1864-1925), diplomatist, was born on 30 July 1864 at Leipzig, the third of the seven children of Sir Joseph Archer Crowe (1825-1896), diplomatist and art historian, and his wife, Asta von Barby (1840-1908), daughter of Gustav von Barby and Eveline von Ribbentrop, and stepdaughter of Otto von Holtzendorff, attorney-general to Duke Ernst II of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. He received his education at 'Gymnasien' in Dusseldorf (1872-80) and Berlin (1880-82), and subsequently attended courses at both King's College and University College, London (1882-5). He never took a degree, as his ambition from an early age was to obtain a place in the Foreign Office. He concentrated on preparing for the entrance examination and became fluent in French as well as English and German. He was appointed a junior clerk in May 1885. 
Crowe's initial tasks in the Foreign Office were purely clerical and gave him little opportunity to take independent action or even to offer advice. Nevertheless he quickly made a reputation for himself by his efficiency and devotion to duty, so that by the mid-1890s he had been marked out for eventual promotion to the highest ranks. From 1885 to 1897 he lived in the Foreign Office as a resident clerk and devoted much of his spare time to a study of British diplomacy during the nineteenth century. During these years he developed firm views on the aims that he believed British foreign policy should pursue and which he thought recent governments had neglected. He became convinced that Britain should be more assertive in order to maintain her command of the sea, and should use her sea-power to preserve a balance of power in Europe. In his view, Britain should always be the guardian of the independence of other nations as well as her own, opposed to the domination of any one state. With no opportunity to influence the formulation of policy, Crowe found ways of bringing these opinions to a wider public. He collaborated with his brother-in-law, the journalist and military historian Henry Spencer Wilkinson, on the writing of 'The Great Alternative', published under Spencer Wilkinson's name in 1894, and he contributed a chapter to a 'Memoir of Hubert Hervey' (ed. Earl Grey, 1899), a close friend recently killed in Africa. Crowe's chapter contained his own political views, which he had shared with Hervey. On 2 February 1903 he married his cousin Clema ('b'. 1869), daughter of Professor Carl Gerhardt, of Gamburg, Baden, and widow of Eberhardt von Bonin. They had four children, Asta ('b'. 1904), Eric ('b'. 1905), Una ('b'. 1906), and Sibyl ('b'. 1908). 
Crowe was a strong critic of the organization of the Foreign Office, feeling that the talents of even its most senior members were wasted on purely clerical tasks, and that the foreign secretary was consequently deprived of the well-informed advice that he needed. The turning point in Crowe's career came in December 1904, when he was asked to supervise a major reorganization of the Foreign Office along the lines that he had been advocating. He quickly revealed exceptional powers of organization and negotiation. He elaborated a completely new scheme and persuaded the Treasury to accept the additional costs involved. By the end of 1905 he had arranged all the details and produced lengthy instructions on how his system should be operated. The reorganization involved the devolution of the clerical work of the Foreign Office to second division clerks, leaving the first division clerks and the under-secretaries free to devote themselves to advising the secretary of state. To make this possible there was a new system of registering and keeping papers in 'jackets', on which minutes could be written. The new system came into operation in January 1906, shortly after Sir Edward Grey became secretary of state. 
Crowe was able to take full advantage of the new system, because its introduction coincided with his promotion by seniority to the rank of senior clerk. He was placed in charge of the western department of the Foreign Office, which dealt with Germany and the other states of western Europe. He quickly became very influential in the formulation and execution of Grey's foreign policy. His years as head of the western department coincided with a deterioration in Anglo-German relations, which he personally very much regretted. He advised Grey during the important negotiations for a possible Anglo-German naval and political agreement (1908-12) and during the Agadir crisis of 1911. He was guided by his belief, expressed at first tentatively in his famous 'Memorandum on the present state of British relations with France and Germany' of January 1907, but then much more positively in later minutes, that the German government was consciously aiming at a general political hegemony in Europe. He argued forcefully that Britain should act firmly to maintain the balance of power and to prevent any erosion of her maritime supremacy. 
In January 1912 Crowe was promoted to be an assistant under-secretary, but continued to be responsible for the western department. Then, in September 1913, he was made responsible for both the western and the eastern departments, to co-ordinate British foreign policy throughout Europe and the Middle East. He was convinced that Germany was preparing for a war against the entente powers and that it was therefore essential to maintain the fragile triple entente. He urged on Grey that the preservation of the increasingly unpopular entente with Russia would only be possible if the British government was very firm with the Russians over imperial disputes, particularly in Persia. 
When the final crisis came in July 1914, Crowe had absolutely no doubt that it was in the interests of Britain herself, and of the independence of Europe as a whole, that the government should enter the war on the side of France and Russia. For Crowe himself, half-German, educated in Germany, strongly Germanophile, and with a German wife, the outbreak of the First World War was a personal tragedy. The war also had a profound impact on Crowe's career. Grey had decided that the permanent under-secretary should be transferred to the Paris embassy in the autumn of 1914, so that Crowe could be promoted in his place. At the age of only fifty, this would have placed him at the head of the Foreign Office for the final fifteen years of his career. In the event his promotion was delayed by six years, and very nearly prevented, when all diplomatic transfers were postponed for the duration of hostilities. 
From 1914 to 1918 Crowe's main task was the organization of the blockade of Germany, a task for which he was particularly well qualified. As head of the western department he had made a special study of these questions and had played a very important role in the negotiations concerning the implementation of the declaration of London (1909), intended as a codification of international law in regard to maritime warfare. He created a new contraband department in the Foreign Office, which soon became larger than the rest of the office combined. In 1916 it became the nucleus of a new ministry of blockade, with Lord Robert Cecil, the parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office, as the cabinet minister in charge. In recognition of his outstanding contribution to the war effort Crowe was given the rank of permanent under-secretary in the ministry of blockade in April 1917. However, his role as director of the blockade brought his name to the attention of the general public, and he suffered from the wave of Germanophobia which swept the country. Critics of the government's blockade policy, notably Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst and other suffragettes, called attention to Crowe's German connections, alleged that he was secretly allowing the blockade to be undermined, blamed him for every failure in the war, and demanded his dismissal. Crowe was subjected to a sustained public attack, which lasted from the summer of 1915 until the end of the war. He was defended in parliament by both Grey and Cecil, but his promotion to be head of the Foreign Office was called into question. When the permanent under-secretary, Sir Arthur Nicolson, retired in June 1916 he was replaced not by Crowe, but by Lord Hardinge of Penshurst. 
In January 1919 Crowe went to Paris as part of the British delegation to the peace conference. He quickly emerged as the most influential member of the Foreign Office team, and played a central role in the territorial negotiations leading to the five peace treaties. In September 1919, when only the German and Austrian treaties had been signed, he was given the vitally important position of British representative on the supreme council of the peace conference, which was chaired by Clemenceau, the French prime minister. Crowe and Clemenceau developed a personal friendship, and partly for this reason Crowe dominated the proceedings of the council until the German treaty was ratified and the peace conference came to an end in January 1920. Lord Curzon, the new foreign secretary, was amazed by Crowe's powers of negotiation and his profound knowledge of the issues involved. When Hardinge left the Foreign Office in November 1920, Curzon insisted that Crowe should be promoted permanent under-secretary. 
Crowe remained head of the Foreign Office, serving under three foreign secretaries (Lord Curzon, Ramsay MacDonald, and Sir Austen Chamberlain), for the next four and a half years. He was keen that a balance of power should be restored in Europe, and that Germany should not be permanently weakened or crippled by excessive reparations. Vital to this balance was close co-operation between Britain and France, the only two powers capable of guaranteeing peace and stability in Europe after the war. Crowe advised Curzon that the only way to persuade France to co-operate with Britain and soften her attitude towards Germany was to offer a guarantee of her security on the Rhine against any future German attack. As Anglo-French relations deteriorated during 1921-2 he continued to advocate this policy, but failed to convince either Curzon or Lloyd George. When the French and Belgians occupied the Ruhr in 1923 he argued that the occupation was illegal under the terms of the treaty of Versailles and that the repressive policy towards Germany was having disastrous consequences which threatened international peace. He drafted the note in which the government publicly condemned the Franco-Belgian action, and then played a major part in the negotiations which culminated in the Dawes plan of 1924. Before he died he had finally persuaded the new Conservative government to accept his proposal for a security pact with France. He formulated and drafted the guarantee of Germany's western frontiers which was later included in the Locarno pact. He exercised a dominant influence over Austen Chamberlain, with whom he developed a very close friendship. He was also an important influence on the foreign policy of Ramsay MacDonald. In October 1924, when he authorized the publication of the Zinoviev letter, he was distressed to discover that the prime minister had not intended the letter to be published. Nevertheless responsibility for the mistake lay with MacDonald, who had failed to make his intentions clear. 
Crowe was over 6 feet tall, with blue eyes, a fair complexion, and thick, wavy, red hair. He suffered throughout his life from poor health, mainly the result of weak kidneys, made worse by constant overwork. He nearly died of kidney failure at the beginning of 1920 and continued working against medical advice. He was an exceptionally cultivated man, read very widely throughout his life, and had a great love of music. As a young man he played the piano to a high standard and composed both songs and piano pieces. His setting of Shelley's 'Arethusa' was published in 1889. His interest in military defence led him to serve as an officer in the first volunteer battalion, City of London fusiliers, from 1890 to 1902, reaching the rank of captain in 1894. His powers of argument were revealed in February 1911 when he won a spectacular forensic victory in the Savarkar arbitration case at The Hague, for which he was appointed KCMG. He was made KCB in June 1917 and advanced to GCMG in January 1920. He died of kidney failure while still in office, on 28 April 1925, in Swanage, Dorset. He was buried on 1 May in nearby Studland. 
Crowe was a great administrator and a master of Foreign Office procedure, whom Baldwin referred to, on hearing of his death, as 'the ablest public servant of the Crown' ('DNB'). Public perception of his views has changed during the twentieth century. Attacked during the war as a pro-German traitor, he was later denounced by many as a rabid Germanophobe after the publication of 'British Documents on the Origins of the War, 1898-1914' (1926-38). His memorandum of January 1907, published in 1928, had a wide popular appeal and aroused great interest in the academic world as a set text for generations of students of international relations. 


@@@@@


doc= 32651


Crozier, William Percival (1879-1944), journalist, was born at Stanhope, co. Durham, on 1 August 1879, the youngest son of the Revd Richard Crozier, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Hallimond. He was educated at Manchester grammar school and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship and obtained firsts in classical moderations (1900) and 'literae humaniores' (1902). A year teaching at Knaresborough persuaded him that he was not cut out to be a schoolmaster. Diverted to journalism, he joined 'The Times' for a few months, and then the 'Manchester Guardian' (1903). He made an impression immediately with his sharply critical analysis of the case for tariff reform. Sooner than most he won his editor's confidence and became C. P. Scott's right-hand man in charge of news gathering and the newspaper's make-up. In 1906 Crozier married Gladys Florence, daughter of George Frederick Baker, draper and furnisher, of Maidstone. They had one son and two daughters. 
Years before he became editor, Crozier reorganized the foreign news service; dramatically increased the use of photographic illustrations and maps; even succeeded in introducing classification. He encouraged new features, though some, like the women's page (1922), with more reluctance than others. He encouraged contributions on a wide range of sporting activity, while the arts columns gave critical coverage to the cinema (or kinema, as Scott preferred) and broadcasting. In 1929 he introduced the daily crossword. It was due to Crozier more than any other that 'the 'Manchester Guardian' was transformed from a provincial organ of opinion into a national newspaper pre-eminent also for its news' (Taylor, xix-xx). 
With his friend and older colleague Herbert Sidebotham Crozier shared a devotion and commitment to Zionism. He became the leading advocate in the daily press of a Jewish national home. His Zionism was 'a secular but profound fulfilment of his strongly scriptural imagination' (Ayerst, 383). He succeeded Sidebotham as news editor in 1912, and in 1918 as military critic. This last he undertook, as all his tasks, with thoroughness and energy, but he lacked his predecessor's flair. In 1919 he was offered, but declined, the editorship of the 'Daily News'. Determined not to repeat the earlier mistake that had cost him Sidebotham's services, Scott made Crozier a member of the 'Manchester Guardian''s board. Ted Scott's tragic accidental death in April 1932 sundered the dynastic succession, and Crozier was appointed editor. His choice seemed to offer some guarantee of continuity for he had served a long and faithful apprenticeship to C. P. Scott. As chairman of the board, John Scott ensured that the tradition of editorial precedence and independence was respected and maintained. 
As editor, Crozier remained to an extraordinary extent what he had always been, 'a working journalist of something approaching genius' (Wadsworth, 232). He was distinguished by the close control he exercised over the paper. He frequently contributed leaders. His own style of writing was clear and precise. He persistently, if gently, censured the use of jargon and verbiage, extolling the virtues of writing that was 'simple, direct, lucid, concise and brief... the best and most effective English for newspaper purposes' (Ayerst, 197). He was as dedicated a Liberal as C. P. Scott, but Westminster was neither a favoured nor a familiar milieu. He was saved from engagement in debilitating domestic political disputes by an overwhelmingly more important issue of foreign politics. His editorship spanned the dozen years from Hitler's assumption of power to the last months before the allied invasion of Europe. No other English editor was better informed about the true nature of German national socialism. His reserved, sceptical manner masked his passionate loathing for the cruelties perpetrated by the Nazi regime. As foreign editor he had always been unduly possessive about foreign news, to the considerable irritation and exasperation of his correspondents. Now he considered it no less than his duty personally and persistently to expose the Nazis. Although he frequently asserted the contrary, he was reluctant to surrender any part of his crusade even though it undermined his frail health. He was not stopped by a perforated ulcer in 1936, any more than by the diagnosis, in 1943, of his ultimately fatal heart condition. He worked to the end. 
A father's over-zealous Methodism had induced in Crozier a reluctant agnosticism. Nevertheless, the scholar-journalist maintained his biblical and classical studies. They informed the two works of historical fiction he wrote in the scanty leisure time he allowed himself: 'Letters of Pontius Pilate' (1928), and the posthumously published 'The Fates are Laughing' (1945). He contributed a fascinating character sketch of C. P. Scott to J. L. Hammond's biography of the editor whose name is synonymous with the 'Manchester Guardian' (1934). Crozier died at his home, 23 Anson Road, Victoria Park, Manchester, on 16 April 1944. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32652


Cruikshank, Robert James (1898-1956), journalist, the son of Robert James Cruikshank, a coffee-house keeper from Balleer, co. Armagh, Ireland, and his wife, Ellen Batcheldor, from Kent, was born in Kensington, London, on 19 April 1898. Always known as Robin Cruikshank, he had little formal education, but read widely from childhood. He began a journalistic career as a reporter on the 'Bournemouth Guardian'. After service in the First World War he was recommended to the news editor of the 'Daily News' in London and remained with that organization for the rest of his life. In 1919 he was sent to Prague to report the founding of the Czechoslovak republic. From the quality of his dispatches his potential as a foreign correspondent was quickly recognized, and it was in this field that he made his mark in journalism. By 1924 he had risen to the post of diplomatic correspondent of the 'Daily News' and four years later he was sent to represent the paper in New York. 
In this position, which he held for the next eight years, Cruikshank made a reputation as one of the top-ranking British correspondents in America, both through his knowledge and sympathetic understanding of America and Americans and by the vividness and dependability of his reporting. Colleagues marvelled at how little of his copy ever needed alteration and described his stories as a 'sparkling run of words' which completely 'outwrote his fellow correspondents' (Glenton and Pattinson, 50). It was once said of him by an American that he 'came to know Americans better than they knew themselves'. His ability to understand and define the essence of a culture was shown in his novel 'The Double Quest', published in 1936, which wittily contrasted and compared British and American society. 
When the post of managing editor of 'The Star' became vacant in 1936, Cruikshank was invited to return to England to take it up. He was appointed a director of 'The Star', the evening stable companion of the 'Daily News' which in the interval had become the 'News Chronicle'. In 1939 he married Margaret Adele, who survived him, a journalist and daughter of Dr J. A. Macknight, of California. They had two daughters. 
It was not surprising that after the outbreak of the Second World War Cruikshank's wide knowledge of the American press and pressmen, combined with his general journalistic talent and his gift for getting on with all manner of people, should have resulted in his being appointed in 1941 director of the American division at the Ministry of Information. He was absent from the editorial chair of 'The Star' for the rest of the war. He was also in 1941-2 deputy director-general of the British Information Services in the United States. This second Anglo-American period, with its combination of journalism and diplomacy, probably marked the peak of his professional achievement. In his wartime posts, he was remembered most vividly for his 'genius' for creating in the office 'a real spirit of cooperation, extending down to the most junior member of staff' (Hamilton, 16). He was appointed CMG in 1945 and, the war over, returned to become, as it were, one of the senior statesmen of the 'Daily News' organization, being appointed a director of Daily News Ltd (the parent company), and of the News Chronicle Ltd. 
Cruikshank took an active part in the editorial and general direction of both newspapers and seemed destined for the highest positions. It was a natural move, when Gerald Barry resigned from the editorship of the 'News Chronicle' at the end of 1947, that Cruikshank should succeed him. It is questionable whether his talent lay chiefly in the direction of editorship -- he was happier and more at ease writing himself than directing others to write -- and it seemed that the burdens of editorship lay rather heavily upon him. By 1954 his health had begun to show signs of deterioration which affected his grip on day-to-day control and by the end of the year he found it necessary to resign. 
Cruikshank had continued to be a prolific writer in the post-war period. His book 'Roaring Century', written in 1946 to mark the centenary of the 'News Chronicle', gave a good example of his rich appreciation of Victorian Britain. Characteristically he waived his royalties in it in favour of the Printers' Pension Fund. Shortly afterwards he wrote 'Charles Dickens and Early Victorian England' (1949) and in 1951 'The Moods of London'. Fellow journalists remembered him most for his 'happy disposition and a complete absence of pomposity' ('The Times', 15 May 1956, 13). His other great loves besides journalism and literature were music and the theatre: from 1947 to 1955 he was a governor of the Old Vic, and at one time he was among the sponsors of the London Philharmonic Orchestra. He was also a delegate to the subcommission on freedom of information of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations. He died at his home at 198 West Hill, Putney, London, on 14 May 1956, and was buried on 17 May after a funeral at Putney Vale cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32653


Crum, Walter Ewing (1865-1944), Coptic scholar, was born on 22 July 1865 at Capelrig, Renfrewshire, the eldest son of Alexander Crum (1828-1893), manufacturer and Liberal member of parliament for Renfrewshire (1880-85), and his wife, Margaret Stewart (Nina), eldest daughter of Alexander Ewing, bishop of Argyll and the Isles. 
Crum was educated at a Brighton preparatory school (from 1873), Eton College (1879-84), and Balliol College, Oxford (1884-8), gaining a second class in modern history. Failure to obtain a first was generally attributed to the amount of time he spent practising the violin; at one time he hoped to take it up professionally, but his instructor advised against this. Instead, he turned his attention to Egyptology, for he had become interested in the Egyptian monuments he saw on family holidays in Paris. On graduating, therefore, he proceeded first to Paris, to study Egyptology under Gaston Maspero and William Groff, and then to Munich. In 1890 he went to Berlin, on the advice of F. Ll. Griffith, to study under Adolf Erman, whose close friend he became, and Georg Steindorff. Steindorff introduced him to Coptic, which soon became his main preoccupation. 
Crum remained in Berlin until 1892, when he applied for a post in the department of Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities at the British Museum. He came first in the examination but was rejected on medical grounds. Since his family's wealth was sufficient to support him, he made no further attempt to obtain an official post. The same year saw his first publications on Coptic, including the chapter on Coptic papyri in W. M. Flinders Petrie's 'Medum', and the first of his bibliographies of Coptic studies and Christian Egypt, which were a highly valued feature of the annual 'Archaeological Report' of the Egypt Exploration Fund (later Society) until 1909. His first independent volume, 'Coptic Manuscripts Brought from the Fayyum', appeared in 1893. From that year until 1910 he assisted Petrie with the teaching of Ancient Egyptian and Coptic at University College, London; among his pupils was Sir Herbert Thompson (1859-1944), who became his closest friend. During this period Crum came to feel the acute need for a new Coptic dictionary that would take account of the advances made in Coptic studies since the previous dictionary (Peyron's 'Lexicon Copticum' of 1835), and especially of the quantities of new texts being found in Egypt at the time, which were mostly unpublished. He was beginning to make systematic preparations for this project when a major upheaval occurred in his domestic affairs. 
In 1896 Crum had married Ella, daughter of Sir Edward Henry Sieveking, physician to Queen Victoria and the prince of Wales, but the marriage was unhappy and they had no children. At University College, however, Crum met Margaret (Madge) Hart-Davis (1876-1953), who was studying Egyptology at the time, and they fell in love. When their relationship became known, in 1910, they were ostracized by the college, but Ella Crum, a Roman Catholic, refused to divorce him. He and Hart-Davis decided to elope abroad, and settled in Austria, first in Graz and later in Vienna. The two remained together for the rest of Crum's life, and she changed her surname to Crum by deed poll, but they could never marry, since Ella Crum outlived her husband. 
In Austria the couple devoted themselves to the first stages of work on the dictionary. Crum travelled to museums and libraries all over Europe collecting material, while still finding time to edit the texts from the Theban monastery of Epiphanius brought to him in 1911 by the American Egyptologist H. E. Winlock. When war broke out in 1914 the Crums were still in Austria, but Winlock persuaded the American state department to take up their case, and they were eventually allowed to leave. 
During the war Crum gave up half his income to charities and volunteered for work in the War Office. Afterwards he settled in Westbury-on-Trym, near Bristol, moving to Bath in 1927, where he was later joined by Thompson, who came to assist with the dictionary. This was eventually compiled from more than 240,000 slips. An earlier contract with the Berlin Academy having lapsed in the war, Crum reached an agreement with Oxford University Press in 1927 to share the cost of publication. It appeared in six parts (1929-39) and at once took rank as the definitive dictionary of the Coptic language. 
This was Crum's 'magnum opus', but by no means his only important work; he was also responsible for editing a huge number of previously unpublished Coptic texts. The two largest of his text editions were the catalogues of the Coptic manuscripts in the British Museum (1905) and in the John Rylands Library, Manchester (1909), both very substantial works. Other notable titles are one volume of the Cairo Museum catalogue, 'Coptic Monuments' (1902); 'Coptic Ostraca' (1902); and the first volume of 'Koptische Rechtsurkunden des achten Jahrhunderts' (1912). He also contributed numerous articles to journals on Coptic and (until 1898) other Egyptological topics. A full bibliography is given in 'Coptic Studies in Honor of Walter Ewing Crum' (1950), vii-xi (revised from 'Journal of Egyptian Archaeology', 25, 1939, 134-8). His achievements were recognized by honorary degrees of PhD (Berlin, 1910) and DLitt (Oxford, 1937); he was elected FBA in 1931. He had a flair for languages, speaking and writing French and German with ease, and knowing many other European languages, as well as Syriac, Ethiopic, and Arabic. Crum's approach to his work, despite its quantity, was always methodical and conscientious, resulting in a very high standard of accuracy. It may be noted that when he discovered that the production costs of the dictionary would be less than expected, he voluntarily repaid subventions towards them from academic bodies. He was always ready to give assistance to other scholars, and little was published on the subject without recourse to him. He could be expansive or highly strung, but was always courteous, modest, and kind. His appearance was tall and strikingly handsome, and some of his friends dubbed him 'our Coptic Apollo'. 
After the completion of the dictionary, Crum's energy began to fail. He spent much of his last days acting as next of kin for Thompson in the latter's final illness, and died of a sudden heart attack at his home, 19 Bathwick Hill, Bath, on 18 May 1944, shortly after learning that Thompson had no hope of recovery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32654


Crump, Charles George (1862-1935), archivist, was born at Wyke Regis, near Weymouth, Dorset, on 9 April 1862, the eldest son of Charles Ashbrook Wright Crump, barrister, of the Inner Temple, then an instructor on the training ship HMS 'Britannia', and his wife, Helen Ann Crane. His parents left England with their family in 1872 and lived at San Remo until 1885. Charles, like his brothers Harry and Louis, was educated by his father, who also took private pupils, for the Indian Civil Service, and obtained seventh place in the examination of 1880, whereupon he entered Balliol College, Oxford, as a civilian in training ['see 'competition wallahs]. 
After graduating in jurisprudence in 1883 Crump proceeded to India, but after six months at Cawnpore he was invalided home for good; he retired in 1886. On recovering, he aimed at a post in the home civil service, and while waiting to compete worked under Sir J. A. H. Murray on the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. In 1890 he married Lucy (died 1946), younger daughter of the literary scholar George Birkbeck Hill, sister of Sir (Edward) Maurice Hill, judge, and sister-in-law of the economic historian Sir W. J. Ashley; they had a son and a daughter. 
Crump obtained a post as clerk in the secretary's department of the General Post Office in 1887, from which in 1888 he was transferred as a junior clerk to the Public Record Office. Here he remained until his retirement with the rank of senior assistant keeper (which he held from 1916) in 1923. Although early in his career he was reprimanded for spilling ink on two court rolls, he was later trusted to protect 'Domesday Book' from air raids in February 1918, when he personally accompanied its removal to safer storage in Bodmin prison. 
Crump's earliest considerable work was an edition of the works of W. S. Landor (1891-3), but the historical and economic interest of his official duties led him away from purely literary tasks. He contributed to Robert Harry Inglis Palgrave's 'Dictionary of Political Economy' (1891-9) and to 'Social England' (1893-7) by H. D. Traill. With two colleagues he edited in 1902 the 'Dialogus de Scaccario' of Richard fitz Nigel (their edition superseded the 1711 text of Thomas Madox) and he was co-editor of the essays entitled 'The Legacy of the Middle Ages' (1926). His extremely acute mind and attractive character are reflected in some degree in 'The Logic of History' (1919), 'History and Historical Research' (1928), and his one novel, a rather ponderous fantasy of academic life, 'The Red King Dreams' (1931). 
Crump's official work can be found in such publications as the 'List of Foreign Accounts' (1900), 'Calendar of Charter Rolls' (1903-27), and the 'Book of Fees' (1920-31). He was an active member of the advisory committee appointed in 1912 by the master of the rolls to bring the Public Record Office into closer touch with historical scholars. However, his greatest service to history was his insistence on the need for the study of records in their proper setting as products of an administrative machine, and not merely as evidence of isolated facts. In this respect later historians and archivists are indebted to him. Crump was one of the group of eight original assistant keepers who played a significant role in the evolution of the modern Public Record Office. He died at his home, 179 Hampstead Way, Hendon, London, on 11 December 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 32655


Cruttwell, Charles Robert Mowbray Fraser (1887-1941), historian, was born on 23 May 1887 at Denton, near Harleston, Norfolk, the eldest of the three sons of the Revd Canon Charles Thomas Cruttwell (1847-1911), historian of Roman literature, and his wife, Annie Maud (died 1926), elder daughter of Sir John Robert Mowbray (1815-1899), first baronet and MP. He was educated at Rugby School, where he won an open scholarship to read classics and history at Queen's College, Oxford, in 1906. After gaining firsts in classical moderations (1908), 'literae humaniores' (1910), and modern history (1911), he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College in 1911, and while in residence there was in 1912 appointed lecturer in modern history at Hertford College. He served valiantly from August 1914 as a second lieutenant in the Royal Berkshire regiment, fighting in France and Belgium during 1915 and 1916 until invalided home, an experience that deeply influenced his later academic work and also permanently damaged his health. 
In 1918-19 Cruttwell worked in the military intelligence department of the War Office; he was then, in 1919, elected to an official fellowship in modern history at Hertford College, where he was also dean from 1920 to 1925. He was no less active in university business -- serving among other offices as a statutory commissioner (1923), lecturer (1926-30), delegate of the university press, and member of the hebdomadal council. His administrative ability was characterized by a penetrating intelligence, wide-ranging knowledge, firm grasp of detail, decisive judgement, and a good memory. These talents were recognized when, in 1930, he was elected principal of Hertford. As such he supported moves to establish an honour school of geography in Oxford, and was instrumental in securing his college's association with that chair upon its foundation in 1932, when Professor Kenneth Mason was appointed as the first incumbent. Cruttwell's only conspicuous failure in public life came on the occasion of the 1935 general election, when as Conservative candidate for one of the parliamentary seats at Oxford University he was defeated by A. P. Herbert (independent). 
Although Cruttwell devoted much of his time to university administration and to his writing, his strongest interest lay in his college, not least in the life of its chapel. While much of the evidence of his way of dealing with others is anecdotal and contradictory, most surviving records testify to his forceful, forthright, and eccentric character, to his interest in the junior members, and to his genuine concern for their welfare. To many who became his close friends Crutters (as he was widely known) was unstintingly hospitable and generous, both in Oxford and at his country house, Vinnicks, at Highclere, near Newbury, Berkshire, and he was remembered with great affection. To others, however, who did not appreciate that his gruff manner disguised a natural shyness, he appeared a rude, harsh-tempered, and unsympathetic man, given to coarse language and cutting personal remarks; but the charge of misogyny so often levelled against him was vehemently denied by those who came to know him well. If a good deal of attention has since focused on his personal rupture with Evelyn Waugh, a scholar in history at Hertford (1922-4), its real significance has no doubt been exaggerated. That their mutual animosity formed early seems clear from reports of Waugh's scurrilous student pranks and from his own writings, yet it is questionable whether his use of the other's name for a variety of unsavoury fictional characters in many of his later works is sufficient evidence of a lasting and bitter feud, on Cruttwell's part at any rate. 
Cruttwell's academic reputation rests primarily on his 'History of the Great War, 1914-1918' (1934; 2nd edn, 1936), a monumental work of painstaking composition, conceived in minute detail and on a truly global scale, widely acclaimed at the time and still well regarded. Written in a precise, even clinical style, it displayed a shrewd understanding of the strategic issues and a mastery of the sources then available. It remains perhaps most notable for its frank and fearless judgements on those identified as the 'principal actors' (military, naval, and political) in that tragic conflict, and in 1936 it earned Cruttwell the award of the degree of DLitt from Oxford University. A digest of its leading arguments and conclusions appeared in 'The Role of British Strategy in the Great War', the Lees-Knowles lectures he delivered in Cambridge in 1936. In the same year he published a short biography of Wellington, in which the strengths and weaknesses of the commander are nicely balanced. Among his many other writings, he is remembered for two textbooks on modern British and European history (1928, 1929), both models of clarity and cogency, and for 'A History of Peaceful Change in the Modern World' (1937). He was also widely regarded as an authority on the political history of the Rhineland. 
Cruttwell enjoyed country pursuits, and served as a Hampshire JP. In his youth he had been a man of strong although rather clumsy physique, but a serious leg wound and other painful complications of wartime service left lasting scars, and in later years he was prone to rheumatic fever. He was forced to resign his principalship through ill health in 1939, and after further prolonged distress he died in a nursing home, the Burden Institute, Stapleton, near Bristol, on 14 March 1941. He was unmarried. In his will he left his historical books and $1000 to Hertford College, which also holds a good portrait by his cousin, Grace Cruttwell. 


@@@@@


doc= 32656


Cruttwell, Charles Thomas (1847-1911), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born in London on 30 July 1847, the eldest son of Charles James Cruttwell, barrister, of the Inner Temple, and his wife, Elizabeth Anne, daughter of Admiral Thomas Sanders. Educated under J. A. Hessey at Merchant Taylors' School (1861-6), he proceeded with a foundation scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, in 1866. He was in the first class in classical moderations in 1868 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1870, graduating BA in 1871 and MA in 1874; he obtained the Pusey and Ellerton Hebrew scholarship in 1869, won the Craven scholarship for classics in 1871, and the Kennicott Hebrew scholarship in 1872. He was president of the Oxford Union Society in 1872. He was a fellow of Merton College from 1870 until 1885, and was tutor there from 1874 to 1877. Ordained deacon by the bishop of Oxford in 1875 and priest in 1876, he was curate of St Giles's, Oxford, from 1875 to 1877. 
In 1877 Cruttwell left Oxford for Bradfield College, where he was headmaster until 1880, when he was appointed headmaster of Malvern College. Despite his efficient scholarship he showed little aptitude for public school administration, and resigned in 1885 to become rector of Sutton, Surrey. A few months later he was appointed rector of Denton, Norfolk, and in 1891 he accepted from Merton College the benefice of Kibworth-Beauchamp. In 1901 he was nominated by Lord Salisbury to the crown benefice of Ewelme, near Wallingford, and in 1903 he was collated by the bishop of Peterborough to a residential canonry. Cruttwell was also select preacher to Oxford University in 1896-8, and again in 1903-5. In 1909 he joined the party of bishops and clergy who visited Germany in the cause of international peace. 
On 5 August 1884 Cruttwell married Annie Maud (died 1926), eldest daughter of Sir John Robert Mowbray, first baronet. They had three sons and one daughter; one son, Charles Robert Mowbray Fraser Cruttwell (1887-1941), became principal of Hertford College, Oxford. Cruttwell died at Ewelme rectory on 4 April 1911. 
Deeply read in ancient and modern literature, Cruttwell published little. The best of his books, 'A History of Roman Literature' (1877), was a concise account of the development of Roman literature from the earliest times until the death of Marcus Aurelius. It reached a sixth edition in 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 32657


Cubitt, William George (1835-1903), army officer, was born in Calcutta on 19 October 1835, the son of Major William Cubitt (1790-1841) of the Bengal native infantry, fifth son of George Cubitt of Catfield, Norfolk. His mother was Harriet Harcourt. His sister Selena Fitzgerald married in 1859 Julian (afterwards Lord) Pauncefote. Educated privately at Latham, Yorkshire, he entered the Indian army as ensign in the 13th Bengal native infantry on 26 July 1853. He served against the Santal rebels in 1855. 
Promoted lieutenant on 23 November 1856, Cubitt was at Lucknow in 1857 when his regiment mutinied. With the volunteer cavalry he was in the action of Chinhat near Lucknow on 30 June 1857, and was awarded the Victoria Cross for having on the retreat from Chinhat saved the lives of three men of the 32nd regiment. He was afterwards present throughout the defence of the residency at Lucknow. His gallant conduct was commended during the capture of the Tehri Koti on 25-6 September and in a successful attack on a barricaded gateway held by the enemy on 12 November 1857, when he was wounded. He was awarded a year's extra service. 
Cubitt married at Fort church, Calcutta, on 19 May 1863, Charlotte Isabella, second daughter of James Hills of Nishchintpur, Bengal, and sister of Lieutenant-General Sir James Hills-Johnes VC. She survived him with three sons and two daughters. The third son, Lewis, died of blood poisoning while assistant commissioner in Uganda, on 31 July 1911. 
Cubitt, who was promoted captain on 26 July 1865 and major on 26 July 1873, served with the Duffla expedition on the north-west frontier in 1874-5, when he was mentioned in dispatches. Promoted lieutenant-colonel on 26 July 1879, he was with the Khyber line force in the Second Anglo-Afghan War in 1880. He was promoted colonel on 26 July 1883, and was with the Akha expedition in 1883-4, when he was mentioned in dispatches, and served in the continuation of the Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1886-7, when he was awarded the DSO. At the time of his retirement in 1892 he was in command of the 43rd Gurkhas (later the 8th Gurkha rifles). 
Accomplished in outdoor games, especially racquets and cricket, Cubitt after retirement resided at Eastfield, Camberley, Surrey, where he died on 25 January 1903. 


@@@@@


doc= 32658


Cudlipp, Percival Thomas James (1905-1962), journalist, was born at 180 Arabella Street, Cardiff, on 10 November 1905, the eldest son of William Christopher Cudlipp, commercial clerk, and his wife, Bessie Amelia Kinsman. Cudlipp's mother, educated at an elementary school, was a woman of strong personality and considerable intelligence, very ambitious for her children. In addition to Percy and a daughter there were two younger sons, both of whom were to become editors of national newspapers. Cudlipp said that his mother chose the names Percival, Reginald, and Hubert for her sons because they would sound well with knighthoods. The story was probably one of Cudlipp's fabrications but it fairly represents his mother's confidence in her sons. Hubert (Hugh) Cudlipp (1913-1998) was made a life peer in 1974. Reginald William (Reg) Cudlipp (1910-2005) became a distinguished director of the Anglo-Japanese Economic Institute, but always regarded himself as a journalist first and foremost. 
Brought up in the Welsh nonconformist tradition the Cudlipp family attended the Wesleyan chapel at Crwys Street, Cardiff, although it seems that for Percy the most powerful magnet there was not religion but the chapel's flourishing dramatic society, for which, having a natural histrionic gift inherited from his mother, he played the part of Shylock in 'The Merchant of Venice'. He was educated at Howard Gardens secondary school, which he left at the age of thirteen. His mother paid a fine so that before reaching school-leaving age Percy could begin work in the office of the 'South Wales Echo', where an opening had occurred which he was determined to fill. He had a precocious talent for rhyme and had already contributed a great deal of verse to the paper, which advertised him as the boy poet of Cardiff. His facility for dexterous and witty verse remained with him throughout his career. 
After six years of apprenticeship, during which he had assimilated the techniques of the profession and had been assiduous in attendance at the local night school, Cudlipp went in 1924 to Manchester as a reporter on the 'Evening Chronicle'. At the same time he was contributing articles and light verse to London newspapers. Cudlipp's next move was predictable, and predictably early. In 1925 he moved to London as drama critic and humorous columnist on the 'Sunday News'. That would have been enough for most journalists but it was not enough for Cudlipp. Through a publicity agent he became a purveyor of topical lyrics to the Co-optimists' revue running in a London theatre. Every afternoon he went to the theatre with the latest edition of the evening newspaper, which provided him with the material for a few verses to add to the lyric. In 1927, when he married Gwendoline May James, the show ran so long that Cudlipp was compelled to cancel his honeymoon in order that the supply of topical rhymes could continue; he needed the money. He and his wife had one son, Michael, who also became a journalist. 
By that time it was becoming known in Fleet Street that a brilliant and versatile talent had descended on it. In consequence in 1929, as Percy Cudlipp, he became a special writer on the 'Evening Standard'. He had arrived, at the age of twenty-four, where every ambitious young journalist of the time wished to be, not indeed at the top of the tree but within earshot of Lord Beaverbrook. By this time Cudlipp's free-ranging talent was in full flower. One morning he interviewed Noel Coward; in the later editions of the 'Evening Standard' that day there appeared a half-page interview with Coward by Cudlipp, in verse, that was a parody of Coward's style and which astonished even Coward himself. 
In 1931 Cudlipp was appointed assistant editor of the 'Standard', and two years later editor. He was then twenty-seven, the youngest editor of a British national newspaper. In becoming an editor Cudlipp turned his back on the particular talent that had marked him out among popular journalists: his ability to write smooth and witty English. From then on he was to be an executive journalist, an editor. If this involved the sacrifice of something which he valued Cudlipp never showed it. At the 'Evening Standard', however, he was not completely happy because of a temperamental clash between himself and the manager of the paper, Michael Wardell, who combined a strong personality with highly conservative views about the paper. In 1938 Cudlipp joined the 'Daily Herald' as editorial manager. In 1940, when Francis Williams resigned, Cudlipp became editor in defiance of the veto of the 'New Statesman', which thought that the paper should have a socialist editor. In fact Cudlipp had always been a convinced socialist. The change of newspaper disconcerted those of Cudlipp's associates who had not realized how heavy had been the strain of his editorship at the 'Standard'. At the 'Daily Herald' he found working conditions far more complicated, and demanding of all his very considerable powers of diplomacy. 
The trade unions, the Labour Party, Odhams Press -- co-proprietors of the newspaper -- each had different views about how a Labour newspaper should be run. There were, too, personal rivalries to consider. Cudlipp was on friendly terms with Herbert Morrison and incurred the dislike of Ernest Bevin, who wished to dominate the newspaper. When Cudlipp left the editorship in November 1953 it seemed that his editorial career was ending in something like frustration. Nothing could have been further from the truth. After a period as columnist in the 'News Chronicle' he became founder editor in 1956 of the 'New Scientist', a weekly which sought to convey accurate, authoritative scientific information in language which the layman could understand. In inspiring scientists to become comprehensible Cudlipp performed a notable service and made a brilliant success of the journal. His last years were, therefore, years of triumph. 
Cudlipp was a gregarious man of great charm, good-natured and lively minded, a master in speech as in writing of precise and elegant English. After journalism, music was the passion of his life. His wit was sharp and exuberant. Beaverbrook once said of him, 'Percy's spear knows no brother'. But in fact his tongue was without malice. His most celebrated remark was made about one of Beaverbrook's lieutenants who, in describing a ride with Beaverbrook over snow-covered terrain in Surrey, said incautiously, 'It was like the retreat from Moscow. Beaverbrook was Napoleon; I was Marshal Ney'. 'You mean Marshal Yea!', said Cudlipp. It was, however, the victim of the remark who spread its fame. 
Cudlipp died at his home, 11 Falmouth House, Clarendon Place, London, on 5 November 1962 and was cremated at Golders Green four days later. He was survived by his wife. 
G. M. Thomson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32659


Cullen, William (1867-1948), chemist and metallurgist, was born at Shettleston, Glasgow, on 18 May 1867, the son of William Cullen and his wife, Margaret Johnston, of Uddingston, Glasgow. He came from a family engaged in the woollen industry and was educated in Glasgow at Hutchesons' Boys' Grammar School and, from 1883, at Anderson's College. There he studied chemistry under William Dittmar and remained as his assistant (1885-90). Later he took a course in metallurgy and mining at the School of Mines in Freiburg, Germany. 
In 1890 Cullen joined the Nobel Explosives Company Ltd, Glasgow, a connection which was maintained throughout his active life. For a time he worked with Kynochs, a rival explosives firm, and spent over two years as technical adviser at its Arklow factory. He returned to Nobels in 1900 and was appointed manager at the firm's Modderfontein factory, which in 1902 became the British South African Explosives Company. The factory was then the largest explosives works in the world and Cullen became its general manager in 1901 and later a director, an office he retained until 1924. Cullen was twice married: first, in 1897, to Jean Crichton Maclachlan (died 1945), with whom he had three sons and one daughter; second, in 1946, to Agnes Campbell Macmillan, who survived him. 
Technically, Cullen's work was mainly concerned with the development of smokeless powders and the design of plant for the convenient manipulation of the plastic mixtures which become the explosive. In 1915 he returned to Britain, where he made his home in London and joined the department of explosives supply of the Ministry of Munitions, where he worked with K. B. Quinan until 1919 on the design and layout of new explosives factories, needed during the First World War. Thereafter Cullen was active in consulting work, mainly connected with explosives and gold mining. He was a director of several public companies, and was involved in the work of various scientific societies. 
Cullen arrived in the Transvaal during the South African War, and he played a modest part in the settlement of the South African provinces into the Union and empire. He liked to think of himself as a pioneer in the Rhodes tradition, and was extremely proud of his lifelong friendship with J. C. Smuts, whom he greatly admired. He knew every public personage in South Africa over many years. In the Witwatersrand mining conditions were bad and silicosis was a scourge, and he worked to promote good health conditions underground. He had a strong interest in education, and his efforts helped to bring about the foundation of the University of the Witwatersrand, from which he received the honorary degree of LLD in 1924. He was active in the newly formed scientific societies of South Africa and was president for 1905-6 of the Chemical, Metallurgical and Mining Society, and secretary of the South African Association for the Advancement of Science. He was the first chairman of the South African Red Cross Society, which he helped to found and of which his first wife became head in Britain. She was made OBE for her services. He also served in the Johannesburg mounted rifles of which he was for two years second in command, and for eight years he commanded the regiment of Imperial light horse; he reached the rank of colonel, and was at one time invited to command all the mounted troops in the Transvaal. 
Cullen belonged to the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (president, 1929-30), the Royal Institute of Chemistry, the Institution of Chemical Engineers (president, 1937-9), and the Society of Chemical Industry (president, 1941-3, and later an honorary member). He contributed papers to the publications of these societies. For some years he was honorary treasurer of the Universities Bureau of the British Empire, and a member of the advisory council on mineral resources and chairman of the consultative committee on base metals, both at the Imperial Institute. He wrote many papers and gave many addresses on empire matters. His lasting interest in education took varied forms: for many years, up to a few months before his death, he was a member of Surrey education committee and particularly concerned himself with further education. He was president of the Science Masters' Association in 1944. 
For many years Cullen suffered from severe depression caused by an internal malady. When it was finally diagnosed and cured, he felt that he could at last live a normal life. He was, despite his illness, a man of buoyant disposition who could be relied upon for guidance, encouragement, and friendship. He died in the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, on 14 August 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 32660


Cullingworth, Charles James (1841-1908), gynaecologist and obstetrician, son of Griffith Cullingworth (died 1860), bookseller, and his wife, Sarah Gledhill, was born on 3 June 1841 at 23 Commercial Street, Leeds. He was educated at Wesley College in Sheffield before joining the family business, but after his father's death he entered the Leeds school of medicine, qualifying as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1865, and licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1866. 
After eighteen months in general practice at Bawtry, near Doncaster, Cullingworth joined the Manchester Royal Infirmary in 1867 as resident physician's assistant, and later as resident medical officer. In 1869 he set up in private practice in Manchester. From 1872 to 1882 he also acted as police surgeon; he had always had an interest in legal matters and published a number of papers on medico-legal topics, including 'Methods of judicial administration in the past' (1884) and 'The criminal responsibility of the insane' (1888). 
In 1873 Cullingworth was appointed honorary surgeon to St Mary's Hospital for Women and Children, Manchester, and after gaining his MD from Durham University (1881) he specialized in gynaecology. Cullingworth's work was closely linked with the Victoria University in Manchester; he strongly supported the campaign, in 1880, to gain university status for Owens College, and for the right of the Manchester medical school, from 1883, to confer its own medical degrees. He was determined to ensure a high academic standard of clinical medicine within the newly enchartered Victoria University. Cullingworth was lecturer in medical jurisprudence from 1879 but gave this up in 1885, when he was elected by his colleagues at St Mary's to the chair of obstetrics and gynaecology at Owens College. During his professorship he acted as secretary to the board of studies for the medical school, a position that allowed him to monitor the standard of medical degrees. He worked hard for the Manchester Medical Society, first as honorary librarian (1872-8) and later as honorary secretary (1879-84); he devoted much of his time to cataloguing the medical library and to establishing, in 1884, the 'Medical Chronicle', a monthly medical journal which was based in Manchester. On 15 April 1882 Cullingworth married Emily Mary, daughter of Richard Freeman, a London outfitter; they had at least one daughter. 
By 1888 Cullingworth's reputation as a surgeon and medical lecturer had grown so much that he was offered the post of obstetric physician at St Thomas's Hospital, London. He found it difficult to leave Manchester but, once established at St Thomas's, his work quickly expanded and he also acted as visiting physician to the General Lying-in Hospital, York Road. After his retirement in 1904 he was made a governor of St Thomas's. Although an accomplished gynaecological surgeon he preferred the title of physician; in 1879 he had become a member of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1887 he was elected a fellow. In 1902 he was the first physician to read the Bradshawe lecture to the college on an obstetric topic, 'Intraperitoneal haemorrhage incident to ectopic gestation'. Most of his work in London was presented to the Obstetric Society; he played an active role in the society's affairs and was its president in 1897-9. 
Cullingworth was a pioneer of gynaecology. His most important work was on the causes of inflammation of the female pelvic organs -- pelvic peritonitis and salpingitis, which he demonstrated was not a primary condition, but usually secondary to some gynaecological infection. He argued that such conditions should be treated surgically; although such treatment later became accepted practice his paper to the Obstetric Society in 1892, entitled 'Abdominal section in certain cases of recurrent peritonitis', provoked considerable comment and criticism from many of his colleagues. His views were fully discussed in his 'Clinical Illustrations of the Diseases of the Fallopian Tubes and of Tubal Gestation' (1895), a book well known for its beautiful illustrations. His section on pelvic inflammation in the textbook 'System of Gynaecology' (edited by Allbutt and Playfair, 1896) was described in 'The Lancet' (23 May 1908) as 'one of the best essays on the subject ever written'. He published widely and made numerous contributions to the 'Transactions of the Obstetrical Society of London' and to the 'Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the British Empire', which he had helped to found, in 1903, and which he edited for the last two years of his life. 
Although Cullingworth is mainly remembered as a great surgical teacher it is arguable that his work to improve the standard of midwifery and to prevent puerperal fever was of much greater long-term importance for British obstetrics and the health of women. He deplored the ignorance and poor standards of nurses and midwives that he encountered in his early career, and published a number of instruction books for nurses, such as 'A Short Manual for Monthly Nurses' (1884), which ran to six editions. He was especially concerned to improve the training of midwives, and was the leader in the movement to secure their legal registration through the 'Midwives Act' (1902); he was chief executive on the 'Midwives Bill' committee, and advised the privy council and the General Medical Council on the drafting of the bill. He represented the Midwives Institute on the Central Midwives' Board, which was set up to ensure the proper training and practice of registered midwives under the act. In recognition of this work he received the honorary degrees of DCL, from Durham in 1893, and LLD, from Aberdeen in 1904. 
In later years Cullingworth suffered from angina but he continued working until his death, at 14 Manchester Square, London, on 11 May 1908. He was buried in Marylebone cemetery. His wife and daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32661


Cullis, Winifred Clara (1875-1956), physiologist and educationist, was the younger daughter and the fifth of the six children of Frederick John Cullis (1842-1931), surveyor and civil engineer of the Gloucester Dock Company, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of John Corbett of Coombe Hill. She was born in Stroud Road, South Hamlet, Gloucester, on 2 June 1875. The Cullis family had lived in Gloucestershire for three hundred years, but moved to Birmingham in 1880, as it offered better educational facilities. Winifred, a lively, generous, and considerate child, learned to read so quickly that her elder brother Cuthbert lost half his fee for teaching her. At the King Edward VI High School for Girls she was known for her outstanding academic ability and for her beautiful speaking voice. Extra tuition in science was obtained for Winifred at Mason College, where a demonstrator threatened to leave as he considered that 'it was indecent for a girl to study biology'. She entered Newnham College, Cambridge, as Sidgwick scholar in 1896, taking a second in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1899 and 1900), and her MA in 1927. She was elected associate of Newnham College (1919-33) and president of the college roll (1952-5). She obtained the DSc of London in 1908, and the LLD 'honoris causa' was conferred on her by Vassar College, New York, USA (1919), Goucher College, Maryland, USA (1931), and Birmingham University (1955). 
Winifred Cullis's most influential teachers were her headmistress, Miss Creak, who believed that children should be given time 'to browse, read and think', J. N. Langley, and F. G. Hopkins. In 1901 she assisted T. G. Brodie in the research laboratory of the Royal College of Surgeons and of the Royal College of Physicians, London, and also taught as a part-time instructor in elementary science in a private school for girls. Later that year she was appointed demonstrator in physiology at the London School of Medicine for Women, Langley having written of her sound qualifications, hard and judicious work, independent thought, accuracy, and skill. Successively she was appointed co-lecturer with Brodie (1903-8); part-time lecturer and head of department (1908); full-time lecturer and head of department, with conferment of title as university reader in physiology (1912); and professor (1919). She was the first woman professor in a British medical school and the second in the country. In 1926 she became the first holder of the Sophia Jex-Blake chair of physiology, retiring as professor emeritus in 1941. When Brodie died (1916), the University of Toronto invited her to be the acting professor of physiology, pending the appointment of a successor. Apart from that year's secondment, she served the School of Medicine for Women throughout her life, even attending an important meeting the day before she died. 
Winifred Cullis's original work included investigation of mechanisms of secretion of urine, perfusion of the isolated mammalian heart, and the effects of fatigue on factory workers. Among those with whom she published papers were W. E. Dixon and W. D. Halliburton. Her greatest contributions were to education, the application of science to healthy living, including sport, and the fostering of international goodwill and the emancipation of both sexes through education. She wrote 'The Body and its Health' with Muriel Bond (1935), and 'Your Body and the Way it Works' (1949). 
Winifred Cullis taught with lucidity, robust humour, enthusiasm, and mastery of the subject. Always nervous beforehand, she sounded at ease whether lecturing to students, broadcasting, or addressing an audience in the Albert Hall. Integrity, warmth, charm, simple but accurate explanations, and the ability to set people at ease, made her a memorable teacher. In 1919 she lectured to troops in Gibraltar and Malta for the Colonial Office, and was appointed OBE, being promoted CBE in 1929. In 1940-41 she travelled thousands of miles, lecturing on wartime Britain in China, Japan, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Australia, New Zealand, and the USA. From 1941 to 1943 she directed the women's section of the British information services in New York, and in 1944-5 lectured in the Middle East, mainly to the Royal Air Force. 
Speaking commitments curtailed Winifred Cullis's research, but extended her influence on national and international affairs. She believed that the essential need in the social system was to see that every person had an opportunity for making use of the capacities that were in them, and that education should give the ability to exercise ingenuity and 'determine values in the spiritual and moral life of the community'. In her opinion, teaching the applications of science to responsible daily living should begin at school, because they were keys to health and the prevention of disease. Biology teaching 'should not be given to the least busy member of staff', but to trained teachers, and 'it should not end at the waist'. She instituted courses for teachers of physical education and ballet in schools of the London county council. She broadcast on 'Health and common sense', and made educational films as aids, but not substitutes, for teachers. 
Winifred Cullis's tact, regard for others, common sense, grasp of essentials, good humour, and wit made her an admirable committee member and chair and a persuasive opponent. Apart from university, medical school, and hospital committees, she served on the clinical management committee of the Institute of Child Psychology, the council of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology, the fatigue research board of the Medical Research Council, and the Home Office committee on the two-shift system for women and young persons. Her concerns also embraced the British Association for the Advancement of Science, the Trades Union Congress committee on scientific planning of industry, the Central Council of Recreative Physical Training, the King Edward VII Hospital Fund, the BBC Council for Adult Education, and the governing bodies of the Royal Academy of Dancing and Chelsea Polytechnic. She was chairman of the British Film Institute's educational panel, and from 1951 until her death, deputy chairman of the English-Speaking Union. She was also a director of 'Time and Tide'. 
A non-militant feminist, Winifred Cullis was amused by being exiled to galleries of lecture theatres in Cambridge and lecturers who addressed the mixed audience as 'Gentlemen'. She overcame prejudice through firmness, good sense, ability, and integrity. She was one of the first women to be elected to the Physiological Society (1915), the first woman elected to the deputy chairmanship of convocation of London University and the only woman delegate from the British Association to attend the silver jubilee celebrations of the Indian Science Association. She was a co-founder of the British Federation of University Women, and the International Federation of University Women, and was president of each from 1925 to 1929 and from 1929 to 1932 respectively. The IFUW now awards Winifred Cullis grants for research. 
Winifred Cullis was handsome, well built, and well dressed. Although lacking classical beauty, her features were noble, and her blue eyes were kindly and shrewd. She was serene, warm, and loved life and people. Unfailingly loyal, high-principled, but tolerant, courageous, and apparently tireless, she enjoyed indifferent health and slept little. She read widely and enjoyed the arts and cross stitch. She died on 13 November 1956 at her home, Vincent House, Pembridge Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32662


Cummings, Arthur John (1882-1957), journalist and author, was born at Barnstaple, Devon, on 22 May 1882, the third child and eldest of the three sons of John Cummings, journalist, north Devon representative of the 'Devon and Exeter Gazette', and his wife, Maria Elizabeth Richards. Bruce Cummings was his youngest brother. He attended Rock Park School, Barnstaple, excelling at his studies. A key influence at the school in the development both of his ethical views and of his appreciation of literature was Philip Ernest Richards, then an Oxford undergraduate, later a Unitarian minister before becoming a professor of English in Lahore. 
Cummings hoped to study law at Oxford, but had to abandon this ambition when his father became seriously ill. He joined the 'Devon and Exeter Gazette', quickly being given responsibility for writing pieces on a wide sweep of subjects, from musical notices to leading articles and even stock market reports. From Devon he moved successively to the 'Rochdale Observer', the 'Sheffield Telegraph', and, just before the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, the 'Yorkshire Post'. He served with the Territorial 4th West Riding (howitzer) brigade, Royal Fleet Auxiliary, seeing action on the western front and being promoted captain. In 1908 he married Lilian, daughter of John Boreham, of Sheffield. She died seven months later of peritonitis. In 1915 he married an artist, Nora, daughter of Arthur Suddards, bank inspector, of Leeds. They had a son, Michael Cummings (1919-1997), a political cartoonist, and a daughter, Jean, a journalist. 
After the war Cummings became an assistant editor on the 'Yorkshire Post'. But the paper was generally Conservative in alignment, and politics had become increasingly important to Cummings, as he had developed into, and remained, 'an ardent Liberal' of the distinctly older, nonconformist, style. He eagerly accepted an invitation in 1920 to become an assistant editor of the 'Daily News' (later the 'News Chronicle') and remained with that paper for thirty-five years. He became deputy editor and then political editor. He reported on the economic conference at Ottawa in 1932 and was scathing of the government for the agreements reached there. In 1933 he wrote brilliantly on both the Reichstag fire trial and the trial of British engineers in Moscow, with each report showing his deep hatred of totalitarianism and injustice. For his foreign correspondence of that year he was given a Selfridge award. 
Of Cummings between the wars it has been said that he was 'the unsparing critic of Conservative governments... No other journalist did as much... to keep the spirit of Liberalism alive in the country during this unhappy period' (Cruikshank). By the late thirties he was perhaps the political commentator with the largest readership in Britain, through his twice-weekly 'Spotlight on politics'. Although remaining a committed Liberal, Cummings 'fraternized' with Labour -- something for which he was occasionally criticized -- particularly in order to develop a broad left opposition to appeasement with Hitler. In mid-1939 he advocated a Liberal constituency agreement with Labour to 'avoid splitting the anti-appeasement vote' (Koss, 591). 
Politics and ethics were the key to Cummings's life. As the 'Liberal conscience of Fleet Street' (Abel), he also earned his description as 'a cheerful Puritan'. Robin Cruikshank said that he could 'well imagine him in Oliver Cromwell's army', fighting as a 'Radical patriot' (Cruikshank). The Institute of Journalists elected him president for 1952-3. In his presidential address he declared his support for the recently established Press Council to monitor standards and ethics in the press. But he also condemned the threat from an over-indulgent use of parliamentary privilege to raise 'pompous or frivolous claims', as a way of reducing 'necessary or legitimate criticism' ('The Times', 6 July 1957, 10). 
Cummings's books included 'The Moscow Trial' (1933), 'The Press and a Changing Civilisation' (1936), and 'This England' (1945). He retired from the 'News Chronicle' in 1955, and died at 6 Heather Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 4 July 1957. He was buried six days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32663


Cummings, Bruce Frederick (1889-1919), zoologist and diarist, was born at Barnstaple, Devon, on 7 September 1889, the youngest of the six children of John Cummings, a journalist, and his wife, Maria Elizabeth Richards. He was educated at a private school in Barnstaple and after leaving school at the age of sixteen was apprenticed until 1910 as a journalist on the 'Devon and Exeter Gazette'. Well before leaving school Cummings had developed a strong interest in natural history, especially ornithology. He rejected the prospect of a career in local journalism and aimed to gain a position in natural history at the end of his apprenticeship. In pursuit of this ambition he undertook a strenuous programme of self-education; his diary entry for 10 March 1908 includes, in addition to shorthand and typewriting, 'German, chemistry classes, electricity lectures, zoology (including dissections), and field work' (Barbellion, 'Journal', 13). 
Cummings published specialized papers in natural history from as early as 1906. In 1912 he took up an appointment at the Natural History Museum in South Kensington as one of the five new permanent staff appointed to the insect room, soon to be renamed the department of entomology. These positions carried considerable research and curatorial responsibility; his appointment was a remarkable achievement for one who had no formal training in the subject. 
The first decade of the twentieth century saw a rapid expansion in the entomological collections of the British Museum (Natural History), as it was formally known, and each of the assistants was assigned particular orders for which he was sole curator and researcher: Cummings was in charge of the Neuroptera, Isoptera, Mallophaga, and Auroplura. The atmosphere in the entomology department in those years was one of mutual isolation, darkened rooms, and stiff formality. According to one of his colleagues, the despair characteristic of Cummings's most famous literary work was the product of this environment (Riley, 2). He was not especially active in the day-to-day responsibilities of his post, and the collections for which he was responsible were still in considerable disorder after his departure. However, one part of the corner of entomology for which he was professionally responsible saw much activity during his tenure, as conditions in the trenches during the First World War led to official demands for information on the behaviour of lice. His diary in these years shows him grappling with the emotional challenge posed by these creatures, expressions of disgust being combined with satisfied remarks on the privilege of scientific detachment. 
Cummings's period of employment at the museum coincided with his gradually deteriorating health. He suffered from a degenerative disease of the central nervous system described as 'disseminated sclerosis', but this diagnosis was kept from him for a long time. He married Winifred Eleanor Benger, a fashion designer, on 15 September 1915, and they had a daughter in the following year. In July 1917 Cummings resigned from the museum. Bedridden and in considerable distress he occupied himself with preparing extracts from his voluminous diaries for publication. These were published in the spring of 1919 as 'The Journal of a Disappointed Man' under the pseudonym W. N. P. Barbellion. The book was introduced by H. G. Wells, whom some reviewers took to be the author. Wells also organized a trust fund for the maintenance of Cummings and his family. 
Sometimes described as a minor classic, 'The Journal of a Disappointed Man' was reissued in 1984. Made up of reflective vignettes from the daily life of its author, its interest lies not least in his descriptions of the effects of physical pain and disability, where he combines the precision of a natural historian with the passionate subjectivity of the sufferer. This was not Cummings's first foray into general writing, as he had earlier published a number of essays bearing on the relations between natural history and general culture. Following the success of 'The Journal of a Disappointed Man' some of these were republished under his pseudonym with the title 'Enjoying Life and other Literary Remains' (1919). The most notable essay is a critique of the ethic of collecting and conservation which first appeared as 'The art of perpetuation' in 'Science Progress' (1917) under the name Bruce Cummings. 
Cummings died shortly after his thirtieth birthday, on 22 October 1919, at his home, Camden Cottage, Gerrards Cross. 'A Last Diary', whose entries cover the period from 21 March 1918 to 3 June 1919, was published posthumously in 1920. However in contrast to 'The Journal of a Disappointed Man', this diary was written for publication and its quality is unremarkable. 


@@@@@


doc= 32664


Cuningham, James MacNabb (1829-1905), military surgeon and medical administrator, was born at the Cape of Good Hope on 2 June 1829, the son of Major William Cunningham of the 54th Bengal infantry. Cuningham, who altered the spelling of his surname, read medicine at Edinburgh University and graduated MD in 1851, receiving a commendation for his thesis on diseases of the aorta. Soon after joining the Bengal medical service in November 1851 he was appointed superintendent of Bareilly prison; later he occupied a similar position at Meerut. At the latter station he was also engaged in non-medical duties, as the superintendent of the government press for the North-Western Provinces. Cuningham was twice married: first, on 2 March 1854, to Mary, only daughter of James McRae, and second, after her death, to Georgina Euphemia, daughter of Robert Reid Macredie, on 11 April 1889. 
Cuningham's aptitude for administrative work led to his appointment in 1866 as secretary to the new Indian sanitary commission. In the same year he was made professor of hygiene at the Calcutta Medical College, and in 1869 he was appointed to the new post of sanitary commissioner to the government of Bengal. He also became the first sanitary commissioner to the government of India, a post which he held from 1875 until his retirement in 1885. In addition to these considerable duties, Cuningham was made head of the Bengal medical department in 1880 and promoted to the rank of surgeon-general. 
Cuningham made few original contributions to medical science and achieved renown chiefly on account of his administrative work. He eschewed laboratory work in favour of epidemiological investigation. As one obituarist put it, 'he was apt to throw cold water on strivings towards the truth by local enquiry and clinical and pathological investigation' ('BMJ', 164). He sought to exclude from official reports all theoretical speculations on the nature and spread of diseases such as cholera, especially those which seemed to imply the need for government intervention or the outlay of public money. The official view of cholera, which Cuningham defended with great vigour, was that it was not a contagious disease and that the quarantines imposed against vessels sailing from India were unnecessary. According to Cuningham cholera could be prevented only by general sanitation and education of the public in hygiene, a view which he expounded in his most important publication, 'Cholera: what the State can do to Prevent it', in 1884 (translated into German in 1895). 
Cuningham maintained this position despite mounting criticism until he retired from the Indian Medical Service. In India he became embroiled in bitter conflicts with A. C. De Renzy and W. R. Cornish, the sanitary commissioners of the Punjab and Madras respectively, who held the fashionable view that cholera was a water-borne disease. De Renzy's persistent refusal to toe the official line eventually led to his dismissal and transfer to a remote station in Assam. But while Cuningham's insistence that cholera was not a contagious disease won him the admiration of Indian officials, it was eventually to cost him his scientific reputation. His position was attacked and even ridiculed in the British medical press, while the endeavours of his Indian opponents were held up as models of scientific enquiry. However, Cuningham was generally held in high esteem as an administrator and his pivotal role in building a sanitary infrastructure in British India was widely acknowledged. 
Cuningham left India in April 1885 and in June the following year was made a companion in the Order of the Star of India. He was appointed honorary surgeon to Queen Victoria in 1888, and served on the army sanitary committee from 1891 to 1896. In 1892 he was made an honorary LLD of Edinburgh. He died at his home in Buckingham Palace Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens, London, from a stroke, on 26 June 1905, survived by two sons and a daughter from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32665


Cunningham, Andrew Browne, Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope (1883-1963), naval officer, was born at 42 Grosvenor Square, Rathmines, Dublin, on 7 January 1883, the third of the five children of Daniel John Cunningham (1850-1909), then a professor of anatomy at Trinity College, Dublin, and his wife, Elizabeth Cumming (died 1926), daughter of the Revd Andrew Browne of Beith, Ayrshire. A brother was General Sir Alan Gordon Cunningham (1887-1983). Cunningham's ancestry was wholly Scottish and he always thought of himself as a Scot, though he spent but little time there, even after his father had taken up the chair of anatomy in Edinburgh. After early schooling in Dublin he was at Edinburgh Academy, aged ten, when his father asked him if he would like to join the navy. 'Yes,' he replied, 'I should like to be an admiral', though he had no more than a vague interest in ships and the sea (Cunningham, 13). After three years at Stubbington House, Hampshire, which specialized in preparing boys for the Royal Navy, he entered the training ship 'Britannia' in January 1897, passing out tenth of sixty-five cadets in May 1898, with first-class passes in mathematics and seamanship. 
Cunningham, who had an early reputation for belligerence and boldness, sought and obtained a posting to the Cape station and shortly after his arrival contrived to join a naval artillery brigade in the South African War. He saw little action but learned much about self-reliance, leadership, and initiative. Following promotion to sub-lieutenant in 1903 he was appointed to the destroyer 'Locust', and began a thirty-year association with destroyers. Promoted lieutenant in 1904, he secured his first command, torpedo boat no. 14, in 1908 but his reputation as a first-class ship handler and man of action was made in the destroyer 'Scorpion', to which he was appointed in 1911 and in which he served until 1918. Destroyer commands offered great scope for individual flair and responsibility and demanded determination and vigour. 
Cunningham, who spent more than a third of his career in the Mediterranean, served with distinction in the Dardanelles campaign, being promoted commander in 1915 and appointed DSO in 1916. His judgement, fearlessness, resolution, and devotion to exacting standards were noted by his seniors, who remarked on his unquenchable zeal. He was audacious and successful in his support of the forces ashore and learned much about both combined operations and the nature of the eastern Mediterranean. His quest for action took him to the Dover patrol early in 1918, in command of 'Termagant', though he had few opportunities to close with the enemy. Nevertheless, he earned a bar to his DSO and in March 1920 a second bar for his service in the Baltic under Rear-Admiral Walter Cowan, an aggressive and extremely demanding flag officer whom Cunningham regarded as a mentor. Cunningham in 'Seafire' led a division of destroyers helping to uphold the newly won independence of the Baltic republics and in tense and dangerous situations exhibited his characteristic decisiveness, courage, and matchless energy. Shortly after his return he was promoted captain at the age of thirty-seven. As a captain (D), he refined the torpedo and anti-submarine tactics of his flotillas. When Cowan was appointed commander-in-chief, North America and West Indies, in 1926, he requested Cunningham as his flag captain and chief of staff; Cunningham commanded successively the light cruisers 'Calcutta' and 'Despatch'. 
In 1929 Cunningham was sent to the Imperial Defence College. Profiting from the broadening of his education in diplomacy, current affairs, and inter-service co-operation, he regarded it as an excellent preparation for high command. Appointed to the new battleship 'Rodney' in command in December 1929, he married, on the 21st of that month, Nona Christine Byatt (1889-1978), a daughter of Horace Byatt, a headmaster of Midhurst, Sussex; the marriage was extremely happy but there were no children. After serving as commodore of Chatham barracks, Cunningham was promoted rear-admiral in September 1932 and, following two more senior officers' courses, achieved his heart's desire -- appointment as rear-admiral (D) in the Mediterranean Fleet (January 1934-April 1936). He was also appointed CB in 1934. 
The commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, was the redoubtable Admiral Sir William Fisher, an officer of great intellect, tireless dedication, and outstanding ability as a fleet commander. Cunningham's own distinguished tenure of the same command owed much to Fisher's brilliant example. Cunningham drove the flotillas extremely hard, developing night fighting skills, precision in ship handling, independent initiative and judgement, and the most exacting standards. Though a severe and eagle-eyed taskmaster, he endeared himself to his captains, who had absolute confidence in his leadership, born of unparalleled experience in destroyers and in the Mediterranean. His relief was his 'Britannia' term-mate, Rear-Admiral James Somerville, but Cunningham was soon serving in the Mediterranean again. Promoted vice-admiral in July 1936, a year later he was called upon to succeed Vice-Admiral Sir Geoffrey Blake, who had become ill, as vice-admiral commanding, battle-cruiser squadron, and second-in-command, Mediterranean Fleet, to Admiral Sir Dudley Pound. 
In October 1938 Cunningham began his first spell of duty in the Admiralty, as deputy chief of naval staff, charged with feverish preparations for war. He deputized on occasion for the terminally ill first sea lord, Admiral Sir Roger Backhouse, whose retirement in spring 1939 brought Pound to the Admiralty, leading to Cunningham's appointment in command of the Mediterranean Fleet. Appointed KCB in January 1939, he was promoted acting admiral on 1 June 1939, when he assumed command. 
Long recognized as an outstanding officer, Cunningham possessed abundant self-confidence, apparently inexhaustible energy, the ability to grasp situations quickly and to issue prompt, unequivocal orders, and the capacity to inspire unquestioning loyalty and unstinting effort. ABC, as he was known, was a difficult man to serve, his fierce blue eyes heralding a man of moderate height with a ruddy complexion, with a fearsome roar, at times irascible and impatient, always exacting in his standards and demanding service from his staff to the point of exhaustion. Like many such martinets and hard-driving leaders, he respected those who stood up to him. Cunningham drove himself as hard as he did his subordinates and rewarded their loyalty and service with firm support and sound advice in their future careers. Many became longstanding friends and recalled that the apparently forbidding and formidable ABC was quick to forgive and that the belligerent, even bullying, demeanour would often vanish in a twinkle of his eyes, to be replaced by a bawdy humour and a teasing manner. 
Cunningham was deeply solicitous of the welfare of those who served under him and not infrequently tender and sympathetic to the point of soft-heartedness. Though he was almost as disparaging of staff officers as he was of gunnery specialists, he was rare among admirals of his day in delegating responsibility to his staff, sometimes to a frightening extent. Cunningham did not enjoy the intellectual capacity of Sir William Fisher, and he was not a student of war as was the commander-in-chief, Middle East, General Wavell, nor did he possess the many-sided technical genius of Somerville or Mountbatten. He did not indulge in introspection, though he was not unreflective, and he never wasted words, though when he spoke he did so with vigour, cogency, and conciseness. He had undoubtedly gained much of practical value from his several senior officers' courses, even more from serving under Cowan and Fisher, and he had a clear appreciation of strategic realities and priorities, as well as a genuine commitment to close co-operation with the army and air force. 
Cunningham's fitness for high command was derived in part from his shrewd distillation of an exceptional amount of sea time, most of it in independent commands imposing an almost constant exposure to problem solving, and the examples set by distinguished superiors, together with an instinctive genius for the handling of ships, both singly and in the mass, and for the conduct of war at sea. By 1939 he possessed exceptional skill as a fleet commander, a sublime tactical acumen, a clinical precision in the exercise of command, and an unrivalled knowledge of the Mediterranean in all its moods and quarters. Cunningham was not a noted student of naval history but he was fully alive to his Nelsonian inheritance as Britain's naval commander in the middle sea. His prescription for the exercise of sea power was exactly the same as that of the victor of Trafalgar: the primary function of a fleet was to seek out and destroy its enemy, and the bolder the methods the better. Like Nelson he believed in keeping war at sea simple and direct; he encouraged, indeed expected, his captains to exercise their own initiative within the strategic canvas which he embroidered with clear, easily comprehended broad principles. 
When Cunningham took command of the Mediterranean station it did not enjoy a high priority in the provision of resources, as the probable immediate threats appeared to come from Germany and Japan; the government hoped to appease Mussolini and hold Italy to a firm if surly neutrality. Though there were tangible if limited arrangements for co-operation with the French navy, Cunningham felt grave concern at the neglected state of naval defences in the Mediterranean. The historic base, Malta, was regarded as indefensible in the face of Italian bombing and in wartime the fleet would have to fall back on Alexandria, equally bereft of air defences and vulnerable to Italian attacks from Libya; moreover, Alexandria lacked adequate dockyard resources. The fleet could expect little assistance from the RAF, as it was grossly over-stretched and could supply little in the way of fighter cover or reconnaissance. As the army was equally weak, the fleet offered the only means of offensive action. However, the Fleet Air Arm was short of carriers and aircraft, none of which were up to date, and offered limited scouting strength, no fighter cover, and a puny strike force capable only of slowing enemy heavy ships -- if it could hit them. When Mussolini began to make obvious preparations to join the war in spring 1940 Cunningham's fleet was reinforced and he devised a strategy that was aggressive without being reckless. Confident of holding the eastern Mediterranean and hoping that the French would protect the western basin, he proposed sweeps in the central portion to test the Italian fleet's readiness to fight and the capacity of Mussolini's air force to deny the traditional exercise of sea power. Pound displayed absolute confidence in Cunningham and the two developed a full and frank correspondence. 
Italy's entrance into the war on 10 June 1940 was accompanied by the collapse of France. Churchill's decision to commit Britain (and the Commonwealth) to a full-scale war in the Mediterranean led to an ultimatum to the French navy to align itself with the Royal Navy or suffer effective demilitarization. A French squadron at Alexandria, under Vice-Admiral Godfroy, was persuaded to disarm its vessels but only after delicate negotiations carried on in a rapidly changing context which threatened to bring about a gunfight in the harbour. Cunningham conducted the talks with Godfroy in a firm but skilful manner, displaying a patience rarely ascribed to him, as well as a diplomatic finesse of consummate subtlety. In the light of tragic confrontations with the French elsewhere Cunningham's achievement was outstanding. 
Cunningham continued to challenge the Italian fleet to a duel and on 9 July, while each fleet was covering convoys in the central Mediterranean, they exchanged fire off Calabria. Enjoying good reconnaissance and splendid intelligence, Cunningham attempted to cut off the Italians from their bases, using the carrier 'Eagle''s Swordfish to slow down his faster opponents. No torpedoes struck home and the clash between the heavy ships was brief and conducted at long range. After Cunningham's flagship, the 'Warspite', hit the Italian flagship, 'Giulio Cesare', at a distance of 13 miles, the enemy turned for home, making smoke and launching heavy land-based bombing attacks on the British forces, though without result. The Italians outpaced Cunningham, who declined to fall into a submarine and mine trap and returned to base. The British claimed a lasting moral ascendancy over the Italian navy but the enemy, who lacked a comparable battle squadron at that time, made a sensible decision to retire. 
Over the next six months Cunningham and Vice-Admiral Sir James Somerville, commanding force H at Gibraltar, steadily restored British control of the Mediterranean, allowing reinforcements of ships and aircraft to reach the eastern Mediterranean and Malta and permitting the running of convoys to the Middle East. Apart from the bold and capable exercise of sea power by the two outstanding British admirals, the poor state of Italian equipment and training, and Italy's shortage of oil and other resources, the British supremacy was made possible by the presence of modern carriers equipped with fighters, 'Ark Royal', with force H, and 'Illustrious', which joined Cunningham in September 1940. Fleet fighters eliminated enemy shadowers and nullified Italian high level bombing attacks. 
It was by the exercise of carrier striking power, however, that the Mediterranean Fleet gained its principal victory in this period. The concept of a carrier air strike against the Italian fleet at Taranto had originated in 1935, at the time of the Abyssinian crisis. On 11 November 1940 'Illustrious' launched twenty-one Swordfish at night and 160 miles from Taranto. The attack, planned meticulously and executed bravely, disabled three of Italy's six battleships for the loss of two aircraft. It represented the Fleet Air Arm's greatest ever triumph and enabled Cunningham to carry the war to the enemy fleet, which would not come to him. The operation was one of several carried out in the same voyage; convoys were escorted and a successful raid conducted on shipping in the Adriatic. Cunningham, always conscious of the severe pressure on his slender resources, was adept at making optimum use of his forces. 
Wavell's spectacularly successful desert offensive of December 1940, aided by Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Longmore's carefully directed air support and a naval inshore squadron, gave the British crucial airfields on the southern flank of the convoy route to Malta, though it imposed on the navy the crippling burden of maintaining Tobruk throughout an eight-month siege. These triumphs exhibited the interdependence of the military, air, and naval campaigns in the Mediterranean, a fact of which the three commanders-in-chief were well aware; Cunningham, Longmore, and Wavell drove the chariot of war in complete harmony. In January 1941 Cunningham was confirmed in the rank of admiral and in March appointed GCB. 
The days of triumph were short-lived, for Italy's early disasters prompted German intervention, initially with a 'Luftwaffe' force specializing in anti-ship operations. On 10-11 January 1941 Cunningham's forces, escorting a convoy from the west to Malta, were surprised by dive-bombers which sank the cruiser 'Southampton' and crippled 'Illustrious'. For the remainder of the war German air power was to be the Royal Navy's most formidable opponent in the middle sea. The co-ordination of the enemy's air forces and Italian naval forces was far from perfect, however, and when the Italian fleet sortied against British convoys to Greece in March 1941 it failed to receive adequate air reconnaissance and fighter cover. The British had also broken enemy codes and the resulting Ultra information enabled Cunningham to intercept the enemy off Cape Matapan on 28-9 March. Air strikes from the new carrier, 'Formidable', first saved Cunningham's scouting cruisers from annihilation and then severely damaged the Italian flagship, 'Vittorio Veneto'. She was able to regain enough speed to escape but a third torpedo strike crippled the heavy cruiser 'Pola'. Cunningham boldly decided to risk a fleet encounter at night, relying on British skill at night fighting, honed in the Mediterranean in the 1930s, supported by radar and the confidence engendered by previous skirmishes with Italian ships. His battle squadron came upon 'Pola''s sisters, 'Zara' and 'Fiume', sent to escort the cripple home, guns trained innocently fore and aft, and in a few minutes blew them out of the water; 'Pola' and two destroyers were dispatched by light forces. The victory was literally a signal success for the British, thanks to their intelligence breakthrough, but it owed much to the persistence of the Fleet Air Arm, the high level of training of the surface forces, and pre-eminently to the qualities of leadership exhibited by the commander-in-chief. Cunningham, who displayed an intuitive grasp of the developing situation, coolly weighed the odds for and against a night action, with its evident hazards and uncertain rewards. He conveyed his aggressive, determined, and confident manner to his subordinates, handled his fleet with decisiveness and, for the most part, gave orders of admirable brevity and precision. Matapan confirmed his reputation as the outstanding seaman of the war and effectively scuttled Italian fleet operations of any substance and seriousness. 
Once again, however, the victor's laurels were turned quickly into wreaths of another kind. In April 1941 allied forces evacuated Greece in the face of the 'Luftwaffe' and the Panzers, enduring severe bombing on their return to Egypt. Less than a month later Cunningham was compelled to rescue allied forces from Crete. These two evacuations were carried out by allied warships and merchantmen in the face of overwhelming axis air power, to which the RAF and Fleet Air Arm could make virtually no reply. Though the bulk of the troops were carried safely to Egypt, warships and troopships suffered severe losses and damage, with several thousand seamen and soldiers killed. Cunningham remained at Alexandria to co-ordinate the operations of his scattered forces, their ships' companies exhausted by continuous voyaging from the beginning of the year, the hazards of negotiating strange harbours at night and the incessant air attacks. He yearned to be at sea with them, sharing their dangers and discomforts, and was well aware that the strain was becoming unendurable -- yet he was determined that the navy should not let the army down, uttering his most famous remark, generally reported as 'It takes the Navy three years to build a ship but three hundred years to build a tradition' (Pack, 177). After the evacuation of Crete at the end of May 1941 Cunningham's fleet was reduced by a half. Crucially, it lacked a carrier, as 'Formidable' had been sent, foolishly, to attack airfields on Rhodes with scarcely a handful of planes and had been put out of action for eight months. The absence of a carrier and the limited support available from shore-based aircraft led Cunningham to demand and obtain an RAF naval co-operation group, analagous to Coastal Command. After Crete, Cunningham was forced on to the defensive, save for an effective contribution to the army's conquest of Vichy Syria and Lebanon. The loss of Libya to Rommel, coupled with the expulsion from Crete, made the supply of Malta a major headache. 
The catalogue of naval disasters in the Mediterranean continued to the end of 1941 with the sinking of 'Ark Royal' and one of Cunningham's battleships, 'Barham', by newly arrived German U-boats and, finally and decisively for the Mediterranean Fleet's line-of-battle, the crippling in December of 'Queen Elizabeth' and 'Valiant' by Italian human torpedoes, which attacked the battleships in Alexandria harbour. Cunningham himself acknowledged a measure of the responsibility for this last catastrophe; he was essentially a seagoing admiral and, while vocal about the air defence deficiencies of Alexandria, he seems to have neglected defence against this form of attack, despite the Italians' deserved reputation for skill and bravery in this field. As the war against Japan had opened disastrously with the loss of 'Prince of Wales' and 'Repulse', Cunningham was left to struggle on with a handful of small cruisers and overworked destroyers. He was fortunate in acquiring another doughty and resourceful Nelsonian admiral, Philip Vian, who in December 1941 and again in March 1942 fought off superior Italian forces while conducting convoys to Malta. The island's future hung in the balance as the axis air attacks redoubled in an effort to neutralize the base and terminate its air, surface, and submarine threats to the Libyan convoys. Cunningham could only pray for the island's safe deliverance for on 3 April 1942 he hauled down his flag prior to taking up the headship of the British Admiralty delegation in Washington. Cunningham, who became a baronet in January that year, had been the outstanding British commander of the war thus far, a fearless leader whose presence with the fleet inspired and reassured his men; in harbour he constantly visited ships, hospitals, and shore stations. His departure was kept secret -- a testimony to his reputation among his enemies and an acknowledgement that there was no adequate replacement. 
The United States' entry into the war in December 1941 made a detailed joint strategy, the exchange of technical data, and the assurance of a steady supply of American equipment matters of urgency. A combined chiefs of staff had been established and Admiral Ernest J. King, who had a reputation for being awkward to almost everyone, had become the United States chief of naval operations. Pound felt that Cunningham, who was as tough and determined as King, was the right man to head the British Admiralty delegation (BAD) at that critical stage of the war. Though Cunningham arrived home early in April, it was not until late June that he reached Washington, Churchill having made persistent attempts to appoint him to the Home Fleet. In Washington there was precious little for him to do: the vast BAD organization was already running smoothly and was concerned chiefly with routine matters. Cunningham was there to bring his broadside to bear on King should the latter fail to co-operate as wholeheartedly as the British wished. King was somewhat uncommunicative, often a reluctant co-operator, and frequently extremely rude; given Cunningham's redoubtable reputation for standing no nonsense, some heated confrontations were inevitable. It says much for Cunningham's patience, skill, and robust character that he generally gained what was required from King. More important, he impressed American civilian and military leaders as a man of integrity, resolution, clarity of thought, and keen strategic insight, with the capacity for thinking and commanding on a grand scale. 
Cunningham, a confirmed advocate of dealing with the Mediterranean situation first, was influential in swinging the opinion of the American high command behind operation Torch, the Anglo-American landings in French north Africa. His evident willingness to co-operate with the Americans, his great prestige as a Mediterranean commander, and the trust he engendered led to an American proposal to appoint him naval commander under General Eisenhower, the allied supreme commander. Cunningham, though not seeking the post, was nevertheless delighted to return to the front line; liaison and administrative work in Washington and the endless socializing quickly made him fret for life at sea. Torch was an ambitious, difficult, and highly uncertain operation. It was the first major allied offensive, it had to be launched from main bases thousands of miles away, it required vast forces of merchantmen, landing craft, and escorting warships and aircraft, and it was likely to meet opposition from the Vichy French. Many thousands of sailors and soldiers had to be trained hastily in landing operations and the planning had to be compressed into a few weeks in summer 1942. 
When the operation was launched in November 1942 it proved highly successful, despite fierce resistance by the French and inevitable shortcomings in the co-ordination and training of the various services. In part, the triumph was due to good fortune in the shape of fine weather and a baffled and unusually sluggish enemy, and it owed much to Eisenhower's determination to make Anglo-American co-operation work all down the line, as well as to the painstaking planning of Vice-Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay and his team. Nevertheless, Cunningham played a key role, for he acted as Eisenhower's 'alter ego', imparting to the untried American staff officer his own robust confidence and formidable will and setting an example to other subordinates of utter loyalty to the commander-in-chief. Cunningham kept a firm grip on naval operations from Casablanca to Tunis and though he regretted the failure to land as close to Tunis as possible, he urged his forces forward to capture more ports and to harry enemy shipping, finally ensuring that few of the considerable axis army in Tunisia escaped. To his distaste, much of his time was occupied in political discussions with French leaders. Initial Vichy hostility was halted by Admiral Darlan, who effectively switched sides from collaboration with the axis to intimate co-operation with the allies. Darlan's deal with Eisenhower, which brought about an early cease-fire, was unpopular with allied public opinion but the arrangement was stoutly supported by Cunningham as a crucial measure enabling the allies to turn their attention to the axis. 
The north African campaign took far longer than had been envisaged, due chiefly to the allies' failure to accept Cunningham's advice to land as far east as Bizerte. However, in late January 1943 Churchill, Roosevelt, and their staffs met at Casablanca to plan the next western offensive. There being no realistic prospect of invading north-western Europe in 1943, it was decided to invade Sicily, as it would enable the Mediterranean route to the East to be reopened and would provide airfields from which southern Germany could be bombed; the conquest of Sicily might also bring about the fall of Mussolini. Planning operation Husky, however, proved to be a nightmare, as the senior commanders could not agree on landing places. Once again, plans had to be redrafted at a very late stage, though Cunningham himself was convinced that any one of the plans would have been successful. He had a somewhat fraught relationship with Ramsay, who was once again the chief planner; it is possible that Cunningham, who had become commander-in-chief, Mediterranean, for a second time in January 1943, and also an admiral of the fleet, felt jealous at having such an able, senior and semi-independent admiral in his bailiwick. He was suspicious of Ramsay's good relations with generals Alexander and Montgomery, for Cunningham disparaged Alexander and disliked Montgomery's arrogance and mischief-making. However, Cunningham's long Mediterranean experience paid good dividends. 
Setting up his headquarters in Malta, Cunningham took charge of an armada of 3000 vessels, the largest to date. Rough seas presented a late hazard but also a bonus in that they lulled the defenders into believing that the operation could not take place on the night of 10 July. Once again, Cunningham's nerve held firm and his subordinates derived confidence from the knowledge that the master was at the helm. Calmer weather, meticulous organization, and better trained and more experienced crews enabled the landing to take place against minimal opposition. Once Sicily was cleared of the enemy in late August, it seemed logical to seize the opportunity of Mussolini's fall and Italian overtures for an armistice to invade the mainland to seize further airfields in the toe of Italy and incite Italians to rise up against their German occupiers. Landings near Reggio and at Taranto were virtually trouble-free but the major assault at Salerno, south of Naples, almost ended in disaster as a fierce German riposte pushed the allied troops back to the beaches; the situation was saved by lavish use of air power and by Cunningham's prompt provision of capital ships for bombardment, with telling effect. Cunningham took justifiable pleasure in watching the Italian battle fleet drop anchor at Malta, making his most famous signal: 'Be pleased to inform Their Lordships that the Italian Battle Fleet lies at anchor under the guns of the fortress of Malta' (Cunningham, 565). It was, fittingly, almost the last act of his seagoing career. 
In October 1943 Cunningham succeeded the dying Pound but his succession was by no means automatic. Churchill, with whom Cunningham had frequently crossed swords, foresaw exasperating conflicts. He believed Cunningham was unsuited to staff work and was also less receptive to modern technology than the premier's choice, Admiral Sir Bruce Fraser, commander-in-chief, Home Fleet. Indeed, Fraser was offered the post but, recognizing that Cunningham enjoyed the navy's support, declined. Cunningham's appointment satisfied public opinion and also the Americans, among whom he commanded considerable respect. Cunningham approached his new post with some trepidation. Not only was he congenitally unfitted for shorebound administration, he also doubted his ability to hold his own intellectually with the other chiefs of staff, Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke and Marshal of the RAF Sir Charles Portal. Fortunately they welcomed him warmly and the trio constituted an effective and generally harmonious team, united in their stand against the prime minister's frequently madcap strategy. Moreover, Cunningham was an effective and experienced delegator and avoided the clogging detail which had often ensnared his predecessor. He was already well known to the American joint chiefs of staff so that in meetings of the combined chiefs of staff he knew how to conduct his business, even with the prickly King. He and the American chief of naval operations had a somewhat strained relationship, despite their mutual respect. Cunningham displayed a fisherman's cunning in playing the prime minister, exhibiting a patience and tactical skill largely unglimpsed in previous appointments, and resisted Churchillian attempts to interfere in the direction of operations and flag appointments. Cunningham was fortunate also that the worst of the war at sea was over. 
Nevertheless, there were still major decisions to be made, principally on the deployment of a British fleet against Japan, which led to a running battle between the prime minister and the chiefs of staff lasting almost a year. Churchill wanted to recover lost colonies but Cunningham, supported by Brooke and Portal, pointed out that the way to end the Far Eastern conflict speedily and economically was to attack Japan's homeland. This direct strategy, fighting alongside America's great task forces, was designed to give Britain a more substantial voice in the Pacific peace settlement and post-war oriental commerce. Cunningham triumphed through persistence and Fraser led the British Pacific Fleet in the final assault on Japan in the spring and summer of 1945. Cunningham had also to ensure destruction of Germany's remaining major surface units and to devise emergency measures to cope with a recrudescence of the U-boat threat in early 1945. He stood firmly behind Ramsay as the latter planned the landings in Normandy in June 1944. Perhaps the most serious problem facing the navy at this time was the acute shortage of manpower, just when it had to find thousands of landing craft and air crews, man new construction, provide personnel for the Pacific Fleet, and maintain long-running commitments in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. Cunningham acted vigorously to prune older ships and shore stations but the problem remained intractable. 
For the most part Cunningham enjoyed good relations with station commanders, some of whom (A. U. Willis in the Mediterranean, Arthur Power in the East Indies, Bernard Rawlings and Philip Vian in the Pacific) were his proteges, but he encountered difficulties with Fraser both in the Home Fleet and in the Pacific. Fraser upheld the autonomy of a fleet commander, while Cunningham asserted the Admiralty's right to direct maritime strategy; both could be obstinate. Mountbatten, at that time supreme allied commander, south-east Asia, also irritated Cunningham by his intrigue, pretensions, and attempts to purloin ships destined for the Pacific. Cunningham also supported his commander-in-chief, Eastern Fleet, Admiral Sir James Somerville, in a dispute with Mountbatten over control of the Eastern Fleet. Cunningham turned to Somerville in autumn 1944, when it seemed necessary to send to Washington as head of BAD an admiral experienced in sea and air warfare (especially in the East), with high technical skills, a warm personality, shrewd judgement, and resolution. King had become more unbearable and less co-operative but Somerville, the most effective head of BAD, skilfully employed a blend of bluntness, salty humour, and an engaging manner to extract the required resources. 
After Japan surrendered in August 1945 Cunningham faced an unpalatable end to his naval career. He had become first sea lord just as Columbia wrested Neptune's trident from Britannia and any prospect of restoring parity was shattered by the nation's virtual bankruptcy. However, like most British leaders Cunningham believed that Britain should continue to play a great power role and he also hoped, somewhat naively, for an integrated imperial defence policy. He was quick, too, to sense a growing threat from the Soviet Union. Cunningham was little interested in technology and was unable to fathom the full significance of electronic developments but he did ensure that captured German scientists and their equipment formed part of a strong Admiralty research and development programme. He was conservative in terms of ship design and conditions on board ship but he yielded to post-war social and economic pressures by agreeing to the reform of officer entry and service pay. Moreover, the years of struggle against axis air power in the Mediterranean and Fleet Air Arm triumphs at Taranto and Matapan had made him a vigorous advocate of naval aviation and he did much to raise the Fleet Air Arm's profile within the navy, especially within the Admiralty itself. The Admiralty was persuaded to retain the Women's Royal Naval Service after the war. A firm advocate of inter-service co-operation, he insisted on a strong amphibious capability and sought to make the Royal Marines the core of future combined operations. 
However, running down the navy to a shadow of its wartime self was hardly a congenial occupation for one who had entered the mighty Victorian navy. In June 1946, following heart trouble, he stepped down in favour of his chosen successor, Admiral Sir John Cunningham (no relation), then commander-in-chief, Mediterranean. Andrew Cunningham had adapted quickly and effectively to the demands of Whitehall life, revealing unsuspected patience and a talent for handling awkward personalities with subtlety and firmness. He gave free rein to subordinates, leaving himself clear to deal with the major strategic and policy issues. His term of office was less fraught and demanding than that of Pound but he employed his considerable authority, unparalleled seagoing experience, high standing with the Americans, shrewd judgement, crisp decision making and clear strategic insight to maintain the Royal Navy's interests in a war increasingly dominated by other arms and the new superpowers. 
Cunningham, created Baron Cunningham of Hyndhope in 1945 and Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope in 1946, refused the governor-generalship of Australia on health grounds. He continued to speak for the navy in public and, occasionally, in the House of Lords. He was prevailed upon to write his autobiography, 'A Sailor's Odyssey' (1951). He had proudly renewed his Scottish connections by becoming a knight of the Thistle in 1945, and served as lord high commissioner to the Church of Scotland in 1950 and 1952. Otherwise raising geese and gardening at his home at Bishop's Waltham in Hampshire and fishing in Scottish rivers were his principal activities. He remained vigorous and active to the end, dying suddenly, on the way to St Thomas's Hospital, on 12 June 1963, aged eighty, after attending the House of Lords. He was buried at sea off Portsmouth six days later and his most visible monument is a bust in Trafalgar Square, London. 
By common consent Cunningham ranks with the greatest of British admirals and there are many parallels between his approach to high command and that of Nelson. Both had an intuitive grasp of the significance of sea power for the British Empire and made much of the Royal Navy's traditions of invincibility, unmatched seamanship, and burning desire to engage the enemy more closely. Like Nelson, Cunningham set down a spare, simple doctrine of sea warfare based on calculated aggressiveness. ABC was a relatively modest man and considerably more able intellectually than he affected to be. His undoubted greatness lay in his single-minded dedication to professional excellence, an early exposure to the problems and possibilities of independent command, a clear mind, a strong nerve, and formidable physical courage. He possessed the priceless capacity for instantly sizing up a situation and issuing crisply concise, unambiguous orders which displayed a profound, intuitive grasp of a problem and its solution. He distilled with shrewdness his experience of courses and commands and the examples set by his seniors but his principal asset was an immense instinctive gift for war at sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 32666


Cunningham, Daniel John (1850-1909), anatomist, born at the manse of Crieff, in Strathearn, on 15 April 1850, was the youngest son in a family of three sons and four daughters of John Cunningham (1819-1893) and his wife, Susan Porteous (died 1902), daughter of William Murray, a banker in Crieff and his wife, Susan Porteous, a relative of Captain John Porteous. After education at Crieff Academy Cunningham spent some three years working in a large mercantile business in Glasgow. But his inclination was for medical study, and in 1870 he entered the University of Edinburgh as a medical student whence he graduated in 1874 with the highest honours. For a few months he practised in Glasgow, but he returned in 1876 to become demonstrator of anatomy in the University of Edinburgh, and for a time held, with this post, the chair of physiology in the Edinburgh Veterinary College. In 1882 he became professor of anatomy in the school of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and the next year was appointed professor of anatomy in Trinity College, Dublin. Here, for twenty years, he was the most popular teacher in the university. In 1903 he succeeded Sir William Turner as professor of anatomy in the University of Edinburgh where he worked with enthusiasm and success until his death. He married, in 1878, Elizabeth Cumming, eldest daughter of Andrew Browne, minister of the parish of Beith in Ayrshire; they had two daughters and three sons, the latter including Andrew Browne Cunningham, Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope (1883-1963), and Sir Alan Gordon Cunningham (1887-1983). 
As a lecturer Cunningham had the talent of illuminating scientific subjects by illustrations drawn from every field of science. His enthusiasm and perseverance were contagious, and roused the latent powers of both colleagues and pupils. He published original research in human and comparative anatomy, as well as in anthropology. In addition to numerous papers in the 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology', of which he was the acting editor, and in other scientific publications, he issued 'Report on the Marsupialia Brought Home by H.M.S. Challenger' (1878) and 'The Dissector's Guide for Students' (1879), which subsequently developed into his 'Manual of Practical Anatomy' (2 vols., 1893-4). The Cunningham Fund, founded in memory of Timothy Cunningham, for the publication of work of special merit connected with the Royal Irish Academy, issued two papers by Cunningham: 'On the Lumbar Curve in Man and the Apes' (1886) and 'On the Surface Anatomy of the Cerebral Hemispheres' (1892). To the 'Transactions' of the same academy he contributed a 'Memoir on Cornelius Magrath, the Irish giant: a research into the connection which exists between giantism and acromegaly' (1891); and to the 'Transactions of the Royal Dublin Society' a 'Memoir on the microcephalic idiot' (1895). He delivered before the Anthropological Institute in 1902 the third Huxley memorial lecture, on 'Right-handedness and left-brainedness', for which he was awarded a memorial medal. In conjunction with Edward Hallaran Bennett he wrote 'The Sectional Anatomy of Congenital Caecal Hernia' (1888). Of the 'Textbook of Anatomy', published in 1902 by the pupils of Sir William Turner, he acted as editor and joint author. 
In administrative affairs Cunningham exercised great influence in the councils of the universities and of the learned societies with which he was connected, and he played a significant part in the establishment of postgraduate instruction at Edinburgh. He was a member of the commission to inquire into the management of the sick and wounded in the South African War, of the War Office committee on the standard of candidates and recruits for the army, and of the vice-regal commission on the inland fisheries of Ireland. He was largely responsible for inaugurating the medical department of the Territorial Army in Scotland. Cunningham received many honorary degrees -- MD and ScD, Dublin, LLD, St Andrews and Glasgow, and DCL, Oxford, in 1892, on the celebration of the tercentenary of Trinity College, Dublin. He was elected FRS on 4 June 1891, and was president of the Royal Zoological Society of Ireland, and vice-president of the Royal Dublin Society. 
Cunningham became ill towards the end of 1908 and journeyed to Egypt, and then the Riviera, in the hope of regaining his health. He died at his home, 18 Grosvenor Crescent, Edinburgh, on 23 June 1909. His funeral service was held at St Cuthbert's parish church before his body was interred in Dean cemetery, Edinburgh, on 26 June. A memorial service was held in St Giles's Cathedral on 27 June. He was survived by his wife and children. A memorial bronze bas-relief was placed, in duplicate, on the walls of the anatomical departments of the University of Edinburgh and of the University of Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 32667


Cunningham, Sir George (1888-1963), administrator in India, was born on 23 March 1888 at Broughty Ferry, on Tayside, Forfarshire. He was the third son of a jute merchant, James Cunningham. His mother, Anna, 'nee' Sandeman, died in 1892 when he was just four, and the family afterwards moved to St Andrews. He was educated at Fettes College and at Magdalen College, Oxford. He successively captained the Oxford and Scottish rugby teams, and won eight international caps in all before his entry into the Indian Civil Service and departure for the subcontinent in 1911. He served initially as an assistant commissioner in the Punjab, but most of his professional career was devoted to the north-west frontier, where he established his reputation as this volatile region's most distinguished officer since Herbert Edwardes in the mutiny period. Cunningham served his apprenticeship (1914-17) as assistant to the chief commissioner, Sir George Roos-Keppel. This experience was further widened with a spell as political agent (1922-3) in the tribal territories of North Waziristan. During this first period of Cunningham's career, the north-west frontier was rocked by the 1919 disturbances and the hostilities with Afghanistan, and he acquired the expertise in dealing with the delicate inter-tribal relations and defence issues which were to be the distinguishing features of his career. After a brief spell in 1925-6 as counsellor at the British legation in Kabul, Cunningham was transferred to New Delhi where he spent five years as private secretary to the viceroy, Lord Irwin. 
Serious unrest resurfaced in the north-west frontier with rioting in Peshawar on 23 April 1930. The agitation was connected with the All-India National Congress civil disobedience movement, although it had a strong local dimension and was orchestrated by the Pakhtun nationalist Khudai Khidmatgars ('Servants of God'). The Khudai Khidmatgar movement had been formed by Abdul Ghaffar Khan, and its members wore uniforms dyed by red brick dust and were dubbed the Red Shirts by the colonial authorities. The British repression of the disturbances was accompanied by the introduction of representative institutions with the establishment of a new legislative council in April 1932. Cunningham returned to the frontier to serve as home member. He was acting governor from November 1932 to May 1933, and later served as governor for the period 1937-46. 
The hallmark of this period was Cunningham's tact in his dealings with the Khudai Khidmatgars, who were allied with the Congress from 1931 onwards. In the later stages of the Pakistan movement, the Red Shirts' ties with the 'Hindu' Congress in the overwhelmingly Muslim frontier appeared increasingly anomalous. They sowed the seeds for the tensions between a Pakhtun and Pakistani identity which were to surface after 1947. Cunningham initially encouraged the United Muslim Nationalists rather than the Khudai Khidmatgars, when he invited their leader, Sir Abdul Qaiyum, to form a ministry in March 1937. It survived until September, when Dr Khan Sahib formed a Congress ministry. Cunningham established a good working relationship with his ministers until their resignation in November 1939. It was his accurate reading of the decline in the frontier Congress's fortunes, however, which lay behind his restrained response to the 1942 Quit India movement. Despite the misgivings expressed in New Delhi, Cunningham's approach avoided the confrontations of the 1919-20 and 1930-32 periods. General Sir Claude Auchinleck indeed remarked that Cunningham's masterly handling of the Quit India campaign was worth two army corps. Cunningham however had to bow to the desire of the viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, for the encouragement of a non-Congress government. Again he perceptively observed that Aurangzeb Khan's Muslim League government, which came to power in May 1943, was likely to be short-lived and beset with corruption and factionalism. Its poor performance contributed to the Muslim League's patchy results in the 1946 elections. 
Cunningham retired to Britain in the spring of that year. His distinguished career had seen him successively appointed CIE (1925), CSI (1931), KCIE (1935), KCSI (1937), and finally, in 1946, GCIE. The following April he was installed as rector of St Andrews University, from which he had already received an honorary LLD. Within three months, however, he was back in Peshawar as governor of the frontier which had now become part of Pakistan, at the request of M. A. Jinnah, the governor-general. There could have been no greater testament to the high regard in which Cunningham's knowledge of the frontier was held. He soon found himself plunged into a political maelstrom. 
The Muslim League had few historic roots in the frontier, but within a week of independence Dr Khan Sahib's Congress ministry had been dismissed. Abdul Ghaffar Khan's continuing championing of the Pakhtunistan demand at a time of tension with both neighbouring India and Afghanistan presented Cunningham with a major problem. He became seriously ill in the spring of 1948 and retired home on the advice of his doctors. 
Cunningham was elected an honorary fellow of his old Oxford college in 1948. His retirement was spent at St Andrews with his devoted Irish wife, Kathleen Mary ('nee' Adair), whom he had married on 2 January 1929. He was elected captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, and in keeping with the sporting prowess of his youth was still able to break eighty on its demanding greens when over the age of seventy. Cunningham died suddenly, on 8 December 1963, at the Teddington home of Lady Halifax, while he was on his annual pilgrimage to the Oxford-Cambridge rugby match at nearby Twickenham. 
Sir George Cunningham was held in great respect by his colleagues, not just because of his immense knowledge and expertise, but because of his tact, imperturbability, and tolerance. He was the outstanding official of his generation in a region which was of crucial strategic importance to the Indian empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32668


Cunningham, Sir John Henry Dacres (1885-1962), naval officer, was born on 13 April 1885 at Demerara, British Guiana, the son of Henry Hutt Cunningham QC (1851-1897), the stipendiary magistrate in the British colony, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary (1855-1897), the daughter of the Revd John Park. Cunningham was not yet a teenager when he and his younger sister, Barbara, were orphaned as a result of a seafaring accident that claimed the lives of both of their parents. Brought back to England in the wake of this double tragedy, the two children were brought up by their mother's relatives in Ulverston, on the fringes of the Lake District. 
John Cunningham's scholastic talents were quickly in evidence at Stubbington House School and shone through his time as a cadet in HMS 'Britannia' (1900-01), where he was regarded as possessing one of the finest intellects seen in the training ship in recent years. Unfortunately, his social skills left much to be desired. Apart from doing nothing to cultivate popularity he was generally seen as being a rather morose, impatient, and disdainful individual who rarely praised anyone and was often withering in his criticism of those whose work did not measure up to the highest standards he set for them. An aloof and introverted figure known for his biting sarcasm, Cunningham made few friends either at school or within the service. But if being a loner discomforted him he showed little sign of it at any stage of his life or during his career. Self-assured to the point of arrogance and immensely hard-working, Cunningham was highly competitive and relished pitting himself against even the most difficult of challenges. A shrewd and complex personality, he managed to gain the respect but not the devotion of his peers and subordinates. 
After passing out of 'Britannia' in 1901 he was posted as a midshipman to the cruiser HMS 'Gibraltar', the flagship on the Cape of Good Hope station, at the time of the South African War. Awarded the queen's medal, Cunningham returned home in 1904 as a sub-lieutenant to take the qualifying examinations for promotion to lieutenant. Achieving a first-class certificate in all five subjects (a so-called 'five-oner'), he was promoted in October 1905. Opting to eschew gunnery for the less glamorous field of navigation as his specialization, he duly qualified at the navigation school and was thereafter appointed as assistant navigator in the battleship HMS 'Illustrious'. During the next three years he graduated to the role of navigator of the gunboat 'Hebe', the cruiser 'Indefatigable' in the West Indies, and the minelayer 'Iphigenia' in home waters. He was little inconvenienced by the rigours of the first-class ship course in 1910 and was rewarded with an instructor's position at the navigation school. In the same year, on 8 March, he married his first cousin Dorothy May (died 1959), daughter of C. K. Hannay. Cunningham had spent some of his early adolescence in Ulverston with Dorothy after his parents had perished at sea. They were married for forty-nine years and had two sons, John and Richard; John became a fire brigade chief and Richard a lieutenant in the Submarine Service, killed in action on board 'P33' in August 1941. 
Cunningham went back to sea in 1911 as navigator in the cruiser 'Berwick' on the West Indies station and in 1915 was transferred to the ill-fated battleship 'Russell' in the Mediterranean. Surviving her sinking by a mine in Maltese waters in April 1916, Cunningham was appointed navigator in the battle cruiser 'Renown'. While serving in the Mediterranean he was promoted commander in 1917, and in the final year of the war became navigator of the 'Lion' in the Grand Fleet. Further preferment came his way when he was appointed to serve as navigator in the newly commissioned battle cruiser 'Hood' in 1920 and as squadron navigator for the entire battle-cruiser squadron commanded at the time by Sir Roger Keyes. He returned ashore in 1922 to serve as commander of the navigation school and followed this a year later by appointment as master of the fleet in the 'Queen Elizabeth', the flagship of Admiral Sir John de Robeck. Promoted captain in 1924 he served for a time on the staff of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich before becoming deputy director of plans at Admiralty House. After commanding the cruiser-minelayer 'Adventure' (1928-9), he returned to Whitehall as director of plans (1930-32) at a time of economic crisis for the entire country. Emerging from a torrid period for the Royal Navy, Cunningham was glad to go back to sea and take command of the battleship 'Resolution' while becoming flag captain to Admiral Sir William Fisher, the commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet. After being appointed aide-de-camp to the king in 1935 Cunningham reached flag rank in 1936 at the age of fifty-one. Later in the year he was offered the post of assistant chief of naval staff. This brought him into close contact with the influential figure of Admiral Sir Ernle Chatfield, the first sea lord. Cunningham's workload increased substantially in 1937 when he assumed responsibility for administering the Fleet Air Arm upon its transfer from the Air Ministry to the Admiralty. His new role initially brought with it a slight change of designation, but the importance of his duties was reflected in the elevation of the office in 1938 to that of fifth sea lord and chief of naval air services with a seat on the Board of Admiralty. He was made MVO in 1924 and CB in 1937. 
As Europe began gearing up for war in the early summer of 1939 Cunningham was promoted vice-admiral and was ordered to take command of the 1st cruiser squadron in the Mediterranean, flying his flag in the 'Devonshire'. Shortly after war broke out in September, Cunningham's cruiser squadron returned to reinforce the Home Fleet under Admiral Sir Charles Forbes. Assigned to the Norwegian campaign from the outset, Cunningham made the best of a desperately poor job. His finest hour came, ironically, in the wake of the allied defeat when he was asked to lead a mixed force of three cruisers, nine destroyers, and three French transports to the port of Namsos, to the north of Trondheim, in order to evacuate the roughly 5700 allied troops of 'Mauriceforce' that had congregated there. Arriving off Namsos during the night of 1 May, Cunningham postponed the evacuation by twenty-four hours in the hope that the beautifully clear weather would deteriorate and help to conceal the mass evacuation. On the evening of 2 May a bank of fog obligingly descended, shrouding the evacuation operation from the German Luftwaffe and allowing the entire 'Mauriceforce' to be spirited away from Namsos in a single heroic night's work. Although badly mauled by bombing and strafing the next day, Cunningham's diminished task force returned with its human cargo safely to Scapa Flow a few days later. 
Cunningham's next major assignment took him back across the North Sea and well into the Arctic circle to the port of Tromso on 7 June in order to rescue King Haakon VII, Crown Prince Olaf, and other members of the Norwegian royal family, along with government ministers and the country's gold reserve. Under strict instructions not to break radio silence, Cunningham in the 'Devonshire' had picked up his evacuees and was on his return leg to the United Kingdom when his ship received a garbled distress call from the British carrier HMS 'Glorious' -- only some 70 miles away -- which was being engaged by vastly superior enemy forces. Whether a narrow sense of duty or mere callous self-preservation dictated his total lack of response one will never know, but his inaction effectively left the crew of the 'Glorious' and her two screening destroyers -- HMS 'Acasta' and HMS 'Ardent' -- to fend for themselves against overwhelming odds. Despite taking the fight courageously to the German battle cruisers 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau', the unequal contest was soon over and all three British warships were sunk with the loss of 1519 officers and men. Only forty-six survived their freezing ordeal in the North Sea. In recent years criticism of Cunningham's role in this tragedy has surfaced. Throughout his life Cunningham claimed not to have received any information about the distress call from 'Glorious'. This view was sharply contested in a British television documentary on the subject aired in 1997, featuring a prominent member of the wireless telegraphy staff on board the 'Devonshire' who could remember receiving the message and entering it into the wireless telegraphy log at the time. It is further alleged that Cunningham either personally doctored the ship's log to eliminate any mention of the SOS call or ordered that any evidence of it be struck from the record. Until the Admiralty opens all the files relating to this incident in 2015, and perhaps not even then, this matter will remain unresolved. 
Cunningham's burgeoning career prospects were not arrested by this incident, however, and he continued to take on new assignments. He confronted his trickiest task yet in September 1940 when he was appointed joint commander with Major-General N. M. S. Irwin of operation Menace -- an effort to land a mixed force of 6670 British and Free French soldiers at Dakar in Senegal in a bid to provide a base for General de Gaulle's Free French movement in west Africa. This expedition turned out to be an ignoble failure, undermined by a lack of secrecy and co-ordination on the one hand and compromised by resolute Vichy French hostility and defensive firepower on the other. Once again Cunningham somehow emerged unscathed from this latest debacle and the Admiralty was content to support him in his seemingly unstoppable drive to get to the top of his profession. 
Knighted in the new year's honours, Cunningham was recalled to the Admiralty in the early months of 1941 and appointed fourth sea lord and chief of supplies and transport. This proved to be a very demanding administrative position, but Cunningham was ideally suited to deal with the complexities of the job and revelled in the myriad aspects of it. He remained at the helm for more than two years before being sent in June 1943 to the eastern Mediterranean as commander-in-chief, Levant, with the acting rank of admiral. Promotion to admiral followed in August and when the two Mediterranean commands were merged later in the year he was confirmed as the commander-in-chief and assumed the responsibility for all allied warships in the same theatre. Admittedly, by this time the naval situation in the Mediterranean had improved significantly, but there were still important amphibious operations to launch at Anzio and in the south of France, both of which he oversaw. 
Cunningham remained in the Mediterranean until he was brought home to relieve Admiral Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope as first sea lord in May 1946. While he could be satisfied that he was the first navigating officer ever to have made it to the pinnacle of his profession, Cunningham was under no illusions about the problems he had inherited from his namesake. Substantial budget cuts and disarmament had already taken place and more of the same were in the pipeline. To make matters worse the sharp divisions that existed within the chiefs of staff committee made Cunningham's task of defending the integrity of the Royal Navy even more complicated. Undermined by personal wrangling and animosity, the committee proved to be utterly ineffectual, both collectively and individually, in resisting the Labour government's radical plans for the armed services over the next two years. Presiding over an almost skeletal navy was not particularly edifying for a person of Cunningham's nature, so when the opportunity to retire from the service presented itself in September 1948 he grasped it with some alacrity. By then he had been made a GCB in 1946, a freeman of the City of London in the following year, and had been promoted to admiral of the fleet in January 1948. He had also received a set of distinguished orders and decorations from France, Greece, Norway, and the United States for his work on their behalf in the recent war. After leaving the navy Cunningham spent the next ten years as chairman of the Iraq Petroleum Company before retiring finally in 1958 at the age of seventy-three. He survived his wife by three years and died in the Middlesex Hospital on 13 December 1962. 
Vain and egotistical, as well as being a strict disciplinarian who insisted on precision and hated any slack attitude and inattention to detail from those who worked for him, Cunningham was known to be a formidable character. Astute and experienced in driving both ships and men, there is no doubt that he accomplished much in his life, but the nagging doubt remains as to the soundness of his judgement under all circumstances, particularly at sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 32669


Cunningham, William (1849-1919), economic historian and Church of England clergyman, was born on 29 December 1849 at 50 Queen Street, Edinburgh, the second of three children born to James Cunningham, a lawyer, and his second wife, Elizabeth Boyle Dunlop, youngest daughter of Alexander Dunlop of Keppoch, Dunbartonshire. Religion was an important part of family life: William's father moved from the Episcopal church to founding a branch of the Church of England in Edinburgh, and later to the Free Church of Scotland. His mother came from a strong Presbyterian background, and her brother took a leading part in the Free Church. 
Cunningham suffered from asthma and was educated at home by an English tutor. From the age of twelve he intermittently attended Edinburgh Institution (1861-4), before proceeding to the Edinburgh Academy (1864-5). In 1865 he entered the arts course at Edinburgh University, where he received his MA in 1869. In the summer of 1868 he studied German at the University of Tubingen, and entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1869. In 1872 he won a scholarship at Trinity College and was listed first with Frederick William Maitland for the moral science tripos. 
Having resolved his religious doubts by embracing the personal theology and social views of F. D. Maurice, Cunningham hoped to combine a clerical and academic career. He was ordained in 1873 and served as a curate at Horningsea, near Cambridge (1873-4), as chaplain at Trinity College (1880-91), curate of Great St Mary's, Cambridge (1879-83), of which he was subsequently vicar (1887-1908), and as archdeacon of Ely (1907-19). Cunningham took both his pastoral and administrative duties seriously throughout his career and in later years was active in convocation. 
Cunningham was attracted to both Hegelian and Comtist philosophy but his failure to win a fellowship threatened his academic prospects. He wrote a dissertation, 'The Influence of Descartes on Metaphysical Speculation in England', which was published in 1876 and took a doctorate in mental science from Edinburgh in the same year. He became a DD at Cambridge in 1889 with a dissertation on Augustine of Hippo. Although he was deputy to the Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy in 1879, a Hulsean lecturer in 1885, a Birkbeck lecturer in ecclesiastical history in 1886-90 and 1908-10, and wrote dozens of papers and pamphlets on church subjects, he failed in his applications for a permanent university teaching position in philosophy or theology. 
Instead Cunningham launched his academic career through the new university extension scheme, serving as an extension lecturer (1874-8) in Leeds, Bradford, and Liverpool, and teaching as many as 600 students per term. On 1 June 1876 he married his cousin Adele Rebecca Dunlop, daughter of Andrew Anderson Dunlop, a merchant of Dublin. The couple had two children: James Michael, who died as an officer in France in 1918, and Audrey, a historian and biographer of her father. In 1878 Cunningham was named an examiner for the new history tripos at Cambridge. His duties included lecturing on economic history. He had attended Alfred Marshall's lectures in economics and had developed a strong interest in social questions. Realizing that a textbook was needed in economic history, he seized the opportunity. 'The Growth of English Industry and Commerce' (1882) was an immediate success and laid the foundation for the study of economic history at Cambridge. It went through six editions and expanded to fill two large volumes. 
Cunningham was an early supporter of the education of women at Cambridge and his subsequent volumes owed much to the assistance of the first generation of women economic historians, including L. C. A. Tomn, who, as L. C. A. Knowles, occupied the first chair in economic history in England at London. From 1884 to 1888 Cunningham served as a university lecturer in history and from 1888 to 1906 he was a lecturer at Trinity College. From 1891 to 1897 he was the Tooke professor of economics and statistics at King's College, London. In 1891 he was elected a fellow of Trinity College. In 1899 he taught at Harvard and in 1914 he gave the Lowell lectures in Boston. Cunningham was a founding fellow of the British Academy, president of the economic section of the British Association (1891, 1905), and president of the Royal Historical Society (1911). He received honorary degrees from Edinburgh and Brown universities. In 1880-81 he travelled widely in India, and in later years also visited South Africa and Palestine. 
Cunningham's reputation rests largely on his economic history, which has been called neo-mercantilist, and as an apologist for British imperialism. He explained that Britain's economic success was not rooted in 'laissez-faire', but in a tradition of national economic regulation from the medieval through the mercantilist periods. Indeed, he put forward the view that Victorian free trade policy had been the imperialism of free trade. Cunningham's support for an inductive economics placed him in opposition to Alfred Marshall's efforts to lay a more deductive and theoretical foundation for political economy in Britain. These differences, aggravated by personal and academic competition, broke into an open controversy with Cunningham's paper of 1892, 'The perversion of economic history'. The English 'Methodenstreit', the conflict between inductive and deductive economics, was further inflamed when Cunningham and most of the economic historians supported protection during the Edwardian tariff reform agitation, while Marshall and most economic theorists defended free trade. In his numerous writings on tariff reform, Cunningham insisted on the proposition that economics must be seen in relation to a particular time and place. 
Cunningham expounded his imperial views in numerous articles, speeches, and books, such as his two-volume 'An Essay on Western Civilization in its Economic Aspects' (1898-1900). His vision consisted of a combination of British nationalism, an established religion with a social gospel, an evolutionary view of society, and a belief that economic history and political economy should be an applied subject in the service of Western civilization, the British empire, and conservative social reform. His views were an important component of a social imperialism which supplanted a tradition of liberal individualism in Britain. After several years of ill health he died on 10 June 1919 in Cambridge. The funeral was held at Great St Mary's on June 13 and he was buried in the cemetery at Wilburton, halfway between Cambridge and Ely. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32670


Currie, Sir Arthur William (1875-1933), army officer, was born in Adelaide township, near Strathroy, Ontario, Canada, on 5 December 1875, the son of William Garner Curry (1845-1891), and his wife, Jane Patterson (1847-1924). Both his parents were Canadian born, their families having originally migrated from Scotland and Ulster. Curry was raised on his father's farm, and educated at Strathroy Collegiate Institute (from 1889) and Strathroy model school. 
In 1894 Curry moved to Victoria, British Columbia, and shortly thereafter he became a schoolmaster in Sydney. He moved back to Victoria in 1896 where he continued teaching until 1900, when he began working as an insurance salesman. Soon after arrival in Victoria he joined the militia (1897) as a gunner and changed the spelling of his name to Currie. In 1900 Currie was offered a commission as a 2nd lieutenant. He rose rapidly in rank and by 1909 was commanding officer of the 5th regiment, BC brigade garrison artillery. On 14 August 1901 he married Lucy Sophia (1875-1969), youngest daughter of William Chaworth-Muster of Nottingham, England, and Comax, British Columbia. Currie then went into business for himself; he and his wife had two children, Marjorie ('b'. 1902) and Garner ('b'. 1911). In 1904 Currie took over the insurance agency for which he had been working. In 1908 he entered a real estate partnership and began selling and speculating on property. In 1913 he ended his term as commanding officer of the 5th regiment, just as the speculative bubble in west-coast real estate burst. Also in that year he was asked to take command of a newly formed militia unit, the 50th regiment. Deeply in debt when war broke out in 1914, he was not able to accept command of the British Columbia military district. When subsequently offered a brigade in the Canadian expeditionary force he borrowed money, paid off most of his debts, and left to take command of the 2nd Canadian infantry brigade. With this brigade he withstood the onslaught of superior forces at St Julien in 1915 and in the same year was promoted successively colonel and brigadier-general. When the Canadian corps was formed in September 1915 Currie was given command of the 1st Canadian division, and with the rank of major-general led his men on the Somme and at Vimy Ridge. In 1917 when General Byng was promoted to army commander, Currie became the first Canadian to become commander of the Canadian corps. Concerned at the time that his pre-war debts would become an impediment, he took steps to eliminate them. His promotion was approved with the endorsement of Sir Douglas Haig and the Canadian government. Currie's subsequent career was extraordinarily successful. He planned and carried through the battle of Hill 70 (August 1917) and led his corps at Passchendaele (October). Perhaps his and the Canadian corps' greatest achievement was during the fighting from the battle of Amiens (August 1918) through to the Armistice on 11 November, known as the Last Hundred Days. This fighting was the greatest sustained advance for the British forces during the entire war. Currie and the Canadian corps greatly distinguished themselves, but criticism of the campaign was launched in the Canadian parliament, by Sir Sam Hughes, which resulted in post-war controversy and a libel action in 1928 which totally vindicated Currie. He was mentioned in dispatches nine times, was appointed CB in 1915, KCMG in 1917, KCB in 1918, and GCMG in 1919. He received many foreign decorations. 
After the armistice Currie remained for a time in command of the Canadian forces on the Rhine and upon his return to Canada he was promoted general, and made inspector-general, and military counsellor to the militia forces of Canada (1919). In 1920 he became principal and vice-chancellor of McGill University. While at McGill he gave his services unsparingly to the Canadian Legion of British Empire Service League, of which he was honorary president; to the Canadian Institute of International Affairs; to the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, of which he was a trustee; to the governorship of the Montreal General and Royal Victoria hospitals; and to the Bank of Montreal. Throughout his tenure at McGill, he was a tireless advocate of veterans' rights and benefits. Eighteen universities in Great Britain, Canada, and the United States of America conferred honorary degrees upon him. 
Currie was a courageous and resourceful commander possessed of great initiative and an instinctive grasp of tactics. Lloyd George called him a brilliant commander and his own prime minister, Robert Borden, thought him the most able corps commander in the British army. He died of pneumonia in Montreal on 30 November 1933, and was buried in that city. Controversy over Currie's place in Canadian military history has resulted largely from the vicious accusations of Sam Hughes and the ensuing libel action. Legal vindication, however, did not stop subsequent journalistic speculation about the Canadian corps commander. Although not a charismatic individual, he had outstanding tactical skill and organizational abilities. Posthumous discovery that Currie had used government funds issued to his militia unit in 1914 to pay private debts and that he had not replaced them until 1917 contributed to the controversy. His accomplishments as brigade, division, and corps commander during the First World War place him among Canada's most outstanding military leaders. 


@@@@@


doc= 32671


Currie, Sir Donald (1825-1909), shipowner, was born on 17 September 1825 at Greenock, the third son of James Currie (1797-1851), a barber, and Elizabeth (1798-1839), daughter of Donald Martin. The family moved from Greenock to Belfast in 1826, where they belonged to the conservative Presbyterian congregation in Fisherwick Place. 
Currie was educated at the Belfast Academy and the Royal Belfast Academical Institution from 1832 to 1839. In 1840 he returned to Greenock, working in the shipping office of his uncle John Martin of Hoyle Martin & Co., and four years later, like so many Scots, went south to Liverpool, joining Charles MacIver, family friend and manager of Samuel Cunard's British and North American Royal Mail Steam Packet Company. It was not long before he settled into Liverpool life. As a member of the Presbyterian congregation at the new Free Church in Canning Street, he played his part in setting up the Young Men's Evangelical Association, and in 1851 married Margaret, daughter of another Scot, John Miller, senior partner in the general merchants Miller, Houghton & Co. Currie and his wife had three daughters. Appointed head of the cargo department, he travelled on the continent between 1849 and 1854 to establish new agencies at Le Havre, Paris, Antwerp, and Bremen, and took much of the responsibility for MacIver's Mediterranean interests as far afield as the Levant and the Black Sea. By 1859 he was a well-regarded figure in local shipping circles, becoming treasurer of the powerful Liverpool Steam Ship Owners' Association. 
Currie left Cunard in 1862 to run his own sailing ships as the Castle Line from Liverpool and London in the India trade. At first he concentrated on Calcutta, exploiting the novelty of a regularly timetabled service, but soon began to diversify his activities, chartering vessels to other Asian ports and exploring the possibilities of the Calcutta-New York connection. From 1863 he also moved into the regular Baltic trade. An elder brother, James, was manager of the Leith, Hull, and Hamburg Steam Packet Company; Donald became one of its principal shareholders, and in 1866 with other partners also set up his own Liverpool and Hamburg Steam Ship Company. 
The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, rapid growth in the size of ships, and the introduction of steam shipping on the routes to the East, created a new and very difficult set of conditions. While other important competitors moved quickly, Currie's already extended operations and relatively limited resources made him hesitant, both in building new steamers and in committing them to India. His loss of a new ship on its maiden voyage in 1872, and a developing connection with the London shipbroker G. H. Payne who chartered some of Currie's boats for a new service to the Cape of Good Hope, were decisive. Currie switched to the much smaller and less lucrative Cape trade in competition with the existing holder of the imperial government's mail contract, the Union Steam Ship Company. Using his position in the Leith, Hull and Hamburg to buy or charter several of their vessels, in addition to his new purchases, he wooed the Cape merchants and in 1874 won a colonial government subsidy to help his newly formed Castle Packets Company survive the next two years. Officials and merchants, dissatisfied with the Union Company's service and hoping for miracles from a breath of competition, were happy to see the mail contract divided with Currie when it was renegotiated in 1876. 
Currie seized the opportunity of an upturn in trade and a measure of security to expand his company rapidly, more than doubling the Castle Company's tonnage to 48,000 by 1881. The company itself was also reorganized, first in 1877 with an expanded capital, Currie himself as the largest shareholder, and his family enterprise of Donald Currie & Co. as its managers. Then, in 1881, the new Castle Mail Packets Company Limited was floated publicly, with a subscribed capital of $720,000 and further resources of nearly $0.5 million; Currie was made manager in perpetuity, in return for which he enjoyed the highly favourable remuneration of 5 per cent per annum of the company's gross earnings. 
Public relations were quite as essential as financial preoccupations to Currie's style of management in the 1870s and to the initial establishment of Castle Mail. Joining the Royal Colonial Institute in 1874, he carefully cultivated prominent public figures both in Britain and in South Africa, including Sir John Molteno, the Cape's prime minister, whose son Percy later married Currie's daughter Elizabeth, and Sir Robert Herbert, permanent under-secretary at the Colonial Office. He was very active among shipowners in shaping the mercantile marine safety legislation of 1876, and received the Royal Society of Arts Fothergill gold medal for his contributions to safety in shipbuilding. He mediated between President Brand of the Orange Free State and British officials in their dispute over the diamondiferous territory of Griqualand West, and supported the Boer delegation to London in 1877 protesting against the Transvaal's annexation; he scored a lucky coup by both bringing to Britain news of the devastating defeat at Isandlwana and speedily taking back the military instructions which averted further disasters; and he subsequently gave evidence to the Carnarvon commission on Britain's naval defences. 
Frequenting corridors of power, he also entered national politics, unsuccessfully contesting the Greenock election of 1876 and becoming Liberal MP for Perthshire in 1880. Currie, however, never had strong political ambitions. His political involvement, like his contacts with influential officials and public figures, remained limited to areas likely to serve his business interests, by providing him with contacts or information and building up his reputation for respectability. It was a successful strategy, symbolized first by his appointment as a CMG in 1877; and then by a knighthood in 1881. On his ships, as later on the neighbouring Perthshire estates of Garth and Glen Lyon which he purchased in 1880 and 1885, he enjoyed entertaining the influential and the journalists who might record the events. In 1880 and 1881 Gladstone was prominent among those entertained in a style which prompted 'Vanity Fair''s Spy to caricature Currie on the occasion of his elevation to a KCMG, as 'Knight of the Cruise of Mr. Gladstone' (21 June 1884). Currie's orchestration of personal publicity and public flotation in the summer of 1881 was brilliant, with 'The Times' noticing Castle Mail's prospectus and Currie's new title on the same day (20 July 1881). Not a week later, on 25 July, Currie entertained a large gathering of British and colonial MPs, shipping representatives, and minor British and Prussian royalty on board his new and largest steamship at the opening of Leith's new docks. 
Amid the accumulated pomp and circumstance which impressed most onlookers as intended, Currie's shaping of the new Castle Mail company represented a most striking business coup. With competition on the Cape route stiffening, with a serious downturn in commercial conditions upon him as the diamond share boom broke and imperial military spending in southern Africa sharply declined, Currie not only obtained an astonishingly high price for his old company, but transferred to the new shareholders a significant proportion of the costs of its recent expansion. Moreover, the structure of Castle Mail left Currie virtually free to indulge his enjoyment of display and personal prominence at the company's expense, and unhampered by any effective control by shareholders over his management. The 'council' which oversaw the company's affairs sounded impressive but lacked power, for it was composed almost entirely of Currie's friends and nominees; useful for their social standing or government connections in colonial affairs, at the Admiralty, and in telegraph construction, they did not possess the working knowledge of company matters which might have benefited shareholders. 
In Castle Mail, Currie had created perhaps the grandest example of a phenomenon common at the time, that of the shipping company in which shareholders' losses financed managerial self-indulgence and extravagance, and where, despite mounting criticism from newspapers and a few investors, no effective opposition emerged. Throughout its life Castle Mail's declared and distributed profits frequently compared unfavourably with other major companies'. Returns were kept within the firm, details of earnings and managers' commissions remained confidential; to finance its further operations and expansion, Currie very cleverly deployed the significant reserves created at flotation together with generous annual allowances for depreciation and successive bank loans, rather than risk his authority by trying to raise further ordinary share capital against the company's persistently discounted shares. This position he was able to sustain for almost twenty years. 
Currie's further distinction as a shipowner in the 1880s lay in his role as architect of the South African shipping conference. Against the background of severe economic depression, he brought the several southern African lines together in 1883 to defend their common interest in avoiding a rate-cutting war and possible bankruptcy. Agreed rates, pooled cargo, controlled voyage schedules, and a system of deferred rebates to compel merchants' loyalty to particular lines, became the order of the day. Not surprisingly the conference provoked vociferous criticism, but the inability of the several governments in South Africa to organize a common response left Currie in charge of the field. His combination of energy, administrative skill, and negotiating talent was such as to win over the German lines and other new challengers in the 1890s and beyond, with the result that the conference repulsed all attackers during his lifetime. 
The pursuit of happiness for Donald Currie lay in business competition and diversification. Not only the cut-throat world of steam shipping but the speculative condition of southern Africa's mineral discoveries and urban expansion offered him almost limitless opportunity. One natural extension of his interests lay in linking ship to shore; difficult anchorages and limited port facilities for larger ships led him to set up local landing and boating companies at Port Elizabeth, Durban, and Beira. African Lands and Hotels, established in 1897, was responsible for Cape Town's famous Mount Nelson Hotel. His first venture beyond shipping occurred in 1881, when he acquired some 75 per cent or $19,000 worth of shares in the newly formed Namaqua Copper Company. This gave him a lasting interest in the future of South-West Africa, but his major concerns, like those of so many after 1880, lay in the gold, diamonds and real estate of the Transvaal and northern Cape. Investments in these crucial sectors not only held out the possibility of personal gain; at least as important were the contacts and commercial information they generated, providing Currie with current business and insights into the future development of the passenger and freight trades so vital to his shipping line. 
Currie's route into diamonds opened up early in 1886 when, having set up the African Mining Corporation, he used it to make strategic investments in the Kimberley mine, while also investing independently on his own account there, and in the nearby Bultfontein mines. This was a time when the future of diamond mining was seen to lie in the amalgamation of the numerous existing companies, so that production and marketing could be controlled in pursuit of stable, high prices. Currie naturally recognized the principle involved, so akin to that of his shipping conference. He tried but was unable to outmanoeuvre larger or more unscrupulous players, such as Cecil Rhodes and Barney Barnato; however, by a mixture of shrewdness and luck, his shareholdings were such that he emerged in November 1888 as chairman of the London board of the new De Beers Consolidated Mines. He held that position for three years, and remained for many years a director, while also enjoying the huge dividends which De Beers regularly paid in the 1890s. 
The attraction of diamonds was rivalled only by the lure of gold. Early in 1887, and working this time through contacts in Natal which handled so much of the Transvaal trade rather than his Cape Town agents, Currie followed a similar approach. He established the African Investment Corporation, again under the control of family and very close friends, and bought up claims. Some were of little worth, but by the mid-1890s his Durban-Roodepoort Gold Mining Company was one of the most productive of all, regularly offering its shareholders dividends between 40 and 80 per cent. 
Currie also made investments of a more speculative kind, for instance in exploration companies and Rhodes's British British South Africa Company. They seem to have reflected less material conviction than his need to keep in touch with local developments and to nurture political connections. Rhodes in particular, much as Currie disliked him and refused to join the British South Africa Company's board, was too powerful to be ignored. In a similar way, Currie was drawn into activities associated with the wider partition of Africa. The prospect of rival shipping firms, French, German, Portuguese, or British, invading his sphere from the north on both coasts, as well as foreign annexations, was ever-present after 1880. To prevent this on the west, Currie devoted much energy to supporting both the territorial claims of the Cape government to South-West Africa, and those of the trader Robert Lewis to copper-mining concessions at Otavi. On the east he dabbled with William Mackinnon in schemes to develop the Portuguese territory of Mozambique. On both sides of the continent, he negotiated constantly for mail contracts and government subventions which would help Castle Mail steamers nose northwards, towards Zanzibar, Mauritius, or Luanda. He displayed boundless persistence and ingenuity in devising arguments -- about the need for defence, the necessity of stimulating legitimate trade and thwarting foreign ambitions -- capable of winning Admiralty or Foreign Office support, and of mortifying the Treasury. 
Currie's reputation was consequently a mixed one. Respected for his business acumen and held up as a contemporary model for emulation, he was simultaneously distrusted by many who had dealings with him; warmly appreciated for his genial hospitality, he was also found unctuous and self-centred. He was described by a director of De Beers as 'the Scotch Fox' (Rothschild archives, B17 Rh), and such epithets, as well as cynical comment about his vanity and social climbing, sat uneasily alongside his always dignified, bearded and increasingly patriarchal appearance. The unscrupulousness which in the 1890s led to a series of libellous but uncontested pamphlets by one former employee stands in marked contrast to the finer feelings of a considerate landlord, consistent churchgoer, and discerning collector of J. M. W. Turner's paintings. 
In the 1890s, Currie's relations with public figures in London and South Africa steadily cooled. Personally secure, he had less need to cultivate them, and his cruises carrying the great and the good ceased after Gladstone's last outing to Kiel in 1895. His claims to have the public interest at heart were more than ever regarded as exaggerated and insincere; increasingly, not only merchants but politicians and industrialists found his management of the shipping conference intolerable and his readiness to make terms with German lines a betrayal of British interests. The Cape government's serious attempt to deprive the Castle and Union companies of the mail contract in 1899 was as worrying for Currie as its failure to find an alternative contractor was comforting. He was reaching the limits of his ability to sustain Castle Mail under its existing organization, given the need for extensive rebuilding to meet renewed challenges from his main competitors. 
His response late in 1899 was to go for a merger of Castle Mail and the Union Company. In an agreement marked by his characteristic blend of ingenuity and effrontery, Currie in effect paid the shareholders of the Union Company to allow him to take them over. Early in 1900, on a tide of heady expectations as to its prospects in a prosperous post-war and perhaps federated South Africa, Currie attended the birth of the new Union Castle Company, to be managed like its predecessor by Donald Currie & Co. It was a masterly if flawed achievement, reflecting no particular talent for innovation but demonstrating most tellingly the potential for survival of the small family firm in the face of all the pressures for enlargement of scale in the form of public limited companies. 
Its operations Currie now left increasingly to his three sons-in-law whom he had brought into the management agreement in 1896. In the 1890s he had established the London shipping exchange, taken an active interest in the London chamber of commerce, and supported the inclusion of seamen within the 'Workmen's Compensation Act' of 1897; but in 1900 he retired from parliament and withdrew from any major part in London's shipping world. The one exception to this was his appearance in 1908 before the royal commission investigating shipping rings, where to the last he maintained his uncompromising rejection of all the criticisms levelled at them. It was Currie's last and this time essentially fruitless stand, for the report issued shortly after his death rejected his arguments. Only months later in 1910, the government of the new Union of South Africa, which embodied the federation Donald Currie had always favoured as the region's natural political system, took steps to bring the shipping ring to heel and precipitated the sale of Castle Mail by his heirs. 
After 1900, Currie spent much more time aboard his steam yacht, cruising with his family among the Scottish isles and in the Mediterranean. He realized some investments, and made several substantial donations, notably to University College Hospital, London, the universities of Edinburgh and Queen's, Belfast, and his old schools. Edinburgh reciprocated with its LLD, the City of Belfast with conferment of its freedom. Strangely, and notwithstanding his visits there in 1887-8 and 1893, there was nothing for South Africa, the source of much of his wealth, either at this time or later in his will. One of the richest men of his day, he died from chronic cystitis and cardiac failure in a nursing home, the Manor House, at Sidmouth, in Devon, on 13 April 1909, survived by his wife and all three daughters. His widow received the king's condolences, his family shared his estate of almost $2.5 million, and he was buried in the churchyard of Fortingal between Garth and Glen Lyon, Perthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32672


Currie, Sir James (1868-1937), educationist, was born in Edinburgh on 31 May 1868, the eldest son of the Revd James Currie, principal of the Church of Scotland Training College, Edinburgh, and his wife, Jane Lyall, daughter of George Key, of St Vigeans, Forfarshire. He was educated at Fettes College, at Edinburgh University, and at Lincoln College, Oxford, to which he gained a classical scholarship in 1888; he graduated in 1892. 
Currie returned to Edinburgh where he taught for a number of years in one of the Scottish education board's schools, which gave him valuable practical experience. In 1899 he joined the Egyptian education department and in 1900 was selected by Lord Cromer to be the first director of education in Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. He had two main educational objectives. The first was to develop basic education in Western-style (but Arabic-language) elementary schools ('kuttabs'), not least in order to counteract the influence of the traditional Koranic schools ('khalwas'), officially regarded as centres of superstition and fanaticism. Consequently 'kuttab' education was encouraged by the institution of a 'voluntary education tax', which originated as a bargain between Currie and the distinguished Sudanese educationist Babikr Bedri, and was later extended to most of the riverine northern Sudan. 
Currie's second main objective was to train a small number of Sudanese for minor government posts. They were educated in so-called 'primary' schools, where some English was taught. Unlike 'kuttab' education, primary education was limited to the anticipated vacancies for its leavers. Between 1906 and 1914 primary enrolment was virtually static at about 770 pupils, while 'kuttab' enrolment expanded from 1280 to over 3600. In the early 1900s Gordon Memorial College at Khartoum, of which Currie was 'ex officio' principal, was a model primary school, upon which was superimposed a number of vocational courses. Several research institutes, including the Wellcome medical laboratories and a geological survey, were more or less loosely affiliated to the college. 
Currie was determined to support only those types of education which served the economic needs of the Sudan. Consequently he denied even the most modest financial assistance to southern Sudanese education, and later refused to support educational ventures in the south in the absence of a comprehensive southern educational policy based on extensive anthropological and sociological research. He nevertheless did not oppose girls' education, which in the early 1900s was believed to serve no economic or administrative purpose. When in 1907 Babikr Bedri demonstrated that a girls' school could function without provoking unmanageable local opposition, Currie supported the school both financially and otherwise. 
Before 1914 Currie was one of a small minority of civilians in an administration dominated by British officers seconded from the Egyptian army. He was not always 'persona grata' to his military colleagues: some of them thought his ideas 'too dogmatic', even 'socialistic'. He was moreover an outspoken supporter of the gradually growing civilian element in the administration. In 1911 he became a member of the governor-general's council. By 1912 educational expenditure had risen to 4 per cent of the Sudan government's revenue -- a figure which declined significantly under his successors, falling as low as 1.9 per cent in 1926. But by 1913 he felt that the administration was failing adequately to support the academic development of Gordon College. In 1914 he resigned. 
Currie married in 1913 Hilda Beatrice, only daughter of Sir Thomas Hanbury, a merchant and botanist, of La Mortola, Ventimiglia, Italy; they had a daughter who died in childhood. On his return to Britain he settled in Wiltshire, where he farmed. He soon became involved in important war work. In 1916 he was appointed director of a new labour supply department, which trained unskilled labour for semi-skilled tasks in the manufacture of munitions. In 1918 he became controller of the Ministry of Labour's training department, which was particularly successful in the rehabilitation of disabled former servicemen. These voluntary services were recognized when he was made a KBE in 1920. He stood unsuccessfully for parliament in the Devizes constituency as an Asquithian Liberal in the 1918 general election. 
In 1922 Currie became the first director of the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation and in 1923 a member of the government's advisory committee on native education in tropical Africa. Between the wars he served, often as chairman, on the governing bodies of several institutions, including the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture, Trinidad. He was a governor of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, South Kensington. As chairman of the governors of Dauntsey's School, Devizes, he modernized and greatly enlarged a small local grammar school and gained for it a national reputation. In 1933 he was created KCMG. 
Currie's links with the Sudan did not cease in 1914. In 1921-2 he was one of the Sudan's representatives in the difficult but ultimately successful negotiations with the Treasury for the refinancing of the Sennar Dam construction works. He revisited the Sudan in 1926 and 1932. He was unhappy at the lack of educational progress, and especially at the negative effects upon education of the policy of indirect rule, which he sharply criticized in the 'Journal of the African Society' (vols. 33, 1934, and 34, 1935). He was an outspoken, even combative man, and this public criticism was unwelcome in Khartoum. One senior official attributed it to Currie's 'failing powers'. Certain other comments were even less charitable. In 1936 he suggested the secondment of Christopher Cox to serve as director of education in the Sudan. He also prompted Sir Stuart Symes to invite the De La Warr commission, set up in 1936 to report on education in British East Africa, to extend its work to the Sudan. The commission's report, published in 1937, compared the Sudan's educational progress unfavourably with that of British East Africa, a conclusion which, had he lived to read it, would have neither surprised nor displeased him. Currie died at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on 17 March 1937. Until 1956 a bronze bust of him stood in the original Gordon College building of the University of Khartoum. 


@@@@@


doc= 32673


Currie, Mary Montgomerie, Lady Currie (1843-1905), poet and writer, was born on 24 February 1843 at Littlehampton, Sussex, the eldest among the four children of Charles James Savile Montgomerie Lamb (1816-1856) and (Anna) Charlotte, 'nee' Gray ('bap'. 1824, died 1880), eldest daughter of Arthur Hopwood Gray, draper and, allegedly, smuggler, of Bersted, Sussex. Mary Lamb's grandfather was Sir Charles Montolieu Lamb, second baronet, of Beauport, Sussex, who married Mary, daughter and heir of Archibald Montgomerie, eleventh earl of Eglinton; her great-grandfather was Sir James Bland Burges, afterwards Lamb. At sixteen Charles Lamb eloped with Anna Charlotte, then nineteen. A few weeks after her birth, Mary was sent to her grandparents at Beauport, near Battle, accompanied by a letter from her father confessing his secret marriage. Sir Charles and Lady Mary Lamb had the infant baptized on the billiard table and adopted her. Her father immediately departed with his wife on a tour of Europe and the East, and returned to England a year and a half later a devotee of 'the Oriental life', a proponent of European revolution, and an avowed agnostic. 
Mary Lamb's upbringing at Beauport thereafter was, by her own account, unorthodox in the extreme. She wore Turkish dress, as did both her parents, 'went barefoot, had no bed, wore no nightgown, and was summoned by the clapping of hands'. She acquired her father's opposition to established religion and his vegetarianism, and throughout her life encouraged romantic tales of her mother's 'gipsy blood'. She also absorbed the influence of her father's many literary friends and acquaintances, including Edward Bulwer-Lytton, George Borrow, and Edward Fitzgerald. Charles Lamb died in 1856, blind and deserted by his wife, without succeeding to the baronetcy. Lady Sophia Eglinton, wife of the fourteenth earl, took over Mary Lamb's education and brought her out in London society, where she soon met with considerable success. She etched the illustrations for a reprint of Tennyson's 'Mariana' (Worthing, 1863) and began to pursue a literary career. 
On 27 February 1864 Mary Lamb married Henry Sydenham Singleton (1818/19-1893) of Mell, co. Louth, and Hazeley, Hampshire, an Irish landowner. Her first book-length publication, a volume of passionate love poetry entitled 'From Dawn to Noon', appeared in 1872 under the pseudonym Violet Fane. The name was taken from a character in Disraeli's 'Vivian Grey' (she later claimed to have forgotten the source) and remained her primary 'nom de plume', though for newspaper and magazine publication she sometimes preferred anonymity, the single initial 'V', or, on occasion, Pamela, Kajin, or Vera. 'From Dawn to Noon' rapidly became a 'succes de scandale'. The poems were widely understood to be addressed to Clare Vyner, a wealthy Yorkshire squire with whom Mary Lamb had fallen in love in the early 1860s and whose refusal to marry her had precipitated her into the match with the much older Singleton. Several more volumes followed: 'Denzil Place: a Story in Verse' (1875), published in America as 'Constance's Fate' (savaged by the press for its sympathetic portrayal of an adulterous woman), a more sentimental verse narrative, 'The Queen of the Fairies' (1876), and a drama in prose and verse, 'Anthony Babington' (1877). Her 'Collected Verses' was published in 1880. 
A beautiful and charming woman, with a reputation for original and witty conversation, Violet Fane was a well-known figure in London society of the 1870s and 1880s. W. H. Mallock dedicated his satire 'The New Republic' (1877) to her, and represented her as the unhappily married and captivating Mrs Sinclair 'who has published a volume of poems, and is a sort of fashionable London Sappho' (p. 27). Oscar Wilde frequented her house in Grosvenor Place and solicited two poems from her for the 'Woman's World' magazine. Other members of her coterie included Robert Browning, Algernon Swinburne, A. W. Kinglake, Alfred Austin, the duchess of Argyll (Princess Louise), James McNeil Whistler, and Lillie Langtry. Mrs Singleton's love affairs grew ever more complicated, and a source of much gossip in the scandal sheets of the day. In the early 1870s she exchanged illicit vows with Philip Henry Wodehouse Currie of the Foreign Office (see below). Their liaison rapidly became an open secret, and she acted as his hostess at entertainments for foreign dignitaries. Her involvement with Vyner nevertheless continued for several years, and in 1880 she also had a more discreet affair with Currie's cousin, the poet and traveller Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, whose diaries provide the most detailed account of her life beside her own (incomplete and unpublished) memoirs. 
Mary Singleton's love life provided the inspiration for most of her verse and prose. In 1877-8 she wrote a series of sketches for Edmund Yates's magazine, 'The World', collected as the 'Edwin and Angelina Papers' (1878). The barely disguised account of her acrimonious relationship with her husband (the morose 'Edwin'), and her affair with Currie ('D'Arcy') made it her most scandalous publication to date. Three novels followed: 'Sophy, or, The Adventures of a Savage' (1881), which drew heavily on memories of her childhood at Beauport and proved her most popular work, going through three editions in its first year; 'Thro' Love and War' (1886), in which the heroine shamelessly pursues a military man she meets in a railway carriage; and her study of modern womanhood, 'The Story of Helen Davenant' (1889). She returned to poetry with 'Autumn Songs' (1889), and in 1892 her poems were again collected, this time handsomely bound in two volumes in a limited edition of 365 copies. In the same year she published her sole work of translation, 'Memoirs of Marguerite de Valois, Queen of Navarre'. 
Henry Singleton, with whom Mary had two sons (Harry and John) and two daughters (Clara and Sophy), died on 16 March 1893, and on 24 January 1894 Mary Singleton married Sir Philip Henry Wodehouse Currie (1834-1906), later Baron Currie of Hawley and newly appointed British ambassador to Constantinople. She followed him to Pera, where they lived until 1898, then on a second ambassadorial posting to Rome. During her time abroad she published regularly in English magazines, principally the 'Pall Mall Magazine' and 'Ladies' Realm', and produced two volumes of poetry: 'Under Cross and Crescent' (1896) and 'Betwixt Two Seas: Poems and Ballads Written at Constantinople and Therapia' (1900). To the amusement of the British press, Sultan Abdul Hamid II, seeking favour with the British embassy, ordered a translation of her poems into Turkish. In her last years she contributed to a number of periodicals, using her own name. Her prose essays were reprinted in 'Two Moods of a Man' (1901) and 'Collected Essays' (1902). The Curries retired to Hawley, Hampshire, in 1903, accompanied by Clara's daughter Pera, whose upbringing they had taken over. Lady Currie died of heart failure on 13 October 1905 while staying at the Grand Hotel, Harrogate. She was buried in the family vault at Mattingley church, Hawley, near Winchfield, Hampshire, on 18 October. 
During her lifetime several of Violet Fane's poems were set to music, notably 'For Ever and For Ever' by Sir Paolo Tosti. Lillie Langtry's memoirs capture the predominant response of contemporaries to her work, recalling her as a writer of 'ardent love poems, which in those hypocritical days were considered highly improper'. Regarded, in her own time, as a late-Victorian Laetitia Landon, she is now more likely to find attention as a writer of (in Wilfrid Scawen Blunt's words) 'very superior society verse'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32674


Currie, Philip Henry Wodehouse, Baron Currie (1834-1906), diplomatist, born in London on 13 October 1834, was the fourth son of Raikes Currie (1801-1881) of Bush Hill, Middlesex, and Minley Manor, Hampshire, MP for Northampton (1837-57), and his wife, Laura Sophia (died 1869), eldest daughter of John Wodehouse, second Baron Wodehouse. He was educated at Eton College and entered the Foreign Office at the age of twenty. He served in that department for forty years, moving up the various grades of political staff to become assistant under-secretary of state for foreign affairs in 1882 and permanent under-secretary of state, the highest permanent post in the Foreign Office, in 1888. He was precis writer to the earl of Clarendon during the latter's tenure as foreign secretary and was temporarily attached to the British legation at St Petersburg in 1856 and 1857, during Lord Wodehouse's special mission to the Russian capital on the conclusion of the Crimean War. He assisted Julian Fane in his duties as protocolist to the conferences on the affairs of Luxembourg in May 1867. 
When Lord Salisbury was sent to Constantinople in 1876 to act as British plenipotentiary to the conference on the Eastern question, Currie was appointed secretary to his special mission. Salisbury formed a high opinion of Currie's abilities; it was to be the beginning of a friendship and close professional relationship between the two men. On Salisbury's accession to the foreign secretaryship in April 1878, Currie became his private secretary and when Lord Beaconsfield and Lord Salisbury attended the congress of Berlin the following June, Currie and Montague Corry (later Lord Rowton) accompanied them as joint secretaries to the special mission. Currie received the CB in recognition of his services. On his return to Britain in addition to his work as private secretary, Currie was entrusted by Salisbury with the correspondence respecting Cyprus, which had been leased from the sultan under the convention of 4 June 1878. 
When Earl Granville succeeded Salisbury as foreign secretary, Currie resumed his work in the Foreign Office as senior clerk in charge of the Eastern department. He was attached as secretary to the special mission sent to invest King Alfonso XII of Spain with the Garter in 1881 and was appointed assistant under-secretary in October 1882. From June to August 1884 Currie acted as joint protocolist to the conferences held in London on the finances of Egypt. In 1885 he was created KCB and in December 1888 was promoted permanent under-secretary of state in succession to Lord Pauncefote, who became British ambassador at Washington. 
Currie again worked very closely with Salisbury when the latter returned to the foreign secretaryship between 1885 and 1886 and again from 1887 until 1892. The permanent under-secretary not only had the full confidence of his chief but seemed to understand what was in Salisbury's mind without being given explicit instructions. In 1885, for instance, Currie, who had been taking the waters at the fashionable spa at Bad Homburg, secured an invitation to spend three days alone with Bismarck, the German chancellor, at Friedrichsruhe, during which they discussed a whole range of questions. Without written instructions from Salisbury, Currie was able to express the foreign secretary's views and to put out feelers which he knew Salisbury was anxious to follow up. 
In fact it was often Currie, as permanent under-secretary, who expanded on official instructions to ambassadors and ministers through private letters sent regularly to posts abroad. Salisbury disliked giving precise orders; he would sketch out his position and then let Currie fill in what was left unsaid. He sometimes even left to Currie the task of receiving ambassadors before they went out to their missions in order to explain what general lines the foreign secretary intended them to follow. Salisbury refused to see either Sir Robert Morier or Sir Nicolas O'Conor, for example, when they left in 1885 and 1886 for their respective posts in St Petersburg and Constantinople; nevertheless, his short note to Currie explaining that he did not wish to see O'Conor or to give him any instructions provided the permanent under-secretary with all the guidance he needed for his conversation with the ambassador. 
Currie served for five years as permanent under-secretary, during which he was made GCB in 1892. He was then appointed by Lord Rosebery in December 1893 as British ambassador at Constantinople and, following precedent, was sworn of the privy council. He held this embassy for four and a half very difficult years when relations between Britain and Turkey were exceedingly tense. During 1895 and 1896, in response to the repeated Turkish massacres of the Armenians, representatives of the great powers intervened to demand reforms and the investigation and punishment of the perpetrators. Lord Kimberley in 1895 and then Lord Salisbury (1895-1901) took the lead in trying to secure the co-operation of the other powers, especially Russia, to bring pressure on the sultan to rein in the Muslim fanatics and to grant concessions. These efforts met with little success, in part because the tsar refused to sanction any coercive measures against the sultan. There was a moment, in August 1896, after a bloody massacre of Armenians in Constantinople by Muslim mobs armed by the Turkish authorities, when it appeared that Britain might intervene despite the risks involved. These were eventually judged to be too high and the idea was dropped, but Currie was instructed to press the sultan to keep Muslim fanaticism in check. A further incident embittered relations between Britain and the sultan when Sa'id Pasha, a former grand vizier imprisoned when he refused to resume his office at the sultan's command, escaped and took refuge in the British embassy. It took five days of negotiations before the sultan promised Currie that the recalcitrant ex-minister would not be molested in any way. The sultan made no secret of his wish to have Currie replaced, but Salisbury turned a deaf ear to these intimations. 
In 1897 the troubles of Asia Minor were succeeded by the revolt of Crete, which was followed by Greek army support for the Cretans, the outbreak of war between Greece and Turkey, and the disastrous defeat of the Greek army. The great powers acting in concert intervened to secure favourable terms for Greece and the autonomy of Crete under Turkish suzerainty, but the physical strain on Currie during this period was considerable and his health gave way. The situation in Constantinople would have taxed any British representative, but Currie lacked the patience, infinite tact, and indirectness of approach needed in the Ottoman capital. He was therefore more than happy to succeed Sir Clare Ford at the embassy at Rome in July 1898, his last post before he was retired on pension on 17 January 1903. 
Unfortunately, what should have been a peaceful sojourn was marked by tension. This arose from the feeling in Rome that Italian interests with regard to Tripoli had been ignored during the course of Britain's negotiations with France, which led to the Anglo-French agreement of March 1899 concerning the Sudan and Nile basin. The British Foreign Office was in fact not sympathetically inclined towards supporting Italian interests in Africa, which were the main subjects of discussion during Currie's time in Rome. Neither in Constantinople nor in Rome therefore did the ambassador enjoy the kind of success that his great ability and social advantages merited. Indeed Currie's efficiency, clarity of judgement, and familiarity with the details of foreign policy were more appropriate to service in the Foreign Office in London than to the conduct of diplomacy abroad. 
Currie, who belonged to a well-known banking family, was a man of considerable wealth and he entertained as befitted a 'grand seigneur'. He was more at ease among a small circle of friends and acquaintances who shared his refined tastes and enjoyed his incisive powers of conversation and good-natured irony than in the wider diplomatic circle in which he had to move. On 24 January 1894 he married Mrs Mary Montgomerie Singleton, 'nee' Lamb (1843-1905), a well-known author and poet under the 'nom de plume' of Violet Fane ['see 'Currie, Mary Montgomerie]. There were no children. Currie was raised to the peerage in 1899 as Baron Currie of Hawley. He died on 12 May 1906 at Hawley, Hampshire, and was buried three days later at St Andrew's Church, Minley, near Fleet, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32675


Currie, Sir William Crawford (1884-1961), shipowner, was born in Calcutta on 4 May 1884, the elder son of William Currie, East India merchant of Glasgow and Calcutta, and his wife, Jessie, also of Scotland. Currie's father was senior partner in Mackinnon Mackenzie & Co., managing agents of the British India Steam Navigation Company (BISN), and kinsman of its founder, William Mackinnon. 
Currie was educated at the Glasgow Academy, Fettes College in Edinburgh, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he gained a rugby blue and a certificate from the Royal Humane Society (1904) for saving a child from drowning. After graduating in history (1905), he gained qualification as an accountant in Glasgow and left for Calcutta (1910) to join his father in Mackinnons. In 1914 Currie married Ruth Forrest, daughter of C. S. Dods of Edinburgh. They had two sons; the elder was killed in action in Burma in 1944. 
A partner in 1918, Currie took his father's place as senior partner in 1922 and began to take a prominent part in public life in India. Sheriff of Calcutta in 1921-2, he sat on the Bengal legislative council (1921-5) and in 1924 was elected president of both the Bengal chamber of commerce and the Associated Chambers of Commerce of India, Burma, and Ceylon. In 1925, during his last year in the east, he was appointed a member of the council of state for India and received a knighthood for his services. 
Currie returned to London to become a partner of Gray Dawes & Co., agents of BISN, and was soon immersed in shipping affairs. He was appointed to the Imperial Shipping Committee (1926-30) and elected president of the chamber of shipping of the United Kingdom (1929-30). 
In 1932 Alexander Shaw (later Lord Craigmyle), who had become chairman of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.) and BISN because of the serious illness of James Lyle Mackay, first earl of Inchcape, invited Currie to join P. & O. as deputy chairman and managing director; in 1938 he was elected chairman in succession to Craigmyle. 
While keeping in close touch with the affairs of the P. & O. group in the Second World War, Currie was a member of the advisory council of the Ministry of War Transport throughout the war and became director of the liner division at the ministry (1942-5). He was also on the executive committee of the Red Cross Society and order of St John (1942-7), and a member of the Red Cross Prisoners-of-War committee (1943-6). His war service was recognized by a GBE (1947) and by France with the Legion d'honneur (1953). 
After the war Currie had the major task, under very difficult conditions, of repairing damage and replacing losses sustained by the P. & O. group's fleets. His quick success in this mammoth undertaking showed the measure of his power and determination. Currie also had to deal with revolutionary changes in the structure of the P. & O. group brought about by the transfer of power in India; and as a trustee and partner in Mackinnons, he had to make new arrangements for the agency: it was reorganized as Inchcape & Co. Ltd with himself as a director. 
During these crowded and anxious years, Currie found time to become president of the Institute of Marine Engineers (1945-6), chairman of the British Liner committee (1946-8), prime warden of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights (1949), and a member of the Commonwealth Shipping Committee. Among a multitude of business interests he was deputy chairman of the Williams Deacon's Bank, extraordinary director of the Royal Bank of Scotland, chairman of the Marine and General Mutual Life Assurance Society, and director of the Suez Finance Company and the Southern Railway. Other activities included a year as high sheriff of Buckinghamshire (1947), president of the Seafarers' Education Service, chairman of the committee of management of the training ship 'Worcester', a trustee of the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich, member of the council of King George's Fund for Sailors, an honorary member of the Company of Master Mariners, and honorary captain, Royal Naval Reserve. 
Currie had none of the arrogance of a 'City tycoon'. Short and stocky, he was a man of great modesty, winning charm, and innate kindliness. He led by persuasion and example and made friends everywhere. In the P. & O. company, he had the respect, devotion, and affection of all grades of employees on land and at sea, British and Indian; in return he knew them by name, and wrote notes of thanks or appreciation in his own hand. Called Sir Willy, he was genuinely loved in the company and esteemed in the shipping industry at large. In his seventies he found it hard to keep up with the momentum of change. He belonged to the pre-war world, and his retirement in 1960 was not before time. 
A keen sportsman in his younger days, he continued to hunt and shoot whenever he had the time. His home was Dinton Hall in Aylesbury. Currie died on 3 July 1961 at Aylesbury. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32676


Curtin, John (1885-1945), prime minister of Australia, was born in Creswick, Victoria, on 8 January 1885, the eldest of the four children of John Curtin (1854-1919), a policeman, and his wife, Catherine Bourke (1859-1938). Both parents were Irish-born. Curtin's father was invalided out of the police force in 1890 and spent the next eight years as a hotel manager in Melbourne and several towns in rural Victoria before settling, poor and unemployed, in the Melbourne suburb of Brunswick. Educated at a succession of schools, young John had to leave to become the family breadwinner. He was a printer's devil, page-boy, office boy, and labourer, then in 1903 became an estimates clerk for an iron manufacturer. As he later recalled, the last was a 'school of profound computations' in which: 'for seven years, I calculated, measured, and otherwise evolved the precise cost to a gentleman profiteer of importing iron from Germany, running it through an abominable noisy machine, and passing it on to a nicely organized trust, preparatory to its consumption by the building contractors of Australia. (Ross, 9)' 

Jack Curtin joined the Brunswick Political Labor Council and the Victorian Socialist Party, under the respective tutelage of two gifted English immigrant agitators, Frank Anstey and Tom Mann, and soon gained a reputation as a boy orator on the Yarra Bank and on Melbourne street corners and as a contributor to the weekly 'Socialist'. He also found time to play amateur cricket and football. In 1908 he moved the resolution to change the name of the Political Labor Council to the Australian Labor Party and, despite his affiliations with the Victorian Socialist Party, also moved that the party should never ally itself with others. He described himself as a utopian revolutionary socialist and criticized those Labor men, Anstey included, who joined that 'upholstered gas-works' (Day, 158) known as parliament rather than working in the industrial movement. 
In 1911 Curtin accepted a full-time post as secretary of the Victorian Timberworkers' Union and was soon very active recruiting members, founding and editing a newspaper, and campaigning for the 'Workers' Compensation Act' (1914). In the federal elections of 1914 his ambition overruled his ideology and he stood unsuccessfully for the seat of Balaclava -- 'a first-rate fighter with the mild appearance of a curate' (Ross, 33), wrote the Sydney 'Bulletin'. Violently against the war, disillusioned by union routine and corruption, and drinking far too hard, Curtin resigned his post in November 1915 to work on a short-term project for the politically and industrially powerful Australian Workers' Union, but he had to enter a private hospital in mid-1916 to dry out. Though Curtin later abstained for long periods, he never fully overcame his drink problem and smoked forty cigarettes a day until his last months. 
Curtin was back into the political fray in August 1916, when he was appointed secretary to the national executive of the Australian trade union anti-conscription campaign. He agreed with the Hardie-Vaillant resolution of the Socialist International of 1910 in favour of a general strike to prevent war, and argued that socialism would conquer both war and poverty. He addressed many meetings, including one of 50,000 on the Yarra Bank, wrote pamphlets, and worked 'with the energy of a tornado' (Ross, 50). Conscription was defeated in two plebiscites, but at the cost of splitting the Labor Party and losing government. In the aftermath of the first vote Curtin, who had refused a call-up for local military service, was gaoled for three days. During the second campaign he was fined for preaching revolution. 
In February 1917, with a salary rise, Curtin was appointed editor of the 'Westralian Worker', which was supported by the Australian Workers' Union, in Perth, Western Australia, and on 21 April he married Elsie (1890-1975), daughter of Abraham Needham, a Tasmanian fellow socialist, in a local register office -- she being a Methodist and Curtin a lapsed Catholic. A daughter was born in late 1917 and a son in 1921. Curtin began remaking himself as a moderate and respectable journalist, and in due course bought his first house in the fashionable beachside suburb of Cottesloe, a train ride from his downtown office. 
Curtin tried again to enter the federal parliament in 1919, standing unsuccessfully for Perth. In 1921 he supported the insertion of the socialization objective into the Labor platform, but he was an implacable opponent of the communists, earning their lasting enmity when he opposed the Fremantle seamen's strike of 1924. During the 1920s he was a moving spirit in the Western Australia branch of the Australian Journalists' Association and instrumental in introducing a journalism diploma at the university. In 1924 he travelled to Geneva as an Australian delegate to a meeting of the International Labour Organization, and in 1927-8 he served on a federal royal commission into child endowment, filing a minority report in favour. He failed to win the federal seat of Fremantle in 1925 but finally won it in November 1928. Barring an interlude from 1931 to 1934, he held Fremantle for the rest of his life. 
In Canberra, Curtin quickly became a back-bencher to watch, though he narrowly missed election to the front bench when Labor formed government at the end of 1929. His major preoccupation was with financial reform to alleviate unemployment -- the expansion of credit via changes in the reserve bank rules. Instead, the government adopted the deflationary premiers' plan in 1931, and the party split again, as it had over conscription. Curtin was unheeded when he argued for maintaining party unity at the expense of office and allowing the conservatives to implement the draconian plan. In the subsequent election he lost his seat. 
Curtin returned to Perth and made his living as a freelance journalist, though early in 1933 he was appointed full-time paid chairman of the advisory council to prepare Western Australia's case for the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Secession was in the air in Western Australia, and Curtin demonstrated how the state's industries suffered under the federal arrangements. In September 1934 he regained the seat of Fremantle. 
James Scullin stepped down as Labor leader in October 1935 and Curtin, after pledging privately to abstain from alcohol, was elected by one vote as his successor. Curtin inherited a party in disarray. In New South Wales, J. T. Lang's dominant faction had been expelled from the party in 1931 and was still estranged. A unity conference brought some of the Langites into federal caucus in 1936, but these 'cannibals' (Day, 323) were to cause Curtin problems for years to come. As leader Curtin chose his policy ground well: avoiding the divisive financial questions, he concentrated on national defence. While the conservative Lyons government relied on imperial defence and appeasement of the dictators, Curtin stressed continental defence (army and air force over navy) and non-intervention in Abyssinia and Spain. This also masked the rift in his party between right-wing Catholics and the international socialists. Domestically, he now stood for 'the maximum of Socialistic benefits within the capitalist system' (ibid., 353). Curtin lost his first federal elections as leader in 1937, but made modest gains. 
When war broke out in Europe in 1939 Labor opposed the reintroduction of compulsory military training and the dispatch of Australian forces overseas, arguing that the best contribution Australia could make to the war effort was to see to its own defences. However, when Germany invaded France and the Low Countries, Labor agreed to send reinforcements: 'The men are there and we will not abandon them' (Ross, 186). At the federal elections in September 1940 Labor came within a whisker of government, and the prime minister, Robert Menzies, offered Labor places in a national government. Fearing another split in his fragile party, Curtin refused, though he promised full co-operation in the war effort and agreed to join an advisory war council. Curtin's patience was rewarded a year later when, in quick succession, Menzies was overthrown and Arthur Fadden's new government lasted only forty days before two independents crossed the floor to put Labor into power. 
Curtin became prime minister on 7 October 1941. Shrewdly, he kept the best conservative appointees in place, among them S. M. Bruce, the former prime minister, as high commissioner in London, General Sir Thomas Blamey as commander of the 2nd Australian Imperial Force, Frederick Shedden as cabinet secretary, and Essington Lewis, the chief executive of the mining giant Broken Hill Proprietary, as munitions supremo. Curtin made his main rival, H. V. Evatt, foreign minister, and placed one of the leading Langites, E. J. Ward, in charge of the vexed area of labour and national service. He told one of his senior public servants to 'Carry out Menzies' policy. There's nothing wrong with his policy -- only see that it is carried out!' (Ross, 223). 
No sooner was Labor in government than Australia's war changed utterly when Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Manila, simultaneously bringing the United States into the conflict and threatening the invasion of Australia. Curtin broadcast a defiant message next day: 'We shall hold this country and keep it as a citadel for the British-speaking race and as a place where civilization will persist' (Serle, 554). His new year's message put the situation more starkly: 'Australia looks to America, free of any pangs as to our traditional links or kinship with the United Kingdom... we know... that Australia can go and Britain still hold on' (Ross, 247). It then went on to demand an all-in effort. 
Churchill smarted at Curtin's 'harsh tones' (Day, 439), and Roosevelt thought the message 'tasted of panic and disloyalty' (Ross, 247), but the United States was already determined to use Australia as a main base, and Curtin as national leader was simply trying to establish publicly some semblance of control. Curtin gratefully accepted Churchill's offer to send the bulk of Australia's forces back to defend their home soil, but was dumbfounded when, in the light of the fall of Singapore on 15 February 1942, Churchill further suggested that the 7th division be diverted to Rangoon. Losing the Singapore base, and with it the Australian 8th division, was, in Curtin's words, an 'inexcusable betrayal' (Ross, 258), and he refused to sacrifice another. Curtin won the 'cable fight' (Day, 440), though the troops had to continue their way across the Indian Ocean without naval escort. It is much less well known that Curtin consented to Australia's 9th division's remaining in the Middle East until 1943 and to other elements of the 6th division being diverted to Ceylon. 
Curtin welcomed the United States general Douglas MacArthur as the allied commander for the south-west Pacific area in March and placed Australia's forces at his disposal. 'You take care of the rear and I will handle the front' (Day, 463), MacArthur said. Curtin set about his task with great thoroughness. By means of radio and the press he 'made friends with the nation' (Ross, 269), coaxing and chiding them into maximum effort. With his principal lieutenant, J. B. Chifley, the treasurer, he defied party dogma to introduce industrial conscription ('the manpower'). There followed rationing of all kinds, fully federalized income taxes, pay-as-you-earn taxation, and the mobilization of huge numbers of women. At its peak in 1943 Labor had more than doubled the numbers in the armed forces and war work. Australia achieved 71.4 per cent engagement of its workforce in direct war activities to the United Kingdom's 75.1 per cent. Manufacturing boomed. War loans were oversubscribed. Strikes, though not eliminated, were kept under control: 'putting miners in gaol would not produce coal' (Day, 520). Unemployment benefits were made available and child endowment increased. The 'total war economy' not only helped win the war but also made life in general better for the nation. 
In November 1942 Australian volunteers and thousands of American conscripts were fighting in the islands above Australia, while Australian conscripts were restricted by their terms of enlistment to national territory. In these circumstances Curtin felt he must risk some form of conscription for overseas military service. Given his and his party's history, the decision was most difficult. Unlike W. M. Hughes in 1916, Curtin used the mechanisms of the party, carefully persuading sufficient members of the state and federal executive committees to accept a compromise: the conscripts would fight only beneath the equator in and about New Guinea, effectively in an extended defence of the mainland. Curtin carried his party, and the bill became law in February 1943. 
In the federal elections of September 1943 Curtin and Labor were rewarded with substantial majorities in both houses, though a referendum a year later failed to secure the continuation of federal war powers into the looming peace in order to facilitate reconstruction. In January 1944 Australia and New Zealand signed a regional pact engineered by Evatt to stake British Commonwealth claims in the region after the war. This considerably annoyed the Americans, and Curtin distanced himself adroitly from Evatt's excesses when he visited Washington in April. In London for the Commonwealth prime ministers' conference mid-year, Curtin floated the idea of pooling sovereignty in a permanent Commonwealth secretariat and council, the better to integrate and co-ordinate British and dominion activities post-war, but found no interest from the Canadians, South Africans, and British. He wished to use the Commonwealth to bolster Australia's position as 'the bastion of British institutions... in the Southern World' (Day, 543) and act as a counterpoise to American influence there. 
Curtin had had heart trouble for some years and suffered a serious attack in November 1944. While he returned to work briefly in the new year, he was again hospitalized in March, and he died at the prime minister's lodge in Canberra on 5 July 1945, a month before the end of the Pacific war. Though a long-time rationalist, he was buried on 8 July with Presbyterian rites in Perth's Karrakatta cemetery. 
Curtin stood 5 feet 11 inches tall and weighed about 12 stone. Bespectacled and soberly dressed, he might have been a suburban bank manager. A cast in his left eye had to be hidden by his image makers. Often withdrawn and of a nervous disposition, he steeled himself for his public work, but his sincerity, superb oratorical and literary skills, mastery of his brief, consummate powers of conciliation, and sound political sense made him an exceptional war leader. His great achievement was to keep the Labor Party united and effective in government through Australia's darkest hour. To do so, he had the wisdom to abandon some of his and his party's earlier principles, and Australia was the better for it. 


@@@@@


doc= 32677


Curtis, Edmund (1881-1943), historian, was born on 25 March 1881 in Bury, Lancashire, the fifth of the six children of Francis Curtis, an architectural draughtsman (died 1918), of Rathmullen, co. Donegal, and his wife, Elizabeth Elliott of Belfast. At fifteen he was working in a rubber factory at Silvertown, east London, and voicing his melancholy in verses which found their way into the weekly press. The resulting publicity brought him two benefactors, through whose generosity he was sent to Allhallows School, Honiton, where one of them, Cecil Grant, was an assistant master. Curtis proved a rewarding pupil. When Grant, in 1898, became headmaster of a new co-educational boarding-school in Keswick, he took Curtis with him as head boy. In 1900 Curtis went to Keble College, Oxford, as a commoner, and gained a first class in modern history four years later. 
As a lecturer in history at Sheffield (1905-14) Curtis published 'Roger of Sicily' (1912) and became recognized as a medieval scholar. He had frequently visited Ireland, and had acquired a working knowledge of Irish, when in 1914 he was appointed professor of modern history at Trinity College, Dublin. Here for the rest of his career he left an abiding impression on his pupils, earning the affection of many whose backgrounds and views were very different from his own. No politician, he 'drifted helplessly in the cross-currents of Trinity academic life' (Lyons, 8). He was never elected to a fellowship, and so remained outside the college's governing circle. Characteristically, he left the residue of his estate as a fund for the benefit of college servants. In 1918 he married Margaret Louise, daughter of Richard Barrington, of the Royal Irish Constabulary. The marriage was dissolved in London in 1925, as a result of his wife's affair with the novelist Liam O'Flaherty. There were no children. 
Combining erudition with independence of judgement, appreciative alike of Gaelic and Anglo-Norman civilization, Gaelic-nationalist in sympathy but proud of his protestant and 'planter' ancestry, and an admirer of English character and institutions, Curtis had an unusual blend of qualities for an Irish historian. However, he worked too much in isolation, taking little account of changing academic fashion or current research. He remained true to the Stubbsian constitutionalism he had absorbed at Oxford, harnessing it to medieval and modern Irish themes, including what he dubbed, revealingly, 'aristocratic Home Rule'. His writing, though warmed by a strong historical imagination, was structurally weak and not always accurate in detail. His editing of documents had technical deficiencies. But he had the merits of a pioneer, and he was a courageous opponent of the narrow sectarianism that marked much that passed for history in Ireland at that time. His 'History of Medieval Ireland' (1923; 2nd edn, 1938) was unusual for the equal attention it paid to Gaelic and settler society. His outline 'History of Ireland' (1936) held the field for several decades. His 'Calendar of Ormond Deeds' (6 vols., 1932-43) unlocked the treasures of the largest medieval archive in Ireland. 
Although pensive and solitary, Curtis was well endowed with social gifts and was a memorable talker. One of his pupils has left a sketch of him on a late visit to Donegal: bounding into the saddle of an ancient bicycle; sleeping in a nightcap and nightgown, under which he wore a black silk cravat; carrying raw liver sandwiches in his pockets to ward off the pernicious anaemia that eventually killed him; endlessly curious about local history, dialects, and folklore. 
Curtis died at the Elpis Nursing Home, Mount Street, Dublin, on his sixty-second birthday, 25 March 1943, and was buried in the protestant churchyard at Malahide. His work continues to earn respect for the breadth of its sympathies and has found advocates among those who regard an eirenic 'present-centredness' as a legitimate part of the Irish historian's calling. 


@@@@@


doc= 32678


Curtis, Lionel George (1872-1955), writer and public servant, was born at The Outwoods, near Derby, on 7 March 1872, the youngest of four children of the Revd George James Curtis (died 1904), rector of Coddington church, Ledbury, Herefordshire, and his wife, Frances (died 1913), daughter of the Revd John Edmund Carr, of The Outwoods. His early years were spent at Coddington rectory with his siblings Mary, Charles, and Arthur; family wealth ensured a comfortable upbringing. His parents were evangelical Christians, followers of Pearsall Smith and 'the Way of Holiness'. In later life Curtis came to question the literalness of their biblical beliefs, but he inherited their evangelical fervour and their conviction that 'the distinctions... between religion and politics... are false' (May, 62). 
Curtis was educated at the Wells House, Malvern Wells, and Haileybury College. He was not noted as a particularly gifted student. In 1891 he entered New College, Oxford; he obtained third classes in classical honour moderations in 1892 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1894. He left Oxford with little idea of what career he wished to follow, but with a circle of friends who were to remain devoted to him for the rest of their lives. 
While an undergraduate, Curtis had developed an interest in the 'social question', reading F. D. Maurice and spending two vacations trudging the roads disguised as a tramp in order to gain firsthand experience of the working of the poor law. On leaving Oxford, he worked for three years for the Haileybury Guild, managing a boy's club in the East End. Through this work he met and was much influenced by Octavia Hill and Canon Barnett. A recommendation from the latter secured Curtis's appointment in 1897 as part-time secretary to Leonard Courtney. Curtis combined devilling for Courtney with studying law. He was eventually called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1902. Meanwhile, on Courtney's recommendation, he gained brief but valuable experience in municipal affairs as private secretary to Lord Welby, vice-chairman of the London county council, in 1899. 
On the outbreak of the South African War in October 1899, Curtis's brother Arthur, a captain in the Royal Artillery, was among those who were swiftly besieged at Ladysmith. Curtis himself enlisted in December 1899, with his friends Max Balfour and Lionel Hichens, in the cyclists' section of the City Imperial Volunteers. For the next six months the three companions performed a variety of tasks, from carrying dispatches to commandeering cattle, but only once came under enemy fire. Curtis's letters home -- published in 1951 as 'With Milner in South Africa' -- testify to his boyish sense of adventure, but also to his respect for his Boer opponents. He was discharged following the capture of Pretoria, in June 1900, and returned home to administer the estate of his brother Arthur, who had died of typhoid three days after the relief of Ladysmith. 
Curtis returned to South Africa in October 1900, determined to play a part in the reconstruction of the war-torn colonies. Through a combination of perseverance, luck, and Oxford connections, he obtained an interview with Sir Alfred Milner, who agreed to take him on his staff as assistant imperial secretary. One of his tasks was to draw up a plan for the new Johannesburg municipality, and in April 1901 he was appointed acting town clerk. The appointment of someone so young and inexperienced was widely criticized, but over the next two years Curtis's hard work and organizing ability won him the admiration of many former critics. The apprehension that he would serve the interests of the wealthy mine owners was soon confounded: indeed, it was largely through Curtis's persistence that the boundaries of the new municipality were drawn to include the mines. Nevertheless, Curtis's self-assurance often created friction. At one point the 'Transvaal Critic' described him as 'a malapert young gentleman sitting on the necks of the Town Council as he dictates to the universe' (Lavin, 'From Empire to International Commonwealth', 52). 
Curtis was promoted assistant colonial secretary of the Transvaal, with responsibility for municipal affairs, in February 1903. As in Johannesburg, he had to create a system of municipal government more or less from scratch. Again, his efficiency won him many admirers, while his abrasive personality caused problems. In October 1905 he was given responsibility also for 'Asiatic' affairs. Convinced that unlimited Indian immigration would mean the end of a 'white' South Africa, he pressed for a system of registration and fingerprinting designed to exclude further immigrants. Curtis's proposals brought him into conflict with the Indian community, led by Mahatma Gandhi, but they were largely embodied in the elected Transvaal assembly's first piece of legislation, the Asiatic amendment ordinance of 1907. By then, however, he was no longer a member of the Transvaal civil service, having resigned in September 1906 in anticipation of self-government, and following a dispute over departmental responsibilities. 
Curtis was only one of a number of young Oxford graduates whom Milner had recruited to work in the administration of the new colonies. Sir William Marriott described them, caustically, as 'Milner's Kindergarten' ['see also 'Milner's Kindergarten]. The name stuck, and was adopted by the members of the group themselves. The Kindergarten became an unusually tightly knit group of friends, drawn together by background and education, and united by shared values and a common veneration for Lord Milner. In South Africa they lived and holidayed together, and many evenings were spent in earnest discussion of political and social problems. Besides Curtis, the Kindergarten included his New College friends -- for whom he had found employment with the Johannesburg town council -- John Dove, Richard Feetham, and Lionel Hichens; other members included Robert Brand, George Craik, Patrick Duncan, William Marris, J. F. (Peter) Perry, Geoffrey Robinson (later Dawson), and Hugh Wyndham. After 1905 they were joined by Philip Kerr, and, following Milner's replacement by Lord Selborne, Dougal Malcolm. The Kindergarten bond was a powerful one, and endured long after the majority of the group had left South Africa. 
Milner's long-term aim in South Africa was to unite the various colonies as a loyal dominion under the British flag. The failure of his schemes to attract British settlers, and what he saw as the premature grant of self-government to the former republics, led him to be pessimistic after his retirement. The Kindergarten, by contrast, saw the unification of South Africa as the key to economic prosperity (and therefore British immigration), but also to that reconciliation between British and Afrikaners which was essential for future imperial loyalty. 'I have always told you that I am much more of a pro-Boer than you', Curtis wrote to Milner (Lavin, 'From Empire to International Commonwealth', 77). Milner was persuaded to secure funds for the Kindergarten from the Rhodes Trust (set up under the terms of Cecil Rhodes's will), and Curtis -- by now acknowledged as 'the Prophet' of the group -- was set to work on a memorandum setting out the case for unification. With minor amendments by Selborne, and after a wrangle between the latter and the Colonial Office, the memorandum was published on Selborne's authority (and supposedly in response to a request from the Cape government, orchestrated by Curtis) in July 1907. 
The publication of the Selborne memorandum was the trigger for a rapid movement towards the unification of South Africa. The Kindergarten helped the movement in a variety of ways. Curtis, now a nominated member of the Transvaal upper house, organized closer union societies throughout the four colonies, and engaged in dextrous backroom persuasion. Kerr edited 'The State', the organ of the movement. Brand and Duncan advised the Transvaal delegation to the National Convention. By June 1909 a constitution had been agreed, and Curtis returned to England to lobby for its passage unamended through the British parliament. In August parliament passed the 'South Africa Act', and on 31 May 1910 the Union of South Africa was established. Selborne wrote to Curtis that 'the main credit for this work must always be yours' (May, 35). Ignoring the largely independent role of local politicians, Curtis also believed that the unification of South Africa was the direct outcome of the persuasive power of the Selborne memorandum, reinforced by the activities of the closer union societies. 
As early as 1907, Curtis wrote to Selborne that South Africa was a 'microcosm' of the British empire and that, once unification was accomplished, the Kindergarten might 'begin some work of the same kind in respect of Imperial Relations' (Lavin, 'Lionel Curtis and the idea of the commonwealth', 99). During the summer of 1909 Milner organized a series of meetings for Curtis with potential sponsors and collaborators, and sufficient agreement was reached to hold the first meeting of the Round Table at Plas Newydd, Lord Anglesey's estate in Anglesey, over the weekend of 4-5 September 1909. Among those present, besides Milner and the available Kindergarten, were lords Howick, Lovat, and Wolmer, and F. S. Oliver. The Round Table was soon joined by Leo Amery, Lord Robert Cecil, Reginald Coupland, Edward Grigg, and Alfred Zimmern, but the core of the group remained, until the Second World War, the Kindergarten. 
The aim of the Round Table was deceptively simple: to ensure the permanence of the British empire by reconstructing it as a federation representative of all its self-governing parts. Curtis depicted this as the logical outcome of the movement towards self-government in the dominions, and the only alternative to disruption and independence. The Plas Newydd meeting endorsed Curtis's strategy for achieving the aim (based on the Kindergarten's experience in South Africa) and agreed to appoint him general secretary of the Round Table and Philip Kerr editor of its eponymous journal, at salaries of $1000 each. Curtis was in fact to remain employed by the Round Table, except for a brief period when he was employed by the Colonial Office, until 1931, when he came into a substantial inheritance from his mother's side. 
The two Round Table employees, together with William Marris, set out on a tour of Canada immediately, in September 1909. They returned with similar impressions, but radically different conclusions: Kerr believed that any attempt to stampede Canada into imperial federation would be counter-productive, whereas Curtis believed that time was of the essence. This was only the first of numerous disagreements within the Round Table, during which Curtis's colleagues attempted to restrain his ardour. Undeterred, he set out on a tour of the dominions -- South Africa, New Zealand, Australia, then back via Canada -- writing up his arguments as the first of a series of 'Round Table Studies', and forming branches in all the major centres of population. Through high-level contacts and his own remarkable persuasive skills, Curtis was able to recruit members from among the leading figures in each dominion. Nevertheless, his activities aroused considerable suspicion, which was not helped by his habit of masquerading as a South African, and his lack of candour concerning the extent to which the branches were intended to be propaganda, and not merely study, groups. The movement suffered an early setback at the Imperial Conference of 1911, when, having read Curtis's memorandum, the prime minister of New Zealand, Sir Joseph Ward, made an impassioned but confused plea for imperial reconstruction, only to be savaged by his prime ministerial colleagues. 
Curtis's 'Round Table Studies' failed to convince many of his fellow Round Tablers either in the dominions or in the London group. Particular sticking points were his insistence that any imperial government should have the power of direct taxation, and that India and the dependencies should come under the control of the dominions as well as of Britain. His elaboration of the 'principle of the Commonwealth' -- the idea that the empire existed in order to promote self-government, in the dependencies as well as the dominions -- only made matters worse. Various of his colleagues described the principle as illogical, unhistorical, dangerous, and irrelevant to the movement's fundamental aim. 
Curtis's reaction to such criticism was not to modify his ideas, but to embark on an even more ambitious programme of 'studies'. His year as Beit lecturer in colonial history at Oxford, in 1912-13 -- which prompted the Beit professor, H. E. Egerton, to complain that he felt like a country rector with the prophet Isaiah as his curate -- gave Curtis the opportunity to add academic substance to his arguments. Thereafter, he set to work on a three-volume study of the imperial problem, tackling, respectively, its history, its contemporary manifestations, and its possible solutions; he also worked on a shorter volume, designed for popular consumption. 
By the outbreak of the First World War, Curtis had still to finish any of his projected volumes. The arguments within the Round Table remained unresolved, and were exacerbated by the circumstances of the war. Many believed that the dominions' war efforts made a reconstruction of the empire unnecessary; Curtis, by contrast, argued that unity would have prevented -- and, without institutional change, was unlikely to survive -- the war. The original plan was for Curtis to publish his volumes on behalf of all the Round Table groups, and as the fruit of their collective research. This proved impossible, but Curtis was authorized to publish, under his own name, 'The Commonwealth of Nations, Part One' (his historical examination of the empire and of the principle of self-government) and 'The Problem of the Commonwealth' (the one-volume argument for a federation of the empire), both in 1916. 
The publication of Curtis's books aroused considerable interest in the press. Few public figures were willing to endorse his conclusions, but many admitted the force and cogency of his arguments. Curtis immediately set out on a tour of the dominions, to arrange for local publication and stimulate debate. His hopes that the Round Table groups would convert themselves into propagandist organs were soon disappointed: the groups (particularly in Canada) showed themselves anxious to distance themselves from his views. Even in England, the majority of his colleagues tempered sympathy with scepticism. Eventually they committed what for Curtis was the heresy of admitting co-operation to be a more fruitful line of advance than federation, at the time of the 1917 imperial war cabinet and conference. By then, however, Curtis's interest had shifted elsewhere. 
Curtis arrived in India in November 1916 to promote his books and attempt to form Round Table groups there. He ended up staying until February 1918, unable to resist embroiling himself in the debate on the constitutional future of the country. His interest in India had first been aroused by Marris, and in 1912 and 1915 he had taken part in discussions with a group of experts collected by the Round Table, to find ways of meeting Indian demands for self-government and equality of status within the empire without endangering stability or British interests. In 1915 he suggested the system which he later called 'diarchy', whereby responsibility for a range of subjects could gradually be transferred from a British-controlled provincial administration to a parallel, Indian-controlled one -- or, if necessary, back again. He persuaded Indian civil servant Sir Frederick William Duke to draw up a scheme for Bengal, and sent copies to the viceroy and the India Office. When he arrived in India, therefore, he came already armed with a constitutional blueprint. 
Curtis expounded the case for 'diarchy' in a series of 'Letters to the People of India' and 'Indian Studies' in 1917, and scored a notable success by persuading a group of Europeans and Indians from Bengal to sign a widely publicized 'Joint Address'. Following Edwin Montagu's declaration of August 1917 and his arrival in India in November, Curtis met the secretary of state on numerous occasions, and lobbied vigorously for the adoption of his scheme, with considerable success. Back home, he brought his influence to bear on the joint select committee charged with examining Montagu's report, driving its chairman, Lord Selborne, at times to distraction. The resultant 'Government of India Act' of 1919 (the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms) differed in several respects from Curtis's original proposal but incorporated the most important element of his scheme. Lord Ampthill commented in the House of Lords that, 'but for the chance visit to India of a globe-trotting doctrinaire with a positive mania for constitution-mongering, nobody in the world would ever have thought of so peculiar a notion as that of 'Dyarchy'' (Lavin, 'From Empire to International Commonwealth', 135). 
Curtis's interest in the question of trusteeship led him to publish an influential article in the 'Round Table' of December 1918, setting out the case for a system of mandates under a League of Nations, and advocating Anglo-American co-operation as the basis for post-war international stability. On the strength of this he was appointed a member of Cecil's League of Nations section at the Paris peace conference. His contribution to the conference at an official level was perhaps less significant than his unofficial work promoting the idea of an Anglo-American institute of international relations, to guide official thinking after the war. This resulted, in 1919, in the founding of the Institute (later the Royal Institute) of International Affairs in London and, slightly later, of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. Curtis was acknowledged as the 'father' of the British Institute (Gathorne-Hardy, 1): it was he who organized the first meetings, secured funds from Sir Abe Bailey and others, and persuaded Colonel R. W. Leonard to purchase 10 St James's Square (Chatham House) as its permanent home. He resigned as secretary of the institute in 1930, to prevent it being seen as a 'one-man show' (May, 241), but he remained a councillor and a member of the endowment committee. In 1944 he was honoured by being made a president of the institute. 
In June 1921 the 'Round Table' published another influential article, written by Curtis and John Dove after a visit to Dublin, which advocated ending the Anglo-Irish conflict by giving the fullest measure of dominion self-government to the south. This resulted in Curtis's appointment as second secretary (and in effect constitutional adviser) to the British delegation at the Anglo-Irish treaty talks of October to December 1921, and as adviser to the colonial secretary on Irish affairs until October 1924. In the latter capacity he worked to ensure the observance of the treaty obligations on both sides, and was instrumental in securing the appointment of an Irish boundary commission, in accordance with the terms of the treaty, and with his friend Richard Feetham as chairman, in May 1924. 
Meanwhile, on 16 April 1920 Curtis had married his former secretary, Gladys Edna (died 1965), known as 'Pat', the youngest of ten daughters of Prebendary Percy Richard Scott, of Tiverton. In June 1924 she lost a child in late pregnancy, in circumstances which left her unable to conceive again. She was a devoted wife, who endured with fortitude Curtis's alternations of enthusiasm and neglect. 
In May 1921 Curtis was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, where he joined many Kindergarten and Round Table colleagues, and was one of few fellows to earn the friendship of T. E. Lawrence. He and Pat moved to Hales Croft, Kidlington, a house converted for them by Herbert Baker, which was to be their home until his death. After resigning from the Colonial Office, he engaged with enthusiasm in university politics and fund-raising. He was largely responsible for the founding of the Oxford Society in 1930, and for securing the gift of the Wytham Abbey estate to the university. He was also involved, with Reginald Coupland, Kerr, and others, in unsuccessful attempts to found an Oxford school of government or of African studies. His interest in environmental questions found expression in short-lived but intense campaigns against sky-writing and ribbon development. 
Through Chatham House, Curtis was closely involved with the organization of a series of unofficial Commonwealth relations conferences, and with the Institute of Pacific Relations. His interest in the Far East (which he regarded as the most probable storm centre of future conflict, and therefore the testing ground of international and imperial co-operation) resulted in his acting as adviser to the municipal council of the Shanghai international settlement in 1929-30, and publishing 'The Capital Question of China' in 1932. In 1935 he unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the British government to hand over control of its South African protectorates to South Africa, arguing that only by having responsibility for all the consequences of their 'native' policy would South Africans come round to a more liberal view. He published a longer version of his controversy with Margery Perham in 'The Times' as 'The Protectorates of South Africa' (1935), gallantly allowing Perham the last word. His interest in Africa also resulted in his securing funds from the Carnegie Foundation for an 'African Survey', which he persuaded Lord Hailey (now a member of the Round Table) to write. 
Curtis's main work between the wars was writing a new series of 'Round Table studies', eventually published as 'Civitas Dei' (3 vols., 1934-7). This was a long and at times rambling discourse on the idea of commonwealth from the time of Aristotle onwards. His assertion that he saw the hand of God in the British empire was derided by his more sceptical colleagues (who once again refused Curtis's work the Round Table imprimatur), but it was well received, especially in liberal Anglican circles. 
Curtis's empire federalism remained undimmed after its decisive rejection by the Imperial Conference in 1921, but it gradually became submerged in a vision of an international commonwealth, based on a union of the Western democracies and their empires. With the failure of appeasement (which he warily criticized) ['see 'Cliveden set], federalism regained its currency, and Curtis once again engaged in federalist activism, promoting Clarence Streit's book 'Union Now' and joining Lord Beveridge and others in sponsoring federal union. His attempts to convert the latter from what he considered its excessively Eurocentric orientation led to frequent internal conflict, and eventually to Curtis's leaving the group. 
Curtis spent the majority of the Second World War in Oxford, co-ordinating the work of Chatham House's foreign research and press service (at Balliol College), and organizing servicemen's league groups. Ostensibly as the outcome of the latter, he published a series of pamphlets advocating immediate federation between the British Commonwealth, the United States, and the surviving Western democracies. The Round Table's rejection of his creed embittered him, but with funding from Sir Malcolm Stewart and others he maintained his output of pamphlets after the war. Notably in 'The Master-Key to Peace' (1947) and 'The Open Road to Freedom' (1950), he argued that atomic power and the cold war had brought a federation of the Western democracies within the realm of practicable possibilities. He joined the executive committee of United Europe in 1947, and attended the Hague conference in 1948, where he argued for a wider framework of federation which would include the British Commonwealth and the United States. His work for international peace was recognized by his nomination for the Nobel peace prize in 1947; in 1949, the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of Chatham House, he was made a Companion of Honour. 
Curtis died at his home in Kidlington on 24 November 1955, and was buried in the chapel of All Souls College on 26 November. Tributes from around the world testified to the enormous range of his influence. He was not an original thinker, but he was a persuasive writer and even more persuasive in person. As Lord Salter later recalled, 'neither I nor others... often succeeded' in 'resisting what Lionel Curtis wished [us] to do' (Salter, 239). His influence was at its height in the years before, during, and immediately after the First World War, largely as a result of his contacts through the Kindergarten and Round Table. In later years he ploughed a more lonely furrow, and came almost to relish his image as a prophet scorned. 


@@@@@


doc= 32679


Curtis, William Edward (1889-1969), experimental physicist, was born on 23 October 1889 at Islington, London, the younger child and only son of Charles Curtis, a gilder, originally of Horsham in Sussex, and his wife, Emily Sarah Haward, from Ipswich. He was outstanding at school (Owen's, Islington), and at Imperial College, London, where he graduated with a first-class degree in physics in 1910. He was awarded the governor's scholarship in 1908 and 1909 and shared the Tyndall prize in 1908. Later he became the first student ever to take the new London University honours degree in astronomy, obtaining a first. He was appointed to a college demonstratorship at Imperial and his research was supervised by Alfred Fowler. 
Fowler introduced Curtis to some of the major problems in spectroscopy, particularly to the observation that certain stellar spectra have lines with wavelengths close to some of the Balmer lines of hydrogen and yet are apparently emitted by helium. Niels Bohr solved this problem in 1913 as an extension to his theory of the hydrogen atom, when he showed that these lines are due to ionized helium; contemporaneous experimental work by Fowler and Curtis proved that the lines are definitely due to helium and not to a new form of hydrogen as certain scientists had assumed. In the course of this work Curtis discovered a unique band spectrum, emitted by excited helium, which was to become his main research interest, though temporarily interrupted by the First World War. 
At the outbreak of war Curtis was in Riga waiting to go to Kiev to observe a solar eclipse. The expedition was called off and Curtis returned to England by a devious route and enlisted as a sapper in the Royal Naval division. After initial training he was sent to Gallipoli where he served during the whole campaign, being twice mentioned in dispatches. For the rest of the war he was an instructor in the wireless training centre at Malvern. 
In 1918 Curtis married (Adeline Mary) Grace, the only daughter of Charles Mitchell, of the War Office; they had two children, a son, who became a physicist, and a daughter, who became a doctor and the wife of Professor R. L. Plackett. On demobilization Curtis returned to Imperial College and to his study of spectra. From the college he moved in 1919 to a lectureship at the University of Sheffield, then to a readership at King's College, London, and finally to a professorship at Armstrong College at Newcastle upon Tyne in the University of Durham. In each of these posts he made his mark, gradually blossoming on the research side into a world specialist on band spectra and on the teaching side into a gifted lecturer noted for his skill in demonstration. He published many scientific papers but perhaps the most important were those in the decade 1922-32 on the band spectrum of the helium molecule, for which accurate wavelength measurements could be made and the theoretical predictions of the new quantum mechanics tested with great precision. For his contributions to spectroscopy he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1934. 
Curtis took up his professorship at Newcastle upon Tyne in 1926 and for more than forty years took a leading part in the educational life of Armstrong College, the university, and the city. As the head of the physics department he built up strong research schools in spectroscopy and acoustics. Later a school of theoretical physics was created. In 1931 a serious constitutional upheaval began involving Armstrong College and the Medical College and Curtis, as a senior science professor, reluctantly, but inevitably, became much involved. The outcome was a royal commission and the creation of one large college named King's College under a rector. 
Curtis's contributions to the Second World War were varied. After chairmanship of the Durham University recruiting board he moved in 1940 to Leamington Spa as director of camouflage and decoy, and when air attacks diminished became successively a scientific adviser at the Ministry of Home Security, with Solly Zuckerman and J. D. Bernal, and then, in 1943, superintendent of applied explosives at Fort Halstead. 
On returning to Newcastle, Curtis became more and more involved in college and public affairs. He was sub-rector of King's for three years (1947-50), president of the Institute of Physics (1950-52), and senior adviser in civil defence for the north-eastern region. For his work for civil defence he was appointed CBE in 1967, and in 1969 the University of Newcastle named its largest theatre the Curtis Auditorium. 
Curtis retired in 1955 but continued to be very active, especially in lectures whose purpose was to stimulate interest in science in young people by showing demonstrations for which school facilities were inadequate. They succeeded admirably and drew huge audiences for many years. Outside his professional life he was impressive as a man of many parts. He had boundless physical energy and played many games well, especially cricket. He liked music and was a modest performer. He died at Newcastle upon Tyne on 6 May 1969. 
G. D. Rochester', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32680


Curzon, George Nathaniel, Marquess Curzon of Kedleston (1859-1925), politician, traveller, and viceroy of India, was born on 11 January 1859 at Kedleston Hall, Derbyshire, the second of the eleven children of the Revd Alfred Nathaniel Holden Curzon, fourth Baron Scarsdale (1831-1916), rector of Kedleston, and his wife, Blanche (1837-1875), daughter of Joseph Pocklington Senhouse of Netherhall in Cumberland. His family was of Norman ancestry and had lived on the same site since the twelfth century. In 1759 Sir Nathaniel Curzon, later first Baron Scarsdale, demolished the existing house at Kedleston and commissioned Robert Adam to build him a great country house in the Palladian style. His descendant, George Nathaniel, was always conscious, however, that the family home was more distinguished than the family which inhabited it, and from an early age he was determined to prove himself a fitting master for Kedleston. In the closing words of the epitaph he composed for himself, 'he sought to serve his country and add honour to an ancient name'. 
Curzon's mother, worn out by childbirth, died in 1875 at the age of thirty-seven; her husband survived her for forty-one years. Neither parent, however, exerted a major influence on the life of George Nathaniel. Scarsdale was an austere and unindulgent father who believed in the long-held family tradition that landowners should stay on their land and not go 'roaming about all over the world'. He thus had little sympathy for those travels across Asia between 1887 and 1895 which made his son the most travelled man who ever sat in a British cabinet. A more decisive presence in Curzon's childhood was that of his brutal governess, Ellen Mary Paraman, whose tyranny in the nursery stimulated his combative qualities and encouraged the obsessional side of his nature. 
Curzon was a good-looking and talented child. Unlike his siblings, who had inherited their father's long narrow face, he had a large and spherical head, while his pink cheeks, high forehead, and hazel eyes gave him an almost cherubic appearance. At the age of ten he was removed from the daily influence of his governess and sent to Wixenford, a preparatory school in Wokingham, where he embarked on a period of prize-winning academic achievement that lasted for fifteen years. This competitiveness, which was alien to the traditions of his family and which he retained all his life, was stimulated by the assistant master, Archibald Dunbar, who like Miss Paraman was both a good teacher and a savage disciplinarian. There can be little doubt that the two of them exercised a powerful influence for good and bad on the character of their charge. 
At Eton College, where he was a pupil from 1872 to 1878, Curzon was a controversial figure who was liked and disliked with equal intensity by large numbers of masters and other boys. This strange talent for both attraction and repulsion stayed with him all his life: few people ever felt neutral about him. His housemaster at Eton, the Revd C. Wolley Dod, was a poor and unimaginative teacher who frequently complained to Lord Scarsdale about his pupil's stubbornness and insubordination. His principal grievance was Curzon's attachment to another housemaster, Oscar Browning, an opponent of the school's sporting ethos who helped to foster the intellectual interests of the brightest pupils. Regarding Curzon as 'one of the most brilliantly gifted boys' he had ever come across, Browning was responsible for encouraging his passion for art and history. His was the third and most beneficial of the major educational influences on the boy's life. 
The young Curzon was motivated by a 'passionate resolve to be at the head of the class' and at Eton he achieved almost as much as a non-athlete is capable of achieving. He won a great many academic prizes and was awarded a record number of distinctions for outstanding work. He was also captain of the oppidans, a member of Pop, and president of the literary society, which had been founded by Browning. At 'Speeches' on 4 June and at the meetings of the literary society, he acquired that love of rhetoric, that fondness for sonorous and elaborate language which he never lost. 
In October 1878 Curzon went up to Oxford to read for a classical degree at Balliol College, which, under the dynamic mastership of Benjamin Jowett, was enjoying its first period as a kindergarten for aspiring politicians and diplomats. Shortly beforehand he suffered acute pains for the first time from that curvature of the spine which tormented him for the rest of his life. Although his doctor allowed him to go to university only on condition he rested and wore a steel appliance to support his spine, Curzon went to Oxford in a confident mood, intent on 'laying the foundations and preparing for the superstructure of his career'. He soon became the leading tory undergraduate of his day, his views reflecting Disraeli's creed of paternalism with social reform, national honour with the mandatory vision of empire. But then, as later, he was less interested in political ideas than in forms of oratory, in statesmanship, and in the practice of government. 
As president of the Oxford Union and secretary of the Canning Club, Curzon struck his Oxford contemporaries as a man destined for a major political career. Most people were impressed by his wit, his eloquence, and his hard work, but others, including Jowett, found him too verbose and self-assured. Many friends of both sexes considered him the best of company, but more distant acquaintances discerned an air of superiority that inspired those lines which journalists quoted against him for the rest of his life: '
My name is George Nathaniel Curzon, 

I am a most superior person. 

My cheek is pink, my hair is sleek, 

I dine at Blenheim once a week. 

' Curzon believed the first couplet, published in the 'Masque of Balliol', to have been written by his friend Cecil Spring-Rice, though the real author seems to have been J. W. Mackail; the second couplet probably was by Spring-Rice. 
At the end of his fourth year Curzon narrowly failed to add a first in Greats to the first he had achieved in moderations two years earlier. He was humiliated by the result and allegedly threatened to devote the rest of his life 'to showing the examiners that they had made a mistake'. Travelling with friends to the eastern Mediterranean in the winter of 1882-3, he spent his spare time writing an essay on the emperor Justinian which won the Lothian history prize at Oxford. On his return he studied hard for a prize fellowship at All Souls College, which he gained in November 1883, and the following year he won the Arnold essay prize with a long work on Sir Thomas More. 
For a short period after Oxford, Curzon managed to give the impression he was leading the life of a handsome dilettante, embarking on a series of risky love affairs (most notably with Lady Grosvenor) and enjoying a rich social life in London and the great country houses. Like most of his close friends, he belonged to that mildly exotic aristocratic circle later known as the Souls; he was also an assiduous and talented member of Wilfrid Scawen Blunt's Crabbet Club, where he once won the annual poetry competition. But his passionate and romantic nature did not prevent him from serving his political apprenticeship, first in the erratic shadow of Lord Randolph Churchill and then under the more stable aegis of the marquess of Salisbury, for whom he briefly worked as an unpaid private secretary during the Conservative government of 1885-6. At the same time he was looking for a suitable parliamentary constituency. In 1885 he stood for South Derbyshire, a county which in the past had automatically sent his undistinguished ancestors to Westminster, and was easily defeated. But the following year he was selected for Southport, which was narrowly held by the Liberals, and at the general election of June 1886 he gained it with a majority of 461. 
Curzon's maiden speech, which was chiefly an attack on home rule and Irish nationalism, was regarded in much the same way as his oratory at the Oxford Union: brilliant and eloquent but also presumptuous and rather too self-assured. Subsequent performances in the Commons, often dealing with Ireland or reform of the House of Lords (which he supported), received similar verdicts; despite his oratorical talents, he showed early on that he did not have a good parliamentary manner. Although commentators compared him to Lord Randolph Churchill, Curzon chose to make his name not as a firebrand orator from the back benches but as an expert on Asia, a continent that had fascinated him since hearing a lecture by Sir James Stephen at Eton, which had infected him with a passion for the mystery of the East and for Britain's dominion of India. 
The period of Curzon's great travels began in August 1887 with a journey round the world followed by a visit to Russia and central Asia in 1888-9, a long tour of Persia in 1889-90, an expedition to the Far East in 1892, and a daring foray through the Pamir to Afghanistan in 1894. A bold and compulsive traveller, fascinated by oriental life and geography, he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society for his exploration of the source of the Oxus. Yet the main purpose of his journeys was political: they formed part of a vast and comprehensive project to study the problems of Asia and their implications for British India. At the same time they reinforced his pride in his nation and her imperial mission. 
During his travels Curzon sent home articles for 'The Times' and other newspapers, and on his return he wrote 'Russia in Central Asia in 1889' (1889), the two massive volumes of 'Persia and the Persian Question' (1892), and 'Problems of the Far East' (1894). Each of these was highly regarded and contributed to his reputation as the country's most knowledgeable politician on Asiatic affairs. In November 1891 the prime minister recognized the fact by appointing him under-secretary for India, a fitting post for a young man who was about to dedicate his Persian book to 'the officials, civil and military in India, whose hands uphold the noblest fabric yet reared by the genius of a conquering nation'. Although Curzon held the post only until the following July, when the Conservatives left office, his reputation was enhanced by his handling of the 'India Councils Bill' (1892). Critics might agree with Henry Labouchere, the Liberal MP, who compared Curzon's performance at the dispatch box to that of 'a divinity addressing black beetles', but the young under-secretary was widely regarded as 'the coming man' on the Conservative benches, a worthy antagonist of those Balliol-schooled Liberals, H. H. Asquith and Sir Edward Grey. 
On his return from Afghanistan at the beginning of 1895, Curzon announced his engagement to Mary Victoria (1870-1906) ['see 'Curzon, Mary Victoria], daughter of Levi Zeigler Leiter, a Chicago millionaire and philanthropist. A musical girl of much charm and beauty, she had met the young English politician in 1890 and had quickly fallen in love with him. Curzon's response had been more lukewarm, probably because he was involved with other women at the time. But in March 1893, at the end of a journey round the world, he proposed to her in Paris; on her acceptance he insisted on keeping their engagement secret for two years while he completed his 'scheme of Asiatic travel' by means of a perilous excursion into Afghanistan and the Pamir. Throughout his courtship Curzon's behaviour was uncharacteristically cold and unromantic, and his engagement was probably an act of impetuosity. Nevertheless, the marriage (on 23 April 1895) turned out to be a firm and happy one which produced three daughters, (Mary) Irene Curzon (1896-1966), Cynthia ['see 'Mosley, Cynthia Blanche (1898-1933)], and Alexandra Naldera. 
When the Conservatives returned to office in June 1895, Curzon was appointed a privy councillor and under-secretary of state at the Foreign Office. As Salisbury, who became foreign secretary as well as prime minister, was in the House of Lords, Curzon became the government's chief foreign policy spokesman in the Commons. In spite of his chief's secretive ways and reluctance to discuss matters with his deputy, he was successful in the role of presenting and defending the government's position. And although he chafed at his inability to influence policy towards Africa and the French empire, he sometimes had the satisfaction of seeing his views prevail in Asia. Convinced that withdrawal from Chitral on India's north-west frontier would lead to a Russian occupation of the area, in 1895 he managed to persuade the government to retain a British force there. He was equally successful three years later in convincing a reluctant cabinet that, following the German and Russian occupation of two Chinese ports, Britain's interests required acceptance of a Chinese offer to lease a third port in the area, Weihaiwei. 
Although Curzon could have expected to join the cabinet at the next reshuffle, he had decided several years earlier that, before aiming for the highest offices of state at home, he wanted to be viceroy of India. Accordingly, he wrote lengthy letters to Salisbury pointing out that he had been preparing himself for the post for many years and arguing that the Indian climate and conditions of work required a youthful and vigorous viceroy. The prime minister kept him waiting for a year but in 1898 recommended him to Queen Victoria as Lord Elgin's successor. A recurrence of his back troubles made it doubtful whether he could take up the post, but a specialist's over-optimistic forecast persuaded Salisbury to allow the appointment to stand. In September Curzon visited the queen at Balmoral and shortly afterwards (11 November 1898) received the title of Baron Curzon in the peerage of Ireland, a device which left him the option of returning to the House of Commons after his term of office. He and his family left Britain before Christmas and on 6 January 1899, a few days before his fortieth birthday, he was proclaimed viceroy in Calcutta's Government House, a magnificent building based on the plan of Kedleston. 
The viceroy's constitutional superior was Lord George Hamilton, the wise and gentle secretary of state for India, who was responsible to the cabinet and to parliament for the actions of the Indian government. But Curzon was as impatient of control from London as he was of inefficiency among his subordinates in India. He believed his duty was to be head not only of his council and the government but of all the departments as well. Bent on reforming every aspect of British rule in India, he began with the secretariats and the provincial governments, slashing his way through bureaucratic procedures and rapidly increasing the turnover of business. 'Efficiency of administration', he proclaimed, was 'a synonym for the contentment of the governed' (L. G. Fraser, 'India under Curzon and After', 1911, 214). In his pursuit of reform he acquired a reputation for trampling on the feelings of officials. But Hamilton, confronted with conflicting evidence about the viceroy's popularity, understood the cause: 'the strong, self-reliant men' recognized in Curzon a 'master mind', but the mediocrities feared and disliked him (Hamilton to Godley, 30 Aug 1901, BL OIOC, Kilbracken MS 102/6b). 
On his arrival in Bombay, Curzon announced that he had come to India 'to hold the scales even' between the different races and religions of the country, and later he could claim accurately that he had 'never wavered in a strict and inflexible justice between the two races'. He also insisted privately that his first duty was to the people of India and that he would rather resign than sacrifice their interests. But justice and good government for the people did not mean in Curzon's view that they should be allowed to participate at a senior level in either process. Like many of his predecessors, he believed that their interests were best served by their traditional rulers, the British and the native princes. He failed to see that the Indian National Congress, founded in 1885, was producing a new nationalist elite, and he dismissed it as a small, noisy, middle-class movement, which he refused to consider as a future partner in the administration of India. 
Although Congress resented Curzon's refusal to take it seriously, its leaders praised both his early reforms and his insistence on equal justice. They particularly applauded his tough stand on indiscipline in the army. After incidents resulting in both cases in the death of an Indian, he insisted on collective punishment for two regiments, the west Kent and the 9th lancers, which had tried to hush up the crimes of their soldiers. This action was strongly resented by the army and its supporters in Britain. As the foreign editor of 'The Times', Valentine Chirol, observed to a later viceroy, 'no one had ever challenged unpopularity among his own people so fearlessly as [Curzon] did in his endeavours... to secure even justice for Indians against Europeans' (Chirol to Hardinge, 12 May 1915, CUL, Hardinge MSS). 
Curzon's first year and a half in India were overshadowed by famine and plague. He twice visited the stricken areas of western India and handled the crisis with an energy and efficiency that greatly reduced the degree of suffering. By the spring of 1900, 5 million people were receiving relief, but the mortality rate had only marginally increased. The crisis stimulated the viceroy's determination to extend the irrigated area of the subcontinent, which he did, especially in the semi-desert wastelands of the Punjab. Among his notable agricultural reforms were the 'Co-operative Credit Societies Act' (1904), which was the first attempt to solve the problem of peasant indebtedness, and the 'Punjab Land Alienation Act' (1905), which prevented moneylenders from taking a holding in settlement of debt. 
The viceroy's reforms encompassed every aspect of Indian life from the police and the railways to education and conservation. After presiding over an educational conference in Simla in 1901, he set up a commission to visit the universities of India and produce a report that would form the basis of new legislation. The conclusions of the report were incorporated in the 'Universities Act' of 1904, a measure much criticized by Indian nationalists at the time but one which was later recognized as an important reform of the university system. The same year saw the passing of the 'Ancient Monuments Bill', perhaps the most far-sighted of Curzon's reforms. He created a directorate-general of archaeology, multiplied the restoration budget by a factor of eight, and personally oversaw repairs to monuments all over India. His restoration of the Taj Mahal and the other monuments of Agra gave him much satisfaction. 'If I had done nothing else in India', he told his wife, 'I have written my name here, and the letters are a living joy' (4 April 1905, Lady Alexandra Metcalfe MSS, priv. coll.). 
The viceroy's administrative reforms included the creation of the North-West Frontier province, which was detached from the Punjab, a satisfactory settlement of the Berar question with the nizam of Hyderabad, and the controversial partition of Bengal, a measure that was revoked, to Curzon's fury, by the British government in 1911. In foreign affairs he was assertive, urging the establishment of a British protectorate of Kuwait and successfully preventing the growth of French influence in Muscat. But the home government, perturbed by these ambitions, resisted his demands for a more vigorous Persian policy. It was not until 1902 that the foreign secretary, Lord Lansdowne, accepted Curzon's advice by warning Russia not to interfere in southern Persia. The following year Lansdowne further pleased the viceroy by declaring that Britain would resist the establishment of a naval base by any foreign power in the Persian Gulf. But Curzon was less successful in his efforts to persuade London to take a firmer line with the amir of Afghanistan and the Dalai Lama in Tibet. 
In January 1903 a vast durbar was held in Delhi to celebrate the accession of King Edward VII. Planned entirely by the viceroy, this splendiferous occasion has often been seen as the apogee of the British empire in India. It was also something of a turning point in the viceroyalty. Despite occasional arguments, the relationship between viceroy and secretary of state had been a successful one for over four years; indeed, Curzon recognized that Hamilton had been a wise counsellor and an important ally in the programme of reforms. But in September 1903 Arthur Balfour, who had succeeded Lord Salisbury as prime minister, replaced Hamilton with St John Brodrick, the viceroy's oldest friend. This change, together with the appointment of Lord Kitchener as commander-in-chief in India, proved disastrous for Curzon. Had he returned to England at the end of his five-year term, neither would have caused him much trouble. But he was tempted to stay on and see his reforms in action. His wife and friends repeatedly urged him to return after five years and prepare to lead the Conservatives after Balfour's retirement. But adamant that his duty lay in India, he persuaded the prime minister to grant him a second shorter term from 1904. Balfour later regarded his assent as one of the greatest mistakes of his premiership. 
In January 1904 Lady Curzon, who was expecting their third child, sailed with her daughters to England. But her husband decided to remain in India for the legislative season in Calcutta. One of his principal occupations was the study of the Bengal question. The successful settlement of the Berar problem had prompted him to examine the issue of provincial boundaries, and he had concluded that Bengal, with a population almost double that of Britain, would be governed more efficiently if it was divided in two. The scheme was finally sanctioned by Brodrick in June 1905, and the new province of East Bengal and Assam, which had a Muslim majority, was inaugurated. This policy, which Bengali Hindus regarded as an attempt to weaken Congress, lost the viceroy his popularity with that nationalist elite that had hitherto applauded his reforms and his stand on equality of justice between the races. 
Curzon sailed for England at the end of April, leaving Lord Ampthill as viceroy until his return. He was appointed lord warden of the Cinque Ports, an honorary post, and on arrival embarked with enthusiasm on the restoration of Walmer Castle, which came with the position. This enthusiasm was quickly dissipated by his wife's long and desperate illness at the end of the summer; for several weeks she hovered between life and death before eventually beginning a slow recovery. Meanwhile the home government had at last sanctioned Francis Younghusband's mission to Tibet, which Curzon had advocated as the only way of forcing the Tibetans to honour past agreements. But when Younghusband extracted a favourable treaty from the Tibetans, he was repudiated by Brodrick on the grounds that he had exceeded his instructions, an action which exacerbated the deteriorating relations between Curzon and his old friend. Their friendship soon foundered altogether over the future of the military department in India. 
The Indian army was administered by the commander-in-chief, who was its executive head, and the military member, a major-general on the viceroy's council responsible for transport, supplies, and other administrative matters. This division of responsibility had been accepted by Lord Roberts and all previous commanders-in-chief, who had recognized that the task of running the army required the labours of the two men and their respective departments. They had realized, moreover, that if the commander took the field in wartime, it was vital for the viceroy to have a second military adviser at hand. 
On taking over as commander-in-chief at the end of 1902, Kitchener told Curzon he wished to abolish the post of military member and add its responsibilities to his own. It was intolerable, he argued, that a subordinate military authority should be in a position either to criticize or to recommend the commander's proposals. After the viceroy expressed his opposition to the scheme, Kitchener embarked on a long and surreptitious campaign to win the support of influential circles in Britain. Through contacts in the press, secret telegrams, and a network of correspondents, he managed to convert many crucial figures -- notably the prime minister and the secretary of state for India -- to his view that the military department should disappear. Although suspicious that Kitchener was plotting behind his back, the viceroy remained unaware of the extent of the intrigue. 
While Curzon was on leave in England in 1904, Kitchener managed to induce the government in London to transfer the control of supply and transport from the military department to himself. Shortly afterwards he decided to resign on the grounds that even the reduced power of the department made his position 'impossible'. Although he was persuaded temporarily to withdraw his resignation, the home government was alarmed by the threat and anxious to accede to his demands. Weak and unpopular, the cabinet therefore warned Curzon through Brodrick that Kitchener's resignation 'would be regarded more anxiously at this moment than any other'. 
Although his wife remained ill in London, Curzon returned to India in December 1904 and took over from Ampthill. He brought with him an advance copy of a dispatch from London asking the Indian government to examine the issue of the military department. In March 1905 the viceroy's council decided unanimously -- with the exception of Kitchener -- that the department should be preserved, and dispatched its reply to London. Several weeks earlier, however, the commander-in-chief had secretly sent his own reply to his supporters in England who had distributed it to the prime minister, the India Office, and various sections of the press. In April Brodrick formed a committee, consisting almost entirely of Kitchener's partisans, to settle the matter, and the following month he sent the government's verdict to India. Although the secretary of state backed Kitchener's case for abolition, all the experts invited to testify before the committee were opposed, and Brodrick's dispatch announced a compromise whereby the military department was replaced by a much weaker military supply department. 
On reading the government's dispatch in mid-June, Curzon's first instinct was to resign. But he was persuaded by his colleagues on the council to try to induce Kitchener to agree to modifications of the dispatch. To the astonishment of his supporters in Britain, the commander-in-chief accepted modifications that would have virtually restored the military member to his former position. The viceroy therefore decided not to resign, a decision he later deeply regretted. In the following weeks Kitchener, encouraged by Brodrick, gradually reneged on his agreement, and Curzon became convinced that the home government was trying to force his resignation. When the secretary of state refused to accept the viceroy's nominee, General Barrow, as the new military supply member, Curzon concluded that he did not have the confidence of the government and telegraphed his resignation. The prime minister accepted it on 16 August 1905 and announced the appointment of Lord Minto as his successor. Staying on to welcome the prince of Wales to Bombay in early November, Curzon finally left India, an angry and embittered man, on 18 November. But in his farewell speech at Bombay's Byculla Club, he delivered a notable example of his particular brand of oratory and of his view of the imperial mission. 'To fight for the right, to abhor the imperfect, the unjust, or the mean, to swerve neither to the right hand nor to the left, to care nothing for flattery or applause or odium or abuse -- it is so easy to have any of them in India -- never to let your enthusiasm be soured or your courage grow dim, but to remember that the Almighty has placed your hand on the greatest of His ploughs, in whose furrow the nations of the future are germinating and taking shape, to drive the blade a little forward in your time, and to feel that somewhere among these millions you have left a little justice or happiness or prosperity, a sense of manliness or moral dignity, a spring of patriotism, a dawn of intellectual enlightenment, or a stirring of duty, where it did not before exist -- that is enough, that is the Englishman's justification in India. It is good enough for his watchword while he is here, for his epitaph when he is gone. I have worked for no other aim. Let India be my judge. (T. Raleigh, ed., 'Lord Curzon in India', 1906, 589-90)' The viceroy's resignation has subsequently been attributed to personal antagonism between Kitchener and himself, between two masterful men each determined to have his own way. British India's judgement at the time remains more valid. There the conflict was seen as essentially between civilian and military control of the army, a conflict which ended in victory for the military because of a prolonged intrigue which drew in the two crucial figures in the cabinet. Curzon lost because, unlike his opponent, he had refused to become a conspirator. 
Despite the support of King Edward VII, the fallen viceroy received no public recognition for his remarkable services in India. Balfour's refusal to recommend an earldom was repeated by Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, the Liberal leader asked to form a government on the day after Curzon's return to England. In deference to the wishes of the king and the advice of his doctors, Curzon did not stand in the general election of 1906 and thus found himself excluded from public life for the first time in twenty years. It was at this time, the nadir of his career, that he suffered the greatest personal loss of his life. Mary Curzon had never fully recovered from her nearly fatal illness and in July 1906 she fell ill again, deteriorated quickly, and died in her husband's arms. She was buried in the church at Kedleston, where Curzon designed his memorial for her, a lovely Gothic chapel added to the north side of the nave. Although he was neither a devout nor a conventional churchman, Curzon retained a naive religious faith; in later years he sometimes said that he was not afraid of death because it would enable him to join Mary in heaven. 
As Lord Scarsdale still occupied Kedleston, his eldest son set up house with his three daughters at Hackwood near Basingstoke and lived there and at 1 Carlton House Terrace, a London mansion he had bought with his father-in-law's money before going to India. In March 1907 he defeated Lord Rosebery in a contest for the chancellorship of Oxford University and threw himself so energetically into the cause of university reform that critics complained he was ruling Oxford like an Indian province. On a visit to South Africa in 1909, where he was supposed to be convalescing after a motor accident, he wrote a memorandum of book length called 'Principles and Methods of University Reform'. Although his ideas were considered too radical by Oxford's governing body, most of them were endorsed by a royal commission after the First World War and were subsequently enacted. 
In January 1908 Curzon finally entered the House of Lords with the help of Lord Lansdowne, who persuaded a sufficient number of Irish lords to elect him as one of their representative peers. He grew to like the Lords, where his stately oratory was perhaps more appropriate than in the Commons, but he remained a strong advocate of its reform and persistently urged a reduction in its hereditary membership. Still bitter about his treatment in India, he stayed aloof from his Unionist colleagues and for eighteen months seldom spoke except in debates on Asian subjects; two of his most powerful speeches were attacks on the Anglo-Russian convention of 1907 and the system of Indian military administration set up to please Lord Kitchener. Domestic politics failed to interest him -- he remained an agnostic on the issue of tariff reform -- until Lloyd George delivered his radical budget of 1909. Then he supported the stance of his party leaders and spoke in favour of Lansdowne's motion to reject it in the Lords. The success of the motion led to the dissolution of parliament and to the two inconclusive elections of 1910. 
In the absence of Balfour, who was ill, the first Unionist campaign was dominated by Curzon, who was fighting his first election since 1895 and who relished a highly publicized speech-making tour of Lancashire. After the elections he scoffed at the Liberal government's threat to restrict the House of Lords' veto on legislation to two years and unwisely advised his party both 'to fight in the last ditch' and to dare Asquith to create new peers in order to carry the 'Parliament Bill' through the upper house. As soon as he realized, however, that Asquith was not bluffing, he changed his mind and attempted to persuade his colleagues that it was preferable to retain the house with a limited veto than to provoke its virtual destruction. Throwing himself with characteristic energy into battle against the 'Diehards', who were determined to defeat the Liberals in the Lords, he persuaded enough Unionists to support the bill or abstain for the government to carry the day. This action, which ended the constitutional crisis, earned him the lasting enmity of the Unionist right. 
Curzon, who was finally made an earl in the coronation honours of 1911, was always an administrator rather than a parliamentarian. Opposition politics left him restless and searching for causes he could pursue. In addition to his work at Oxford, he became president of the National League for Opposing Woman Suffrage, but most of his causes were geographical, artistic, or conservationist. In 1911 he became president of the Royal Geographical Society and raised enough funds to buy it new premises in South Kensington. In the same year he became a trustee of the National Gallery and devised a far-sighted scheme, which was unfortunately not adopted for many years, to exempt owners from death duties on their houses and paintings if they undertook to keep their collections intact and opened them to the public. He also became a prominent figure in the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and one of the most enlightened conservationists in the country. In 1911 he bought Tattershall Castle in Lincolnshire, which he restored and bequeathed to the nation; a few years later he did the same on a grander scale with Bodiam Castle in Sussex. His subsequent restoration of both Kedleston and Montacute House in Somerset makes him a unique figure in the history of the National Trust, which by 1990 owned all four properties. 
In May 1915 Curzon was one of the Unionist politicians invited to join a coalition cabinet under Asquith. Although he was given the title of lord privy seal, he was effectively a minister without portfolio, a position which he found extremely frustrating. As a member of the Dardanelles committee, he urged the cabinet to introduce compulsory military service, he opposed the evacuation of the Gallipoli peninsula, and he advised against the Indian army's ill-fated advance on Baghdad during which the shortcomings of Kitchener's system were tragically demonstrated. (In 1917 a royal commission's report on the Mesopotamian campaign condemned the system and vindicated Curzon's stance of twelve years earlier.) At the beginning of 1916 he became a knight of the Garter and was appointed chairman of the Shipping Control Board, a committee which allocated shipping resources between the competing demands of the navy, the army, and the merchant marine. But he hankered after more demanding and imaginative work and hoped that Asquith would create an Air Ministry with himself at its head. Although the prime minister believed that such a ministry would increase friction between the Admiralty and the War Office, which jealously protected their own spheres of aerial activity, he did make Curzon president of a new Air Board in May 1916. Much of the rest of the year was spent trying to overcome the obstructiveness of the Admiralty, now headed by his old friend and adversary Balfour, but his views were eventually adopted and an Air Ministry was established in 1918. 
By the end of 1916 all the Unionist ministers, including Curzon, had come to the conclusion that Asquith was too indecisive a prime minister to win the war. At a meeting on 3 December they decided that their leader, Andrew Bonar Law, should urge him to resign and inform him that, if he refused, all the Unionist ministers would resign themselves. Their private papers make it clear that at the time they expected Asquith to go and that Lloyd George would succeed him. But this was not made immediately obvious to the prime minister, who for two days believed he could carry on; only when he understood the decision taken on 3 December did he decide to surrender his office. The incident was subsequently misrepresented by Lord Beaverbrook and later historians who claimed that the Unionists had resigned in order to strengthen Asquith's hand against Lloyd George. After Curzon's death, Beaverbrook alleged that the former viceroy had seen Asquith on 4 December and assured him he would never serve under Lloyd George. This charge, which has done much damage to Curzon's reputation, is unfounded; a study of the documents reveals that there was no meeting between the two on 4 December and that Curzon could not have given the assurance. 
In December 1916 Curzon became a member of Lloyd George's war cabinet. Three weeks later, on 2 January 1917, following a long love affair with the novelist Elinor Glyn, he married the much younger Grace Elvina Trilla Duggan (1877-1958), daughter of Joseph Monroe Hinds, at one time United States minister in Brazil, and widow of Alfred Duggan of Buenos Aires. But his second marriage was much less happy than his first. Grace was a fashionable society woman who loved horse-racing, and the couple's lack of common interests, together with their failure to produce an heir, led to a tempestuous relationship. 
Curzon's work under Lloyd George was the most sustained, vital, and concentrated he had been required to do since leaving India. As lord president of the council, he was leader of the House of Lords, and as one of five members of the war cabinet, he was a key figure in the team meeting day after day to discuss and direct the main areas of the war effort. He was also Lloyd George's usual choice as chairman of innumerable subcommittees dealing with matters as diverse as timber, import restrictions, and a settlement for Ireland. Although he and the prime minister were never on close terms, he was the only man who remained in the cabinet throughout Lloyd George's premiership. 
The war cabinet spent much of the summer of 1917 discussing military strategy and allowed itself to be persuaded by the military to sanction General Haig's disastrous autumn offensive which culminated in the slaughter at Passchendaele. It also had to deal with a number of Asian questions. Curzon was strongly opposed to Zionist aims in Palestine and argued that Jewish immigrants would not be able to establish a homeland there without expelling the indigenous Arabs. Although he managed to include a commitment to the 'non-Jewish communities' in the Balfour Declaration, he remained convinced that the policy was mistaken, 'the worst' of Britain's Middle East commitments and 'a striking contradiction of our publicly declared principles' (Curzon to Bonar Law, 14 Dec 1922, Parl. Arch., Bonar Law MS 111/22/46). He was also anxious about any change of policy that might loosen the bonds between Britain and India. But he realized that the wartime atmosphere, stirred by the Russian Revolution and by what he called 'the free talk about liberty, democracy, nationality, and self-government which have become the common shibboleths of the Allies', meant that substantial concessions had to be made. Thus he did not dissent from the cabinet view that self-government within the British empire should be stated as their aim for India so long as it was made clear that it was 'under British guidance that this end must be pursued, and alone can be achieved', and that the essential safeguards of British justice and power were not weakened (Curzon's memoranda to imperial war cabinet, 17 June 1917, and war cabinet, 2 July 1917, BL OIOC, Curzon MS 112/164). 
In August 1917 the government declared its aim to be 'the gradual development of self-governing institutions in India under the aegis of the Crown'. Curzon did not interpret this to mean a handover of power within the foreseeable future but a developing process that would take generations or even centuries. He was thus horrified when Edwin Montagu, the secretary of state for India, quickly produced a scheme, later known as the diarchy, whereby in each province elected native ministers would run matters such as health, education, and agriculture, while the local British governor would retain control over finance, the police, and other 'reserved' matters. Believing that the plan would 'lead by stages of increasing speed to the ultimate disruption of the Empire' (Curzon to Montagu, 25 July 1918, Cambridge, Trinity College, Montagu MS AS 3/2/15), Curzon refused to serve on the cabinet committee appointed to prepare legislation. When the bill came up for its second reading in December 1919, he told the Lords it was a 'daring experiment' which was unlikely to lead to better government, but he accepted it as necessary in that era when people preferred to govern themselves badly than be 'even superbly governed by another race' ('Hansard 5L', 37, 12 Dec 1919, 1048-9). 
After the conclusion of the armistice in November 1918, Curzon rose in the House of Lords to make an eloquent appraisal of Britain's role in the war. He declared: 'The British flag never flew over a more powerful or a more united Empire than now; Britons never had better cause to look the world in the face; never did our voice count for more in the councils of the nations, or in determining the future destinies of mankind. ('Hansard 5L', 32, 18 Nov 1918, 162)' Curzon's experience of ceremonies made him a natural choice as an organizer of events and memorials to celebrate victory and commemorate the dead. He organized the peace celebrations in the summer of 1919, he supervised the erection of the cenotaph in Whitehall, he designed its unveiling ceremony -- a restrained and moving ritual centred on a two-minute silence and the haunting lament of the 'Last Post' -- and he planned another ceremony for the burial of an unknown soldier in Westminster Abbey. These events aroused such strong feelings that popular opinion demanded an annual service at the Cenotaph, and Curzon was asked to devise the remembrance day service, one of his finest and most lasting achievements. 
In January 1919, in addition to his other duties, Curzon was asked to take charge of the Foreign Office while Lloyd George and Balfour (who remained foreign secretary) were pursuing a peace treaty in Paris. The division of responsibility between Curzon and Balfour was unclear, and an unsatisfactory situation was further complicated by Lloyd George's insistence on dealing with areas of the world which interested him. When the prime minister formed a larger cabinet in October 1919, Curzon and Balfour exchanged posts, but the new foreign secretary remained leader of the House of Lords. Lloyd George, who had negotiated the treaty of Versailles, largely retained control of affairs in Europe and Russia, while Curzon dealt with the rest of the world. This division of labour between a prime minister who had achieved the status of international statesman and a foreign secretary with unparalleled Asian experience was, in the hectic post-war years, not unreasonable. The partnership broke down, however, when they disagreed on the most crucial Euro-Asian issue, the peace settlement with Turkey. 
Curzon personally directed negotiations which led to the Anglo-Persian agreement in August 1919 and was delighted with an outcome that seemed to cement British influence in Tehran. He was thus disgusted when the Persian government, although heavily bribed by the British, failed to ratify the agreement which was subsequently discarded by Reza Khan after his 'coup d'etat' in February 1921. In the Middle East he favoured a policy of setting up independent Arab states under British tutelage, as happened in Iraq. But he acquiesced with great reluctance in the decisions of the San Remo conference to award the Palestine mandate to Britain and the Syrian mandate to France. In Egypt he was surprised by the strength of local nationalism but soon realized that the government had no option but to accept the conclusion of the Milner commission, which recommended the abolition of Britain's protectorate and the establishment of an independent constitutional monarchy. Against the fierce opposition of both Lloyd George and Churchill, his views eventually prevailed, and in March 1922 Egypt was recognized as an independent monarchy under her sultan, henceforth known as King Fuad I. 
Early in 1919 Curzon circulated three memoranda to the cabinet outlining his views on a settlement with Turkey. They contained two principal arguments: that a peace treaty must be negotiated swiftly and that, as a result of its defeat, Turkey should lose its European territory but be left in possession of its Anatolian heartland. He was opposed to landing European troops in Asian Turkey and was particularly scornful of the suggestion to install the Greeks in Smyrna. Lloyd George, however, was passionately pro-Greek and even encouraged the Smyrna occupation. Again the prime minister's policy prevailed at San Remo where the conference decided on a settlement -- later embodied in the treaty of Sevres -- that turned the straits into a neutral zone and gave Greece eastern Thrace, various islands in the Aegean, and control of the Smyrna area for five years, after which the local population would decide its future. As Curzon predicted, this solution was completely unacceptable to Turkish public opinion which soon coalesced behind the nationalist rebellion of Mustafa Kemal, the future Ataturk. 
In 1921, during which he received a marquessate, the foreign secretary spent much of his time trying to persuade the Greeks that the occupation of Smyrna was a blunder that would end in their military defeat. In March 1922 he was laid low by a combination of phlebitis, thrombosis, and lymphangitis which kept him out of action for five months. He returned to his office in August just in time for the long-predicted debacle in Asia Minor when the Turkish nationalists overwhelmed the Greek army, sacked Smyrna, and advanced northwards to threaten allied forces occupying Chanak in the neutral zone on the Asiatic shore of the straits. At a cabinet meeting on Friday 15 September, Curzon warned against trying to stop the Turkish advance by military means. But the following day, while he was at Hackwood, Lloyd George and Churchill issued a communique to the press warning of war if the 'violent and hostile Turkish aggression' succeeded in seizing control of the straits. The effect of this bellicose statement was to persuade France and Italy to withdraw their forces from the threatened areas of the neutral zone and leave the way open for a Turkish confrontation with the much smaller British force under the control of General Sir Charles Harington. Furious with his colleagues' 'flamboyant manifesto', which he first saw in the newspapers, Curzon insisted on going alone to Paris to restore a united allied position with the French premier, M. Raymond Poincare. After a long and bad-tempered meeting, Curzon and Poincare agreed on terms to offer Kemal, including the statements that they 'viewed with favour' Turkey's claim to eastern Thrace and that they would remove their troops from Constantinople after a peace settlement. 
But Curzon's success was undone by news of a revolution in Greece, which encouraged the anti-Turkish faction in the cabinet, led by Lloyd George, Churchill, and Lord Birkenhead, to make another belligerent gesture. Outraged by Kemal's refusal to respect the neutral zone, they persuaded the cabinet on 29 September to send an ultimatum threatening to open fire on the Turks unless they left the zone. War was averted largely by the good sense of Harington, who did not deliver the ultimatum, and by the vigour of the foreign secretary, who finally convinced his colleagues that the problem could be solved by diplomacy. Negotiations between the allies and the Turks opened at Mudanya, and the crisis appeared to have passed when a combination of fresh Turkish demands and French acquiescence again threatened conflict. Among other things, the Turks now insisted on occupying eastern Thrace immediately, in advance of a peace treaty and without guarantees for the minorities. As the French commander on the spot was prepared to concede on all issues, Curzon again crossed the channel to patch up a united position with Poincare. After another heated meeting, allied unity was largely restored on the basis of the British formula. On 11 October the Turks signed the Mudanya convention by which they agreed to withdraw from the neutral zone until after a peace treaty, and accepted the proposal that eastern Thrace should be administered by the allies for a month before the Turks returned. 
On 10 October the Conservative leader, Austen Chamberlain, summoned his ministerial colleagues to a meeting to reaffirm their decision to fight a general election under Lloyd George. Curzon was one of a small minority who opposed the scheme, arguing that such a move made before the party's meeting of the National Union of Conservative Associations (which was known to be hostile to the continuation of the coalition) would be regarded as a transparent trick; he was also worried that an election would dislocate foreign policy on the eve of a crucial conference on the Near East. The election talk came at a time when the foreign secretary was feeling increasingly disenchanted with his association with Lloyd George. For four years he had submitted to the prime minister's meddling in foreign affairs and the humiliations that these had sometimes entailed. On 14 October 1922, just after the Chanak crisis, Lloyd George made a violent speech in Manchester denouncing the barbarity of the Turks, and on the same day Curzon discovered that he had been secretly intriguing with an Italian emissary. The foreign secretary decided he had had enough. Three days later he placed his resignation in Lloyd George's hands and the following day he was one of several Conservatives who urged their former leader, Andrew Bonar Law, to come out of retirement and fight the election at the head of the anti-coalitionist faction. On 19 October Law easily defeated Chamberlain in a vote at a meeting of MPs at the Carlton Club and forced the government's resignation. In the ensuing week he became Conservative leader, formed his cabinet (with Curzon still at the Foreign Office), and dissolved parliament. A comfortable Conservative victory in November allowed the foreign secretary to set off for Lausanne in search of a peace with Turkey. 
The conference of Lausanne was Curzon's finest moment as foreign secretary. Through diplomatic skill and force of personality, he dominated the eleven weeks of the proceedings, dealing with his allies, France and Italy, as shrewdly as he managed the Turks. His achievements were embodied in the treaty of Lausanne of 1923 which secured the freedom of the straits, achieved a relatively high level of regional stability, and, by restoring Turkish sovereignty to the Turkish heartland, enabled the new country to make the transition from enfeebled empire to nation state. It was the most successful and the most lasting of the post-war treaties. 
In May 1923 it was diagnosed that the prime minister was suffering from cancer of the throat, and on Whit Sunday he resigned. Curzon, who earlier had been appointed to act as deputy prime minister in Law's absence, confidently expected to be his successor. Law, who also thought he would be succeeded by his foreign secretary, gave no advice to the king, but two members of his entourage misrepresented his views and gave the king's private secretary, Lord Stamfordham, the impression that he favoured the chancellor of the exchequer, Stanley Baldwin. Balfour advised the monarch that it was essential for the prime minister to be in the House of Commons, but in private admitted that he was prejudiced against Curzon. George V, who shared this prejudice, was grateful for the advice and authorized Stamfordham to summon the foreign secretary to London and inform him that Baldwin would be chosen. Believing that he was being summoned to form a government, Curzon was devastated by the news. His first instinct was to retire from public life, but he was persuaded to stay on as foreign secretary and a few days later he proposed Baldwin's election as leader of the Conservative Party. 
For the rest of the year the new prime minister allowed Curzon to form his foreign policy virtually unhindered. Most of the issues that needed to be dealt with were European. He scored one minor success in forcing the Soviet government to remove certain of its agents from Asian capitals and another in helping to end the Italian occupation of Corfu. But the most critical issues were the questions of French security and the reparation payments the allies had imposed on Germany four years earlier at Versailles. Although the government strove to be neutral between the two countries, Curzon considered Poincare's stance to be unreasonable and helped defeat his various schemes for weakening Germany, notably the attempt to set up separatist states in the Rhineland and the Palatinate. He also did much towards solving the reparations issue by urging the formation of a committee with United States participation to study the question: this led the following year to the Dawes plan and French withdrawal from the Ruhr, and in 1925 to the Locarno pact. 
In November 1923 Curzon opposed Baldwin's decision to call an election on the issue of protection and correctly forecast an electoral reverse. The first Labour government was formed in January 1924, and Curzon vacated the Foreign Office after a tenure which, including those first nine months under Balfour, had lasted for almost exactly five years. After nearly nine years of continuous service in the cabinet, Curzon embarked on new duties as leader of the opposition peers. But he was able to devote much of 1924 to his other interests, restoring Kedleston and replanting the garden, serving as chairman of the trustees of the National Gallery, and completing one of his finest books, a study of Calcutta and the viceroys which was posthumously published under the confusing title 'British Government in India'. In the previous year he had published 'Tales of Travel', a charming collection of memoirs and essays which attracted good reviews and successful sales. A similar volume, 'Leaves from a Viceroy's Notebook', was brought out after his death. 
After his electoral victory in November 1924, Baldwin formed his second government and decided that the state of Anglo-French relations would be improved by a change at the Foreign Office. Curzon reacted indignantly to the news that the new foreign secretary would be Austen Chamberlain, but he suppressed his initial desire to retire from politics and agreed to serve as lord president of the council and leader of the House of Lords. In March 1925, while staying the night at Cambridge, he suffered a severe haemorrhage of the bladder. He was taken to London the next day, and on 9 March an operation was performed. But he knew it was the end, that the suffering and overburdened body, which he had pushed so hard for so long, was giving up. He died at 1 Carlton House Terrace, London, on 20 March 1925 at the age of sixty-six. His coffin, made from the same tree at Kedleston that had encased Mary, was taken to Westminster Abbey and from there to his ancestral home, where he was interred beside Mary in the family vault on 26 March. In the parliamentary tributes Asquith encapsulated essential truths when he described Curzon as 'a great and unselfish servant of the state... always ready in that service to 'scorn delights and live laborious days', a man who pursued high ambitions by none but worthy means' ('Hansard 5L', 60, 23 March 1925, 614). 
Few statesmen have experienced such vicissitudes of fortune in both their public and their personal lives. Curzon's career was an almost unparalleled blend of triumph and disappointment. Although he was the last and in many ways the greatest of Victorian viceroys, his term of office ended in resignation, empty of recognition and barren of reward. After ten years in the political wilderness, he returned to government yet, in spite of his knowledge and experience of the world, he was unable to assert himself fully as foreign secretary until the last weeks of Lloyd George's premiership. And finally, after he had restored his reputation at Lausanne, his last ambition was thwarted by George V. 
Curzon was one of the outstanding political intellects of his generation, yet his influence in later life seldom matched his ability. This was partly caused by his failure to solve the problem that marred both his life and his career -- the problem of human relations, of how to manage other people. It was also caused by the general perception of him as an anachronism, a Victorian viceroy at a time when political rights for Indians became an issue, an Edwardian foreign secretary at a time when foreign policy was no longer a matter of stately rejoinders between the chancelleries of Europe but a hectic round of conferences trying to solve the problems thrown up by the First World War, dismantling empires, creating new nations, redrawing dozens of frontiers in Europe, Asia, and Africa. 
But history can be kinder to Curzon than his contemporaries were. His viceregal administration needs no apology: if he was blinkered about Indian nationalism, he was ahead of his time on matters of conservation and education, and the disasters of the Mesopotamian campaign vindicated his opposition to Kitchener's scheme. As foreign secretary, he revealed a similar blend of foresight and antiquated ideas, but again the final verdict must be positive. His contemporaries might jeer at certain policies, but he was the only minister far-sighted enough to see that the Balfour Declaration would lead to decades of Arab-Jewish conflict, that Lloyd George's pro-Greek policy would lead to a bloodbath in Anatolia, and that the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms would lead to the rapid breakup of the British empire. As with his later European policies, he did not of course receive praise for prophecies fulfilled while he was out of office or after his death. But they should be placed to the credit of a man too often assumed to have been gazing permanently and despondently into the past. 


@@@@@


doc= 32681


Howe, Sir Assheton Gore Curzon- (1850-1911), naval officer, born at Gopsall, Leicestershire, on 10 August 1850, was the ninth son of Richard William Penn Howe, first Earl Howe of the second creation (1796-1870), being the second son of his second wife, Anne (died 23 July 1877), second daughter of Admiral Sir John Gore. He was a great-grandson of Richard Howe, first Earl Howe, the great admiral, whose daughter and heir, Sophia Charlotte, Baroness Howe, married Penn, eldest son of Assheton Curzon, first Viscount Curzon. Curzon-Howe entered the navy on board the 'Britannia' in December 1863, and from 1868 to 1871 served in the frigate 'Galatea', captain the duke of Edinburgh, which went round the world during that commission. He was promoted sub-lieutenant on 18 March 1870, and served on the 'Bellerophon' in the channel squadron. His commission as lieutenant was dated 18 September 1872, and in November 1873 he was appointed to the sloop 'Eclipse' on the North American station. A year later he was transferred to the 'Bellerophon', flagship on the same station, and in February 1876 was appointed to the 'Sultan' in the Mediterranean, commanded by the duke of Edinburgh, whom two years later he followed into the 'Black Prince'. 
In July 1879 the 'Bacchante' was commissioned by Captain Lord Charles Scott for a cruise round the world, and to give Albert Edward, duke of Clarence, and the prince of Wales, afterwards King George V, their sea training as cadets. Curzon-Howe was chosen to be her first lieutenant, and was directly responsible for the seamanship instruction of the princes. On the return of the ship to England he was promoted commander on 31 August 1882. 
In January 1883 Curzon-Howe became executive officer of the 'Sultan' in the channel squadron, and two years later was appointed in the same capacity to the 'Raleigh', flagship on the Cape station. In July 1886 he was given the command of the royal yacht 'Osborne', from which on 6 January 1888 he was promoted captain. Shortly afterwards Curzon-Howe commissioned the 'Boadicea' for the East India station, where, in August 1888, she relieved the 'Bacchante' as flagship of Sir Edmund Fremantle. As flag captain and chief of the staff he took part in the Vitu (Witu, Kenya) expedition of October 1890, for which he received the CB. Curzon-Howe married on 25 February 1892 Alice Ann (died 5 Nov 1948), eldest daughter of General Sir John Cowell PC KCB, master of her majesty's household. They had two sons and three daughters. Their eldest daughter, Victoria Alexandrina, to whom Queen Victoria was godmother, died at Malta on 3 February 1910. 
From August 1891 he served for a year at the Admiralty as assistant director of naval intelligence, and then went to the North American station in command of the 'Cleopatra', and as commodore during the Newfoundland fishing season. In this ship he was present at Bluefields, Nicaragua, during the disturbances of 1894, and by his prompt action in landing a party of seamen and marines averted a civil war. In January 1896 he was created CMG for his services in Newfoundland, and in the same month became flag captain to Rear-Admiral A. T. Dale in the 'Revenge', flagship of the flying squadron which was put in commission shortly after the publication in January 1896 of the Kaiser's telegram to Kruger; this congratulated Kruger on the defeat of the Jameson raid, a gesture perceived by the British as a hostile intervention in their imperial affairs. In April 1897 he was appointed to command the training ship 'Britannia' at Dartmouth, and afterwards, from February 1900, he commanded the battleship 'Ocean' on the China station. In July 1899 Curzon-Howe was appointed an aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria, and held this post until promoted to flag rank on 23 July 1901. 
In June 1902 he hoisted his flag in the 'Magnificent' as second in command in the channel, and from that time his employment was practically continuous. In June 1903 he became second in command on the China station with his flag in the 'Albion'. On 30 June 1905 he was appointed KCB, and on 12 September he was promoted vice-admiral. In the December following he returned to the Channel Fleet, now greatly enlarged, as second in command, with his flag on board the 'Caesar'. In February 1907 he was appointed commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Fleet, whence in November 1908 he was transferred in the same capacity, but with acting rank as admiral, to the Mediterranean, his flagship during both commands being the 'Exmouth'. The disastrous earthquake at Messina in December 1908 called the commander-in-chief with part of his squadron to aid in the relief work, and the crisis which accompanied the revolution in Turkey made the Mediterranean for the time the centre of concern. On 2 January 1909 he was advanced to admiral, and in July received the GCVO. He was relieved in April 1910, and immediately hoisted his flag on the 'Victory' as commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. 
Curzon-Howe died suddenly at Admiralty House, Portsmouth, on 1 March 1911 and was buried with naval honours at Highcliffe, near Christchurch. A memorial tablet was placed in Portsmouth Dockyard church. 'Holding strong opinions on some points, he constantly stood aloof from all controversies of public character. Few flag-officers who have held such important appointments have ever been so little in the public eye as he' ('The Times'). This reflected a solid career, undistinguished by any particular contribution. 


@@@@@


doc= 32682


Cushny, Arthur Robertson (1866-1926), pharmacologist, was born at Speymouth, Moray, on 6 March 1866, the fourth son of the Revd John Cushny, minister of the established church successively at Fochabers, Speymouth, and Huntly, and his wife, Catherine Ogilvie, daughter of Alexander Brown, procurator fiscal of Elgin. He was educated at Fochabers Academy and Aberdeen University, where he graduated MA in 1886 and MB, CM in 1889. At Aberdeen John Theodore Cash, regius professor of materia medica, aroused his interest in pharmacology. As holder of the George Thompson fellowship Cushny worked for a year at Bern under Hugo Kronecker, and later at Strasbourg under Oswald Schmiedeberg, then the most distinguished pharmacologist in Europe. From 1892 to 1893 he acted as Schmiedeberg's assistant, and in the latter year, on the recommendation of the American pharmacologist John Abel, was appointed, at the age of twenty-seven, to the chair of pharmacology in the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. In 1896 he married Sarah Firbank, an Englishwoman whom he had met in Strasbourg. She was the daughter of Ralph Firbank, a railway engineer. They had one daughter. 
In 1905 Cushny returned to England in order to become the first professor of pharmacology in University College, London. The chair was the first of its kind in England, designed to ensure emphasis on experimental pharmacology. In 1918 he succeeded Sir Thomas Fraser as professor of materia medica and pharmacology at Edinburgh University. 
While at Ann Arbor, Cushny continued researches, begun at Strasbourg, on the action of the digitalis glucosides, which involved also an investigation of the physiology of the mammalian heart -- subjects on which he wrote many papers, culminating in an exhaustive monograph, 'The Action and Uses in Medicine of Digitalis and its Allies' (1925). In the course of these studies he incidentally suggested that the clinical condition known as 'delirium cordis' might be identical with auricular fibrillation, a heterodox prediction which was verified ten years later as the result of the application of electrocardiographic methods to humans. The condition now known as auricular fibrillation has proved to be one of the most important diseases of the heart. 
While in the United States, Cushny also began to study experimentally the functions of the kidneys and the action of diuretics. To this subject he made many valuable contributions, and published 'The Secretion of Urine' (1st edn, 1917; 2nd edn, 1926), in which he co-ordinated the mass of contradictory evidence which had accumulated since Carl Ludwig's day, for which purpose, as he says in the preface, 'it was necessary to sift thoroughly this mass of printed matter of over 6,000 pages'. His account of kidney secretion was accepted not only as the most authoritative critical review of past work, it also put forward a novel view of the functions of the kidney which was to serve as a foundation for further research, and is specially associated with Cushny's name. 
In 1903 Cushny published his first study of the pharmacological actions of optical isomers, in which he showed that 'l'-hyoxyamine is about twenty times as active as the diedisomer, and about twice as active as the 'dl'-compound (atropine). Later he made similar quantitative studies of other optical isomers, which proved, as is now accepted, that two substances, identical in chemical composition and structure apart from their optical activity, may differ widely in pharmacological activity. He went on to demonstrate how complex the pharmacological action of optical isomers could be. Cushny summarized his own and other investigations on this subject in the Dohme lectures delivered at the Johns Hopkins University at Baltimore in 1925, published as 'Biological Relations of Optically Isomeric Substances' in 1926. 
These three subjects formed, perhaps, Cushny's chief scientific interests, and his contributions to them constitute his main claim to a permanent position in the history of his science. In addition he published a long and valuable series of monographs covering a wide field of pharmacological inquiry. In 1899 appeared the first edition of his 'Textbook of Pharmacology and Therapeutics', which went through eight editions in his lifetime. It was the first authoritative textbook to be written in English by an experimental pharmacologist, and it played an important part in guiding teaching and research during a period in which therapeutics was emerging from the mists of tradition and empiricism. 
The originality of his researches, the authority of his writings, and his international friendships made Cushny one of the leading pharmacologists of his generation. He was a man large of mind, heart, and stature, outwardly austere, inwardly kindly, generous in helping others. He served on many commissions and international conferences, notably the royal commission on whisky and other potable spirits (1908). He received honorary degrees from the universities of Aberdeen and Michigan and was elected FRS in 1907 and to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1919. Cushny died suddenly of a cerebral haemorrhage at his home, Peffermill House, Edinburgh, on 25 February 1926. His wife and daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32683


Cust, Henry John Cockayne (1861-1917), politician and journalist, was born on 10 October 1861 in London, the elder son of Henry Francis Cockayne Cust (1819-1884), Conservative MP for Grantham (1874-80) and a major in the north Salopian yeomanry cavalry, and his wife, Sarah Jane (died 1867), daughter of Isaac Cookson, of Meldon Park, Northumberland, and widow of Major Sidney Streatfeild. He went to Eton College in 1874, where he was captain of the oppidans, and in 1881 entered Trinity College, Cambridge. At Cambridge he was a member of the boat club and of the Magpie and Stump (a light-hearted debating society) and was elected to the Apostles, the exclusive literary society, in 1883. He was elected to a scholarship at Trinity in that year and graduated BA with second-class honours in the classical tripos in 1884. He was admitted to the Inner Temple on 17 August 1888 but was not called. He obtained the 'baccalaureat en droit' in Paris but did not practise. Instead, he decided to forgo a legal career and entered parliament in 1890 as Conservative MP for Stamford, Lincolnshire. 
Cust was a socialite and a member of the Crabbet Club (1888-94), founded by Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, whose members included George Curzon and George Wyndham. He was also a member of the intellectual and aristocratic coterie called the Souls. The group included some of the most wealthy and powerful men and women of the day, among whom were George Curzon, Margot Tennant (later Lady Asquith), and the politicians Arthur Balfour and George Wyndham. Cust, as a handsome young man, was popular among the set and had numerous affairs, one of which was with Violet Manners (1856-1937), wife of Lord Granby. Despite the knowledge of the affair among the Souls, the birth of their daughter Lady Diana Manners (later Lady Diana Cooper) in 1892 was not acknowledged until well into the twentieth century. Cust left Violet for an affair with Pamela Wyndham, sister of George Wyndham, but she was sent to India to get over Cust. Cust then seduced Emmeline Mary Elizabeth (Nina) Welby-Gregory (1867-1955), daughter of Sir William Earle Welby-Gregory, fourth baronet. Under pressure from Balfour, he was forced to marry her on 11 October 1893, when it was thought that she was pregnant by him. Nina adored her husband but this affection was not returned and she lived a childless and lonely marriage. 
In 1895 Cust retired from parliament. He had been denounced by the feminist Millicent Fawcett, as a scoundrel unfit for public office. He devoted himself to journalism. In October 1892 he met the American millionaire William Waldorf Astor, who, at their first meeting, invited Cust to edit the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. He accepted at once, despite lacking any working knowledge of such a position. During his editorship he made the paper the best evening paper of the day. Among his contributors were H. G. Wells, Alice Meynell, and Rudyard Kipling. His journalism was active in that he did not flinch from saying what he thought needed to be said. This strong trait, together with political disagreements and the rejection of Astor's own written contributions, finally forced Astor to dismiss him in February 1896. Such was the loyalty of his staff that they had to be persuaded by him not to resign. His short period as an editor was the high point of his professional career. 
Cust continued his social life in London and found time to write the introduction to Machiavelli's 'The Art of War' and 'Florentine History' in the 'Tudor Translations' series, edited by his friend W. E. Henley. During his time at the 'Pall Mall Gazette' Cust contributed many poems and these were collected by his widow and his nephew Ronald Storrs and published in 1918 as 'Occasional Poems'. As a poet his sole claim to fame was as author of 'Non nobis domine', though his authorship was not recognized until the second edition of the 'Oxford Book of English Verse' (1939). In 1900 he re-entered parliament as member for Bermondsey; he remained there until 1906. In August 1914 he founded and became chairman of the fund-raising central committee for national patriotic organizations. He served as a JP for Lincolnshire and also Bedfordshire. 
Cust was of average height and an assiduous dresser, as is shown to good effect in the Spy cartoon of 1894. Lady Diana Cooper thought him 'Very beautiful with noble hands and impeccable filbert-shaped nails. He wore a coat such as I never saw another wear -- dark blue cloth, flaring, full, with a flat sable Eton collar. It was like Holbein's 'Ambassadors'' (Abdy and Gere, 69). He was one of the greatest conversationalists of his time, and Curzon aptly sums him up in the obituary in 'The Times': 'He was the unchallenged leader of the dinner-table. Quip, retort, repartee, quotation, allusion, epigram, jest -- all flashed with lightning-speed from that active workshop, his brain' ('The Times', 3 March 1917). One succinct and brash parliamentary quotation illustrates this: 'My position is quite clear, I have nailed my colours to the fence' (Abdy and Gere, 70). He was the cousin of the third and last Earl Brownlow (1844-1921) and spent his life vainly waiting to inherit the barony of Brownlow. Cust died of heart failure at his home, 17 Hyde Park Gate, London, on 2 March 1917 and after cremation at Golders Green on 5 March was buried at Belton church, Lincolnshire, on 7 March. Nina Cust survived him by thirty-eight years. 


@@@@@


doc= 32684


Cust, Sir Lionel Henry (1859-1929), art historian, was born at 13 Eccleston Square, London, on 25 January 1859, the only son of Sir Reginald John Cust (died 1913), barrister, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Caroline (died 1914), elder daughter of Edward Bligh, fifth earl of Darnley. He was a first cousin of Henry John Cockayne Cust, the politician and journalist. He was educated at Eton College, and matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1877. He was elected a scholar of the college in 1880, and obtained a first class in the classical tripos of 1881. 
In 1882 Cust entered the civil service, obtaining a post in the War Office, but the work was not congenial to him, and at the suggestion of Sidney Colvin he was transferred in 1884 to the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum, of which Colvin had recently become keeper. Here Cust's real interests were engaged. He had a good eye and an extremely retentive memory; his knowledge of pictures and prints had been enlarged by study on the continent; he was methodical, conscientious, and enjoyed research. His 'Index' to the Dutch, Flemish, and German artists represented in the print room (1893), followed by an 'Index' to the French artists (1896), was of great service to students, and the preparation of it made him familiar not only with major masters but also with innumerable minor artists. Writers on art in Britain had hitherto mostly been attracted to the Italian schools; Cust's predilection was for the schools of northern Europe. Of Van Dyck and also of Durer he made a special study. 
In 1895 Cust was appointed director of the National Portrait Gallery in succession to Sir George Scharf. His first task was the moving of the collection from its temporary home at Bethnal Green to the new gallery in St Martin's Place, followed by the compilation of catalogues of the holdings (1896, 1901-2). The study of portraiture in Britain appealed to his love of history and genealogy and to his interest in established families, including his own. The obituary notice in 'The Times' described Cust as 'a walking genealogy' to the extent that 'he may be said to have slept with Burke at his bedside'. Cust also had a wide knowledge of the collections in the great country houses. The biographies of artists, notable for their accuracy and painstaking research, contributed to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' made a fresh beginning in the study of British art, as did his exhibition catalogues of portraiture organized for the Oxford Historical Society (1904, 1905, 1906). At the same time Cust maintained his former interests. An authoritative study of Durer's paintings and prints was published in 1897, followed in 1898 by a monograph on an early German engraver, 'The Master 'E.S.' and the 'Ars moriendi''. His 'History of the Society of Dilettanti' appeared in 1898, and his 'History of Eton College' in the following year. As a writer Cust lacked the graces of style, but he was always a master of facts. In 1900 he published his most important single book, a large and exhaustive work on Van Dyck. Two small monographs on the same master appeared in 1903 and 1906, and a further study in 1911. 
In 1901 Cust was offered the post of surveyor of the king's pictures, and with the consent of the trustees was allowed to combine this with his directorship of the National Portrait Gallery. He resigned the directorship in 1909, but continued to hold the office of surveyor until 1927. In 1901 he was also appointed gentleman usher to the court. Cust's duties as surveyor involved the supervision of all the collections in the various royal palaces; and he was responsible for a good deal of rearrangement and rehanging of the pictures, which had become rather static during the reign of Queen Victoria. His office brought him into close personal contact with Edward VII. He published a work on the collection entitled 'The Royal Collection of Paintings: Buckingham Palace' (1905), 'Windsor Castle' (1906). 'Notes on the Authentic Portraits of Mary, Queen of Scots' and a large illustrated work, 'The Bridgewater House Gallery', had appeared in 1903. 
From 1909 to 1919 Cust was joint editor with Roger Fry of the 'Burlington Magazine'. Among his own numerous contributions to the magazine was a series of notes on pictures in the royal collections, published in book form in 1911. In the long-neglected field of early portraiture in Britain his work was particularly valuable. He set himself the task of clearing away the myths and discovering the facts, his most notable service being the rehabilitation of the sixteenth-century painter H. E. (Hans Eworth), long erroneously identified with Lucas d'Heere. His study of Eworth, which contains a full catalogue of the painter's works, was published in the Walpole Society's 'Annual' (vol. 2, 1913). Studies of other foreign artists working in Britain at a similarly early date were also undertaken. Cust was keenly interested in the movement for introducing good pictures into schools, and for many years, until its dissolution, was chairman of the Art for Schools Association, founded in 1883. 
Cust's personal appearance hardly suggested his zest for scholarly research and his capacity for hard and rapid work. Inclined to plumpness, and given to shyness, he none the less gave the impression of one who enjoyed life to the full in the Edwardian style. He had a great love of music as well as of painting, and a gift for simple pleasures. A volume of his poetry, 'Ludibrium ventia', was published privately in 1904. The extraordinary accuracy of his memory enabled him to dispense with notebooks. He married in 1895 Sybil, sixth daughter of George William Lyttelton, fourth Baron Lyttelton, and half-sister of Bishop Arthur Temple Lyttelton and of the statesman Alfred Lyttelton. They had one son. His wife contributed a memoir of Cust to his posthumously published volume 'King Edward VII and his Court' (1930). Cust was created KCVO in 1927. He also received the degree of LittD at the University of Cambridge, and was made FSA, a chevalier of the Belgian order of Leopold, an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Antwerp, and a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem. He died on 12 October 1929 at Datchet House, Datchet, Buckinghamshire, where his later married life was spent. 


@@@@@


doc= 32685


Cust, Robert Needham (1821-1909), East India Company servant and orientalist, was born at Cockayne Hatley, Bedfordshire, on 24 February 1821, the second son of Henry Cockayne Cust (1780-1861), canon of Windsor, and his wife, Lady Anna Maria Elizabeth (died 1866), eldest daughter of Francis Needham, first earl of Kilmorey. His father was the second son of Brownlow Cust, first Baron Brownlow (1744-1807). 
Cust was educated at the Revd H. Burn's school in Mitcham, Surrey (1830-33), Eton College (1834-40), and the East India Company's college at Haileybury (1840-42), where he distinguished himself in Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic, and Hindustani. In 1844 he was posted to Ambala as assistant to the governor-general's agent for the north-western frontier, Major George Broadfoot, and temporarily took charge as agent when Broadfoot was killed in action at Ferozeshahr in December 1845. In 1846 he was appointed deputy commissioner of Hoshiarpur and under the guidance of John Lawrence enthusiastically implemented the paternalistic, 'non-regulation' style of government that became the hallmark of the Punjab administration. In November 1849 he was transferred back to his old district of Ambala. 
In May 1852, after eighteen months' furlough, Cust was appointed officiating joint magistrate of Benares and three months later became officiating magistrate of Banda. In March 1855 he returned to England to study for the bar and while there married, on 10 May 1856, Maria Adelaide (died 1864), second daughter of Henry Lewis Hobart, dean of Windsor, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in August 1857 and returned to India in February 1858, whereupon he was appointed commissioner of Lahore. Subsequently he acted as financial commissioner of the Punjab and in 1861 as judicial commissioner. At Lahore he was remembered by his subordinate officers as a stickler for the rules and a great talker, but gloomy and prone to moralizing. 
On 17 January 1864 Maria died, seven days after giving birth to their third daughter. Cust, who was devastated by her death, went home to England to settle the children, and upon his return in October became acting home secretary to the government of India (1864-5). On 28 December 1865 he married Emma, eldest daughter of Edward Carlyon, rector of Debden, Hampshire, and shortly afterwards took up a seat on the board of revenue in the North-Western Provinces. Unhappily, in August 1867 Emma too died in childbirth, whereupon Cust quit India immediately, just nine months short of qualifying for his pension. 
Back in England he recovered his energy and spirit, and on 11 November 1868 he married Elizabeth Dewar (died 1910), only daughter of J. Mathews. In 1867-8, at the prompting of his old boss John Lawrence, now viceroy, he drafted a code of revenue law for northern India, but this was his last official undertaking. Independently wealthy, he devoted his remaining years to oriental philology and religion, travelling throughout Europe, north Africa, and Asia and attending numerous international congresses. He was a prominent member of many literary societies and of the Royal Geographical Society, and from 1878 until 1899 served as honorary secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society. Inexhaustibly prolific, between 1870 and 1909 he published more than sixty volumes, all of which he financed himself, and hundreds of articles and reviews. Chief among his works are 'Modern Languages of the East Indies' (1878), 'Modern Languages of Africa' (1883), 'Oceania' (1887), 'The Caucasian Group' (1887), and a seven-part series, 'Linguistic and Oriental Essays' (1880-1904). Even at the time, however, Cust's scholarship was regarded as intelligent rather than profound and it is actually his diaries and letters, with their unique portrayal of Victorian sensibility in India, which have proved to be the most durable of his writings. 
Cust was a devout, evangelizing Christian, but he rejected literal interpretations of the 'Old Testament' and prided himself on a scientific understanding of the development of different religions. He served on the committees of the Church Missionary Society and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, as well as supporting numerous philanthropic ventures. In 1899 he published his autobiography, 'Life Memoir, 1821-1899'. He died on 28 October 1909 at his residence, 49 Campden Hill Road, Kensington, and was buried at Putney Vale. His wife, Elizabeth, died six months later. He was survived by their only child, Anna Maria Elizabeth ('b'. 1870), and three children of his first marriage: Albinia Lucy (1857-1929), Robert Henry Hobart (1861-1940), a Renaissance art specialist, and Maria Eleanor Vere Cust (1862/3-1958), a geographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 32686


Custance, Henry (1842-1908), jockey, born at Peterborough on 27 February 1842, was the son of Samuel Custance, a postboy, and his wife, Elizabeth Carpenter. Devoted from childhood to horses and to riding, he rode at thirteen in a pony race at Ramsey in Huntingdonshire. After vainly seeking employment at Newmarket, he spent three years at Epsom, where, in his own words, he had 'a jolly, though rough, time' in the employment of Edward (Ned) Smith of South Hatch, who was associated with the sporting journal 'Bell's Life', and raced his horses in the name of Mellish. 
Custance's first important victory was gained on Rocket in 1858 in the Cesarewitch, which he won again in 1861 on Audrey. In 1860 he was attached to the Russley stable, then under the management of Matthew Dawson, and that season he rode over forty winners, including Thormanby in the Derby. This victory earned him a present of $100 from the owner, Mr Merry, the only gift he received in three years of riding for the Glasgow ironmaster. In 1863 he became stable jockey at East Ilsley for James Dover, who trained the 1866 triple crown winner Lord Lyon. Unfortunately Custance missed the Two Thousand Guineas ride because of a fall at the Epsom spring meeting. He won a third Derby in 1874 on the vile-tempered George Frederick. By this time Custance was having to waste heavily just to make 8 stone 10 lb, and in 1879 he retired. His last winning mount was Lollypop in the All-Aged Stakes at the Newmarket Houghton meeting. 
As a jockey Custance was bold and resolute, had good hands, and was a fine judge of pace. After his retirement from the saddle he long remained a familiar figure on the racecourse. He held for many years a licence as deputy starter to the Jockey Club, and was also official starter to the Belgian Jockey Club. In 1885 he officiated at the Derby, thus becoming the first person to both win and start that race. Living at Oakham, where he was proprietor of The George inn, he regularly hunted with the Quorn and Cottesmore packs. He was always a cheerful and amusing companion, and published 'Riding Recollections and Turf Stories' in 1894. He died of a paralytic seizure at his home, 53 New Walk, Leicester, on 19 April 1908, leaving a widow, Mary. Laid out in 1906, New Walk led to Leicester's Victoria Park, site of the city's original racecourse. 


@@@@@


doc= 32687


Custance, Sir Reginald Neville (1847-1935), naval officer and author, was born in Belfast on 20 September 1847, the eldest son of General William Neville Custance and his second wife, Mary, eldest daughter of Thomas Meggison of Walton, Northumberland. He entered the navy in September 1860 aboard the training ship 'Britannia'. He then served in the frigate 'Euryalus' and was present at the bombardment of the Japanese clan forts at Kagoshima in 1863, and Shimonoseki in 1864. He was promoted lieutenant on 6 February 1868, a year in which he received the Royal Humane Society silver medal for life-saving. He served in the West Indies between 1868 and 1872, before joining the instructing staff of the gunnery training ship HMS 'Excellent' in 1873. He remained aboard the 'Excellent', as a senior staff lieutenant, from 1875 to 1878. He was promoted commander on 31 March 1878, and spent the following year at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. Between November 1880 and early 1884 he commanded the sloop 'Flamingo' in the West Indies. His promotion to the substantive rank of captain followed on 31 December 1885. 
In October 1886 Custance was ordered to the Admiralty, to prepare a scheme for mobilization. He was subsequently appointed assistant director of naval intelligence on the formation of the naval intelligence department, and served under Captain W. H. Hall until 1889 and then under Captain Sir Cyprian Bridge. Bridge, along with Admiral Philip Colomb, became a major influence on his intellectual development. While at the Admiralty, Custance had a good working relationship with Captain John Fisher, the director of naval ordnance; both supported the battleship against the French torpedo boat challenge. In January 1890 he took command of the cruiser 'Phaeton' in the Mediterranean. Between September 1893 and January 1895 he served as naval attache at Washington and Paris. In February 1895 he took command of the new second-class battleship 'Barfleur', serving in the Mediterranean and from early 1898 the China station. He later took her name as his pen-name, a reflection of his preference for small battleships, based on the views of Bridge and Sir John Laughton. 
Between March 1899 and November 1902 Custance, who had been promoted rear-admiral on 1 August 1899, was director of naval intelligence. The appointment reflected the high opinion of his abilities held at the Admiralty. A well-informed student of strategy, Custance used his position to promote the study of history as the basis for the development of modern doctrine. He also established the defence and trade divisions of the department. He forced the intelligence department into the heart of Admiralty policy-making, by a combination of will-power and intellect. At this stage he was considered among the most brilliant officers in the service; yet his subsequent career was ruined by a clash of wills that warped his judgement. His relationship with Fisher deteriorated when Fisher went to the Mediterranean, largely as a result of Fisher's constant criticism of Admiralty policy, both in official correspondence and carefully handled newspaper leaks. The two men became bitter enemies after the Admiralty visit to Malta in 1901. Fisher had argued that more destroyers should be attached to his fleet, and persuaded the board to ignore Custance's advice that these were unnecessary. Custance knew that Fisher was exaggerating the threat to serve his own ambitions, and used the German navy as a counter-argument for keeping forces at home. This was considered premature, but it rapidly became policy when Fisher returned to the Admiralty in late 1904. 
Between November 1902 and November 1904 Custance served as second in command of the Mediterranean Fleet. In early 1903 the Admiralty set up two committees to investigate the possibilities of long-range firing. Custance presided over the Mediterranean committee, and firings were carried out by his flagship, the 'Venerable'. In view of the limited possibilities for combining range and observation with control of the guns, he initially deprecated long-range fire. After the first series of firings additional equipment was installed aboard the ship, and the results improved significantly. Custance's methodical work, reflecting six years at 'Excellent', laid the groundwork for the development of more sophisticated equipment and control systems that permitted accurate fire at hitherto unimagined distances. His report was highly commended by the Admiralty. Custance's interest in fire control led him to clash with Fisher over the merits of Arthur Pollen's promising designs. 
In 1904 Custance was made KCMG and on 20 October that year he was promoted vice-admiral. He spent the next two years ashore, publishing under his pen-name, Barfleur, historically based criticisms of contemporary naval policy, collected in the volume 'Naval Policy: a Plea for the Study of War' (1907). In February 1907 Fisher appointed him second in command of the Channel Fleet, under Lord Charles Beresford, because the two men disliked one another. Fisher's divide-and-rule tactics backfired. Discovering that a shared hatred overrode other misunderstandings, they formed the core of the 'syndicate of discontent' ably supported by Rear-Admiral Doveton Sturdee, Beresford's chief of staff, and a galaxy of retired admirals. While Beresford was the figure-head, Custance provided the brains. His personal animus drove the syndicate, and reduced the last three years of Fisher's term at the Admiralty to one long rearguard action. Whatever the merits of either case, the real beneficiary was the army, which exploited Beresford to assume the leading position in national strategy. In this Custance revealed the worst side of his character, allowing personal antipathies to colour his judgement, to the detriment of the service and the state. 
Promoted full admiral in May 1908, Custance hauled down his flag for the last time in July, an occasion marked by the customary KCB. He lingered on the active list until 1912, and was created GCB the following year, and an honorary DCL from the University of Oxford. He continued to be consulted, notably by Churchill, but the bitter hostility of Fisher ensured that he had no influence. His chances for fleet command, or service at the Admiralty, for which he was well suited, were destroyed by his role in the 'syndicate'. He was too clearly identified with the quarrel to be employed by those seeking to heal the breach. 
The remainder of Custance's life was devoted to the study of war, and the promotion of his thesis that the naval mind had become divided into two schools, the 'materiel' and the historical, and that the dominance of the 'materiel' school resulted in warships designed on entirely incorrect principles. The generalization was erroneous and simplistic, as his own career demonstrated. The pamphlets 'The Fighting Power of the Capital Ship' (1909) and 'The Military Growth of the Capital Ship' (1910) were stimulating and intelligent critiques of Fisher's policy; in them Custance argued that speed had been important throughout the nineteenth century because the enemy would be running away, and that this was no longer the case because the relative naval balance had shifted away from the Royal Navy. Consequently, as both sides wanted to fight, firepower would decide the contest. 
During the First World War Custance publicly criticized the influence of Sir Julian Corbett on the doctrine of the navy. He considered that Corbett had deprecated the importance of seeking decisive battle. Subsequently he contributed to the 'Naval Review', the closed-circulation professional journal, and published three more books: 'The Ship of the Line in Battle' (1912), 'War at Sea: Modern Theory and Ancient Practice' (1919), and 'A Study of War' (1924). The last two were peculiarly wrong-headed, arguing that sound strategy required a concentration on the military aim of destroying enemy armed forces before attempting to secure political aims. As Donald Schurman observed, Custance's work adds 'to our knowledge of naval controversy, but not to the growth of naval history' (Schurman, 'Education', 14). Custance died at his home, Beaumont Broad, Broadclyst, Devon, on 30 August 1935. 
Custance was part of a small but professionally significant group of officers who made a serious study of war in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. This group, linked to Professor Sir John Knox Laughton, included Cyprian Bridge, Philip Colomb, Doveton Sturdee, Gerard Noel, and Prince Louis of Battenberg. All were members of the council of the Navy Records Society, which used history as the basis from which to develop a modern naval doctrine. However, Custance saw history as a source of support for his case, not an all-embracing approach to the comprehension of major issues. Although possessed of a powerful mind and great knowledge of the service, he had little influence on policy. His narrow, dogmatic, and inflexible opinions were delivered with an uncommon degree of venom, especially when dealing with Fisher. He lacked the mental flexibility to benefit from debate. 
Custance set high standards for his subordinates, both as officers and gentlemen. He kept a generous table as an admiral, and was interested in the views of junior officers. However, he lacked the personal warmth to inspire unthinking devotion, while his suspicious nature made him a difficult superior. A confirmed bachelor, his arrogant and unbending approach deprived his work of lasting value, and his life of close society. The one friend of his last years was Admiral Sir Herbert Richmond, another cold intellectual naval outsider. It was through Richmond, and personal correspondence, that Custance's notion of a service divided between the historical and the 'materiel' schools came to influence the work of the American historian Arthur J. Marder. Marder considered that Custance combined 'a nasty temperament devoid of generosity' with 'the cleverness of a monkey' (Marder, 'From the Dreadnought', 1.91). Custance's quarrel with Fisher warped his judgement, and deprived the navy of the services of a highly competent and learned officer. The sad irony was that the two men agreed on so many of the key issues concerned with the modernization of the Royal Navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32688


Cutts, Edward Lewes (1824-1901), antiquary, was born on 2 March 1824 at Sheffield, the son of John Priston Cutts, optician, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Robert Waterhouse. He was educated at Sheffield collegiate school, graduated BA at Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1848, and was ordained in the same year. On 23 April 1846 he married Marian, daughter of Robert Knight of Nottingham; they had ten children, seven of whom survived their father. Two sons, John E. K. Cutts and John Priston Cutts, worked together as ecclesiastical architects. A third son, Henry Whitmore Cutts, wood engraver, was the father of the film director (John Henry) Graham Cutts. Marian Cutts died in 1889. Cutts was curate successively of Ide Hill, Kent, until 1850, of Coggeshall, Essex, until 1857, and of Kelvedon, Essex, until 1859, and was perpetual curate of Billericay, also in Essex, until 1865. He then became general secretary of the Additional Curates Society, resigning in 1871 to become vicar of Holy Trinity, Haverstock Hill, London. 
Cutts's first publications were in medieval archaeology. 'A Manual for the Study of the Sepulchral Slabs and Crosses of the Middle Ages' appeared in 1849. A series of articles in the 'Art Journal', beginning in 1856, was collected and published as 'Scenes and Characters of the Middle Ages' (1872; 4th edn 1922). From 1852 to 1866 Cutts was honorary secretary of the Essex Archaeological Society and editor of its 'Transactions'. 
Most of Cutts's subsequent writings were published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. They include works on many ecclesiastical subjects, devotional books, and children's historical fiction. 'Turning Points of English Church History' (1874), 'Turning Points of General Church History' (1877), and 'Parish Priests and their People in the Middle Ages' (1898) were among his books that had more than one edition. 'Some Chief Truths of Religion' (1875) was translated into Swahili and printed at the Universities Mission Press at Zanzibar in 1895. Cutts contributed the volumes on Jerome (1878) and Augustine (1881) to the series 'The Fathers for English Readers'. 'A Handy Book of the Church of England' under his editorship went through eight editions (1892-1901). Cutts's ecclesiastical writings are solid and establishmentarian, exhibiting their author's high-church temperament but treating other parties with sympathy. He was awarded an honorary DD by the University of the South in Sewanee, Tennessee, in 1876. 
Cutts broke the routine of a parish clergyman and writer in 1876 when he visited the Assyrian Church of the East as the representative of Archbishop Tait of Canterbury. Accompanied by his son William, he travelled to Turkish Kurdistan and Persia, met the patriarch and bishops, and brought back a scheme for an educational mission. From this journey came his official report 'The Assyrian Christians' (circulated privately), 'Christians under the Crescent in Asia', describing his mission and recording a census of the church, and a fine children's book, 'Amina: a Tale of the Nestorians' (all 1877). These and his other efforts in keeping the proposed mission before the church public during the next four years led to the establishment of the archbishop of Canterbury's Assyrian mission. Cutts died at Holy Trinity vicarage, 70 Haverstock Hill, on 2 September 1901, and was buried at Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 


@@@@@


doc= 32689


Dadabhoy, Sir Maneckji Byramji (1865-1953), industrialist and politician in India, was born in Bombay on 30 July 1865. He came of a much respected Parsi family, the second son of Khan Bahadur Byramji Dadabhoy JP, registrar of joint stock companies and assurances. He was educated in Bombay at the well-known Fort and Proprietary High School, and then at St Xavier's College. In 1884 he married Bai Jerbanoo, second daughter of Khan Bahadur Dadabhoy Pallonji, with whom he had two daughters. In the same year he went to England, was admitted to the Middle Temple, and in 1887 called to the bar. On his return to India he began to practise at the Bombay high court and at an unusually early age was elected a member of the Bombay municipal corporation. In 1888 he was made a justice of the peace. In 1890 he moved to Nagpur and enrolled as an advocate at the court of the judicial commissioner of the Central Provinces. He was appointed manager of Raja Bahadur Laxman Rao Bhonsla's estate in Nagpur, and negotiated the partition of that estate between the Raja Bahadur and his brother. For this he received a record fee, and the case brought him prominence in his profession. He was elected to the Nagpur municipal corporation and served that body for forty years (1890-1930). In 1896 he was appointed government advocate. He found time to write commentaries on the 'Central Provinces Tenancy Acts' of 1888 and 1898 which became standard works. He was retained by the Great Indian Peninsula Railway in connection with the development of its communications in the Central Provinces, and was also associated with the activities of a wealthy Marwari business house in Ahmadabad. 
Dadabhoy increasingly moved into the industrial and public life of his province. Through partnership in a mining syndicate, he had a share in the development of the considerable mineral resources of the Central Provinces. He was director of a number of textile mills, founded and was managing director of the Nagpur Electric Light and Power Company, and was managing proprietor of several collieries and other industrial concerns. His interests and ability brought him leadership in the Indian industrial community as a whole. In 1907 he presided at the Central Provinces and Berar industrial conference, and in 1911 he was elected president of the All-India industrial conference in Calcutta. Throughout his public career he took a keen practical and urgent interest in the industrialization of India. He was recognized as an authority on the economic life of the country, and served on a number of commissions dealing with finance and economics, including the Indian fiscal commission (1921-2) and the royal commission on Indian currency and finance (1925-6). From 1920 to 1932 he was a governor of the Imperial Bank of India. 
Dadabhoy's long experience of municipal politics served him well when he entered the wider parliamentary field in 1908, as a nominated, and then an elected member of the governor-general's legislative council. He soon established a prominent position as a forceful, independent, and constructive critic of the government of India. In 1921 he was elected to the council of state, to which he was subsequently nominated in 1926, 1931, and 1937. He became its president in 1932. He filled this post with distinction and general acceptance until 1946, when the constituent assembly was established to draw up a constitution for the independent India which was to come into being in 1947. 
Dadabhoy was short of stature, and this often left the members of the council of state in some doubt whether their president was standing up or sitting down -- a dilemma which gave him much amusement. If short, he was sturdy and robust, and gave the impression of great physical strength. He had an agile mind, shrewd judgement, great tact, and a rare capacity for making friends. His politics were liberal: a friend of John Gorst and a member of the council of the liberal East India Association, he was a committed but moderate nationalist. He was not a supporter of the radicalism of the Gandhian Congress. Although a frequent and candid critic of the government, he was a profound believer in the value of Indo-British partnership and friendship to the Commonwealth and to the world. This conviction was the keynote of his public and parliamentary career and the theme of his outspoken and constructive contribution as a delegate to the second session of the round-table conference in London in 1931. It was also the basis of his conduct during his years as president of the council of state. Throughout some of the stormiest periods in India's political history, he succeeded in exercising his authority and influence with the general support of all parties in the house. 
Dadabhoy was gregarious, cosmopolitan, and hospitable. In the United Kingdom he entertained lavishly at Kingsnympton Hall, on Kingston Hill, Surrey. He was a generous host at his spacious house in Nagpur, and at the many social clubs of which he was a member, in Bombay, Delhi, Simla, and Calcutta. For his services in India Dadabhoy was appointed CIE (1911) and knighted in 1921. He was subsequently made KCIE (1925) and KCSI (1936). He died in Nagpur on 14 December 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 32690


Dafoe, John Wesley (1866-1944), journalist in Canada, was born near Combermere in the Ottawa valley, Upper Canada, on 8 March 1866, the eldest son of a pioneer farmer, Calvin Dafoe, and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of John Elcome, farmer, of nearby Bangor. After attending local schools until the age of fifteen, he became a teacher in one of them. Three years later he was in Montreal learning his way as a reporter for the 'Montreal Star', then edited by Hugh Graham (later Lord Atholstan) who tutored him well. As parliamentary correspondent he began to acquire a reputation as political observer and commentator. It gained for him, briefly and perhaps prematurely, the editorship of the fledgeling 'Ottawa Journal'. He was not a success. He then moved west and for six years he honed his skills with the 'Manitoba Free Press'. He married Alice Parmelee, daughter of William G. Parmelee, the deputy minister of customs and excise, in Ottawa in 1890. They raised a large family of four daughters and three sons. Dafoe subsequently returned to Montreal in 1892 and edited the 'Montreal Herald' for three years and then rejoined the editorial staff of the 'Montreal Star'. 
By this time Dafoe was a vigorous champion of the Liberal Party and attracted the notice of Clifford Sifton, minister of the interior in the Liberal cabinet of Sir Wilfrid Laurier. Sifton had acquired control of the 'Manitoba Free Press' and in 1901 he appointed Dafoe editor. It was the beginning of a long, successful, but occasionally difficult relationship. Sifton was not often in Winnipeg and their full and frequent correspondence is a rich mine of information on Canadian public life. Within a short time the 'Free Press' was the most influential (and prosperous) newspaper in western Canada, whose interests Dafoe championed with the federal Liberals. Increasingly, he came to see himself as a friendly but not uncritical adviser to government. It led to some odd situations. 
As minister of the interior, Sifton initiated a vigorous immigration policy seeking out the peasantry of eastern Europe who, he was convinced, would make the vast Canadian prairies a great breadbasket. Dafoe approved of the economic thrust of the policy but, unlike Sifton, deplored its social consequences. For years he editorialized about the danger of 'Balkanizing' Canada and demanded a unilingual school system to neutralize the presumed threat. Similarly, when Sifton campaigned against the proposed reciprocity treaty between Canada and the United States in 1911, Dafoe gave it vigorous support. He was first and always a free-trader, but he had little choice if the 'Free Press' was to maintain its influence (and income) in western Canada, which Sifton was forced to acknowledge. 
Publisher and editor stood firmly together during the First World war. However, when in 1917 Laurier, now leader of the opposition, opposed conscription for overseas service, Dafoe broke with the Liberals and ranged the 'Free Press' behind a union government pledged to compulsory service. It would be ten years before Dafoe returned to the Liberal fold. In the interval, he gave editorial blessing to the post-war Progressive Party, which represented predominantly western agrarian interests. When the majority of them were absorbed by the Liberals in 1926, Dafoe also returned. But he remained an independent Liberal counsellor, turning down a cabinet post among other offers. He did accept an appointment to the Rowell-Sirois royal commission of 1937-40 which fundamentally reshaped the Canadian confederation. 
Dafoe's greatest preoccupation during the 1930s was the worsening situation in Europe. Here he seemed torn. His nationalism drew him more and more to see Canada as a North American country, best free of European (and especially British) entanglements. At the same time, he was perhaps the most vocal exponent in the country of the principle of collective security and the League of Nations. But the ambivalence disappeared when war began in 1939, and the 'Free Press' gave solid support to the government's war effort. Dafoe remained at his editorial desk until he died after a brief illness, at Winnipeg, on 9 January 1944. 
J. W. Dafoe never wished to be anything but a journalist, and he was, arguably, Canada's best. His prose was vigorous and direct rather than elegant; designed to explain and persuade rather than to charm. Secure in his abilities, he surrounded himself with the best young people he could find and for three decades the 'Free Press' was the most influential newspaper in the country. He cared little for public honours, rejecting a knighthood among others. But he did accept several honorary degrees and served devotedly as chancellor of the University of Manitoba from 1934 until his death. Somehow he found time for private writing; his books included 'Over the Canadian Battlefields' (1919), 'Laurier: a Study in Canadian Politics' (1922), 'Clifford Sifton in Relation to his Times' (1931), and 'Canada: an American Nation' (1935), and he edited 'Canada Fights' (1941). 


@@@@@


doc= 32691


Dain, Sir (Harry) Guy (1870-1966), general practitioner, was born in Birmingham on 5 November 1870, the eldest of six children of Major Dain, draper, and his wife, Diana Weaver. He was educated at King Edward's Grammar School (1883-7) and at Mason College, to which in 1892 the medical department of Queen's College, Birmingham, was transferred. He qualified MRCS LRCP in 1893 and took the MB BS (London) in the following year. 
Dain spent his entire career in his native city of Birmingham. After holding appointments as resident medical officer at the Children's Hospital and assistant house-surgeon at the General Hospital, he settled in general practice. Later he became head of a large partnership in Selly Oak. Dain was married twice: on 17 July 1897 to Flora Elizabeth Lewis, a nurse, who died in 1934; and on 1 February 1939 to Alice Muriel Hague, a dispenser, who survived him. There were two daughters and two sons of the first marriage, of whom one son was killed in the Second World War. One daughter and one son entered the medical profession. 
On the introduction of national health insurance Dain began to develop a long-lasting interest in medical politics. In Birmingham he was a member of the first insurance committee and of the first panel committee. Very soon he became its chairman, and in 1917 he became a member of the insurance acts committee in London. For six years he presided over the annual conference of local medical and panel committees (1919-24) and for twelve years (1924-36) he was chairman of the insurance acts committee itself. During this period it was said that his name was suggested for every sub-committee or deputation to the government. Though no orator Dain had the gift of clear and persuasive speech, and an enviable ability to disentangle complicated matters. While everyone was afforded a full part in decision making, it was made easier by the way in which Dain presented the essential facts and drew attention to the root of a problem. In 1936 the Dain Testimonial Fund was established to mark his work on behalf of insurance practitioners. At his request the fund was used to help finance the education of the children of medical practitioners who had fallen on hard times. 
In 1934 Dain was elected to the General Medical Council as a direct representative of GPs in England and Wales. He remained a member until his resignation in 1961. This was the longest period of service of any medical practitioner. Dain joined the British Medical Association (BMA) in 1896. Between 1937 and 1942 he was chairman of the association's representative body, his membership of which spanned the period 1919-57. He was a member of the BMA council from 1921 to 1960, serving as chairman in the period 1943-9. The 1940s were testing years for the medical profession, owing to the planning and introduction of the National Health Service (NHS). By virtue of his position in the BMA, Dain became one of the chief spokesmen for the profession. In some ways he was an unlikely leader. Well into his seventies, he was 'an unspectacular, competent family doctor... better known as a steady negotiator than a forceful leader' ('The Times', 1 March 1966). However, whether he was negotiating at the ministry, or in the chair of council, or at mass meetings of the profession, or holding press conferences, he was steadfast, persuasive, honest, and patient, never departing from the principles he held to be essential. It was his great achievement to keep the profession united in the face of the most severe pressures. 
Dain's attitude towards the proposed NHS was conditioned by his experiences as a panel practitioner and as a medical politician. These had bred in him a deep suspicion of government involvement with medicine and throughout the negotiations over the new service he fought against the prospect, real or imagined, of state control of the medical profession. He was particularly fearful that doctors would become salaried civil servants and that patients would lose their right to choose their own doctors. At the time of his election as chairman of the BMA's council (in 1943) he remained opposed to the creation of a comprehensive service, preferring instead an extension of the national health insurance scheme with the preservation of private practice on a large scale. While the wartime coalition remained in power, with Henry Willink as minister of health, Dain remained satisfied with the direction of negotiations. Indeed, in March 1945 he informed a group of Nottingham doctors that discussions with the minister comprised 'a constructive attempt to implement the entirely admirable preamble of the [February 1944] White Paper, 'A National Health Service'' ('BMJ', Supplement, 7 April 1945, 52). 
The advent of a Labour government with Aneurin Bevan as minister of health changed all of this, even though Dain had great personal admiration for Bevan's qualities as a politician, regarding him as knowledgeable, decisive, and determined. When the 'National Health Service Act' received royal assent in November 1946 Dain's assessment was hostile. 'The Act', he told a BMA meeting in Exeter, 'is part of the nationalization programme which is being steadily pursued by the Government. What the Minister appears to have done is to have taken the Bill which we had partly fashioned and to have inserted into it the Socialist principles of State ownership of hospitals, direction of doctors, basic salary for doctors, and abolition of buying and selling of practices' ('BMJ', 16 Nov 1946, 747). Dain maintained this intransigent attitude throughout 1947 and well into 1948, notwithstanding Bevan's commitment that he would never introduce full-time salaried service. In a speech at Shrewsbury, delivered in April 1948, Dain urged the profession to refuse service under the act. But when the BMA's plebiscite went against this advice Dain, democrat that he was, accepted the decision without demur. In a letter to 'The Times' on 18 June 1948, he pledged that the profession would 'do its utmost to make the new Service a resounding success'. 
In recognition of his service to his profession Dain received the honorary degrees of LLD from Aberdeen in 1939, and MD from Birmingham in 1944. As a member of more than twenty years' standing he was elected FRCS in 1945, having served for some years on the council. He was awarded the gold medal of the BMA in 1936. It was with special pleasure that in 1957 he became the first recipient of the Claire Wand award for outstanding services to general practice. He was knighted in 1961, a year after he retired, aged ninety. 
Dain's interests in medicine were wide, and throughout his association with the BMA he continued to devote much of his time to his busy practice in Birmingham, where he was popular with patients. His leisure interests included gardening and playing bridge. In appearance Dain was short, dapper, and smart. He had blue eyes, a kindly face, and a briskness of manner. Mentally alert and physically fit into his nineties, he died at Highmead, Aberdyfi, Merioneth, on 26 February 1966. A memorial service was held at St Pancras Church, London, on 23 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 32692


Dakin, Henry Drysdale (1880-1952), biochemist, was born at 60 Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, London, on 12 March 1880, the youngest of a family of five sons and three daughters of Thomas Burns Dakin and his wife, Sophia, formerly Stevens. His father was then the owner of a sugar refinery in London, but later acquired an iron and steel business in Leeds, and moved there with his family in 1893. Dakin, after a brief period at the Merchant Taylors' School, London, therefore transferred at the age of thirteen to the Leeds modern school. On leaving school he was apprenticed to the Leeds city analyst, T. Fairley, before he entered, in 1898, the Yorkshire College, Leeds. In later years he recalled this early and strict scientific discipline of an analyst's laboratory as valuable training for his lifelong devotion to the then newly emergent science of biochemistry. 
Dakin's course for the BSc brought him at once into contact with Julius B. Cohen, then the lecturer in organic chemistry at the Yorkshire College. It was with Cohen that Dakin began to acquire his lasting interest in the optical activity of organic compounds, its influence on their biological activities, or on their acceptability as nutrients. His specially vivid interest in the selective action of a natural enzyme on one component of a racemic compound led Cohen to give him the nickname Zyme, which his friends were to use as a familiar mode of address for the rest of his life. 
After obtaining his BSc in 1901 from the University of Manchester, and spending a further year with Cohen as his personal assistant and demonstrator, Dakin was awarded a research exhibition by the 1851 Commissioners, and worked with it at the Jenner (later the Lister) Institute under S. G. Hedin; at Heidelberg, with A. Kossel; and for a final period again at the Lister Institute. These researches covered enzymatic actions on proteins and, selectively, on racemic esters of mandelic acid; on arginase and protamines; and on the synthesis of the hormone adrenaline and related active bases. 
At that juncture the physician and biochemist Christian A. Herter (1865-1910) of New York was enquiring in London for somebody with suitable scientific and personal qualifications for an appointment with him in a private laboratory for biochemical researches which he had installed, and fully equipped, on two upper floors of his Madison Avenue mansion. Dakin accepted this unusual opportunity, for which, indeed, he had unique qualifications; and, in the event, he was to spend the rest of his working life in developing its special possibilities. Its conditions accentuated in him an inborn shrinking from any kind of publicity, which prevented him from taking part in any open meeting, discussion, or ceremony. He was elected FRS in 1917 but an invitation to deliver the Croonian lecture was met by a penitent refusal; and the award to him of its Davy medal (1941) was accepted only because, in wartime conditions, it could be presented in his own library. Congenial colleagues, however, were always welcomed to free and lively discussions of researches in private. Dakin had, indeed, a genius for quietly intimate friendships. Meanwhile publications of his own important researches in biochemistry were issuing in a steady stream from the Herter Laboratory. 
After Herter died in 1910 his widow, Susan Dows Herter (died 1951), was eager to maintain the laboratory, with Dakin thenceforward in sole charge of its uses. In 1916 their personal devotion was confirmed by their marriage. Dakin, though chronically unfit for active service, had hastened to Britain to offer his services for any national purpose. He eventually found opportunity for researches on the antiseptic treatment of wounds, and became an active advocate and exponent of the use of a buffered hypochlorite solution. This he used to great purpose in the 'Aquitania' (then serving as a hospital ship for the Dardanelles) after having arranged for the installation of an electrolytic tank, with which an unlimited supply of the hypochlorite solution -- Dakin's solution -- could be made from sea water. 
The Dakins moved later from Madison Avenue to a house and estate at Scarborough-on-Hudson, some 30 miles upriver from New York. There the laboratory was reinstated in a special building, and Dakin continued his researches, with their characteristic, unhurried perfection, almost until his death, on 10 February 1952, a year after that of his wife. They had no children. He had received honorary doctorates from Leeds, Yale, and Heidelberg. Dakin was cremated and his ashes buried, as he had requested, in his wife's grave. 
H. H. Dale', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32693


Dale, Sir David, first baronet (1829-1906), industrialist, was born on 11 December 1829 at Murshidabad, Bengal. He was the younger son of David Dale, an employee of the East India Company and judge of the city court there, and his wife, Ann Elizabeth, daughter of the Revd George Douglas of Aberdeen. Dale's great-uncle was David Dale, the Glasgow banker and philanthropist, whose daughter married the socialist Robert Owen and was mother of Robert Dale Owen. His elder brother, James Douglas (1820-1865), joined the Indian army on the Madras establishment, and became lieutenant-colonel. Dale's father died on board the 'Providence' on 23 June 1830, during the voyage home with his wife and children. Mrs Dale, while travelling with her children to New Lanark to visit her family, was detained at Darlington by an accident to the mail coach, and received such kindness from Quakers of that town that she returned and made Darlington her home. She became a member of the Society of Friends in 1841, and died in 1879. 
Dale was educated privately at Edinburgh, Durham, and Stockton. Brought up among Quakers, Dale remained a member of the Society of Friends until the late 1880s. 
Dale's adult career began in the office of the Stockton and Darlington Railway Company, and in 1852, at the age of twenty-three, he was appointed secretary to the Middlesbrough and Guisborough section of the line. On 27 January 1853 he married a widow, Annie Backhouse Whitwell, 'nee' Robson (died 1886), who already had two children; another son and daughter were born to them. 
In 1858 Dale entered into partnership with William Bouch and became lessee of the Shildon locomotive works; the partnership ended in the early 1870s. Henceforth his activities rapidly expanded. He was concerned with the formation of the Consett Iron Company, of which he was appointed inspector in 1858, subsequently becoming managing director in 1869 and chairman in 1884. In 1866 he embarked on extensive shipbuilding enterprises in co-operation with the firms of Richardson, Denton, and Duck of Stockton, Denton and Grey of Hartlepool, and Thomas Richardson & Sons of Hartlepool, who combined together with a view to amalgamation. Dale became vice-chairman of this ambitious undertaking, but the union was not successful, and the companies reverted shortly afterwards to their former independent positions. Dale retained an interest in the two first-named concerns. He was also managing partner of Pease & Partners Ltd, and chairman of companies working iron ore mines near Bilbao in Spain. In 1881 he became a director of the North Eastern Railway Company, having previously served as director of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, and on the formation of the Sunderland Iron Ore Company in 1902 he was appointed chairman. He was an active member of the Durham Coal Owners' Association and of the Cleveland Mine Owners' Association. 
Dale owes his main distinction to his pioneer application of the principle of arbitration to industrial disputes. The first board of arbitration was formed in connection with the iron trade of the north of England in March 1869, and Dale was its first president. The experiment was successful, serving to stabilize the industry's previously disorganized and volatile industrial relations. In recognition of Dale's services to the Iron Trades Conciliation Board he was publicly presented in 1881 with an address and a portrait painted by W. W. Ouless. Dale's important position within industry led to his appointment on several royal commissions, among which were those on trade depression (1885-6); on mining royalties (1889-93); and on labour (1891-4). At the Berlin labour conference of 1890, convened by the German emperor, he was one of the representatives of Great Britain, and during the sittings he received marked attention from the emperor and Bismarck. He helped to found the Iron and Steel Institute in 1869, and acted as honorary treasurer from that date until 1895, when he was elected president. His first wife having died in 1886, on 2 August 1888 he married Alice Frederica, elder daughter of Sir Frederick Milbank, of Barningham Hall, Yorkshire. She died in 1902. 
In politics Dale was a Liberal, though his attention to business interests prevented him from standing for parliament. He became high sheriff for Durham in 1888, and the University of Durham made him an honorary DCL in 1895. He was created a baronet in the same year. 
Active to the end, Dale died at York on 28 April 1906, and was buried in his home town of Darlington. In his honour a Sir David Dale chair of economics was instituted in 1909 at Armstrong College, Newcastle upon Tyne, then part of Durham University. A memorial lectureship on labour problems was also initiated at Darlington, the first lecture being delivered by Sir Edward Grey on 28 October 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 32694


Dale, Sir Henry Hallett (1875-1968), physiologist and pharmacologist, was born at 5 Devonshire Street, Islington, London on 9 June 1875, the third son and third of the seven children of Charles James Dale ('b'. 1842), manager of a pottery manufacturing firm, and his wife, Frances Anne, daughter of Frederick Hallett, a furniture-maker in Clerkenwell. Dale's younger brother, Benjamin James Dale, who died in 1943, was a composer of some distinction and warden of the Royal Academy of Music. At several stages of his education Dale faced financial problems. Seemingly destined for a commercial career, at sixteen he won a scholarship to the Leys School, Cambridge. Three years later he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on a minor scholarship and a sub-sizarship in natural sciences; he was soon awarded a sizarship and then won a major foundation scholarship in 1896. In his natural sciences tripos, parts one (1896) and two (1898), he was placed in the first class. 
Dale stayed in J. N. Langley's department of physiology for a further two years. His college scholarship of $100 per annum was not sufficient to keep him, and when he failed to obtain a Coutts-Trotter studentship at Trinity, which went to Ernest Rutherford, Dale collected whatever demonstratorships and private coaching he could. When, shortly afterwards, Rutherford was appointed as professor at McGill University, the studentship fell vacant, and Trinity College divided it between Dale and R. J. Strutt (later fourth Baron Rayleigh), and allowed them to retain their scholarships as well. When Dale presented his thesis for a college fellowship, he did so again in competition with Strutt. This time he was unsuccessful, though the thesis was highly commended. Dale was financially unable to remain in Cambridge. He devoted a few weeks to 'shameless cramming' of descriptive anatomy and then sat for a Schuster scholarship at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London -- awarded on examination in anatomy and physiology -- and was elected. While at Bart's, Dale lived with his parents for reasons of economy. A few months before he qualified BCh, Cambridge, in 1902, he was awarded the George Henry Lewes studentship, founded by George Eliot, and made arrangements with professors E. H. Starling and W. Bayliss to work in the department at University College, London. During the tenure of this studentship, in October 1903, he also spent four months in Frankfurt am Main working under Paul Ehrlich. On returning to London, Dale applied for the Sharpey studentship in physiology at University College, London, and was appointed in March 1904. 
Dale married that year his first cousin Ellen Harriet (died 1967), daughter of F. W. Hallett. They had three children, all of whom studied either physiology or medicine. Their elder daughter, Alison Sarah, married Alexander Robertus Todd FRS, professor of organic chemistry at Cambridge. Their second daughter, Eleanor Mary, married Robert Edgar Hope Simpson, a medical practitioner. Their third child, a son, Robert Henry (died 1957), became a plastic surgeon in Saskatoon, Canada. 
Later in 1904 Dale accepted a research post in physiology at the Wellcome Physiological Research Laboratories offered to him by Henry S. Wellcome. Dale spent ten extremely fruitful years there, the first eighteen months as their pharmacologist and the remainder of the time as director. Here he met George Barger and engaged a number of young men who started their scientific career with him, including Arthur Ewins, Alexander Glenny, P. P. Laidlaw, and J. H. Burn. In 1914 Dale became director of the department of biochemistry and pharmacology of the projected Central Institute for Medical Research, which in 1920 became the National Institute for Medical Research at Hampstead. In 1923 Dale was made chairman of the committee of departmental directors and, in 1928, the first director of the institute, a position he held until his retirement in 1942, when he accepted the directorship of the Royal Institution, becoming at the same time Fullerian professor of chemistry. He retired from this position in 1946. 
In 1936, when Sir Henry Wellcome died, Dale was nominated as one of the founding trustees of the Wellcome Trust. He was its chairman from 1938 to 1960, and continued as scientific adviser until 1968, giving advice until a week before he died at the age of ninety-three. To commemorate his unique services as chairman, the trust in 1961 endowed a Royal Society professorship, the Henry Dale research professorship. 
Dale was secretary of the Royal Society from 1925 to 1935 and its wartime president from 1940 to 1945, which brought special responsibilities. During his secretaryship obituary notices of the fellows of the society, previously published in the society's 'Proceedings', were for the first time published collectively in a single volume each year. He also inaugurated the system whereby fellows were encouraged to write and deposit personal records, for the benefit of future obituarists. During his presidency a meeting of the society was held outside Britain for the first time, in India; the number of fellows to be elected each year was increased from twenty to twenty-five and women were admitted to the fellowship for the first time in 1945. Dale set up the British Commonwealth Science Committee, to foster scientific co-operation, which led to the Royal Society Empire Scientific Conference in 1946. His presidency brought him secret duties; in 1942 he chaired a small, highly confidential, scientific advisory committee to the war cabinet, and later he advised the post-war cabinet until 1947. 
Dale's last two years as director of the National Institute for Medical Research were devoted to the detailed planning of a building at Mill Hill. After his retirement Dale became a member of the Medical Research Council (1942-6), chairman of its post-war committee on the medical and biological application of nuclear physics (1945-9), member of the advisory committee on atomic energy (1945-7), chairman of the radioactive substances advisory committee (1949-52), of the governing body of the Lister Institute, and of the scientific committee of the British Council. He was president of the Royal Society of Medicine (1948-50) and of the British Council (1950-55), and in 1947 presided over the British Association at its Dundee meeting and over the seventeenth International Physiological Congress at Oxford. He was a trustee of the National Central Library (later part of the British Library lending division) and a member of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries. 
A substantial part of Dale's research career, on chemical mediators in the functioning of the body, came from work on a fungus, ergot of rye. In 1906 he provided the first example of an adrenergic blocking agent by showing that an extract of ergot, called ergotoxine, reversed the raising effect on the blood pressure of both sympathetic nerve stimulation, and of the application of adrenaline. Some of this work was done in collaboration with T. R. Elliott, although the two men never published together, and they were some of the earliest experiments to suggest mechanisms of chemical neurotransmission, for which Dale was ultimately to share the Nobel prize. In 1907 he discovered histamine in an extract of ergot, and with Barger determined its chemical structure and physiological actions, and in 1909 he discovered an extract from the posterior pituitary gland which had the property of contracting the uterus. The following year Dale and Barger, after an extensive chemical and physiological study of over fifty structurally related substances, introduced the useful term 'sympathomimetic', now in general use, for chemicals that imitated the effects of the sympathetic nervous system. In 1913 Dale made a fundamental discovery that anaphylactic contractions of smooth muscle resulted from the formation of cell-fixed antibodies, which changed prevailing views about the mechanisms of anaphylaxis, allergy, and immunity. In 1914, in collaboration with Arthur Ewins, Dale discovered a naturally occurring source in ergot of a vasoactive substance, acetylcholine. He characterized its physiological effects, and showed that it acted on smooth muscles, gland cells, and the heart; and in a different fashion, on the cells of autonomic ganglia and the adrenal medulla. Later work revealed a similar action at motor end-plates in the peripheral nervous system. This distinction allowed Dale, over twenty years later, to suggest, and to establish with several co-workers, the physiological role of acetylcholine at several sites in the autonomic nervous system and at the neuromuscular junction. 
During the First World War, employed by the Medical Research Committee, Dale directed his energies to war work, studying amoebic dysentery, gas gangrene, and wound shock, organizing alternative British supplies of the anti-syphilitic, Salvarsan, produced in Germany. Immediately after the war he returned to the study of histamine, and with Laidlaw made a beautiful analysis of its vascular effects and the mechanism of histamine shock. In 1929, with Harold Dudley he first isolated acetylcholine and histamine from an animal source, a discovery that greatly stimulated his own, and others', research into acetylcholine. In 1934 he coined the terms 'cholinergic' and 'adrenergic' to distinguish nerve fibres by the chemical neurotransmitter they might use. For his work on the role of acetylcholine in chemical neurotransmission he was awarded the Nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1936, shared with the Austrian pharmacologist Otto Loewi. A somewhat different, but immense contribution that Dale also made to therapeutics throughout the world was his experimental and administrative work, from the 1920s onwards, in establishing international standards for hormones, vitamins, and various other drugs; he himself provided the first international standard for insulin. 
Dale published numerous scientific articles and two books, one of which, 'Adventures in Physiology', is an annotated collection of his most important papers. He also contributed several notices to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Dale's work was recognized by his appointment as a fellow of the Royal Society (1914); CBE (1919); knight (1932); GBE (1943); and by his admission to the OM (1944). Dale shared the unique position of being holder of two orders of merit -- the second one being the order of merit of the German Bundesrepublik (1955) -- with only one other person in Britain, T. S. Eliot. In 1949 Dale received Belgium's grand croix of the order of the Crown. In 1900 Dale won the Gedge prize, Cambridge University; in 1909 the Raymond Horton Smith prize; in 1926 the Cameron prize, University of Edinburgh. A research professorship of the Royal Society bears his name and in 1959 a Dale medal was struck in his honour by the Society of Endocrinology. It is awarded annually and the recipient delivers the Sir Henry Dale lecture. Dale was an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, of University College, London, and of the Chemical Society. He received honorary degrees from twenty-five universities, including eleven in Britain; he was the recipient of seventeen medals, an honorary member of the Physiological Society, British Pharmacological Society, Pharmaceutical Society, Royal Society of Medicine, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the Royal Society of New Zealand, an honorary associate of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, and an honorary, foreign, corresponding, or associate member of thirty-seven foreign scientific societies. Dale died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 23 July 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 32695


Daley, Sir (William) Allen (1887-1969), medical officer of health, was born at Bootle, Lancashire, on 19 February 1887, the elder son of William Daley (died 1911), medical officer of health of Bootle, and his wife, Mary Allen. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, Crosby, and at the University of Liverpool. He graduated BSc (London) in chemistry in 1906, then MB, ChB (Liverpool), in 1909, with first-class honours, and MB, BS (London), in 1910, with distinction in medicine. He obtained the Cambridge diploma in public health in 1911 with distinction, and his London MD degree in 1912. After holding resident posts in Liverpool he became resident medical officer at the London Fever Hospital in 1911. In May that year his father was drowned at the age of forty-seven in a yachting accident and Daley was recalled to Bootle to succeed him as medical officer of health at the early age of twenty-four. 
For the next forty-one years Daley held posts of increasing responsibility and importance in the field of preventive medicine. The early work at Bootle showed energy and promise leading to similar appointments successively in Blackburn (1920-25) and Hull (1925-9). Daley was appointed in 1928 to serve on a departmental committee of the Ministry of Health on the recruitment and training of midwives and his work there was noticed by the medical officer of health of the London county council, Frederick Menzies. In 1929 Daley was appointed a principal medical officer of the London county council and in 1938 he became deputy to Menzies. In the nine years before the outbreak of war in 1939 the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board and the metropolitan boards of guardians were being integrated into a single service by the London county council. Menzies had chosen well: Daley's apparently unlimited energy and industry had found an appropriate task. Within a short time he had a complete grasp of the complexities of the service down to the smallest detail. He recorded and reported on all his activities and copies were distributed widely so that staff were made aware of progress or delay in all projects. It was commonplace to hear from staff that at no other time or place in their careers were they so well informed about their work. Daley chaired many departmental committees dealing with such diverse subjects as pathological services, hospital standards and staffing, the district medical service, the ambulance service, and the tuberculosis scheme. He was demonstrably a master of the committee method: well informed, affable, and urbane. 
In 1939 Daley succeeded Menzies as county medical officer; in the same year he was elected FRCP. During the Second World War he had the difficult task of guiding the hospital service during a time when it acquired a reputation of never refusing a casualty a bed, though many buildings were badly damaged. His work was recognized by a knighthood in 1944 and, in 1947, by an honorary physicianship to George VI. Daley took a special pride in his election to the council of the Royal College of Physicians while a practising medical officer of health, a rare honour. In 1943 he published with Reginald Coleman a paper entitled 'The development of the hospital services with particular reference to the municipal hospital system of London', in 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine' (35, 1941-2, 45-56). 
The 'National Health Service Act' of 1946 led to a further period of great activity during which the London county council hospitals were transferred to the newly formed regional hospital boards, and simultaneously steps were taken to absorb the personal health services previously in the care of the metropolitan boroughs which made up the county council area. This was accomplished with Daley's accustomed skill in 1948, even though he regretted the loss of the responsibility of local authorities for hospitals, and four years later he reached the official retiring age. This had no perceptible effect on his activities; he transferred his personal files to his home and continued to serve on the many committees to which he had been appointed in a personal capacity. 
Daley was president of the Central Council for Health Education, having been a founder member and the author of a paper in the 1920s which played a considerable part in the thinking which led to the formation of the council. In 1927 he published 'Population Education in Public Health' (with Hester Viney) and an interview with him on the topic of health education was published in the 'Health Education Journal' (1, 1943, 19-23). He was chairman of the Chadwick trustees and president of the National Association for Maternal and Child Welfare. These were appointments which he continued to the end of his life, but in addition he held appointments on boards of governors of hospitals and other bodies concerned with health. Age limits removed him from many of these, but to the end he retained the vice-chairmanship of the academic board of the Royal Postgraduate Hospital at Hammersmith in west London. 
At the time of his retirement from his official post, Daley had written or spoken on 250 occasions, varying from addresses for learned societies to speeches at prizegivings. Some fifteen years later this had been increased to more than 450. He delivered the Croonian lectures to the Royal College of Physicians, the De Lamar lecture at Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, and a report to the World Health Organization and Rockefeller Foundation on health and social workers in England and France. After his retirement he visited Australia on behalf of the Nuffield Foundation, lecturing on the British National Health Service, and he lectured also in North America, where for several months he was associate health officer of the city of Baltimore. 
In 1913 Daley married Mary 
(Marie; died 1962)
, daughter of Edward Toomey, of Liverpool; they had a daughter who became a consultant obstetrician and gynaecologist in London and a son who became a consultant physician also in the capital at St Thomas's Hospital. Although in the last five years of Daley's life physical afflictions slowed him down, there was no lack of mental power and he continued by correspondence and conversation to be one of the best-informed, as well as one of the best-known, figures in public health circles. He died on 21 February 1969 at Tenerife during a winter holiday. 


@@@@@


doc= 32696


Dallinger, William Henry (1842-1909), Wesleyan Methodist minister and biologist, was born in Devonport on 5 July 1842, the son of Joseph Stephen Dallinger, artist, etcher, and engraver. He was educated privately and showed an early inclination towards natural history. His religious instinct led him to qualify for the Wesleyan ministry in 1861. After serving Wesleyan churches in Faversham, Cardiff, and Bristol, he passed to Liverpool, where he remained for twelve years (1868-80). On 18 December 1866, while in Cardiff, he married Emma Jane ('b'. 1842), daughter of David Goldsmith, an ironmonger from Bury St Edmunds. The couple had one son. 
In 1870, in Liverpool, Dallinger began microscopic researches, which he pursued for ten years, into minute septic organisms. In 1880 he was appointed governor and principal of Wesley College, Sheffield. After eight years, the Wesleyan conference, recognizing his scientific attainments, allowed him to retire from the position while retaining the status and privilege of a Wesleyan minister but without pastoral charge. In addition to his work as minister and governor, Dallinger was a successful public lecturer on microscopical subjects, and for thirty years he lectured for the Gilchrist Educational Trust. 
Dallinger's contributions to science were of two kinds -- his classical investigations into the life history of certain micro-organisms, and his improvements in microscopical technique. In collaboration with John James Drysdale of Liverpool he concentrated his research on protozoa, in particular on flagellates, about which little was then known. In addition Dallinger and his colleague contributed valuable evidence regarding the then controversial question of abiogenesis (the apparent spontaneous generation of life). They were able to show that flagellates subjected to increasingly high temperatures could be forced to exist in temperatures ordinarily lethal to unacclimatized specimens. Further research showed that the spores of such organisms were also resistant to very high temperatures. These discoveries led to the realization that the ordinary precautions (such as boiling) by which organic solutions were sterilized were insufficient. More importantly, however, his contemporaries believed that these results explained the origin of life in experiments where spontaneous generation had been supposed to occur. 
As an expert microscopist, Dallinger enjoyed the highest reputation. His earliest biological researches were rewarded by an unsought grant of $100 from the Royal Society, and he was elected FRS in 1880. He occupied the post of president of the Royal Microscopical Society four times (1884-7) and that of the Quekett Club (1890-92). He was requested to present his principal results at the British Association meeting in Montreal in 1884, and while there he was awarded an honorary degree of LLD from Victoria University. In 1892, at the celebration of the tercentenary of Trinity College, Dublin, he received his DSc degree, and four years later Durham University created him a DCL in recognition of his contributions to science. 
In 1879 Dallinger delivered the Rede lecture at Cambridge, 'The origin of life', which he illustrated with the life histories of simple organisms. His chief papers were published in the 'Monthly Microscopical Journal' (1873-6). He edited and rewrote William Benjamin Carpenter's book 'The Microscope and its Revelations' (1890; new edn, 1901), and was author of a theologico-scientific work, 'The Creator and what we may Know of the Method of Creation' (1887). He died at his home, Ingleside, New Stead Road, Lee, Kent, on 7 November 1909. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32697


Dalton, (Edward) Hugh Neale, Baron Dalton (1887-1962), politician, was born at The Gnoll, near Neath, Glamorgan, on 26 August 1887, the eldest child of Canon John Neale Dalton KCVO CMG (1839-1931) and his wife, Catherine Alicia Evan-Thomas (1863-1944). The descendant of Welsh landowners on his mother's side and Anglican clergy on his father's, Hugh Dalton was not obviously destined for a career as a socialist politician. Yet he became one of the best known Labour leaders of the inter-war and early post-Second World War period, and one of the most influential intellectuals in politics of his generation. 
Key to Dalton's early development was a childhood in The Cloisters at Windsor Castle, where his father was a member of the St George's Chapel chapter, having spent much of his adult life as tutor and companion to the two sons of the prince of Wales, Eddie and George (later George V). Hugh's adult radicalism can be seen, at least in part, as a rebellion against a childhood environment of aristocratic snobbery and monarchical opulence. His education was conventional. In 1895 Hugh entered St George's choir school at Windsor, which his father had helped to set up. In 1898 he was sent to Summer Fields, a boarding preparatory school in Oxford and crammer for the most famous public schools, and thence, in 1901, to Luxmoore's House at Eton College, where (by his own description) he was 'rather bored and indifferent' and acquired the political views of a 'Joe Chamberlainite, a Tory Democrat, a self-confessed Imperialist' (Pimlott, 29). In 1906 he entered King's College, Cambridge, with a closed exhibition, to read mathematics. Here he became a close friend of Rupert Brooke, who started at King's the same term. Both were part of a glittering circle of undergraduates and younger dons that included Arthur Schloss (later Arthur Waley, the Sinologist), Ben Keeling, Francis Birrell, Gerald Shove, Maynard Keynes, and Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson. 
Dalton's association with Brooke coloured the rest of his life. 'No Cambridge friendship of mine meant more to me than this', Dalton wrote later, 'and the radiance of his memory still lights my path' ('Call Back Yesterday', 38). Brooke died in 1915. Dalton felt his loss and that of other Cambridge contemporaries during the First World War very deeply. His political commitment to preventing war, and his generous habit of befriending much younger men and giving them encouragement, were consciously linked to memories of this phase in his life. Meanwhile he had been attracted to socialism as an undergraduate. Following the election of a reforming Liberal administration early in 1906, advanced political theories were in the air. Infected by the mood, Dalton exchanged Chamberlain for Keir Hardie and Sidney Webb: at the end of his first term, he and Brooke joined the Fabian Society, an intellectual discussion and pressure group set up in 1884 that had already profoundly influenced progressive opinion. From the start Dalton took the society's activities and preoccupations seriously, acquiring a Fabian outlook that characterized his future career. A keen participant in the society's activities, he quickly came to the attention of Beatrice Webb, who perceptively described the 21-year-old undergraduate in 1908 as 'one of the most astute and thoughtful of our younger members -- by nature an ecclesiastic -- a sort of lay Jesuit -- preparing for political life' (Pimlott, 50). 
At Cambridge Dalton abandoned mathematics, and in 1910 he was awarded an upper second-class degree in the new discipline of economics. Although he moved to London the same autumn to read for the bar at the Middle Temple, he had little interest in the law, and in the following year began work on a doctorate, supervised by Professor Edwin Cannan at the London School of Economics (LSE), on the inequality of incomes. In May 1914 he was called to the bar. Later the same month he married Ruth Fox (1890-1966) ['see 'Dalton, (Florence) Ruth, Lady Dalton], a fellow Fabian and former student at the LSE. When the First World War broke out in August, he joined up and was placed in the Army Service Corps. Sent to France, he witnessed -- at a safe distance -- the battle of the Somme. At his own request he transferred to the Royal Artillery, and in 1917 he was sent to the Italian front, where he commanded a 6 inch howitzer, and was decorated by the Italian government (medaglio al valore militare) for his part in the retreat following the battle of Caporetto. His experiences during the rapid withdrawal to the River Tagliamento provided material for his first book, 'With British Guns in Italy', published in 1919. 
Dalton's experience of war spurred him politically. By the time of his return to England following the armistice, he had a firm ambition to enter parliament as a Labour MP. Other jobs and activities were seen as stepping-stones. It took six years to achieve his aim. Meanwhile he built a career as an academic economist. After a brief experience working at the Ministry of Labour and as a teaching assistant, he was appointed Sir Ernest Cassel reader in economics at the LSE in 1920. The same year he published 'Some Aspects of the Inequality of Incomes in Modern Communities', based on his doctoral thesis. This was a theoretical work with a practical purpose, and developed the ideas of A. C. Pigou and Edwin Cannan, offering an intellectual justification for economic socialism. The case against large inequalities of income, he argued, 'is that the less urgent needs of the rich are satisfied, while the more urgent needs of the poor are left unsatisfied'. Dalton wrote other books on economics, including a celebrated textbook, 'Principles of Public Finance' (1922), which was translated into many languages and continued to be prescribed reading for economics students until the 1960s. He also published a polemical call for a wealth tax, 'The Capital Levy Explained' (1923). 
However, the bases of Dalton's economic thinking and of his political outlook on economic questions are to be found in 'Inequality of Incomes', a book that has had a wide influence and has been described by the economist Amartya Sen as 'a classic contribution' (Pimlott, 138). It was his first, and effectively his last, such contribution. Dalton scarcely remained at the forefront of his discipline, and a personal coolness between him and his friend and former tutor, Maynard Keynes, reduced the interest he might have shown in new doctrines. After the early 1920s, and especially after he entered parliament, Dalton regarded academic economics as a second string. Indeed, his self-image was that of a man of action: he tended to pour scorn on other academic socialists who wrote and campaigned from the security of the ivory tower. Instead of cultivating economists, he sought the attention of leading figures in the Labour world -- especially Arthur Henderson -- and he made himself available to the emerging Labour Party as a policy expert. 
Although Labour increased its parliamentary representation rapidly in the early 1920s, Dalton at first found it hard to get a seat. Public frustration was compounded by private tragedy. In 1922 the Daltons' only child, Helen, died at the age of four. The impact of this catastrophe never left them. In the short run it seems to have encouraged Hugh to pursue his career with heightened ferocity. In 1924, following four unsuccessful contests in different constituencies, he was elected MP for Camberwell (Peckham division). However, a dispute with the local party led him to switch seats during his first parliamentary term. After a period of uncertainty he was adopted as candidate for the Bishop Auckland division, a mining constituency in co. Durham, which he represented from 1929 to 1931 and from 1935 to 1959. 
In parliament, as one of the few Labour MPs with a solid professional or academic background, Dalton quickly made his mark, building an almost unassailable position as a member of the Labour establishment. In 1925 he was elected to Labour's parliamentary executive (shadow cabinet), a position he retained until his voluntary retirement from it thirty years later. The following year trade union backing ensured his election to the Labour Party national executive committee (NEC). Although he was defeated in the NEC election the following year, he regained his place the year after. A busy political life did not interrupt his writing. Increasingly his interests had moved from economics to foreign policy. In 1928 he published another book, 'Towards the Peace of Nations'. In this he advocated a 'strong' League of Nations policy, and -- in notable contrast to other radical writers on war and peace at the time -- called for a league equipped with the economic and military weapons necessary to police the world and punish transgressors. Following the election of a second minority Labour government in 1929, Dalton was given the post of under-secretary at the Foreign Office. The job appealed to him, even if his bombastic style did not entirely appeal to Foreign Office officials, who found him difficult to handle. Nevertheless, as deputy to the foreign secretary, Arthur Henderson, he played an important part in negotiations aimed at providing an international disarmament treaty. 
The episode was short-lived: when the government collapsed in 1931 and Ramsay MacDonald formed the National Government, Dalton forfeited his office and joined most of his Labour colleagues on the opposition benches. At first his position within the Labour Party was strengthened by defections which made him one of the leading figures on the NEC. The moment did not last. In the general election of October 1931 he lost his seat, and for a time seemed politically marginalized. Fortunately he was able to return to a full-time post at the LSE. There followed a period of reflection and travel. Since, however, most of the other Labour leaders had also been defeated, he was not out of the limelight for long. His position on the NEC, together with his academic income and Ruth's private means, provided a solid base -- which many other former ministers lacked -- for a political recovery. There were obstacles. The much-reduced Parliamentary Labour Party, under the leadership of George Lansbury, had responded to the 1931 electoral disaster by moving sharply to the left. Dalton had to deal with a party in the Commons that supported near-pacifism in foreign affairs, and advocated the 'socialization' of the banks at home. Over the next few years Dalton's mission was to restore reason to Labour's counsels. He became the party's most articulate and persuasive voice in favour of policies that took account of the world as it really was, and which sought to secure Labour's re-election. 
In 1935 Dalton published his own bold assessment of a future Labour government's policy options, 'Practical Socialism for Britain'. If 'Inequality of Incomes' was intellectually Dalton's most ambitious work, 'Practical Socialism' -- later described by Roy Jenkins as 'the first swallow of the post-1935 summer' of socialist reformism -- was politically the most influential. In it Dalton revived and updated nuts-and-bolts Fabianism, a doctrine that in the 1920s had sunk in a sea of sentimental rhetoric, and in the early 1930s had been dismissed by impatient communists and fellow-travellers. Dalton's message was defiantly pragmatic: 'if our concern is with practical politics', the author declared, 'we do better to decide the direction of advance than to debate the detail of Utopia' (Pimlott, 217). The essence of 'practical politics' was practical planning. Much of the book was devoted to this topic, linking Labour Party ideas to those of non-Labour planning enthusiasts, and providing what eventually became a virtual blueprint for the first post-war Labour administration. Dalton did not write the book in a vacuum: many of the key ideas came out of discussions with a group of younger political aspirants with economic interests, including Douglas Jay, Hugh Gaitskell, and Evan Durbin. Over the next few years the same group refined Dalton's political approach, and married it to a Keynesian economic one. 
Domestic policy was one of Dalton's main concerns in the 1930s. The other was the threat of continental fascism. A visit to Germany in April 1933 brought home to him the danger of Nazism. 'Germany is horrible', he wrote privately on his return, at a time when Labour's official policy favoured unilateral disarmament. 'A European war must be counted now among the probabilities of the next ten years' (Pimlott, 227). After regaining his Bishop Auckland seat in the 1935 election, he was appointed Labour foreign affairs spokesman, and set about changing the party's international policy. In 1936-7 he served as chairman of the Labour NEC, and made maximum possible use of a hitherto largely titular office. By the end of 1937, with help from sympathetic trade union leaders, Dalton had moved the party from semi-pacifism to a policy of armed deterrence and rejection of appeasement. This change had an important effect in the months before the declaration of war in September 1939, making it possible for Labour -- though still in opposition -- to stiffen the dithering National Government in its post-Munich resolve to stand up to Hitler. It also facilitated the cross-party alliance that succeeded in bringing down Neville Chamberlain in May 1940. 
Dalton was still writing. During the so-called 'phoney war', he published 'Hitler's War: before and after', a short tract in which he looked ahead to the end of hostilities, once again stressing the need for a strong system of collective security, and advocating a post-war federal union of European states, including post-Nazi Germany. In the meantime he urged a 'warmonger' policy, and favoured taking the war onto the enemy's home ground at the earliest possible moment. When Winston Churchill became prime minister at the head of a wide-ranging war coalition, Dalton was appointed minister of economic warfare, with responsibility for depriving the enemy of supplies. Churchill also placed him in command of the Special Operations Executive (SOE) -- a secret organization charged with carrying out clandestine warfare. 
At first, the importance of SOE seemed small. When Churchill asked Dalton in July 1940 to 'set Europe ablaze' with anti-German partisan and terrorist activity (Pimlott, 298), the words sounded almost ironic, and may have been intended to be so. With the threat of Nazi invasion of Britain imminent, Europe did not seem the most likely place for a conflagration. However, Dalton threw himself into the secret aspect of his new duties with characteristic energy. With the diplomatist Gladwyn Jebb as his chief executive officer, Dr Dynamo -- as he was nicknamed -- succeeded in turning SOE into the co-ordinator of resistance activity across the occupied territories of the continent. There is still disagreement over the precise extent of SOE's impact. During Dalton's period as responsible minister, however, it could claim several successful operations. Thus it seems to have played a key part in engineering a 'coup d'etat' in Yugoslavia, and it also helped to bring about a temporary blocking of the Danube. 
In February 1942, as part of a ministerial reshuffle, Dalton was shifted from the Ministry of Economic Warfare to the Board of Trade, where he was placed in charge of a wide empire that included consumer rationing and other wartime controls, with an increasing responsibility -- as the end of the war approached -- for post-war planning and reconstruction. A major legislative landmark was Dalton's 1945 'Distribution of Industry Act', inspired by the minister's own experience of poverty in his north-east constituency. This particular measure set the pattern for subsequent post-war regional policies, aimed at mopping up pockets of unemployment. 
Like most of his contemporaries Dalton did not expect Labour to win the July 1945 general election. However -- just in case it did -- he made a point of telling Clement Attlee that he would like to be foreign secretary in any possible Labour administration. Attlee did not commit himself. However, following Labour's landslide victory the incoming prime minister told his colleague that he would 'almost certainly' get the Foreign Office, and even encouraged him to pack his bags for the journey to Potsdam. Dalton's excitement at this prospect was short-lived. Within hours Attlee -- possibly influenced by an audience with the king, who urged him to think again -- had changed his mind, and appointed Ernest Bevin foreign secretary, sending Dalton to the Treasury instead. 'When told that I was not to be foreign secretary, but chancellor of the exchequer, I was not unhappy, or disappointed, for more than half an hour', Dalton later recalled. 'I swallowed my fate in one gulp' ('High Tide', 4). The decision had profound implications, both for Britain and for the world. It also determined what was to be the climax -- and crisis -- of Dalton's career. 
Dalton's period at the Treasury was greatly affected, for good and ill, by his own background as an expert in economics and public finance. The new chancellor brought enthusiasm, socialist commitment, and expert knowledge to his post, which had been reduced in authority by the heavy wartime emphasis on physical planning, but which now rapidly acquired a vital strategic importance, partly because of the political status of its holder. Over the next couple of years Dalton was able to play a vital role as one of the government's 'big five', together with Attlee, Bevin, Herbert Morrison (lord president), and Sir Stafford Cripps (Board of Trade), who provided a directive inner core to the administration during its most energetic and radical phase. 
Later Dalton wrote that he faced six urgent problems at the Treasury when he arrived there: the re-conversion of industry, manpower, and expenditure to peaceful purposes; a smooth transition from war to peace, avoiding unemployment, industrial unrest, and inflation; honouring Labour's pledge to extend the social services; altering taxation so as to cut the total, while reducing the gap between rich and poor; the carrying out of nationalization pledges; and, finally, finding a way to pay for the imports needed to maintain employment and prevent starvation. Dalton's first challenge was to tackle the consequences of the announcement in Washington of an abrupt end to the wartime lend-lease arrangement with the United States, on which Britain had depended heavily. Dalton sent his former tutor, Maynard (now Lord) Keynes, to the American capital to negotiate a large North American loan. The success of these negotiations bought time for domestic reform, though at high risk. At home the new chancellor set the pace for the new administration, dominating parliament with his oratory and intellectual power. 'He bestrode the world', Lord Callaghan later recalled. At the time Michael Foot -- who became a fierce left-wing critic -- wrote that the chancellor's stature 'was increased by every speech he made' (Pimlott, 441). This was Dalton's zenith. Physically he was imposing. 'He curves his towering, six-foot-three inch frame far over the Dispatch Box', one newspaper reported in March 1947, 'screws his bald domed head sideways and upwards and, from time to time, rolls his pale blue eyes so that the whites blaze and flash with an almost Mephistophelian effect' (ibid., 442). 
Dalton introduced four budgets -- in October 1945, April 1946, April 1947, and November 1947. The measures these contained justify describing him as the most socialist -- or at any rate, the most levelling -- chancellor ever to have held office. In some ways he was old-fashioned. In particular he did not follow the new practice of relating budget proposals to a detailed survey of the whole economy. His budgetary approach was described by observers as 'Gladstonian' in style. Though he accepted the principle that fiscal policy could be used as a long-run full-employment weapon, he can be described as Keynesian only in a broad sense. At the same time he did not forget his own sermons in 'Inequality of Incomes'. The redistributive aim of his budgets was to some extent disguised because of the need to reduce the total of tax compared with high wartime levels. Nevertheless tax cuts in his budgets were heavily in favour of the worst off. As his future protege Anthony Crosland put it later, Dalton 'maintained, and even extended, the great advance towards income-equality that was made during the war' (Pimlott, 454). 
One of Dalton's most creative schemes was the setting up of a special National Land Fund, to be used to reimburse the Inland Revenue for land offered by executors to meet the obligations of deceased owners. As a result of this measure many important houses and lands passed to the National Trust. Dalton also provided money for development areas. In the City he became the most detested chancellor since Lloyd George, especially when he spoke -- too gleefully -- of fulfilling the pledge to banish unemployment, and of his own determination to 'find, with a song in my heart, all the money necessary for sound constructive schemes' (Pimlott, 457). The phrase 'with a song in my heart' became a trademark, and when the tide turned against him it was used by cartoonists and tory enemies as evidence of his devil-may-care treatment of the nation's finances. 
It took time, however, for the hostility to crystallize. Dalton's first major enactment as chancellor, nationalizing the Bank of England, aroused remarkably little opposition in the financial world, partly because the act did not in practice provide the degree of control over other banks that had been anticipated in Labour's pre-war proposals. More controversial (though not initially) were Dalton's 'cheap money' policies, designed to speed reconstruction through increased local authority borrowing. At first cheap money seemed to work. However, the floating in January 1947 of a new stock, notoriously known as 'Daltons', turned the tide against him. The undated stock quickly plummeted, taking with it much of the chancellor's reputation. Faced with what has been described as 'a gigantic bear raid' of institutional sellers, Dalton's efforts to find support from public funds failed, and many purchasers suffered severe losses. This set-back was accompanied by a wave of criticism across a wider front, just as the government faced serious difficulties as a result of a fuel shortage triggered by the coldest winter in living memory. Suddenly 'annus mirabilis' had become 'annus horrendus', and Dalton faced a major financial crisis. During the middle months of 1947 a dollar drain became a torrent, forcing the suspension, in August 1947, of the free convertibility of dollars and pounds which had been a key aspect of the North American loan agreement. For the administration this was a turning point, and Dalton was widely blamed. 
Worse was to come. On 12 November 1947 the chancellor opened his fourth budget, seen as an emergency measure against inflation. Ironically, this final Dalton budget has come to be regarded as a pioneering initiative, which for the first time fully incorporated Keynesian principles, providing a model for the subsequent 'austerity' budgets of Sir Stafford Cripps. As it turned out, Dalton was not at the Treasury to see the effects of the new approach. Walking through the lobby on his way to deliver the budget speech, he was approached by a reporter on the London evening 'Star' who stopped him and asked a question. The chancellor replied precisely, giving details of the main tax changes he was about to announce. The reporter immediately telephoned his editor, and copies of the 'Star' containing the information in the stop-press section were on sale before the chancellor had reached the relevant part of his speech. There was no movement on the stock exchange attributable to this leak, which the opposition accepted was no more than a regrettable accident. However, Dalton's position had been weakened over preceding months. Some colleagues had come to regard him as a liability, and he had unwisely become involved in a Cripps-led manoeuvre aimed at persuading the prime minister to stand down. Dalton's offer of resignation was accepted, and his career as a front-line minister came to an end. Cripps became chancellor, and the big five became the big four. 
From Dalton's own point of view, the disaster was doubly unlucky. Not only were the circumstances of his resignation humiliating in themselves. The timing -- in the aftermath of a financial collapse, when his own reputation was at its lowest point -- meant that he got little credit when the economy began to show signs of recovery a few months later. Instead, the myth that the country had been saved by an ascetic chancellor taking over from a profligate one became firmly established. 
Nevertheless, there was a comeback of sorts. In June 1948 Attlee brought the former chancellor back into the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster and effectively minister without portfolio. In November Dalton became head of the British delegation to the Committee of Western European Powers, a new body charged with looking at ways of increasing European unity. Negotiations led eventually to the 'Statute of the Council of Europe', signed in London in May 1949, following the acceptance of Dalton's own proposal that the new European assembly should be established in Strasbourg, as a symbol of Franco-German amity. After the general election of 1950 Dalton was at first made minister of town and country planning. In February 1951 his responsibilities were extended to include housing, and he became minister of local government and planning. With the retirement of Sir Stafford Cripps through ill health and the death of Bevin, Dalton's star seemed once more to be rising -- especially as the new chancellor of the exchequer, Hugh Gaitskell, was a personal friend and protege. Labour's election defeat at the end of the year, however, ended Dalton's ministerial career, and in 1952 he lost his seat on Labour's national executive. 
After the 1955 election Dalton retired from the shadow cabinet and in 1959 he stood down as an MP. In January 1960 he accepted a life peerage. Meanwhile he had caused a stir with the publication of the first two volumes of his autobiography, 'Call Back Yesterday' (1953) and 'The Fateful Years' (1957), based on private diaries, which set a new fashion for 'confessional' memoirs. A third volume, 'High Tide and After', was published early in February 1962. A week later, on 13 February, Lord Dalton died at St Pancras Hospital in London. His wife survived him by four years. Two volumes of his diaries have been published posthumously ('The Second World War Diary', 1986, and 'The Political Diary', 1987). 
Hugh Dalton's legacy was diffuse and controversial. Though he had devoted friends, he made many enemies, often in his own party. Renowned for his booming voice and mischievous enjoyment of gossip, he was often seen as an arch-conspirator who (as Harold Wilson once put it) was apt to meet himself coming back. There were other insults: tories called him a class traitor, left-wingers a bully. Critically, his platform style, though powerful, could seem contrived, and did not convey the moral authority and sincerity of purpose that other, equally ambitious, politicians achieved. At times he did not seem to take himself entirely seriously, and even caricatured his own faults and eccentricities. Partly for these reasons, he did not acquire a position in the socialist pantheon. Nevertheless his influence on British political history and Labour Party ideas bears comparison with that of any other Labour politician who did not become prime minister. As an intellectual he was important in developing Fabian thought, and in helping to give it a hard economic edge. As a politician he was both a powerful and determined advocate and a back-room expert, who was personally responsible for many of the key Labour Party documents of the 1930s and war period, setting the scene for the post-war Attlee government. As chancellor of the exchequer his policies helped to facilitate an ambitious domestic reform programme, in the most adverse conditions. Meanwhile, he talent-spotted and nurtured several generations of young political aspirants. The grouping later known as the Gaitskellites emerged from the circle of his younger friends. In addition to Hugh Gaitskell himself, Anthony Crosland, Roy Jenkins, Denis Healey, George Brown, and James Callaghan were among those who learned from him and benefited from his practical help. 
Dalton's political beliefs, rooted in early twentieth-century socialist thought and the ethical philosophy of G. E. Moore, were in many ways typical of his generation of left-of-centre intellectuals. He firmly believed in the state as the instrument of social betterment. He also believed in planning as a means to achieve greater economic equality. Yet he was not a doctrinaire. Unlike some contemporaries he was never tempted by the Marxist certainties in vogue in the 1930s; and he was slow to accept the Keynesian ideas which his own group of friends enthusiastically (and sometimes uncritically) endorsed. Some of his opinions were maverick. Though an early advocate of versions of European federalism, he had an emotional dislike of Germans, whom he blamed -- somewhat indiscriminately -- for the human tragedy of two world wars. On the other hand, he was one of the few British politicians who early on recognized the danger posed by the Nazi dictatorship. More than many political leaders, he was consistent in his thinking. More than most, he took a close, professional interest both in political ideas and in the details of the policies he supported. A member of the second generation of Labour leaders, he played an important part in giving his party the intellectual confidence not only to make it electable, but also to make it effective. 


@@@@@


doc= 32698


Dalton, Ormonde Maddock (1866-1945), classical scholar and medieval archaeologist, was born in Cardiff on 3 January 1866, the second of the three sons of Thomas Masters Dalton, solicitor, and his wife, Emily Mansford. From Harrow School he won an exhibition at New College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in classical moderations (1886) and in 'literae humaniores' (1888). He then travelled in France and Germany, visited a brother's coffee plantation at north Coorg in India, and in 1894 taught at Abbotsholme School in Derbyshire. 
In 1895 Dalton entered the department of British and medieval antiquities at the British Museum under Sir Wollaston Franks, and was promoted first class assistant in 1901 and assistant (later called deputy) keeper in 1909. In 1921 he became keeper of British and medieval antiquities when that very heterogeneous collection was separated from ceramics, ethnography, and oriental antiquities. He was conscientious in this role, the administrative side of which took away from his research, but he 'shirked no part of the task, and he was deeply respected for his charmingly courteous and sympathetic treatment of subordinates' (Hill, 14). 
In the British Museum Dalton's first duties were ethnographical. He collaborated with Hercules Read in 'Antiquities from the City of Benin' (1899) and with Thomas Athol Joyce in the 'Handbook to the Ethnographical Collections' (1910). He became a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1895, was honorary secretary and editor of its 'Journal' from 1896 to 1897, and contributed to its publications. He was also elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1899, served four times on its council, in 1900-22, and contributed important articles to 'Archaeologia'; he was elected FBA in 1922. But Dalton's interest changed from ethnology to archaeology with his 'Catalogue of Early Christian Antiquities' (1901), one of the British Museum's series of departmental catalogues which, because of the wealth of commentary in them, became standard works on the subjects concerned. This was followed by the official 'Guide to the Early Christian and Byzantine Antiquities' (1903; 2nd edn, 1921), and his account of the 'Treasure of the Oxus' (1905; 2nd edn, 1926) which had been acquired through Franks. He was one of the secretaries (with Robert Weir Schultz) of the Byzantine Research and Publication Fund which produced 'The Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem' (1910), 'The Church of Saint Eirene at Constantinople' (1913), and 'The Church of Our Lady of the Hundred Gates' (1920), by various authors, and collected much still unpublished material. 
Dalton's prolific output in the years before the First World War included his 'Guide to the Mediaeval Room' (1907; rev. edn, 1924), the 'Catalogue of the Ivory Carvings of the Christian Era' (1909), papers on the great Cyprus treasure of silver plate ('Archaeologia', 57/1, 1900, and 60/1, 1906; 'Burlington Magazine', March 1907), and the catalogue of the McClean bequest in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (1912). They were followed by the 'Catalogue of the Engraved Gems of the Post-Classical Periods... in the British Museum' (1915). But his most distinguished work is 'Byzantine Art and Archaeology' (1911), an encyclopaedic survey of all fields of craftsmanship except architecture. This omission was repaired in his translation (with Hermann Justus Braunholtz) of Strzygowski's 'Origin of Christian Church Art' (1923), and in 'East Christian Art: a Survey' (1925). Other interests are represented by a translation (with introduction) of the 'Letters of Sidonius' (2 vols., 1915), a translation (with a long introduction) of the 'History of the Franks' by Gregory of Tours (2 vols., 1927), and an uncompleted version of the 'Dialogues' and 'Letters' of Sulpicius Severus. 
Inveterate shyness limited Dalton's activities outside the British Museum, but at Bath, where he retired in 1928, he was an assiduous and generous, if sometimes awkward, host. Glimpses of his inner life are afforded by three books published under the pseudonym W. Compton Leith ('Apologia diffidentis', 1908; 'Sirenica', 1913; and 'Domus doloris', 1919), certainly his, although never fully acknowledged. The third book contemplated the effect of pain in the disciplining of the mind and body, and was written during a period of convalescence after he was knocked down by a motor car and seriously injured. This accident ended his war work for the Admiralty, in which he had been engaged in map making. In official life he was courteous and kindly, a skilful collector and critic, of boundless industry and learning. 
In 1940 Dalton moved to his cottage in the Quantocks, where he acquired unspoiled land and transferred it to the National Trust. He died at his home, White Cottage, Holford, Somerset, unmarried, on 2 February 1945, leaving his estate to New College to found a research scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 32699


Dalziel, Davison Alexander, Baron Dalziel of Wooler (1852-1928), newspaper proprietor and financier, was born in Camden Town, London, on 17 October 1852, the youngest son of Davison Octavian Dalziel (1825-1875) and his wife, Helen, daughter of Henry Gaulter. He was descended from a Northumbrian family distinguished for both artistic and business ability: of the eight sons of his paternal grandfather, Alexander Dalziel of Wooler (1781-1832), seven became artists; four of them, George Dalziel, Edward Dalziel, John Dalziel, and Thomas Bolton Gilchrist Septimus Dalziel -- the 'Brothers Dalziel' ['see under 'Dalziel family (per. 1840-1905)] -- produced as engravers, draughtsmen, and publishers a large proportion of the woodcut illustrations issued in England between 1840 and 1880. The eighth son, Davison Dalziel's father, became a businessman rather than an engraver. 
Dalziel went to New South Wales in his youth and worked as a journalist on the Sydney 'Echo'. On 29 January 1876 he married Harriet Sarah (1854-1938), the daughter of John Godfrey Dunning of Edinburgh, at St James's Church, Sydney. Their only child, Helen, died on 21 December 1910. 
As a young man Dalziel also spent several years in the United States, where he gained experience of newspaper management. On returning to London in 1890, and with American financial backing, he became one of the founders of Dalziel's News Agency. In 1910, together with Sir Alexander Henderson, he bought a controlling interest in 'The Standard' and the 'Evening Standard' newspapers from Sir Cyril Arthur Pearson, and was chairman of the board of directors for many years. Under his management, 'The Standard' made a name for itself through its 'Woman's platform' page, allowing supporters and opponents of female suffrage to argue their case. Dalziel was also a shareholder in the 'Daily Express' from 1912 to 1916. He controlled the 'Pall Mall Gazette' from August 1915 until 1917, when he sold it for $10,000. 
In 1916 Dalziel disposed of his newspaper interests ('The Standard' ceased publication in 1917 and the 'Evening Standard' was sold to Sir Edward Hulton), and became prominent as a director of public companies, chiefly those concerned with overland transport. In 1906 he formed the General Motor Cab Company Ltd, of which he was initially vice-chairman and then chairman, 1907-12. In 1907 he was chiefly responsible for the introduction of motor cabs in London. He was chairman of the Pullman Car Company from its inception in 1915 and was a director of the International Sleeping Car Company, being elected chairman and president of the managing committee in 1919. He became chairman of the International Sleeping Car Share Trust Ltd in 1927, a holding company which he formed with a capital of $5.25 million in order to gain a controlling interest in the International Sleeping Car Company. The next year he negotiated the purchase by the latter company of the touring agency business of Thomas Cook & Son. 
Dalziel, who had always put his newspapers at the service of the tory party, was elected to parliament as a Conservative MP for Brixton in January 1910, having been narrowly defeated in 1906. He was an effective speaker and an able advocate of tariff reform. Except for a short interval in 1923-4, he continued to represent Brixton in the Commons until he was raised to the peerage as Baron Dalziel of Wooler in 1927, having already been created a baronet in 1919. 
Dalziel was a man of ability and energy: in negotiation he was forceful yet conciliatory, and much of his success was due to personal charm which, combined with business acumen and friends in government, secured to him the loyalty of friends and associates both in Great Britain and elsewhere. He died at his home, 18 Grosvenor Place, Westminster, London, on 18 April 1928. After his death, the peerage and baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 32700


Dalziel family (per. 1840-1905), wood-engravers, established the firm known as the Dalziel brothers, one of the most important providers of illustrations for books and magazines of the mid-Victorian period. The prime source of information about the firm is given in 'The Brothers Dalziel: a Record' (1901). 
Alexander Dalziel (1781-1832) and his wife, Elizabeth Hills (1785-1853), were the parents of twelve children; seven of their eight sons were artists, four of whom worked in the family firm. Alexander Dalziel 'spent a great part of his time in horticultural pursuits, and in middle life took up art as a profession' (Dalziel and Dalziel, 1), and his talent was inherited by most of the couple's children. William (1805-1873) was a heraldic and decorative painter; Robert (1810-1842) was a portrait painter; Alexander John (1814-1836) worked as a black and white artist; George (1815-1902), Edward (1817-1905), and Thomas (1823-1906) were the core of the London firm; and John (1822-1869) worked for the firm until poor health compelled his retirement in 1868 to Drigg, Cumberland. The youngest son, Davison Octavian ('b'. 1825), devoted himself to commerce. Of the daughters, Margaret Jane (1819-1894) also worked for the firm. George Dalziel (1815-1902), draughtsman and wood-engraver, the founder and leader of the London firm, was born on 1 December 1815, at Wooler, Northumberland, and was educated at Newcastle upon Tyne. He went to London early in 1835 as pupil to the wood-engraver Charles Gray, with whom he remained for four years. He then set up independently, and in 1840 was joined by his brother Edward at 48 Albert Street, Mornington Crescent. Work came to them partly through association with more established wood-engravers. Through Ebenezer Landells, they engraved for the early numbers of 'Punch' (started in 1841) and the 'Illustrated London News' (started in 1842), and were thus well placed to participate in the great flowering of the English pictorial press. Their Tyneside origins led them to engrave for the artist William Harvey, who hailed from Newcastle, and who introduced them to the publisher Charles Knight, another pioneer in the use of wood-engraved illustrations in popular works. Other publishers with whom they worked were Cadell of Edinburgh (on the 'Abbotsford Edition' of Sir Walter Scott's novels), Joseph Cundall of Bond Street, and David Bogue. In 1850 they began an association with the publisher George Routledge, which was to underpin their later success. They were joined in their wood-engraving business by their sister Margaret in 1851, and by their brother John in 1852 and Thomas in 1860. Their business address changed to 4 Camden Street North, Camden Town (thus cited in Post Office directories from 1854). George married Mary Ann, the daughter of Josiah Rumball of Wisbech, in 1846, but they had no children. 
The family's range of work was wide, and may be seen in the forty-nine volumes (now in the British Museum) in which they filed proofs of their engravings between 1839 and 1893. Illustrations for magazines, trade catalogues, and technical publications are here (the Dalziels supervised all the illustrations in the 'Art Journal Illustrated Catalogue' of the Great Exhibition, 1851), as well as those for the artistic books for which they became famous. They became known as the largest firm of wood-engravers in London. Wood-engraving as a process involves intricate work by an individual engraver on a small block of wood. Inevitably, therefore, the organization of the craft of wood-engraving was small-scale; many wood-engravers were self-employed. The scope for making economies of scale was very limited. It was hardly possible to do more than allow engravers to specialize in, say, figures or foliage, so that blocks could be passed from engraver to engraver as necessary, slightly speeding up the process. In expanding their business from the original family co-operative, then, the Dalziels simply employed more engravers. They also took pupils (fondly remembered in the 'Record') and made a point of teaching them drawing as well as engraving. More venturesomely, in 1857 they set up their own printing shop, the Camden Press, which enabled them better to control their output and to initiate projects. To accommodate this they moved premises to 53 Camden High Street (renumbered 110 in 1863). 
As is clear from their 'Record', the Dalziels prided themselves on the artistic illustrations they engraved and on the relationships they established with artists. At the start they engraved work by English caricaturists such as George Cruikshank, John Leech, Richard Doyle, and Kenny Meadows; by established artists such as William Harvey and Sir John Gilbert; and by artists influenced by German style, such as John Tenniel and F. R. Pickersgill. As they entered on 'the Golden Period of Illustration' in the 1860s they became particularly associated with Pre-Raphaelite book illustration. If such a category really exists, it can be said to begin with the edition of Tennyson's 'Poems', published by Edward Moxon in 1857, which included illustrations by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Holman Hunt, and John Everett Millais, as well as by other artists who did not attempt the entranced, medievalizing scenes usually regarded as Pre-Raphaelite. The Dalziels engraved some of the blocks for the Moxon Tennyson. Their collaboration with Millais endured, and included his illustrations for Trollope's 'Orley Farm' (1861), 'Framley Parsonage' (1862), and 'The Small House at Allington' (1864). The most notable collaboration with Millais was 'The Parables of Our Lord', a six-year project which was published in 1864. A similar but even more extended project was an illustrated 'Bible'. The illustrations for this were never completely assembled, but sixty-two that were to hand were published in 1881 as 'Dalziel's Bible Gallery'. This included work by Millais, Holman Hunt, Ford Madox Brown, E. J. Poynter, Lord Leighton, Edward Burne-Jones, Simeon Solomon, and Frederick Sandys, and can be seen as a Pre-Raphaelite work rather out of due time. The Dalziels also engraved work by Arthur Hughes, who might be seen as the children's Pre-Raphaelite. 
Many of the books with engravings by the Dalziels were conceived primarily as illustrated books, and were commissioned, financed, and produced by the brothers, though they appeared over the names of other publishers. Most prominent among these were Routledge and their partners, Warne, who had a close relationship with the Dalziels, concentrating on the business side of publishing, and leaving the art direction to the engravers. The Dalziels' ventures (usually lavishly produced in gold-blocked, embossed cloth bindings, and called fine art gift books) often took the form of anthologies (of text by various writers and illustrations by various artists, the illustrations sometimes being reused in different contexts), which have been criticized as lacking a unified aesthetic. Among them were 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858), 'Summer Time in the Country' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1858), 'English Sacred Poetry' (ed. Willmott, 1862), 'A Round of Days' (1866), 'The Spirit of Praise' (1866), 'Wayside Posies' (1867), 'Golden Thoughts from Golden Fountains' (1867), 'Touches of Nature' (1867), and 'Picture Posies' (1874). There were also texts by a single author with illustrations from many hands, such as the poems of Wordsworth (1859) and Jean Ingelow (1867). Sometimes a single artist's vision of a whole work was conveyed, as in the edition of Shakespeare (1858-61) illustrated by Sir John Gilbert, Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (1863) and Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1864), both illustrated by J. D. Watson, and Cervantes' 'Don Quixote' (1866), illustrated by Arthur Boyd Houghton. 
The Dalziels also contributed engravings of the work of their stable of artists to magazines, such as 'Good Words' and the 'Cornhill Magazine' (both begun in 1860) and the 'Sunday Magazine' (begun 1865), which were important showcases for 'sixties' illustration, and assisted in the emergence of several new artists with marked individual talents: Arthur Boyd Houghton, G. J. Pinwell, Frederick Sandys, M. J. Lawless, J. W. North, Fred Walker, and Frederick Barnard. Most of these contributed to another major project, the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works, published by Chapman and Hall (1871-9). The Dalziels' publications in the 1860s became esteemed and collectable, and they exhibited wood-engravings at the Royal Academy in 1861-3, 1866, 1869, and 1870. 
Like all wood-engravers in the mid-Victorian period, the Dalziels practised facsimile engraving wherever possible: when an artist had provided an original drawing with clear black lines, the engravers reproduced those lines exactly. When artists introduced tone, with pencil or brushwork with Chinese white, the engravers' task was more difficult, and they developed various types of shading, which had their own appeal. If there was anything in common between the later illustrators, it was perhaps a tendency to produce designs which, while fully naturalistic, had a strong element of silhouette and pattern, and which were tight within their frames (almost as if they had been cropped down from larger, more expansive designs). Blocks engraved by the firm were signed 'DALZIEL' in sloping script capitals. 
The Dalziels became wealthy and prominent people, living in impressive villas in Hampstead and Primrose Hill. They seem to have conducted a sort of salon for their artists: George Du Maurier, when invited to a swell private party, said (rather disparagingly) that he 'would sooner far be invited to the gin and whisky parties of the brothers Dalziel... where the Queen's English is solemnly murdered every other Saturday, I believe' ('Young George Du Maurier... Letters, 1860-67', 1951, 150). In due course, however, the kind of illustration which the Dalziels promoted was superseded. More importantly, the rise of photomechanical engraving in the 1880s undermined the wood-engraving trade. In their later years, the Dalziels worked largely for comic magazines, some of which they owned, such as 'Fun', 'Hood's Comic Annual', and 'Judy'. The style of illustration in many of the comic papers was not too far removed from the style of the sixties illustrators (as the work of Du Maurier in 'Punch' demonstrates), but when the Dalziels brought out 'Ally Sloper's Half-Holiday' in 1884 they were undoubtedly falling short of their previous standards. However, these papers did offer scope for the literary talent of George Dalziel, who enjoyed writing verses and stories for them. He published three volumes of poems. By 1893 the Dalziels were bankrupt, but the printing press carried on in business until 1905. 
George Dalziel died on 4 August 1902 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Edward Dalziel (1817-1905), draughtsman and wood-engraver, was the fifth son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 5 December 1817 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. Following his brother George to London in 1839, he joined him in his trade as wood-engraver and helped to create the firm. While George was the senior member of the firm, Edward was the driving force. 'The extension and development of our transactions and the carrying out of many of the fine art works which we published, is unquestionably due to my brother Edward', declared Thomas Dalziel (White, 178). Edward trained as an artist at the life school at Clipstone Street Academy, where his fellow students included his close friend Charles Keene and John Tenniel, who was later to bring to the firm his illustrations for Lewis Carroll's 'Alice in Wonderland' (1865) and 'Through the Looking Glass' (1871). In his leisure time Edward painted in oils and watercolour, exhibiting at the British Institution in 1841, the Royal Academy in 1865 and 1866, and other galleries. The London addresses from which he sent in were 34 Edward Street, Hampstead Road, in 1841, and 10 St George's Square in the 1860s. In 1847 he married Jane Gurden (died 1873), with whom he had five sons and four daughters. 
Dalziel contributed designs to some of the books illustrated by the firm, such as William Cullen Bryant's 'Poems' (1857?), 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1864), and Robert Buchanan's 'Ballad Stories of the Affections' (1866) and 'North Coast' (1868). While competent, his designs are slightly stilted and laboured, an effect which is turned to advantage in his illustrations of chubby, doll-like children. He played the part of patron to the newer artists whom the firm launched: his private collection (sold at Christies on 19 June 1886) included substantial groups of work, many obtained 'direct from the artist', by Arthur Boyd Houghton, J. D. Watson, J. W. North, G. J. Pinwell, and Fred Walker. He recorded that his recreations were 'the love of art work' and 'wandering about seeking all that would give a higher appreciation of the beauties of nature' ('Who's Who'). He died on 25 March 1905 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 

Thomas Bolton Gilchrist Septimus Dalziel (1823-1906), painter and draughtsman, was the seventh son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 9 May 1823 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was apprenticed to a copperplate engraver, but preferred to work as an illustrator, independently in London from 1843, and as part of the family firm from 1860 (though he began contributing to the books they illustrated from 1857). On 5 July 1856 he married Louisa, the daughter of Charles Gurden, a cook; they had five sons and three daughters and Louisa survived him. 
Thomas was the most talented artist among the Dalziel brothers. His illustrations were more fluent and confident than those of Edward, but he tended to be influenced stylistically by other artists. In 'The Poets of the Nineteenth Century' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1857) and 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858) his figure designs resemble those of John Gilbert or James Godwin, and his landscapes those of Birket Foster or Harrison Weir. In these illustrations the entire surface of his blocks was intricately worked over, but as bolder effects became more common in the firm's work his style became looser. For example, his landscapes in 'A Round of Days' (1866) have more supple lines and more white space. His major work of illustration was for Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (published by Ward, Lock, and Tyler in 1865), for which he designed all the hundred small, strong engravings. Mostly placed among text and unframed, these put a premium on striking silhouette. His contributions to 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1865) are freely drawn and often composed with a poised and pleasing irregularity, rivalling those in the same volume (for which several artists supplied designs) by Arthur Boyd Houghton. Both Thomas and Houghton used Houghton's collection of oriental curios and costume when preparing these illustrations. Thomas was also a painter, exhibiting at the Royal Academy in the 1860s. Included in his son Herbert's studio sale (see below), and illustrated in the catalogue, were some fifteen of his highly finished watercolours of land- and seascapes, as well as many drawings. Thomas died on 17 March 1906 at Wooler House, Beltinge Road, in Herne Bay, where he had lived since 1893, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Edward Dalziel's sons kept the firm going into the second generation. Edward Gurden Dalziel (1849-1888) was a painter, exhibiting often at the Royal Academy, and an illustrator, contributing designs to the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works (1871-9) and to comic and other magazines. Gilbert (1853-1930) learned wood-engraving with the firm, and studied art at South Kensington and the Slade School, but became more of a journalist than an artist; he worked on the family's comic papers and became the proprietor and editor of 'Judy' and several other such publications. Unmarried, he recorded as his recreation 'the collection of art treasures and curios, especially India-proofs of the Dalziels' wood-engravings' ('Who's Who'). After the wood-engraving business went bankrupt in 1893, Edward's other two sons, Harvey Robert ('b'. 1855) and Charles Davison ('b'. 1857), carried on the Camden Press as Dalziel & Co. until it closed in 1905. 
Thomas Dalziel's sons Herbert ('b'. 1858) and Owen ('b'. 1860) were both painters, contributing frequently to Royal Academy exhibitions in the 1880s and 1890s. Many of Herbert's landscapes were illustrated in the catalogue of the sale of the contents of his studio at Sothebys, Belgravia, on 16 May 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 32701


Dalziel family (per. 1840-1905), wood-engravers, established the firm known as the Dalziel brothers, one of the most important providers of illustrations for books and magazines of the mid-Victorian period. The prime source of information about the firm is given in 'The Brothers Dalziel: a Record' (1901). 
Alexander Dalziel (1781-1832) and his wife, Elizabeth Hills (1785-1853), were the parents of twelve children; seven of their eight sons were artists, four of whom worked in the family firm. Alexander Dalziel 'spent a great part of his time in horticultural pursuits, and in middle life took up art as a profession' (Dalziel and Dalziel, 1), and his talent was inherited by most of the couple's children. William (1805-1873) was a heraldic and decorative painter; Robert (1810-1842) was a portrait painter; Alexander John (1814-1836) worked as a black and white artist; George (1815-1902), Edward (1817-1905), and Thomas (1823-1906) were the core of the London firm; and John (1822-1869) worked for the firm until poor health compelled his retirement in 1868 to Drigg, Cumberland. The youngest son, Davison Octavian ('b'. 1825), devoted himself to commerce. Of the daughters, Margaret Jane (1819-1894) also worked for the firm. George Dalziel (1815-1902), draughtsman and wood-engraver, the founder and leader of the London firm, was born on 1 December 1815, at Wooler, Northumberland, and was educated at Newcastle upon Tyne. He went to London early in 1835 as pupil to the wood-engraver Charles Gray, with whom he remained for four years. He then set up independently, and in 1840 was joined by his brother Edward at 48 Albert Street, Mornington Crescent. Work came to them partly through association with more established wood-engravers. Through Ebenezer Landells, they engraved for the early numbers of 'Punch' (started in 1841) and the 'Illustrated London News' (started in 1842), and were thus well placed to participate in the great flowering of the English pictorial press. Their Tyneside origins led them to engrave for the artist William Harvey, who hailed from Newcastle, and who introduced them to the publisher Charles Knight, another pioneer in the use of wood-engraved illustrations in popular works. Other publishers with whom they worked were Cadell of Edinburgh (on the 'Abbotsford Edition' of Sir Walter Scott's novels), Joseph Cundall of Bond Street, and David Bogue. In 1850 they began an association with the publisher George Routledge, which was to underpin their later success. They were joined in their wood-engraving business by their sister Margaret in 1851, and by their brother John in 1852 and Thomas in 1860. Their business address changed to 4 Camden Street North, Camden Town (thus cited in Post Office directories from 1854). George married Mary Ann, the daughter of Josiah Rumball of Wisbech, in 1846, but they had no children. 
The family's range of work was wide, and may be seen in the forty-nine volumes (now in the British Museum) in which they filed proofs of their engravings between 1839 and 1893. Illustrations for magazines, trade catalogues, and technical publications are here (the Dalziels supervised all the illustrations in the 'Art Journal Illustrated Catalogue' of the Great Exhibition, 1851), as well as those for the artistic books for which they became famous. They became known as the largest firm of wood-engravers in London. Wood-engraving as a process involves intricate work by an individual engraver on a small block of wood. Inevitably, therefore, the organization of the craft of wood-engraving was small-scale; many wood-engravers were self-employed. The scope for making economies of scale was very limited. It was hardly possible to do more than allow engravers to specialize in, say, figures or foliage, so that blocks could be passed from engraver to engraver as necessary, slightly speeding up the process. In expanding their business from the original family co-operative, then, the Dalziels simply employed more engravers. They also took pupils (fondly remembered in the 'Record') and made a point of teaching them drawing as well as engraving. More venturesomely, in 1857 they set up their own printing shop, the Camden Press, which enabled them better to control their output and to initiate projects. To accommodate this they moved premises to 53 Camden High Street (renumbered 110 in 1863). 
As is clear from their 'Record', the Dalziels prided themselves on the artistic illustrations they engraved and on the relationships they established with artists. At the start they engraved work by English caricaturists such as George Cruikshank, John Leech, Richard Doyle, and Kenny Meadows; by established artists such as William Harvey and Sir John Gilbert; and by artists influenced by German style, such as John Tenniel and F. R. Pickersgill. As they entered on 'the Golden Period of Illustration' in the 1860s they became particularly associated with Pre-Raphaelite book illustration. If such a category really exists, it can be said to begin with the edition of Tennyson's 'Poems', published by Edward Moxon in 1857, which included illustrations by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Holman Hunt, and John Everett Millais, as well as by other artists who did not attempt the entranced, medievalizing scenes usually regarded as Pre-Raphaelite. The Dalziels engraved some of the blocks for the Moxon Tennyson. Their collaboration with Millais endured, and included his illustrations for Trollope's 'Orley Farm' (1861), 'Framley Parsonage' (1862), and 'The Small House at Allington' (1864). The most notable collaboration with Millais was 'The Parables of Our Lord', a six-year project which was published in 1864. A similar but even more extended project was an illustrated 'Bible'. The illustrations for this were never completely assembled, but sixty-two that were to hand were published in 1881 as 'Dalziel's Bible Gallery'. This included work by Millais, Holman Hunt, Ford Madox Brown, E. J. Poynter, Lord Leighton, Edward Burne-Jones, Simeon Solomon, and Frederick Sandys, and can be seen as a Pre-Raphaelite work rather out of due time. The Dalziels also engraved work by Arthur Hughes, who might be seen as the children's Pre-Raphaelite. 
Many of the books with engravings by the Dalziels were conceived primarily as illustrated books, and were commissioned, financed, and produced by the brothers, though they appeared over the names of other publishers. Most prominent among these were Routledge and their partners, Warne, who had a close relationship with the Dalziels, concentrating on the business side of publishing, and leaving the art direction to the engravers. The Dalziels' ventures (usually lavishly produced in gold-blocked, embossed cloth bindings, and called fine art gift books) often took the form of anthologies (of text by various writers and illustrations by various artists, the illustrations sometimes being reused in different contexts), which have been criticized as lacking a unified aesthetic. Among them were 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858), 'Summer Time in the Country' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1858), 'English Sacred Poetry' (ed. Willmott, 1862), 'A Round of Days' (1866), 'The Spirit of Praise' (1866), 'Wayside Posies' (1867), 'Golden Thoughts from Golden Fountains' (1867), 'Touches of Nature' (1867), and 'Picture Posies' (1874). There were also texts by a single author with illustrations from many hands, such as the poems of Wordsworth (1859) and Jean Ingelow (1867). Sometimes a single artist's vision of a whole work was conveyed, as in the edition of Shakespeare (1858-61) illustrated by Sir John Gilbert, Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (1863) and Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1864), both illustrated by J. D. Watson, and Cervantes' 'Don Quixote' (1866), illustrated by Arthur Boyd Houghton. 
The Dalziels also contributed engravings of the work of their stable of artists to magazines, such as 'Good Words' and the 'Cornhill Magazine' (both begun in 1860) and the 'Sunday Magazine' (begun 1865), which were important showcases for 'sixties' illustration, and assisted in the emergence of several new artists with marked individual talents: Arthur Boyd Houghton, G. J. Pinwell, Frederick Sandys, M. J. Lawless, J. W. North, Fred Walker, and Frederick Barnard. Most of these contributed to another major project, the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works, published by Chapman and Hall (1871-9). The Dalziels' publications in the 1860s became esteemed and collectable, and they exhibited wood-engravings at the Royal Academy in 1861-3, 1866, 1869, and 1870. 
Like all wood-engravers in the mid-Victorian period, the Dalziels practised facsimile engraving wherever possible: when an artist had provided an original drawing with clear black lines, the engravers reproduced those lines exactly. When artists introduced tone, with pencil or brushwork with Chinese white, the engravers' task was more difficult, and they developed various types of shading, which had their own appeal. If there was anything in common between the later illustrators, it was perhaps a tendency to produce designs which, while fully naturalistic, had a strong element of silhouette and pattern, and which were tight within their frames (almost as if they had been cropped down from larger, more expansive designs). Blocks engraved by the firm were signed 'DALZIEL' in sloping script capitals. 
The Dalziels became wealthy and prominent people, living in impressive villas in Hampstead and Primrose Hill. They seem to have conducted a sort of salon for their artists: George Du Maurier, when invited to a swell private party, said (rather disparagingly) that he 'would sooner far be invited to the gin and whisky parties of the brothers Dalziel... where the Queen's English is solemnly murdered every other Saturday, I believe' ('Young George Du Maurier... Letters, 1860-67', 1951, 150). In due course, however, the kind of illustration which the Dalziels promoted was superseded. More importantly, the rise of photomechanical engraving in the 1880s undermined the wood-engraving trade. In their later years, the Dalziels worked largely for comic magazines, some of which they owned, such as 'Fun', 'Hood's Comic Annual', and 'Judy'. The style of illustration in many of the comic papers was not too far removed from the style of the sixties illustrators (as the work of Du Maurier in 'Punch' demonstrates), but when the Dalziels brought out 'Ally Sloper's Half-Holiday' in 1884 they were undoubtedly falling short of their previous standards. However, these papers did offer scope for the literary talent of George Dalziel, who enjoyed writing verses and stories for them. He published three volumes of poems. By 1893 the Dalziels were bankrupt, but the printing press carried on in business until 1905. 
George Dalziel died on 4 August 1902 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Edward Dalziel (1817-1905), draughtsman and wood-engraver, was the fifth son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 5 December 1817 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. Following his brother George to London in 1839, he joined him in his trade as wood-engraver and helped to create the firm. While George was the senior member of the firm, Edward was the driving force. 'The extension and development of our transactions and the carrying out of many of the fine art works which we published, is unquestionably due to my brother Edward', declared Thomas Dalziel (White, 178). Edward trained as an artist at the life school at Clipstone Street Academy, where his fellow students included his close friend Charles Keene and John Tenniel, who was later to bring to the firm his illustrations for Lewis Carroll's 'Alice in Wonderland' (1865) and 'Through the Looking Glass' (1871). In his leisure time Edward painted in oils and watercolour, exhibiting at the British Institution in 1841, the Royal Academy in 1865 and 1866, and other galleries. The London addresses from which he sent in were 34 Edward Street, Hampstead Road, in 1841, and 10 St George's Square in the 1860s. In 1847 he married Jane Gurden (died 1873), with whom he had five sons and four daughters. 
Dalziel contributed designs to some of the books illustrated by the firm, such as William Cullen Bryant's 'Poems' (1857?), 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1864), and Robert Buchanan's 'Ballad Stories of the Affections' (1866) and 'North Coast' (1868). While competent, his designs are slightly stilted and laboured, an effect which is turned to advantage in his illustrations of chubby, doll-like children. He played the part of patron to the newer artists whom the firm launched: his private collection (sold at Christies on 19 June 1886) included substantial groups of work, many obtained 'direct from the artist', by Arthur Boyd Houghton, J. D. Watson, J. W. North, G. J. Pinwell, and Fred Walker. He recorded that his recreations were 'the love of art work' and 'wandering about seeking all that would give a higher appreciation of the beauties of nature' ('Who's Who'). He died on 25 March 1905 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 

Thomas Bolton Gilchrist Septimus Dalziel (1823-1906), painter and draughtsman, was the seventh son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 9 May 1823 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was apprenticed to a copperplate engraver, but preferred to work as an illustrator, independently in London from 1843, and as part of the family firm from 1860 (though he began contributing to the books they illustrated from 1857). On 5 July 1856 he married Louisa, the daughter of Charles Gurden, a cook; they had five sons and three daughters and Louisa survived him. 
Thomas was the most talented artist among the Dalziel brothers. His illustrations were more fluent and confident than those of Edward, but he tended to be influenced stylistically by other artists. In 'The Poets of the Nineteenth Century' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1857) and 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858) his figure designs resemble those of John Gilbert or James Godwin, and his landscapes those of Birket Foster or Harrison Weir. In these illustrations the entire surface of his blocks was intricately worked over, but as bolder effects became more common in the firm's work his style became looser. For example, his landscapes in 'A Round of Days' (1866) have more supple lines and more white space. His major work of illustration was for Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (published by Ward, Lock, and Tyler in 1865), for which he designed all the hundred small, strong engravings. Mostly placed among text and unframed, these put a premium on striking silhouette. His contributions to 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1865) are freely drawn and often composed with a poised and pleasing irregularity, rivalling those in the same volume (for which several artists supplied designs) by Arthur Boyd Houghton. Both Thomas and Houghton used Houghton's collection of oriental curios and costume when preparing these illustrations. Thomas was also a painter, exhibiting at the Royal Academy in the 1860s. Included in his son Herbert's studio sale (see below), and illustrated in the catalogue, were some fifteen of his highly finished watercolours of land- and seascapes, as well as many drawings. Thomas died on 17 March 1906 at Wooler House, Beltinge Road, in Herne Bay, where he had lived since 1893, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Edward Dalziel's sons kept the firm going into the second generation. Edward Gurden Dalziel (1849-1888) was a painter, exhibiting often at the Royal Academy, and an illustrator, contributing designs to the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works (1871-9) and to comic and other magazines. Gilbert (1853-1930) learned wood-engraving with the firm, and studied art at South Kensington and the Slade School, but became more of a journalist than an artist; he worked on the family's comic papers and became the proprietor and editor of 'Judy' and several other such publications. Unmarried, he recorded as his recreation 'the collection of art treasures and curios, especially India-proofs of the Dalziels' wood-engravings' ('Who's Who'). After the wood-engraving business went bankrupt in 1893, Edward's other two sons, Harvey Robert ('b'. 1855) and Charles Davison ('b'. 1857), carried on the Camden Press as Dalziel & Co. until it closed in 1905. 
Thomas Dalziel's sons Herbert ('b'. 1858) and Owen ('b'. 1860) were both painters, contributing frequently to Royal Academy exhibitions in the 1880s and 1890s. Many of Herbert's landscapes were illustrated in the catalogue of the sale of the contents of his studio at Sothebys, Belgravia, on 16 May 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 32702


Dalziel, (James) Henry, Baron Dalziel of Kirkcaldy (1868-1935), politician and newspaper proprietor, was born at Borgue, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 24 April 1868, the second son of James Dalziel (died 1904), shoemaker, of Borgue, and his wife, Margaret Emily Davies. He was educated at Borgue Academy, at Shrewsbury high school, and at King's College, London. He began work as a journalist, and through his employment in the parliamentary press gallery he became known to the Liberal Party whips. Having obtained a financial interest in the old radical paper 'Reynolds's News' he was encouraged by Edward Marjoribanks, the chief whip, to stand as a Liberal candidate at the March 1892 by-election in Kirkcaldy, in the hope that he could later 'use his knowledge of the press world in the foundation of a Liberal newspaper' (Gilbert, 159). He won the seat by a large majority and retained it until he entered the House of Lords in 1921. 
One of Dalziel's earliest acts in parliament was to introduce a motion (3 April 1894) supporting Scottish home rule to provide a legislature in Scotland for Scottish affairs; this was followed soon afterwards by a resolution calling for the same for each of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. This brought Dalziel into alliance with the Welsh nationalists and with David Lloyd George, who spoke for the motion. Dalziel remained close to, and an important and loyal supporter of, Lloyd George throughout the rest of his career. 
Not particularly successful as a parliamentary performer Dalziel was of most use to the future prime minister as part of his political manipulation of the press. In 1909 he first brought Lloyd George together with the powerful press proprietor Lord Northcliffe. In 1914 Dalziel became sole owner of 'Reynolds's News', and during the Liberal split of late 1916 his paper became a mouthpiece, with support from other areas of the press, for Lloyd George in his successful campaign for leadership of a coalition government. In 1918 Dalziel organized Lloyd George's purchase of the 'Daily Chronicle'. Dalziel, who had been knighted in 1908 and sworn of the privy council in 1912, was rewarded with a baronetcy on 25 June 1918 and was made chairman and political director of the paper. Sir George Riddell noted that Lloyd George would have full editorial control of the paper through Dalziel, 'who will in effect be his agent' (Koss, 335). Dalziel had also been increasing his own holdings, including the purchase of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' in 1917. But he was not a success in his political role at the paper and was replaced in 1921, the year in which, on 28 June, he was raised to the peerage as Baron Dalziel of Kirkcaldy. In December 1922 he sold all his newspaper interests and effectively retired from business and politics, though he was subsequently recruited as a member of the National Party of Scotland. 
On 12 July 1928, at the age of sixty, Dalziel married Amy, daughter of Fossey Thackery and widow of Donald Macrae of Wicklow. Her sudden death on 26 June 1935 greatly affected him, and he died of heart failure at his home, 1 Brunswick Terrace, Hove, Sussex, nineteen days later, on 15 July. He was buried at Borgue on 22 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 32703


Dalziel family (per. 1840-1905), wood-engravers, established the firm known as the Dalziel brothers, one of the most important providers of illustrations for books and magazines of the mid-Victorian period. The prime source of information about the firm is given in 'The Brothers Dalziel: a Record' (1901). 
Alexander Dalziel (1781-1832) and his wife, Elizabeth Hills (1785-1853), were the parents of twelve children; seven of their eight sons were artists, four of whom worked in the family firm. Alexander Dalziel 'spent a great part of his time in horticultural pursuits, and in middle life took up art as a profession' (Dalziel and Dalziel, 1), and his talent was inherited by most of the couple's children. William (1805-1873) was a heraldic and decorative painter; Robert (1810-1842) was a portrait painter; Alexander John (1814-1836) worked as a black and white artist; George (1815-1902), Edward (1817-1905), and Thomas (1823-1906) were the core of the London firm; and John (1822-1869) worked for the firm until poor health compelled his retirement in 1868 to Drigg, Cumberland. The youngest son, Davison Octavian ('b'. 1825), devoted himself to commerce. Of the daughters, Margaret Jane (1819-1894) also worked for the firm. George Dalziel (1815-1902), draughtsman and wood-engraver, the founder and leader of the London firm, was born on 1 December 1815, at Wooler, Northumberland, and was educated at Newcastle upon Tyne. He went to London early in 1835 as pupil to the wood-engraver Charles Gray, with whom he remained for four years. He then set up independently, and in 1840 was joined by his brother Edward at 48 Albert Street, Mornington Crescent. Work came to them partly through association with more established wood-engravers. Through Ebenezer Landells, they engraved for the early numbers of 'Punch' (started in 1841) and the 'Illustrated London News' (started in 1842), and were thus well placed to participate in the great flowering of the English pictorial press. Their Tyneside origins led them to engrave for the artist William Harvey, who hailed from Newcastle, and who introduced them to the publisher Charles Knight, another pioneer in the use of wood-engraved illustrations in popular works. Other publishers with whom they worked were Cadell of Edinburgh (on the 'Abbotsford Edition' of Sir Walter Scott's novels), Joseph Cundall of Bond Street, and David Bogue. In 1850 they began an association with the publisher George Routledge, which was to underpin their later success. They were joined in their wood-engraving business by their sister Margaret in 1851, and by their brother John in 1852 and Thomas in 1860. Their business address changed to 4 Camden Street North, Camden Town (thus cited in Post Office directories from 1854). George married Mary Ann, the daughter of Josiah Rumball of Wisbech, in 1846, but they had no children. 
The family's range of work was wide, and may be seen in the forty-nine volumes (now in the British Museum) in which they filed proofs of their engravings between 1839 and 1893. Illustrations for magazines, trade catalogues, and technical publications are here (the Dalziels supervised all the illustrations in the 'Art Journal Illustrated Catalogue' of the Great Exhibition, 1851), as well as those for the artistic books for which they became famous. They became known as the largest firm of wood-engravers in London. Wood-engraving as a process involves intricate work by an individual engraver on a small block of wood. Inevitably, therefore, the organization of the craft of wood-engraving was small-scale; many wood-engravers were self-employed. The scope for making economies of scale was very limited. It was hardly possible to do more than allow engravers to specialize in, say, figures or foliage, so that blocks could be passed from engraver to engraver as necessary, slightly speeding up the process. In expanding their business from the original family co-operative, then, the Dalziels simply employed more engravers. They also took pupils (fondly remembered in the 'Record') and made a point of teaching them drawing as well as engraving. More venturesomely, in 1857 they set up their own printing shop, the Camden Press, which enabled them better to control their output and to initiate projects. To accommodate this they moved premises to 53 Camden High Street (renumbered 110 in 1863). 
As is clear from their 'Record', the Dalziels prided themselves on the artistic illustrations they engraved and on the relationships they established with artists. At the start they engraved work by English caricaturists such as George Cruikshank, John Leech, Richard Doyle, and Kenny Meadows; by established artists such as William Harvey and Sir John Gilbert; and by artists influenced by German style, such as John Tenniel and F. R. Pickersgill. As they entered on 'the Golden Period of Illustration' in the 1860s they became particularly associated with Pre-Raphaelite book illustration. If such a category really exists, it can be said to begin with the edition of Tennyson's 'Poems', published by Edward Moxon in 1857, which included illustrations by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Holman Hunt, and John Everett Millais, as well as by other artists who did not attempt the entranced, medievalizing scenes usually regarded as Pre-Raphaelite. The Dalziels engraved some of the blocks for the Moxon Tennyson. Their collaboration with Millais endured, and included his illustrations for Trollope's 'Orley Farm' (1861), 'Framley Parsonage' (1862), and 'The Small House at Allington' (1864). The most notable collaboration with Millais was 'The Parables of Our Lord', a six-year project which was published in 1864. A similar but even more extended project was an illustrated 'Bible'. The illustrations for this were never completely assembled, but sixty-two that were to hand were published in 1881 as 'Dalziel's Bible Gallery'. This included work by Millais, Holman Hunt, Ford Madox Brown, E. J. Poynter, Lord Leighton, Edward Burne-Jones, Simeon Solomon, and Frederick Sandys, and can be seen as a Pre-Raphaelite work rather out of due time. The Dalziels also engraved work by Arthur Hughes, who might be seen as the children's Pre-Raphaelite. 
Many of the books with engravings by the Dalziels were conceived primarily as illustrated books, and were commissioned, financed, and produced by the brothers, though they appeared over the names of other publishers. Most prominent among these were Routledge and their partners, Warne, who had a close relationship with the Dalziels, concentrating on the business side of publishing, and leaving the art direction to the engravers. The Dalziels' ventures (usually lavishly produced in gold-blocked, embossed cloth bindings, and called fine art gift books) often took the form of anthologies (of text by various writers and illustrations by various artists, the illustrations sometimes being reused in different contexts), which have been criticized as lacking a unified aesthetic. Among them were 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858), 'Summer Time in the Country' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1858), 'English Sacred Poetry' (ed. Willmott, 1862), 'A Round of Days' (1866), 'The Spirit of Praise' (1866), 'Wayside Posies' (1867), 'Golden Thoughts from Golden Fountains' (1867), 'Touches of Nature' (1867), and 'Picture Posies' (1874). There were also texts by a single author with illustrations from many hands, such as the poems of Wordsworth (1859) and Jean Ingelow (1867). Sometimes a single artist's vision of a whole work was conveyed, as in the edition of Shakespeare (1858-61) illustrated by Sir John Gilbert, Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (1863) and Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1864), both illustrated by J. D. Watson, and Cervantes' 'Don Quixote' (1866), illustrated by Arthur Boyd Houghton. 
The Dalziels also contributed engravings of the work of their stable of artists to magazines, such as 'Good Words' and the 'Cornhill Magazine' (both begun in 1860) and the 'Sunday Magazine' (begun 1865), which were important showcases for 'sixties' illustration, and assisted in the emergence of several new artists with marked individual talents: Arthur Boyd Houghton, G. J. Pinwell, Frederick Sandys, M. J. Lawless, J. W. North, Fred Walker, and Frederick Barnard. Most of these contributed to another major project, the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works, published by Chapman and Hall (1871-9). The Dalziels' publications in the 1860s became esteemed and collectable, and they exhibited wood-engravings at the Royal Academy in 1861-3, 1866, 1869, and 1870. 
Like all wood-engravers in the mid-Victorian period, the Dalziels practised facsimile engraving wherever possible: when an artist had provided an original drawing with clear black lines, the engravers reproduced those lines exactly. When artists introduced tone, with pencil or brushwork with Chinese white, the engravers' task was more difficult, and they developed various types of shading, which had their own appeal. If there was anything in common between the later illustrators, it was perhaps a tendency to produce designs which, while fully naturalistic, had a strong element of silhouette and pattern, and which were tight within their frames (almost as if they had been cropped down from larger, more expansive designs). Blocks engraved by the firm were signed 'DALZIEL' in sloping script capitals. 
The Dalziels became wealthy and prominent people, living in impressive villas in Hampstead and Primrose Hill. They seem to have conducted a sort of salon for their artists: George Du Maurier, when invited to a swell private party, said (rather disparagingly) that he 'would sooner far be invited to the gin and whisky parties of the brothers Dalziel... where the Queen's English is solemnly murdered every other Saturday, I believe' ('Young George Du Maurier... Letters, 1860-67', 1951, 150). In due course, however, the kind of illustration which the Dalziels promoted was superseded. More importantly, the rise of photomechanical engraving in the 1880s undermined the wood-engraving trade. In their later years, the Dalziels worked largely for comic magazines, some of which they owned, such as 'Fun', 'Hood's Comic Annual', and 'Judy'. The style of illustration in many of the comic papers was not too far removed from the style of the sixties illustrators (as the work of Du Maurier in 'Punch' demonstrates), but when the Dalziels brought out 'Ally Sloper's Half-Holiday' in 1884 they were undoubtedly falling short of their previous standards. However, these papers did offer scope for the literary talent of George Dalziel, who enjoyed writing verses and stories for them. He published three volumes of poems. By 1893 the Dalziels were bankrupt, but the printing press carried on in business until 1905. 
George Dalziel died on 4 August 1902 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Edward Dalziel (1817-1905), draughtsman and wood-engraver, was the fifth son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 5 December 1817 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. Following his brother George to London in 1839, he joined him in his trade as wood-engraver and helped to create the firm. While George was the senior member of the firm, Edward was the driving force. 'The extension and development of our transactions and the carrying out of many of the fine art works which we published, is unquestionably due to my brother Edward', declared Thomas Dalziel (White, 178). Edward trained as an artist at the life school at Clipstone Street Academy, where his fellow students included his close friend Charles Keene and John Tenniel, who was later to bring to the firm his illustrations for Lewis Carroll's 'Alice in Wonderland' (1865) and 'Through the Looking Glass' (1871). In his leisure time Edward painted in oils and watercolour, exhibiting at the British Institution in 1841, the Royal Academy in 1865 and 1866, and other galleries. The London addresses from which he sent in were 34 Edward Street, Hampstead Road, in 1841, and 10 St George's Square in the 1860s. In 1847 he married Jane Gurden (died 1873), with whom he had five sons and four daughters. 
Dalziel contributed designs to some of the books illustrated by the firm, such as William Cullen Bryant's 'Poems' (1857?), 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1864), and Robert Buchanan's 'Ballad Stories of the Affections' (1866) and 'North Coast' (1868). While competent, his designs are slightly stilted and laboured, an effect which is turned to advantage in his illustrations of chubby, doll-like children. He played the part of patron to the newer artists whom the firm launched: his private collection (sold at Christies on 19 June 1886) included substantial groups of work, many obtained 'direct from the artist', by Arthur Boyd Houghton, J. D. Watson, J. W. North, G. J. Pinwell, and Fred Walker. He recorded that his recreations were 'the love of art work' and 'wandering about seeking all that would give a higher appreciation of the beauties of nature' ('Who's Who'). He died on 25 March 1905 at Dalkeith, 107 Fellows Road, Hampstead, where he had lived since 1900, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 

Thomas Bolton Gilchrist Septimus Dalziel (1823-1906), painter and draughtsman, was the seventh son of Alexander and Elizabeth. He was born at Wooler, Northumberland, on 9 May 1823 and educated in Newcastle upon Tyne. He was apprenticed to a copperplate engraver, but preferred to work as an illustrator, independently in London from 1843, and as part of the family firm from 1860 (though he began contributing to the books they illustrated from 1857). On 5 July 1856 he married Louisa, the daughter of Charles Gurden, a cook; they had five sons and three daughters and Louisa survived him. 
Thomas was the most talented artist among the Dalziel brothers. His illustrations were more fluent and confident than those of Edward, but he tended to be influenced stylistically by other artists. In 'The Poets of the Nineteenth Century' (ed. R. A. Willmott, 1857) and 'The Home Affections Pourtrayed by the Poets' (ed. C. Mackay, 1858) his figure designs resemble those of John Gilbert or James Godwin, and his landscapes those of Birket Foster or Harrison Weir. In these illustrations the entire surface of his blocks was intricately worked over, but as bolder effects became more common in the firm's work his style became looser. For example, his landscapes in 'A Round of Days' (1866) have more supple lines and more white space. His major work of illustration was for Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (published by Ward, Lock, and Tyler in 1865), for which he designed all the hundred small, strong engravings. Mostly placed among text and unframed, these put a premium on striking silhouette. His contributions to 'Dalziels' Arabian Nights' (1865) are freely drawn and often composed with a poised and pleasing irregularity, rivalling those in the same volume (for which several artists supplied designs) by Arthur Boyd Houghton. Both Thomas and Houghton used Houghton's collection of oriental curios and costume when preparing these illustrations. Thomas was also a painter, exhibiting at the Royal Academy in the 1860s. Included in his son Herbert's studio sale (see below), and illustrated in the catalogue, were some fifteen of his highly finished watercolours of land- and seascapes, as well as many drawings. Thomas died on 17 March 1906 at Wooler House, Beltinge Road, in Herne Bay, where he had lived since 1893, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Edward Dalziel's sons kept the firm going into the second generation. Edward Gurden Dalziel (1849-1888) was a painter, exhibiting often at the Royal Academy, and an illustrator, contributing designs to the 'Household Edition' of Dickens's works (1871-9) and to comic and other magazines. Gilbert (1853-1930) learned wood-engraving with the firm, and studied art at South Kensington and the Slade School, but became more of a journalist than an artist; he worked on the family's comic papers and became the proprietor and editor of 'Judy' and several other such publications. Unmarried, he recorded as his recreation 'the collection of art treasures and curios, especially India-proofs of the Dalziels' wood-engravings' ('Who's Who'). After the wood-engraving business went bankrupt in 1893, Edward's other two sons, Harvey Robert ('b'. 1855) and Charles Davison ('b'. 1857), carried on the Camden Press as Dalziel & Co. until it closed in 1905. 
Thomas Dalziel's sons Herbert ('b'. 1858) and Owen ('b'. 1860) were both painters, contributing frequently to Royal Academy exhibitions in the 1880s and 1890s. Many of Herbert's landscapes were illustrated in the catalogue of the sale of the contents of his studio at Sothebys, Belgravia, on 16 May 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 32704


Dampier, Sir William Cecil Dampier (1867-1952), scientist and agriculturist, was born in South Hampstead, London, on 27 December 1867, the only son (he had one sister) of Charles Langley Whetham, manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Ann, daughter of Thomas Dampier, glove manufacturer, of Yeovil. A shy boy, of indifferent health, he was educated for the most part privately. He became interested in science and entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was awarded an exhibition and a scholarship in his second and third years. He obtained first classes in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1888-9), was Coutts Trotter student (1889), and Clerk Maxwell scholar (1893). Influenced by J. J. Thomson he undertook research at the Cavendish Laboratory which earned him a college fellowship in 1891. He was a college lecturer in physics (1895-1922), tutor (1907-13), senior tutor (1913-17), and remained a fellow for the rest of his life, an active member of the finance and estates committees and an ardent supporter of the Cambridge Preservation Society. An attempt in 1918 to represent Cambridge University in parliament as an independent Conservative proved unsuccessful. 
In 1901 Whetham was elected fellow of the Royal Society and in the following year he published a treatise, 'Theory of Solution', which was for some time the standard textbook. He wrote a number of papers on ionic velocities and on electrolysis. Although college duties and other pursuits gradually diverted him from research he retained an interest in the work of other scientists, publishing 'The Recent Development of Physical Science' (1904) and 'History of Science' (1929), both of which went into a number of editions. 
In 1897 Whetham married Catherine Durning, daughter of Robert Durning Holt, shipowner, of Liverpool. They had one son and five daughters, two of whom became scientific research workers. Whetham and his wife became absorbed in the history of his forebears, among whom were Thomas and William Dampier, bishop and buccaneer respectively; they published a biography of the roundhead Colonel Nathaniel Whetham in 1907 and, led on to a general study of heredity and its influence on society, they followed this with 'The Family and the Nation' (1909) and 'Heredity and Society' (1912). 
Whetham inherited the Dampier family property in 1916 and farmed the land on the Hilfield estate in Dorset between 1918 and 1926. He specialized in the making of cheese and took part in the investigation of the possibilities of extracting lactose from whey. So he came to his last and abiding interest in agricultural economics. 
Whetham was co-opted a member of council of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1921, received its gold medal in 1936, and became a vice-president in 1948. In 1925-42 he was a member of the Agricultural Wages Board, in 1933-51 a development commissioner, and in 1938-9 chairman of the land settlement committee. He was chairman of the Ministry of Agriculture machinery testing committee (1925-33) and of the committee for the preservation of grass and other fodder crops (1933-9), and acting chairman of the rural industries bureau (1939-45). In 1931 he was knighted for his services to agriculture, and changed his name to Dampier. In the same year he became first secretary of the Agricultural Research Council which he was able to establish on sound lines with freedom to engage directly in research before resigning in 1935 when he felt the technical side of the work had gone beyond his range of knowledge. He remained a member of the council until 1945 and served on many of its committees. 
A shrewd and kindly man who found his long life 'interesting and amusing', Dampier was always willing to give his services in the public welfare. He died at the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 11 December 1952, a few months after his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32705


Dane, Sir Louis William (1856-1946), administrator in India, was born on 21 March 1856 at Chichester, where his father, Richard Martin Dane (1813-1901), was an army staff surgeon; he later became an inspector-general of hospitals. His mother was Sophia Eliza, daughter of Colonel Charles Griffiths who served in the First Anglo-Afghan War, and granddaughter of Henry Griffiths, a close friend in India of Warren Hastings. The Dane family had long dwelt in co. Fermanagh and, although Dr Dane moved to England, he nevertheless sent Louis, who was his fifth son, and an elder brother, Sir Richard Morris Dane, to Dr Stackpole's school, Kingstown, Dublin. Both in turn then entered the Indian Civil Service. Louis passed the examination in 1874 and in 1876 was posted to the Punjab ['see 'competition wallahs]. As assistant commissioner in Dera Ghazi Khan he ensured supplies for the Pishin column in the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80). In 1879 he became private secretary to Sir Robert Egerton, lieutenant-governor of the Punjab. He had a successful spell as a settlement officer at Gurdaspur and Peshawar. His brother Richard had served in the former location before him. In 1898 Dane was appointed chief secretary to the Punjab government. On 21 March 1882 he had married Edith (died 1948), daughter of Sir Francis Booth Norman. They were to have four daughters and three sons. 
In 1900 Dane went on leave and seemed to have ended his Indian career, for he became resident magistrate of Tralee, co. Kerry. In November 1901 however he was recalled to India by Lord Curzon to become resident of Kashmir, and in March 1903 foreign secretary in the government of India. Curzon was especially concerned over Afghan affairs. In 1901 Amir Habibullah had succeeded his father, Abdur Rahman, whose reign of twenty years had been marked by friendship with India, although at its end certain issues were unsettled. In October 1904 Dane headed a mission to Kabul where he gained the young amir's respect. Negotiations were too protracted for the forceful viceroy who wanted to withdraw the mission, but Dane, dissenting, held that the amir's renewal of his father's engagements should be accepted as sufficient. The cabinet in London supported Dane and the treaty was signed in March 1905. Dane, who had been appointed CSI in 1904, was now made a KCIE. The value of his achievement became clear in the First World War when, despite persistent German pressure, Habibullah maintained his country's neutrality in the face of domestic dangers which were tragically underlined by his assassination in 1919. 
In 1908 Dane became lieutenant-governor of the Punjab. This was a difficult period following the widespread rural disturbances the previous year. It fell to Dane to oversee the enactment in 1912 of the 'Punjab Colonization of Land Bill'. An earlier ill-judged version of the legislation had caused the 1907 disturbances. His tireless energy in touring his province set a high example to his officers. His linguistic gifts and handsome presence helped to win him general respect and public confidence. In December 1911 he was called upon to arrange the memorable people's fair at the royal durbar. He was promoted GCIE and, exactly a year later, had to hand over to the government of India the Delhi district as part of the enclave of the new capital. The viceroy, Lord Hardinge of Penshurst, was seriously wounded on his way to the ceremony which nevertheless took place. In this emergency, Dane, after his formal speech, 'laid aside the typescript', wrote his contemporary Sir Henry Sharp, 'and began to talk [in Urdu].... It swept through the audience like a strong wind. Formality melted in emotion.' In May 1913 Dane's successful period as lieutenant-governor of the Punjab ended and he retired to London. 
After his retirement Dane continued to take an active interest in Indian affairs and was for many years on the board of the Attock Oil Company. On 13 March 1940, at a joint meeting of the East India Association and Royal Central Asian Society, he was badly wounded in the arm by the assailant who killed Sir Michael O'Dwyer. He was then nearly eighty-four, and lived to be almost ninety, dying at his home, 24 Onslow Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 22 February 1946. The youngest of his sons, Henry, died in captivity in Japan in 1942 and was posthumously appointed to the DSO in 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 32706


Daniel, (Charles) Henry Olive (1836-1919), printer and college head, was born on 30 September 1836 at Wareham, Dorset, the eldest son of the Revd Alfred Daniel, curate of Wareham, and his wife, Eliza Anne, daughter of Clement Wilson Cruttwell. In 1838 his father became perpetual curate of Frome, Somerset. Henry, as he was later known, was interested in printing from the age of ten; his first 'book', printed 'by the use of types and thumb and inking', appeared about 1845. He was educated at Grosvenor College, Bath, King's College School, London, and Worcester College, Oxford, where he was elected scholar in 1854. After taking his degree in 1858, with a first class in 'literae humaniores', he returned to King's College as classical lecturer in 1859. In 1863 he was elected to a fellowship at Worcester College, where he spent the remainder of his life. In 1864 he was ordained deacon. He was dean in 1865, vice-provost in 1866, junior bursar in 1870, and proctor in 1873. On 21 August 1878 he married his cousin Emily Crabb Olive (1852-1933), an artist, and third daughter of Edmund Crabb Olive; they had two daughters, Rachel (1880-1937) and Ruth (1884-1961). Compton Mackenzie, who was engaged to Ruth, painted a vibrant portrait of the Daniels in his novel 'Guy and Pauline' (1915). 
Daniel began printing at Oxford in 1874, seventeen years before William Morris founded the Kelmscott Press. He exerted considerable influence, largely because of his adoption of the Fell type which had lain unused at the Clarendon Press for 150 years (thirty-six years previously Caslon's old-faced type had been revived by William Pickering and Charles Wittingham 'the nephew', for the Chiswick Press). Fell type was first used by Daniel in 'A New Sermon of the Newest Fashion' (1876), the second book which he printed at Oxford. He also used a black letter, of which the first example is 'The Growth of Love' (1890) by his friend Robert Bridges. Daniel first used a toy press; from 1850 to 1882 he used a small Albion press, and from 1882 onwards a large Albion hand-press, which was first used to print 'Hymni ecclesiae' in 1882. 
One of the most interesting productions of the Daniel Press, and perhaps the best-known, was 'The Garland of Rachel' (1881), a celebration in verse of the first birthday of his daughter Rachel with contributions by Andrew Lang, Austin Dobson, Robert Bridges, Lewis Carroll, and Edmund Gosse. Emily Daniel contributed capital letters and other designs to the Daniel Press, and this was the first book in which large ornaments and illuminations by her were used. Some of Daniel's books were reprints, including 'Desiderii Erasmi colloquia duo' (1880); 'Hymni ecclesiae' (1882); 'Sixe Idillia' of Theocritus (1883), probably translated by Sir Edward Dyer from the unique copy in the Bodleian Library; 'Love's Graduate', an attempt by Edmund Gosse to separate Webster's work from that of William Rowley in 'A Cure for a Cuckold' (1885); William Blake's 'Songs' (1885) and 'Songs of Innocence' (1893); Robert Herrick's 'His Flowers' (1891) and 'Christmas' (1891); 'Odes, Sonnets, and Lyrics of John Keats' (1895); and Robert Jones's 'The Muses' Garden for Delights' (1901). Other books contain the work of contemporaries and friends, particularly the plays and poems of Robert Bridges, later poet laureate, comprising fifteen pieces printed between 1883 and 1903, and 'Our Memories' (1893), consisting of personal reminiscences of Oxford by a number of senior members of the university. Richard Watson Dixon, Henry Patmore, Margaret Woods, Herbert Warren, Walter Pater, Laurence Binyon, and others are represented by one or more volumes. The smaller Daniel books are delicate, the larger, such as the 'Keats' and Bridges' 'Shorter Poems', in five parts, are fine and handsome. But typographically none of them rivals the best work from later famous presses. Daniel had admirable taste, but had no serious intention of reforming or improving English printing. He was an amateur who aimed at pleasing himself and his friends by printing as well as his means would allow, rather showing how beautifully a book could be made. 
Daniel was connected to Worcester College, Oxford, as provost from 1903 (the first to be elected by the fellows), and he wrote the college's history with W. R. Barker in 1900. He was remembered by J. C. Masterman, a scholar at Worcester when Daniel was provost, and later provost himself, as a 'venerable figure, belonging to the past rather than to the present' (Masterman, 46). In later life he was 'magnificent', his golden beard almost completely white, his complexion 'bright and sanguine', his bearing upright, and with the overall appearance of a 'Viking chief' (ibid., 46-7). He was much loved and admired at Worcester, where he was thought of as a generous bursar and a 'gentle and understanding' provost (ibid.). He was chiefly responsible for the decoration of the college's chapel and hall, carried out from the designs of William Burges; the former is, perhaps, the most important example in Oxford of Pre-Raphaelite influence (Daniel's portrait is incorporated into the fresco on the north wall of the chapel). Daniel also took an interest in municipal affairs, and held office as councillor and alderman. He died at Oddington, near Moreton in Marsh, Gloucestershire, on 6 September 1919, and was buried in Holywell cemetery, Oxford. In 1920 Daniel's large press was presented by his wife to the Bodleian Library, and 'The Daniel Press' (1921) was the first book to be printed in the library. 


@@@@@


doc= 32707


Daniel, Evan (1837-1904), Church of England clergyman, educationist, and author, born at Pontypool on 4 September 1837, was the second son of Evan Daniel of Pontypool, builder and architect, and his wife, Sarah Beach. After education at the national school, Pontypool, he entered St John's Training College, Battersea, in 1856. He became lecturer in English literature at the college in 1859 and vice-principal in 1863. In the same year he was ordained deacon, and priest in 1864. He was appointed principal in 1866, a post which he held for twenty-eight years. On becoming principal he began reading for a degree at Trinity College, Dublin; both in 1868 and 1870 he won there the vice-chancellor's prize for English verse, and in 1869 the prize for English prose. He graduated BA in 1870 as senior moderator and gold medallist in English literature, history, and political science, and proceeded MA in 1874. 
Daniel was well regarded as an educationist, and published several books on the subject, including 'How to Teach the Church Catechism' (1882) and 'Elementary Algebra' (2 vols., 1883-5). He edited John Locke's 'Some Thoughts on Education' (1880), and made the complex history of the prayer book comprehensible in his popular 'The Prayer-Book' (1877), which went through at least twenty editions. From 1873 to 1879 he served on the second London school board, and in 1881 he was appointed practical lecturer on education at Cambridge. In 1879 Anthony Wilson Thorold, bishop of Rochester, made him an honorary canon of his cathedral, and from 1892 he was proctor in convocation for the dean and chapter of Rochester. On his resignation of the principalship of St John's Training College in 1894, Archbishop E. W. Benson nominated him to the vicarage of Horsham, and in 1902 he became rural dean of Storrington. Daniel, who held broad-church views, was known as a powerful preacher. He married in 1863 Elizabeth Mosell of Pontypool, who died in 1901. They had six daughters and three sons. Daniel died at Horsham vicarage on 27 May 1904, and was buried in the churchyard there. 
A portrait of Daniel, painted after his death by P. Keelan, was hung in the hall of St John's Training College, Battersea, where he was also commemorated by the establishment of the Daniel Library. A stained-glass window to his memory was installed in Horsham parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32708


Danquah, Joseph Boakye (1895-1965), lawyer and politician in Ghana, was born on 21 December 1895 at Bepong, Kwawu, Gold Coast, the son of Emmanuel Yaw Boakye Danquah (died 1907) and his second wife, Lydia Okom Korantemaa. His royal father had been chief state drummer to the king of Akyem Abuakwa but had become a Presbyterian adherent of the Basel Mission; at great personal risk he had exchanged the palace for evangelism at the age of forty. Danquah was educated in Basel Mission schools and in 1913 was employed as a clerk with a prominent African barrister, Vidal Buckle, in Accra. In 1914 he passed the local civil service examination and became a clerk in the supreme court. In 1915 his older half-brother Nana Ofori Atta, the king or 'okyenhene' of Akyem Abuakwa, appointed him first secretary and then in 1916 chief clerk and registrar of the native court in Akyem's capital, Kyebi. In this period Danquah collected the information that he later used in two of his finest books, 'Cases in Akan Law' and 'Akan Laws and Customs' (both 1928). These contributions to comparative law and anthropology were in the great tradition of Ghanaian legal writing established in the nineteenth century by John Mensah Sarba and continued by J. E. Casely Hayford. Danquah also wrote a celebration of his kingdom and his king, 'The Akim Abuakwa Handbook' (1928), 'Ancestors, Heroes and God' (1938), and 'The Akan Doctrine of God' (1941). 
Initially antagonistic to the aims of anti-colonial organizations in the Gold Coast because of his king's hostility to them, Danquah was by 1921 moving closer to the aims of the Aborigines' Rights Protection Society (ARPS). At the suggestion of one of the most prominent leaders of the ARPS, the lawyer and politician Kobina Sekyi, Danquah decided that he should read law. This won the support of his king and in 1921 he left for Britain. He studied philosophy and law at University College, London and ate dinners in the Inner Temple. By 1927 he had managed to graduate as a bachelor of arts, a bachelor of laws, and a doctor of philosophy and had been called to the bar. He was also involved in anti-colonial politics in London, and was one of the founder members of the West African Students' Union and editor of its journal. 
In 1927 Danquah returned to the Gold Coast where he established a legal practice. Increasingly committed to nationalism, he founded and then edited the daily 'Times of West Africa'. In 1930 he was the moving force behind the new anti-colonial Gold Coast Youth Conference. In 1934 he returned to Britain as secretary to a deputation of chiefs and intellectuals petitioning the secretary of state for the colonies to refuse his assent to a new, restrictive 'Sedition Bill'. The deputation failed. Danquah was now at odds with his royal half-brother whom he suspected of being hostile to the nationalism with which he himself was increasingly identified. He remained in Britain until 1936, spending much of his time in the British Museum's reading room researching African history. That research led him to the conclusion that the Akan, his own ethnic group, were the relicts of the ancient empire of Ghana. This argument gained local currency eventually and led to an independent Gold Coast choosing to be known as Ghana from 1957. 
On his return to Accra in 1936 Danquah maintained his nationalism and was one of the most formidable proponents of rapid democratization and the end of British colonial rule. While continuing his legal practice, he also revived his newspaper, wrote plays and innumerable scholarly and more popular articles, and acted, somewhat uncomfortably, as legal adviser to his half-brother. He had also married Mabel, the daughter of one of the country's most eminent lawyers, Frans Dove. Both before and after their later divorce she was among the Gold Coast's most influential women intellectuals and political activists. She also became a lifelong political adversary of Danquah. His second wife, Elizabeth, died in 1987. He had numerous children, both legitimate and illegitimate. 
In 1947 the tempo of anti-colonial politics picked up after an unofficial truce during the Second World War. Unpersuaded that the reformed constitution of 1946 amounted to progress and increasingly alienated from the colonial regime, Danquah, a nephew, the husband of one of his nieces, and a cluster of intellectuals and businessmen formed the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC) in August 1947. The first modern nationalist party in the country's history, the UGCC demanded 'self government in the shortest possible time'. It invited a London-based student, Kwame Nkrumah, to act as its general secretary. Although the evidence shows they played little part in fomenting the pivotal urban riots of February and March 1948, Danquah and other senior figures in the UGCC were illegally detained under emergency regulations. After their release the more conservative nationalists of the UGCC and their more radical, dynamic general secretary began to pull apart. Depending upon which account one believes, Nkrumah and his lieutenants were either expelled or elected to leave the UGCC in June 1949 and founded their own party, the Convention People's Party (CPP). 
This brought into public gaze a serious rift in the nationalist movement between gradualists and socialists. Danquah was to remain the most prominent spokesman of conservative nationalism until his death, a tradition which is still evident in modern Ghanaian politics. His antagonist was Kwame Nkrumah. It was a personal as well as an intellectual animosity. Danquah was prominent in a sequence of unsuccessful political alliances which failed to gain significant votes in each of the colonial general elections (1951, 1954, and 1956) which led to independence in March 1957. He lost his parliamentary seat in the 1954 election. Outflanked by the greater organizational skills and popular attraction of the CPP which governed Ghana from 1954 until deposed by a military coup in 1966, Danquah was condemned to watch his arch-enemy flourish. Although respected professionally -- he was elected president of the Ghana Bar Association in 1963 and was a fellow of the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences -- he remained on the losing side. He stood against Nkrumah in the election for a president when Ghana opted to become a republic in 1960 but polled no more than 10 per cent of the votes in a somewhat suspect electoral process. Ghana's most internationally respected intellectual and a founding father of the nationalist movement had been humiliated. 
Suffering from hypertension and asthma, Danquah was detained under Ghana's 'Preventive Detention Act' in 1961 and was released in 1962. He was again detained in 1964 and died in his cell in Nsawam gaol, 80 miles north of Accra, on 4 February 1965, gasping for breath and unattended by a doctor he had begged to see. He was buried in Akyem Abuakwa. He is commemorated in Accra by an imposing statue on that city's ring road. The statue portrays him in traditional cloth leaning on a pile of books. 


@@@@@


doc= 32709


Danvers, Frederick Charles (1833-1906), civil servant and writer on engineering, was born on 1 July 1833 in Hornsey, London, the second son of Frederick Samuel Danvers, an officer in the East India Company, and his wife, Mary Matilda, daughter of H. Middleton of Wanstead, Essex. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London (1843-6), at King's College, London, and at Addiscombe College, near Croydon; he then studied civil and mechanical engineering for two years. In January 1853 he joined the clerical establishment at East India House. When the India Office was created in 1858 he was made, in September of that year, a junior clerk in its public and ecclesiastical department. The following year he was sent to Liverpool and Manchester to report on the fitness of traction engines for use in India. His technical knowledge led in 1861 to his transfer to the public works department. He became a senior clerk in June 1867 and an assistant secretary in February 1875. On 17 October 1860 he married, at the parish church in Hove, Louisa (1837-1909), daughter of Elias Mocatta. They had three sons and five daughters. 
In 1868 Danvers's proposals for a tunnel under the Hooghly River to solve the problem of taking the East India Railway from Howrah into Calcutta were forwarded by Sir Stafford Northcote. Danvers became a busy writer on technical, statistical, and economic matters, chiefly with respect to India, contributing articles on public works to 'Engineering', 1866 to 1875, and an article to Spon's 'Information for Colonial Engineers', in 1877. He compiled memoranda on India's coal 1867-9, and the parliamentary paper 'Statistical papers relating to India' (1869); he wrote 'Coal Economy' (1872) and 'A Century of Famines, 1770-1870' (1877). 
Danvers was an original associate of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, for which he acted as honorary auditor from its foundation in 1872 until his death. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Statistical Society in 1880, later serving on its council (1893-1905). One of the two papers he read to it was 'A review of Indian statistics' in 1901. He was also elected a member of the Society of Arts in 1890, subsequently sitting on its Indian section committee. He read three papers to the society, for two of which he was awarded its silver medal: 'Agriculture in India' (1878) and 'The India Office papers' (1889). The third paper, in 1886, was 'Famines in India'. 
In 1877 Danvers transferred, still as an assistant secretary, to the revenue department. In January 1884 he became registrar and superintendent of records to the India Office. His appointment effected greater efficiency in this area which, partly in anticipation of the fourth centenary of Vasco da Gama's first voyage to western India, led to his being sent to Lisbon in 1891-2 to study records of Portuguese rule in the east. His report was published in 1892, followed by 'The Portuguese in India... a History of the Rise and Decline of their Eastern Empire' (2 vols., 1894). Although referred to as his 'magnum opus', S. E. Fryer deemed it to be 'marred by want of perspective [with] incomplete reference to authorities' ('DNB'). He was made knight commander of the royal military order of Jesus Christ of Portugal. Danvers similarly studied records in the state archives in The Hague (1893-5). His subsequent report was eventually published in 1945 as 'Dutch activities in the east'. He retired from the India Office in July 1898. 
In 1877 Danvers wrote 'The covenant, or, Jacob's heritage, being an examination into circumstances connected with ancient Israel, with England, and with other leading nations'. His last work was ''Israel Redivivus', being a History of the Tribes of Israel' (1905). Other late works included 'Map of the World, Commonly Known as 'the Second Borgian Map'' (1889) and a contribution to 'Memorials of Old Haileybury College' (1894) entitled 'An account of the origin of the East India Company's service and of their college in Hertfordshire'. He also wrote the introduction to several works on records of the East India Company. 
Danvers died of pneumonia on 17 May 1906 at Broad Oaks, Addlestone, Surrey; he was buried at All Saints' Church, Benhilton, near Sutton, Surrey. His wife died in Sutton on 29 May 1909 and was buried beside him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32710


Fachiri, Adila Adrienne Adalbertina Maria (1886-1962), violinist, was born in Budapest, Hungary, on 26 February 1886, the eldest of the three daughters of Taksony Aranyi de Hunyadvar, chief of police in Budapest, and his wife, Adrienne Nievarovicz de Ligenza, the fourteenth child of a Pole of good family from the Cracow district. Her sister, the third daughter, Jelly Eva D'Aranyi (1893-1966), also a violinist, was born in Budapest on 30 May 1893. Their mother, Adrienne, was the niece of Joseph Joachim, the celebrated violinist and friend of Brahms. The entire family was musical and both girls began their musical training as children at the piano; Bela Bartok, as a student of twenty-two, was among their teachers and became a lifelong friend. It was as violinists, however, that the two entered the Budapest Academy of Music as children; they became pupils of the great violinist Jeno Hubay. 
Adila began to play in public when she was fourteen, winning the approval of Budapest critics and the affection of audiences not only for her playing but also for her charm. In 1906, the year of her debut in Vienna, she won the artists' diploma of the Budapest Academy and, although an impresario at once offered her a favourable contract, she went to Berlin to become the only private pupil of her celebrated great-uncle. 
Although Joachim died in 1907, not only was Adila's playing profoundly influenced by him, but it also brought her into contact with Joachim's circle, including such musicians as Grieg, Humperdinck, Casals, Ysaye, and the distinguished English musicologist Donald Tovey. Her work under Joachim included not only the standard concertos and the violin and piano works of the nineteenth-century masters but also the music of eighteenth-century composers, including the accompanied and unaccompanied violin music of Bach. At the same time she never disdained effective showpieces by composers like Saint-Saens, Sarasate, and Wieniawski. 
Joachim had planned to conduct Adila's debut in Berlin, with the Philharmonic Orchestra there, in November 1907, and the concert was given in spite of his death; the impression Adila made opened the doors of many other important concerts for her, and she travelled widely, introducing Jelly as a supporting artist and as her partner in Bach's D minor double concerto. Jelly's formal training thus ended by the time she was fourteen. 
Adila's English debut took place in 1909. Supported by her great-uncle's English friends and disciples she was a great success. The liveliness, personality, and quite un-English attractiveness of the D'Aranyi sisters made them welcome in England, and their associates included Bertrand Russell, as well as Fanny Davies, the pianist pupil of Clara Schumann, and Sir Henry Wood. Kept in Britain by the outbreak of the First World War, they settled down to become a regular part of English musical life, assisted by such friends as Herbert Asquith and A. J. Balfour over any difficulties arising from their nationality. When, after 1919, their international careers could be resumed, England remained their base. Wartime music-making, much of it at private concerts in great houses, turned Adila's attention to chamber music, often with the cellist Guilhermina Suggia. 
In November 1915 Adila married Alexander P. Fachiri (died 1939), an American lawyer of Greek descent, and adopted her husband's name for professional purposes. In 1919 Alexander Fachiri, also an accomplished cellist, took British citizenship and practised in international law. They had one daughter. Of a retiring disposition, Fachiri was never entirely happy for his wife to undertake public recitals. However, following his death on 27 March 1939 she was restored to the concert platform. Her broad, powerful style, responsive and high-spirited but essentially classical, remained unimpaired, and her readiness to tackle new music was as great as it had ever been. She was in demand as a teacher, and although after the Second World War she settled near Florence, she returned from Italy from time to time to play in London, where she was last heard in 1957 playing in Bach's double concerto with her sister. She died in Florence after a short illness on 15 December 1962. 
It was customary during the lifetime of the two sisters to contrast the classical style of Adila Fachiri with the more impulsively romantic playing of Jelly D'Aranyi. The two were, however, such frequently and perfectly matched partners in many works of a variety of styles and periods that to hear them together was to realize that, essentially, they were in complete musical sympathy. Gustav Holst dedicated his double violin concerto to them, and the sisters gave its first performance in 1930. 
During the 1920s and 1930s, when Adila Fachiri was heard less frequently in public as a soloist, Jelly D'Aranyi combined recitals with concerto performances with major European orchestras and established a reputation in the USA. As well as Bach's unaccompanied violin works she played the concertos of Szymanowski, Respighi, and Vaughan Williams, whose 'Concerto accademico' was dedicated to her; she also played his 'Lark Ascending' very frequently. Her recital repertory included Ravel's 'Tzigane', perhaps the most important of all the works dedicated to either of the sisters. She played the violin and piano sonatas of Bartok, written for her and her sister, and the sonatas of John Ireland, Eugene Goossens, and Richard Strauss. In addition, Jelly was partly responsible for the rediscovery of Schumann's violin concerto, and she first played it to the public in 1938. This concerto, dismissed as an inferior work by Clara Schumann, the composer's widow, had been allowed to become forgotten. What Jelly apparently called a 'game' with a wine glass on an improvised ouija board put her on to the track of a work she did not even know existed (the violin concerto was not at that time listed in catalogues of Schumann's compositions). It was found in the composer's manuscripts in the Prussian State Library. 
Apart from many appearances with her sister Adila, Jelly formed a close friendship and effective musical partnership with the pianist Myra Hess. In 1933 Jelly suggested and began to carry out a series of charity recitals in English cathedrals. She was appointed CBE in 1946. Jelly joined her sister in Florence after the Second World War; she died there, unmarried, on 30 March 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 32711


Darbishire, Helen (1881-1961), literary scholar and college head, was born in Oxford on 26 February 1881, the second of the three children of Samuel Dukinfield Darbishire (1846-1892), physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary and coroner to the university, and his wife, Florence Eckersley (died 1917). Both parents were natives of Manchester, where the Darbishires' home in the mid-nineteenth century was a centre of Liberal and Unitarian society, frequented by such distinguished figures as William and Elizabeth Gaskell and James and Harriet Martineau; Helen's grandfather, the elder Samuel Dukinfield Darbishire (1796-1870), a solicitor, befriended J. A. Froude and employed him as tutor to his daughters in 1849. 
Helen Darbishire was at first educated privately with her cousins in Penmaen-mawr in Caernarvonshire, where the family lived from 1889 to 1892, during her father's illness. After his death, she went to the Oxford high school. In 1900 she entered Somerville College, Oxford, as a Pfeiffer scholar, and in 1903 graduated with a first class in the recently instituted honour school of English. One of her teachers was Ernest De Selincourt, the first university lecturer in English, and a cousin by marriage of her mother; he became, as she wrote later, 'a lifelong friend... I owe more to his mind and spirit than can be said'. After working as a visiting lecturer at Royal Holloway College, London University, between 1904 and 1907, she returned to Somerville in 1908 as English tutor, and remained there for thirty-seven years. She became a member of the college council in 1913, a fellow in 1921, and she was university lecturer in 1926-31, principal in 1931-45, and honorary fellow in 1946. She was also the first woman to be chair of the faculty board of English. Her only absence from Oxford of more than a few months was as visiting professor at Wellesley College, Massachusetts, in 1925-6. 
As a tutor, Helen Darbishire was quick to recognize and foster any genuine response to literature, however immature; and if her teaching was not always immediately stimulating (some pupils found her remote), it was felt as a slow-growing, durable influence, sustained by the continuing example of her own meticulous scholarship. One of the future directions of her own studies is seen in an early publication, the exemplary edition in 1914 of Wordsworth's 'Poems in Two Volumes' (1807), which shows her characteristic power of combining close attention to textual matters with sensitive interpretation. She assisted De Selincourt in his work on Wordsworth until his death in 1943, when she took responsibility for the remaining three volumes (1946-9) of the five-volume Clarendon edition of Wordsworth's 'Poetical Works'. This may be regarded as her greatest achievement. 
Meanwhile Helen Darbishire was laying the foundations of her own monumental edition of Milton, with 'The Manuscript of Milton's 'Paradise Lost', Book I' (1931), which broke new ground by demonstrating, through close study of the handwriting of the manuscript, that Milton used spelling and punctuation to emphasize the meaning and the movement of his verse. After 'The Early Lives of Milton' (1932), however, publication of work other than articles and reviews was long delayed by her duties as principal -- an office unsought, and even unwelcome to her modesty and reserve, but one which was fulfilled loyally and efficiently. Before and during the Second World War she actively assisted displaced foreign scholars. Her tenure of office saw new developments in the college's constitution and additions to its buildings, including the east quadrangle (now named after her) and the college chapel. A selection of her regular addresses was posthumously published in 1962; their keynote was Wordsworth's 'We live by admiration, hope, and love'. 
In retirement, after completing the Clarendon edition of Wordsworth, Helen Darbishire returned to her work on Milton. Believing that 'an editor must take his courage in his hands and exercise his critical judgment', she set out to offer a text of 'Paradise Lost' 'which represents more nearly than any previous printing... what Milton would have achieved if he had had his sight' (Willey, 410). Although the new text (published in 1952) received criticism, it has remained a foundation for subsequent editions. The second, less controversial volume of 'The Poetical Works of John Milton', containing the rest of his poems, appeared in 1955, and an edition of the complete poems in the 'Oxford Standard Authors' series was published in 1958. 
Helen Darbishire expressed the wisdom accumulated from her extensive work on the editions of Wordsworth and Milton in the 1949 Clark lectures at Trinity College, Cambridge, on Wordsworth (published as 'The Poet Wordsworth', 1950), and in the 1951 James Bryce memorial lecture at Somerville, on 'Paradise Lost' (published 1951). Further work on the manuscripts of 'The Prelude' at the Dove Cottage Museum led to the revision in 1952 of her 1914 edition of 'Poems in Two Volumes' and in 1959 of De Selincourt's 1926 edition of 'The Prelude'. Her last publication, in 1958, was a 'World's Classics' edition of the 'Journals' of Dorothy Wordsworth, with whom she felt a particular sympathy. 
Constantly consulted by Wordsworth scholars and eager amateur inquirers from all parts of the world, Helen Darbishire was generous with the fruits of her own researches and with the resources of the Wordsworth Library at Grasmere. As a trustee of Dove Cottage, and, from the death of De Selincourt in 1943 until her own death, chair of the trustees, she greatly developed its facilities as a centre of study. She received many honours for her scholarship. She was twice awarded the Rose Mary Crawshay prize by the British Academy: in 1932 for her work on Milton, and in 1950 for that on Wordsworth. She was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1947. She received the honorary degree of DLitt from Durham and London, and in 1955 was appointed CBE. 
Helen Darbishire was of middle height, fair, with candid blue eyes, and a look of serenity and determination. For the last seven years of her life, Shepherds How, overlooking the Vale of Grasmere, was the 'quiet heart's selected home', which she shared with her friend and 'second sister', Vera Farnell. Age hardly affected her ability to work steadily and unhurriedly, and did not diminish her sense of humour. She died at home, after a short illness, on 11 March 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 32712


Darbyshire, Alfred (1839-1908), architect, was born on 20 June 1839 at 8 Peru Street, Salford, Lancashire, the son of William Darbyshire, manager of a dyeworks, and his wife, Mary Bancroft. He was a nephew of George Bradshaw, originator of the railway guide. Of an old Quaker family, he went to Quaker schools, first that of Charles Cumber at Manchester, then Ackworth School, near Pontefract (1851-4), and finally Lindow Grove Academy at Alderley, Cheshire. He was articled to the architect Peter Bradshaw Alley, of Lane and Alley, Manchester, in 1855 and remained in the office until 1862, when he went into practice for himself. He married on 10 August 1870 Sarah (died 1933), daughter of William Marshall of Westmorland, with whom he had one son and three daughters. 
Alfred Waterhouse had been articled to Alley's partner Richard Lane and Darbyshire admired Waterhouse's adaptation of Gothic to modern circumstances. But he was not a committed Goth. In competitions for Macclesfield town hall (1864), Pendleton town hall (1865), and the Manchester exchange (1866) he submitted alternative Gothic and classical designs, and the classical one -- 'French Italian', as he described it -- was successful at Pendleton. 
Darbyshire's reputation, however, was chiefly that of a theatrical architect. At one stage he considered becoming an actor, and had many theatrical friends. In Manchester he built the Comedy Theatre (1884; later called the Gaiety) and carried out alterations at the Theatre Royal and the Prince's. He also designed a theatre at Rawtenstall, Lancashire. In London he altered and decorated the Lyceum Theatre in 1878 for Henry Irving, with whom he developed the 'Irving-Darbyshire safety plan', which he described in a publication of 1884. It was intended to make the audience safe from fire by isolating the separate parts of the theatre and providing two fireproof escape routes from every part of the house, and was first fully implemented in his rebuilding of the Exeter theatre (1889) after a disastrous fire in 1887. In his last major theatre, the Palace of Varieties, Manchester, an audience of 3000 people could be cleared in a few minutes. His other buildings include: Alston Hall, Lancashire (1876); the churches of St Cyprian (1899) and St Ignatius (1900) in Salford; and the Carnegie Library in Knutsford, Cheshire (1903-4). Many of these works were designed with Frederick Bennett Smith ('b'. 1863), a pupil of Alley's who joined Darbyshire in partnership from about 1885 to 1905. He also produced designs for temporary exhibitions, including a military bazaar at Manchester in 1884, a great Shakespearian show in the Royal Albert Hall, London, in the same year, and the old Manchester section of the Royal Jubilee Exhibition at Manchester in 1887. 'No job was too small for Darbyshire', wrote Cecil Stewart ('The Stones of Manchester', 105). 
Darbyshire was an amateur actor and a friend of actors, in particular Charles Calvert, whom he assisted in the production of his Shakespearian revivals at the Prince's Theatre, Manchester (1864-74), and Henry Irving, who was a stock actor at the Theatre Royal, Manchester, in the mid-1860s. When he took leave of Lancashire in 1865, Darbyshire played the part of Polonius to Irving's Hamlet. In the Calvert memorial performances at Manchester in October 1879 he was instrumental in obtaining the assistance of Tom Taylor, Herman Merivale, Lewis Wingfield, and Helen Faucit, who gave her last performance as Rosalind, with Darbyshire acting the part of Jacques. 
In 1869 Darbyshire was one of the original members of the Brasenose Club, Manchester. He was elected an associate of the Institute of British Architects in 1864, fellow in 1870, and vice-president 1902-5. He was elected FSA in 1894. From 1901 to 1903 he was president of the Manchester Society of Architects, and did much to encourage the foundation of a chair of architecture at Manchester University. He was a member of the Society of Friends. A keen student of heraldry, his collection of books on that subject is in the John Rylands Library, Manchester. Besides several pamphlets and lectures, Darbyshire published 'The Booke of Olde Manchester and Salford' (1887), 'A Chronicle of the Brasenose Club, Manchester' (2 vols., 1892-1900), 'An Architect's Experiences: Professional, Artistic, and Theatrical' (1897), and 'The Art of the Victorian Stage' (1907). He died at Manchester Infirmary on 5 July 1908, and was buried at Flixton church. Even one of his obituarists made the common mistake of confusing him with H. A. Darbishire, another architect, by wrongly crediting him with the design of Columbia market, Bethnal Green, London (dem.). 


@@@@@


doc= 32713


D'Arcy, Charles Frederick (1859-1938), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born at Rehobeth House, Dublin, on 2 January 1859, the eldest son of John Charles D'Arcy, assistant cashier in the Great Southern and Western Railway Company's service, and Henrietta Anna, daughter of Thomas Brierly. He was descended from John Darcy, lord justice of Ireland in the reign of Edward III. D'Arcy's childhood and youth were passed in Dublin. He attended the high school, and in 1877 entered Trinity College, where he spent seven years, studying chiefly mathematics, philosophy, and divinity, and graduating with a senior moderatorship in logics and ethics. In 1884 he was ordained for St Thomas's Church, Belfast. There he remained for six years. He married on 12 August 1889 Harriet le Byrtt (died 1932), elder daughter of Richard Lewis, of Comrie, co. Down; they had one son and three daughters. 
In 1890 D'Arcy was appointed to the country parish of Billy, near the Giant's Causeway, moving in 1893 to the industrial town of Ballymena, co. Antrim. Here he laid the foundation of his career and reputation, publishing 'A Short Study of Ethics' (1895), which went through two editions and was reprinted in 1912. In 1899 he published his first set of Donnellan lectures (delivered at Trinity College in 1897-8) under the title 'Idealism and Theology'. In it he argued that the current idealism could not bridge the gulf between the self and society, that idealism, if it were to survive, must transcend itself and mere theism, and must accept substance, at once personal and supra-personal, that is the Christian Trinity. 
D'Arcy was now recognized as a leading religious thinker of his country, and preferment came his way every three or four years. He returned to Belfast in 1900 as vicar of the city and dean of the newly founded St Anne's Cathedral; three years later he was raised to the bench as bishop of Clogher. In 1907 he was translated to the southern see of Ossory, Ferns, and Leighlin. In 1911 he returned to the north to preside over the populous see of Down, Connor, and Dromore. The home-rule movement was at its height, and the clouds of civil war were gathering. Some indication of D'Arcy's strength of feeling as a unionist is given by the remark attributed to him that there were worse things than civil war. D'Arcy after some hesitation took his stand openly with Sir Edward Carson, and the Ulster Unionist Council, and signed the Ulster covenant (28 September 1912). The bishop called for special services in the churches of his diocese on that day, to the embarrassment of other northern bishops, whom he had not consulted. By the Larne gun-running on 24 April 1914 the Ulster Volunteer Force secured arms; but in August the First World War broke out, and civil war was averted. 
D'Arcy's political views were strongly unionist, and he had taken a firm line in the crisis. He also understood well the feelings of southern protestants, and was 'persona grata' with members of his church in both north and south. When in 1919 the archbishopric of Dublin fell vacant, he was elected to fill the see; but he was not to serve for long in his native city, for in the following year he was called to the highest office in the Church of Ireland, becoming archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland. 
D'Arcy's eighteen years' tenure of the primacy was outwardly uneventful; he was not confronted with any acute crisis, nor called upon to take any far-reaching decision; but the problem of preserving an undivided Church of Ireland in a divided Ireland was present and urgent, if in the background. D'Arcy was an enthusiast for church reunion, especially with the Presbyterian church, though his attitude to Roman Catholicism was one of caution and courteous disapproval. He avoided word or act which might accentuate the acute division of political sentiment consequent on the recent partition of the country. His successor in Armagh, John A. F. Gregg, had immense respect for D'Arcy's intellect but not (according to Gregg's biographer) for his capacity as an administrator. 
As primate, D'Arcy soon became well known in England both in ecclesiastical circles and in the learned societies. He was prominent at the Lambeth conferences of 1920 and 1930, and at the Lausanne conference of 1927. In 1927 also he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. In 1936 he was chosen to represent the Anglican communion at the centenary of the consecration of W. G. Broughton as first Anglican bishop of Australia. In the summer of 1937 his health began to fail, and he had thoughts of resignation, but he remained primate to the day of his death, which occurred at the palace, Armagh, on 1 February 1938. He was buried on 3 February in Armagh Cathedral. 
D'Arcy's writings fall into two periods. In his younger days he was the metaphysician and moralist, seeking along academic lines to harmonize faith and reason in the spheres of thought and practice. Later in life science in its theoretical aspects occupied his attention, and in a series of books, 'Science and Creation' (1925), 'The Christian Outlook in the Modern World' (1929), and 'God in Science' (1931), he endeavoured to reconcile the doctrine of evolution with Christian faith and practice. His views found their best expression in his last serious work, 'Providence and the World-Order' (1932, Alexander Robertson lectures delivered at Glasgow University in that year); here he argued that what to God is creation, to man is evolution, and that the ascending orders of reality -- physical, biological, psychical, and so on -- constitute 'the splendid epic of creation'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32714


Darling, Charles John, first Baron Darling (1849-1936), judge, was born at Abbey House in Colchester on 6 December 1849, the elder son of Charles Darling, a farmer and estate manager, later of Langham Hall, Essex, and his wife, Sarah Frances, daughter of John Tizard, of Dorchester. Educated at home, he read voraciously and acquired an impressive command of French language and literature. He never went to university, but, obtaining an inheritance from an uncle, he commenced articles with a firm of solicitors in Birmingham. Transferring to the bar, he was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1872, where he read in the chambers of John Welch. He was called in 1874 and became a bencher in 1892. He 'devilled' for John Huddleston in Crown Office Row and joined the Oxford circuit. He combined legal practice with journalism, contributing notably to the 'St James's Gazette', the 'Pall Mall Gazette', and the 'Saturday Review'. His career at the bar was not particularly noteworthy but he took silk in 1885. The same year, he married Mary Caroline (died 1913), elder daughter of Major-General William Wilberforce Harris Greathed, RE, a veteran of the Indian mutiny, and granddaughter of Caroline Clive. They had one son, who predeceased his father, and two daughters. 
In December 1885 Darling contested South Hackney as a Conservative, and after a further unsuccessful contest there in July 1886 against Sir Charles Russell he was returned at a by-election in February 1888 for Deptford, having defeated Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, and retained the seat until his elevation to the bench in 1897. His years in the Commons were undistinguished. A competent party man rather than a politician with any original contributions to make, he spoke on legal matters and on home rule for Ireland, and occasionally on social and economic issues such as the operation of the Fair Wages Resolution and matters pertaining to the dockyard victualling depot in his constituency. 
In the autumn of 1896 Darling was appointed commissioner of assize on his own circuit and did his work competently and for no payment, thus thwarting the Liberal Party's demand that he vacate his seat on assuming an office of profit under the crown. In October 1897 rumours spread that the lord chancellor, Lord Halsbury, was intending to appoint Darling to the High Court bench. On 26 October 'The Times' devoted a leading article to the rumours and stated, without mentioning a name, that the subject of the rumour was a man of 'acute intellect and considerable literary power', but that he had given 'no sign of legal eminence... if he is raised to the Bench, it will be on political grounds'. Two days later Darling's appointment to the Queen's Bench Division was announced. 'The Times' returned to the charge; H. H. Asquith gave expression to his doubts, and much indignation was expressed in the Temple. The 'Solicitors' Journal' charged that the 'way to the High Court bench is once more shown to be through contested elections and general service as a political hack', to the exclusion of learning, practical experience, and appropriate moral qualities. Yet despite the almost universal condemnation of Darling's appointment, the 'Law Journal' wrote: 'He will prove a far better judge than some of his critics believe.' In respect to his long judicial tenure which lasted until 1923, it may be said in his favour that his summing-up in criminal cases and his judgments in the court of criminal appeal were on the whole excellent, his judgments being particularly characterized by close reasoning and admirable English. Indeed, he often had to deliver judgments in cases where each side's evidence seemed hopelessly irreconcilable. In other cases, including 'Official Secrets Act' prosecutions, the evidence was frequently bizarre. In a murder trial he was very good. Unfortunately, in charges of less gravity he often allowed himself to behave with a levity quite unsuited to the trial of a criminal case, thinking erroneously that he could thereby induce the jury to bring in the right verdict by an eventual careful and accurate summing-up. In fact he had frequently lost the respect of the jury to such an extent that they ignored or paid little attention to the judge. The Pemberton Billing case (1918), with its sensational and absurd disclosure of a German 'black book' naming 47,000 English moral degenerates, including R. B. Haldane, the Asquiths, and even Darling himself, was a shocking example and went far to lower the status of the bench. Darling often allowed himself as a judge to be grossly insulted by witnesses and laughed with them and at them. He presided over the notorious Stinie Morrison (1911) and Armstrong (1922) cases, 'Douglas v. Ransome' and 'Wootton v. Sievier' (1913), the Romney picture case (1917), and the Mond libel case (1919) among others, and was much concerned with the court career of Horatio Bottomley. In the court of criminal appeal Darling presided over the Crippen (1910) and Casement (1916) appeals. Few of his judgments, however, constituted precedents. One exception was 'Chester v. Bateson' (1920) on the legality of subordinate legislation (albeit in wartime) with its fine quotation, in French, from Montesquieu's 'De l'esprit des lois'. The case became familiar to many generations of constitutional law students and practitioners. 
As an overall assessment of Darling's judicial career, the view of a later observer that it were better he had not been appointed to the bench is unduly harsh. No doubt he was, as some have suggested, a 'professional oddity', whimsical and given to 'inveterate facetiousness'. Yet his literary sense and rapidity of literary allusion were due to a vast reading and a deep appreciation of English and French literature. Despite this, he was to some extent a 'populist' judge who enjoyed entertaining his audience and receiving their plaudits in court. In that respect, the dignity which he lent to his office was perhaps less than appropriate on occasions. But many of his cases, meat and drink to the popular press of the day, deserved no better. 
When R. D. Isaacs, Lord Reading, went to the United States of America as ambassador during the First World War, Darling as senior puisne of the King's Bench Division served as his deputy and his work was recognized by the distinction, unusual in the case of a serving judge, of being sworn of the privy council (1917). During the machinations by Lloyd George in 1922 to prevent the attorney-general, Sir Gordon Hewart, from vacating for the moment his Commons seat in order to succeed Reading as lord chief justice, Darling was mooted as a possible stop-gap appointment. Indeed, he had written to Hewart stating that he would be willing gladly to take the office for a little time -- 'even for ten minutes' -- and to give it up when asked to do so. But to no avail. On being passed over in favour of the 77-year-old A. T. Lawrence, Lord Trevethin, he is said characteristically to have remarked that he supposed he was not old enough. Darling retired from the bench in November 1923, an event which was marked by a public farewell in court. In January 1924 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Darling of Langham. He spoke in the House of Lords on matters of legal interest, proposing unsuccessfully a modification to the MacNaughton rules on insanity by the inclusion of a new category of 'irresistible impulse'. He took part in privy council cases as a member of the judicial committee, and as late as 1931 he returned to the King's Bench Division in order to assist in reducing arrears. In 1926 he made a six weeks' tour of Canada as guest of the Canadian Bar Association. His last three years were lived quietly. He died at the age of eighty-six at the Cottage Hospital, Lymington, Hampshire, on 29 May 1936 and was buried on 31 May at Beaulieu. He was succeeded as second baron by his grandson, Robert Charles Henry Darling. 
Darling was a member of the royal commission on the working of the King's Bench (1912), and chairman of the committees of courts martial (1919), on the 'Moneylenders Bill' (1925), and on national marks (1928). Given the controversy in subsequent years surrounding the First World War capital courts martial, it is unfortunate that the courts martial commission recommended that the evidence presented to it should not be published (it never was), and that Darling's ruling as chairman meant that it was prevented from fully investigating alleged miscarriages of justice. 
Physically, Darling was small, gaunt, and somewhat short-sighted. He none the less affected to present a patrician hauteur in court. As a conversationalist, particularly in the benchers' room of the Inner Temple, he was pleasant, amusing, and often really witty, and was a delightful companion on a walk. He wrote 'Scintillae juris' (1877), rich in gnomic wisdom and sharp satire, and 'On the Oxford Circuit and other Verses' (1924), among other works of literary, although at times somewhat slight and precious, character. 


@@@@@


doc= 32715


Darwin, Bernard Richard Meirion (1876-1961), writer on golf, was born at Downe in Kent on 7 September 1876, the only son of Sir Francis Darwin (1848-1925), botanist, and his first wife, Amy, daughter of Lawrence Ruck, of Pantlludw, Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire. Amy died in childbirth in 1876. Bernard was the grandson of Charles Darwin, a piece of information with which he sometimes greeted strangers, so often had he been asked his relationship to the author of 'On the Origin of Species'. He was educated at Summer Fields School (Oxford), at Eton College (1889-94), to which he won a scholarship, and at Trinity College, Cambridge. He played for three years in the university golf team and captained it in his third year, 1897. In the law tripos he took third-class honours in the first part (1896) and second-class honours in the second part (1897). In 1903 he was called to the bar of the Inner Temple but his heart was not in law. In 1908, a year after being engaged to contribute occasional articles to the 'Evening Standard', 'Country Life', and 'The Times', he began to devote himself full-time to the world of golf. It was almost as though he had deliberately turned his back on the scholarship and literary talent by which he was surrounded in his family, including two relatives, Berta Ruck and Gwen Raverat, who became established literary figures. 
The links that were forged with Fleet Street that year endured. Darwin continued to write about golf for 'The Times' until 1953 and for 'Country Life' until shortly before his death. The only time his weekly article for 'The Times' failed to appear was on his first visit to the United States in 1913, when the 'Mauretania' containing his dispatch was held up by fog in New York harbour. War intervened between what were for Darwin two important visits to the United States. That first one in 1913 enabled him to cover for 'The Times' the appearance of Harry Vardon and Edward Ray in the United States open championship. The contest resulted in victory for an unknown American youth, Francis Ouimet, a historic event since it marked the turning of the tide in the direction of American ascendancy in the game. Darwin was the only daily British correspondent present and marked the card for the winner in the three-way play-off. 
In the First World War Darwin served in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps as a lieutenant (acting major). He spent two and a half years in Macedonia. For some time he was deputy assistant director of ordnance services for the 26th division. His second visit to the United States was in 1922, when he accompanied the British amateur team which played in the first Walker cup match against the United States. The British captain fell ill and Darwin replaced him. The match was lost but Darwin won his single. He was well qualified to fill that gap for he had just reached the semi-finals of the British amateur championship for the second time (1921 and 1909). He had also to his credit achievements which in his time ranked second in importance only to the amateur championship: eight England caps against Scotland, and victory in the 'Golf Illustrated' golf vase (1919) and in the President's Putter (1924). In 1934 he received golf's greatest honour when he was elected captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club. He continued writing through the Second World War, both golf articles and fourth leaders, his supply of raw material coming from his own personal experience and from the letters of friends who wrote to him from all corners of the world. Because of the restrictions on newsprint he was never given full rein after the war, and in 1953 he retired from 'The Times'. His departure was marked by a dinner given to him not by 'The Times', whose staff scarcely knew him apart from his writings, but by a host of golfing friends which included not only golfers and writers but a governor-general, members of parliament, and judges. 
Golf has always had its eloquent apologists but nobody before had attempted to submit his or her thoughts on the subject to the glare of daily journalism. Blandly expressing ignorance of the workings of Fleet Street, Darwin succeeded in making his reports acceptable to a wide public through the milder qualities of scholarship, humour, and urbanity. When he began to write, golf reporting in the daily press was little more than a list of figures at the bottom of a column; by the time of his retirement he had turned it into a branch of literary journalism. That Darwin was something of a snob few would deny, but this seldom showed in his writings, and when it did the point was so delicately made that it was almost impossible to take offence. More important from the golfing point of view was the fact that whereas his keen, experienced eye could instantly detect a weakness he was uniformly kind to the perpetrators of it. Because he himself had suffered at the highest level, not perhaps from a lack of nerve but from an overheated temperament, he was long-suffering in print about all except bores. 
Partisanship was the key to Darwin's outlook on life. A taste for murder trials, to which he readily confessed, may be attributed to his legal background, but what fascinated him most was the contest between the accuser and the accused, and the insight which such trials gave him into the lives of others. He was fascinated by prize-fighting to the extent of writing a book on it, and this pugnacious streak in his temperament may have accounted for his love of Dickens and his battling characters. Darwin quoted freely and without affectation from his favourite authors Stevenson, Thackeray, Hazlitt, Borrow, and Trollope, but in the case of Dickens he seemed hardly able to help himself; quotations spilled over from his abundant knowledge of and deep affection for his characters. He was an entirely suitable choice for the formidable task of writing a foreword to the 'Oxford Dictionary of Quotations' (1941), and it occasioned little surprise when the citation for the CBE which he was appointed in 1937 spoke of his contribution to both literature and sport. In a thousand small ways he must have kindled in others an appreciation of the joys of good reading. 
Darwin married in 1906 Elinor Mary (died 1954), daughter of William Thomas Monsell; they had one son and two daughters. His son, Sir Robert Vere (Robin) Darwin, became principal of the Royal College of Art (1948-67) and was knighted in 1964. Darwin's wife provided the illustrations for some children's books he wrote, the first of which, 'The Tale of Mr. Tootleoo', appeared in 1926. Outside the realm of golf his writings reflected his own interests -- a book on the English public school (1929), another on London clubs, and another on W. G. Grace (1934). It was in his autobiographical writing that he scored most heavily. In 'Green Memories' (1928), 'Pack Clouds Away' (1941), and 'The World that Fred Made' (1955) his style was nostalgic without becoming sentimental. It brought vividly to life the gentle pleasures of childhood and family life. Darwin died at Filsham House Nursing Home, St Leonards, Sussex, on 18 October 1961. 
Peter Ryde', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32716


Darwin, Sir Charles Galton (1887-1962), physicist, was born on 19 December 1887 at Newnham Grange, Cambridge, the eldest of the two sons and two daughters of Sir George Howard Darwin, FRS (1845-1912), and his wife, Maud (1861-1947), daughter of Charles du Puy, of Huguenot descent, from Philadelphia. He was a member of the widespread Darwin-Wedgwood family; Charles Robert Darwin was his grandfather. One of his sisters, Margaret, married Sir Geoffrey Keynes, surgeon and writer, and the other, Gwen Raverat, described in 'Period Piece' (1952) the family's happy early life when five Darwin first cousins, including Frances, later Cornford, the poet, were especially close Cambridge companions. 
Darwin was a scholar at Marlborough College (1901-6) and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1906-10), where he read for the unreformed mathematical tripos, becoming fourth wrangler in part one in 1909 and obtaining a first class in part two in 1910. He joined Ernest Rutherford in Manchester as Schuster lecturer in mathematical physics in 1910, the period of the discovery of the atomic nucleus. Darwin wrote, 'inter alia', a paper on the collision of alpha particles with light nuclei which helped Rutherford in work which led to the discovery of artificial nuclear disintegration. He then worked with H. G. J. Moseley on the diffraction of X-rays and in 1914 published two papers which were described as landmarks in the history of X-ray analysis of crystals. 
In the First World War Darwin commanded a section in one of the royal engineer units organized to detect enemy guns by sound ranging and won the MC. Late in 1917 he was attached to the Royal Flying Corps for work on aircraft noise. From 1919 to 1922 he was fellow and lecturer at Christ's College, Cambridge, and in this period he and R. H. Fowler wrote joint papers about the basis of classical atomic statistics and their relation to thermodynamics, introducing the useful concept of 'the partition function'. In 1922 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In the same year, while a visiting professor at the California Institute of Technology, he began work on optical properties, especially those involving magnetic fields. In 1924 he was appointed first Tait professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University, but, although an outstanding lecturer, he did not establish a school of theoretical physics. 
Darwin himself worked on the applications to magneto optics of the then new Bohr-Sommerfeld quantum theory of atomic structure. When he spent short periods at Niels Bohr's institute in Copenhagen in 1927 and 1928 he was excited by the ferment of ideas there and returned to write important papers. The first, in 1927, usefully suggested the way free electrons behave. Then, on 1 February 1928, Paul A. M. Dirac's first paper on his new relativistic electron appeared. Darwin immediately realized its significance and a month later had produced a paper which made Dirac's theory accessible to ordinary physicists and greatly hastened its general acceptance. He also used the theory to derive for the first time the correct explanation of the fine structure of the hydrogen spectrum. Two further papers analysed the magnetic moment, and the diffraction, of the relativistic electron. Subsequently he worked out in detail for non-relativistic Schrodinger electrons the very important case of a collision between two electrons and then considered other examples of the uncertainty principle. At intervals over the years he continued to spend time on a purely classical problem concerning the effective electric field acting on an electron in an ionized medium. In 1925 Darwin married Katharine, daughter of Francis William Pember, a lawyer, who was the warden of All Souls College, Oxford, from 1914 to 1932. She was the granddaughter of Edward Henry Pember and was herself a mathematician. They had one daughter (a crystallographer) and four sons (an electronic engineer, a civil engineer, a Foreign Office lawyer, and a zoologist). 
Darwin returned to Cambridge in 1936 as master of Christ's College but in 1938 he became director of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). He successfully reorganized the NPL for urgent war work and in 1941 was seconded to Washington for a year as first director of the British office set up to improve Anglo-American scientific war co-operation -- a crucial post which he filled with energy, sound scientific judgement, and diplomatic skill. He was involved in liaison over the atomic bomb, and was one of the few to realize that it presented problems different in kind, as well as in explosive power, from conventional weapons. On returning to Britain he became scientific adviser to the War Office. When he went back full time to the NPL Darwin was concerned with the reconversion for peace and with reorganization and new creations among the laboratories of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Foreseeing the great potentialities of electronic computers, he created in the NPL two new divisions, mathematics and electronics. The successful collaboration of these divisions produced Pilot ACE, the first electronic digital computer available to British industry. 
Darwin retired from the NPL in 1949. Thereafter he continued to write some scientific papers but his chief interest became population problems and eugenics. In his book 'The Next Million Years' (1952) he considered the long-term future of mankind. He contributed the notices of Sir W. H. Bragg and D. R. Hartree to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Before and after retirement he was in demand for committee work. For example, he was a member of the University Grants Committee for a double term, from 1943 to 1953. From 1941 to 1944 he was president of the Physical Society and from 1953 to 1959 president of the Eugenics Society. He and his wife enjoyed foreign travel and among his missions was a visit as scientific adviser to Thailand in 1953 on behalf of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
Darwin was knighted in 1942. He received honorary degrees from Bristol, Manchester, St Andrews, Trinity College (Dublin), Delhi, Edinburgh, Chicago, and California. He was an honorary fellow of Christ's College (1939) and of Trinity College, Cambridge (1953). He received the royal medal of the Royal Society in 1935 and was a vice-president in 1939. He also received the Makdougall Brisbane prize from the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was a foreign member of the Hollandsche Maatschappij der Wetenschappen of Haarlem, and an honorary member of the French Physical Society and of the American Philosophical Society. 
Sir George P. Thomson, who wrote the Royal Society memoir of Darwin, suggests that Darwin's most useful work was as an interpreter of the new quantum theory to experimental physicists and that he was especially fitted for this because of his exceptionally wide range of understanding and a most unusual capacity for seeing the essential idea in a maze of complicated mathematics or conflicting experiments. This capacity of seeing essentials equally helped him at the National Physical Laboratory and in his work in the two wars. 
Darwin was physically large, cheerful, and tolerant. The two portraits of him are very similar and were painted by his cousin Robin Darwin. He was warm and sympathetic to those who knew him well but students and some of his staff at the National Physical Laboratory felt awe as well as admiration for him. He had wide curiosity. He was proud of his family connections and devoted to his immediate family. He died on 31 December 1962 at Cambridge in the house where he was born, which subsequently became part of Darwin College. His wife survived him. 
Margaret Gowing', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32717


Darwin, Sir Francis (1848-1925), botanist, was born on 16 August 1848 at Downe, Kent, the seventh of the ten children of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882), the naturalist, and his wife, Emma (1808-1896), daughter of Josiah Wedgwood (1769-1843) and granddaughter of Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795). He was educated at home and then at Clapham grammar school, where Charles Pritchard, who later became Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford, was headmaster. In 1866 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated with first-class honours in the natural sciences tripos in 1870. He then studied medicine at St George's Hospital, London, with the intention of becoming a physician. In 1875 he obtained the MB degree in Cambridge. However, he never practised medicine, turning instead to botany; he was elected to the Linnean Society later in 1875. From 1874, except for brief periods of research, he spent the next eight years working as secretary and assistant to his father; in 1876 he went to the University of Wurzburg for some months to learn laboratory methods from Julius Sachs, and in 1881 he spent a short time working with Heinrich Anton de Bary at the University of Strasbourg. In 1874 he had married Amy Ruck, who died in 1876 giving birth to their son, Bernard Richard Meirion Darwin. After the death of his wife he lived at Downe with his parents and child. 
Darwin's first major contributions to botany were inspired by the collaboration with his father. The results of their observations and experiments were published in 1880 in 'The Power of Movement in Plants', whose title page reads 'By Charles Darwin assisted by Francis Darwin'. The book was an extension of Charles Darwin's work on climbing plants and it showed that the same mechanisms can be observed in plants in general. By extending the idea of irregular circumnutation the Darwins analysed the growth movement of plants in response to factors of the environment such as light, gravity, and wounds. In addition, they demonstrated that the mechanism of curvature in both roots and shoots was the result of differential growth rates. They could also confirm that the effect of the stimuli on the growth movement was indirect and that light and gravity act on some substance in the tip of the root and the shoot, which is transmitted to other parts of the plant. Francis Darwin later refined some of the experimental techniques and modified their theoretical conclusions. Between 1880 and 1908 Darwin published a dozen papers and some public lectures he had given on growth movements in plants. 
After his father's death in 1882 Darwin moved to Cambridge. In 1883 he married Ellen Wordsworth Crofts [
When Darwin began teaching in Cambridge, British botany moved away from the purely taxonomic tradition towards a more experimental and physiological approach. Darwin's experience in holding a practical class in this new subject for many years encouraged him to publish 'Practical Physiology of Plants' (1894). Written together with E. H. Acton, it was the first book of its kind in the English language. One year later a more elementary botanical textbook, 'The Elements of Botany', followed, in which he presented the lectures he had given to medical students. 
In his own original research Darwin began to focus on the distribution and function of stomata and on the transpiration of plants in general. To analyse the control of loss of water by plants he invented or developed a variety of special instruments. In 1897 he introduced the horn hygroscope for the study of stomatal function and in later years the porometer, in which air was drawn through a leaf and its velocity measured, and other apparatus. 
An additional focus of Darwin's scientific work was his editions of the letters and manuscripts of his father. In 1887 he published the three-volume 'Life and Letters of Charles Darwin', which included an autobiographical chapter and many annotations, as well as a delicately observed chapter of family reminiscences. He further produced one-volume versions of these in subsequent years. In 1903 a sequel, 'More Letters of Charles Darwin', followed, which was edited jointly with A. C. Seward. As a last important contribution to Darwin studies the edition of the two earliest evolutionary essays written by Charles Darwin (1842 and 1844) has to be mentioned ('The Foundations of The Origin of Species', 1909). These books have provided the basis for all subsequent scientific biographies and papers on Darwin, and only recently have new editions of manuscripts and letters started to supersede Francis Darwin's editions. 
After the death of his second wife in 1903 Darwin resigned from the readership in botany and moved to London, but after only about a year returned to Cambridge and continued his botanical research. In 1913 he married Florence, 'nee' Fisher (died 1920), the widow of Professor F. W. Maitland. His later publications consisted mainly of collections of earlier essays and lectures on a variety of subjects, including musical instruments, which had been a lifelong interest. Darwin's publications, which are dated from 1872 to 1921, include, besides several scientific books, lectures, and addresses, some sixty papers. 
For his contributions to science Darwin received many honours. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1882, served on its council in 1894-5 and 1902-8, and as foreign secretary in 1903-7. He was made an honorary ScD of Cambridge in 1909, at the time of the Darwin centenary, and, in 1912, received the Darwin medal of the Royal Society. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Dublin, Liverpool, Sheffield, St Andrews, Uppsala, Prague, and Brussels. He was knighted in 1913. He died at his home, 10 Madingley Road, Cambridge, on 19 September 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 32718


Darwin, Sir George Howard (1845-1912), mathematician and geophysicist, was born on 9 July 1845 at Down House, Downe, Kent, the fifth child (the third of seven to survive childhood) of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882), the naturalist, and his wife, Emma Wedgwood (1808-1896), granddaughter of the potter Josiah Wedgwood of Etruria. He was baptized on 23 October 1845 at St Peter's Church, Maer, Staffordshire. 
George Darwin was reared in a scientific environment and his earliest education was at his father's side. In 1856 he was sent to the nearby Clapham grammar school, owned and directed by the Revd Charles Pritchard FRS, later Savilian professor of astronomy at Oxford. There, among the Airys, Herschels, and Hamiltons, he studied mathematics and science at a level higher than that found at the public schools. At that time the young Darwin exhibited no profound aptitude for mathematics but, as might be expected, he took an interest in natural history, especially in the study of lepidoptera. 
In both 1863 and 1864 Darwin failed to gain entrance scholarships at Cambridge, but he matriculated at Trinity College in 1864. There he became friends with the Balfour brothers, Arthur, Frank, and Gerald, and with J. W. Strutt (later Lord Rayleigh). He also quickly joined Fletcher Moulton (later a lord justice of appeal) and William Christie (later astronomer royal) in the mathematics classes of E. J. Routh, the most successful coach of his generation. These studies paid handsome dividends, for in 1866 Darwin won a foundation scholarship at Trinity, and in 1868 he was placed second wrangler in the tripos and won the second Smith's prize, both behind Moulton. Later that autumn he was elected a fellow of Trinity. 
Although offered the mathematical mastership at Eton, Darwin decided to make the law his profession, and he was admitted at Lincoln's Inn and studied in London from 1869 to 1872. He was called to the bar in 1872 but never practised, for it was during those years that he developed (apparently inherited) symptoms of serious digestive troubles that would ail him for the rest of his life. He took cures at Malvern, Homburg, and Cannes, but to no avail. The bouts of illness apparently persuaded him to give up the legal profession, and he settled back at Trinity in October 1873, gradually turning to scientific pursuits. 
Darwin's first major scientific paper, 'On the influence of geological changes on the earth's axis of rotation', was read before the Royal Society in 1876 and published the following year ('Philosophical Transactions', 167, 1877, 271-312). Darwin was animated by recent speculations of geologists that great changes in the obliquity of the ecliptic and in the positions of the earth's poles could explain glacial periods. He proved analytically that 'thus throughout geological history the obliquity of the ecliptic must have remained sensibly constant' (ibid., 303). However, he did find that changes of position of the earth's axis of symmetry due to geological deformations were possible, although limited, for large-scale deformations could produce a geographical displacement of the pole of at most 1 degree to 3 degree. Nevertheless, because Darwin thought that the earth exhibited plasticity by making rough readjustments to a figure of equilibrium, perhaps through earthquakes, he suggested that the pole might actually have wandered up to some 10 degree or 15 degree. Since Darwin had proved that the obliquity of the ecliptic itself could not have shifted, here he had found a way to explain the geologists' problem of the glacial epoch: the glacial period may only appear to have been a period of great cold, for, if the north pole were in Greenland, then Europe and much of North America would have been glaciated. But he backed off, modestly, but rhetorically, asking: 'If, then, geologists are right in supposing that where the continents now stand they have always stood, would it not be almost necessary to give up any hypothesis which involved a very wide excursion of the poles?' (ibid., 305). 
This paper was reviewed for the Royal Society by William Thomson. Soon afterwards, in the spring of 1877, Thomson invited Darwin to Glasgow to discuss the issues. That dialogue profoundly altered Darwin's life. It was the beginning of a very intimate friendship between Darwin and Sir William and Lady Thomson, the Thomsons later becoming the godparents of Darwin's first son. Given the traditional portrayal of the confrontational relationship between Thomson and Charles Darwin concerning the age of the earth and its impact on the theory of natural selection, George's position is all the more surprising. 
That discussion, and many similar ones, convinced Darwin to investigate the geophysical history of the earth. In particular he determined that if he treated the earth as a viscous body, instead of as an elastic one as Thomson had done -- mathematicians and astronomers heretofore had only treated it as rigid -- then an analysis of tidal reactions, especially of the frictional resistance to the tides, might prove illuminating. Consequently Darwin was the first to find that Thomson's own path breaking work on the strain of an incompressible elastic sphere could be adapted to the flow of an incompressible viscous fluid, he was the first to treat the earth as a wholly viscous body, and he was the first to develop a theory of viscous tides in the body of the earth. 
Darwin began to develop the consequences of this line of thought in his seminal paper, 'On the precession of a viscous spheroid, and on the remote history of the earth' ('Philosophical Transactions', 170, 1879, 447-538). The paper is ostensibly an investigation of how the rotation of a homogeneous viscous spheroid is altered by the tides raised in it by external disturbing bodies. But it is really about tides in the earth's body caused by the moon and sun and the reaction of such tides on the moon, for, indeed, it was Darwin's desire to fathom the physical history of the earth that led him to apply his mathematical talents along this vein in the first place. 
Darwin analysed the tidal friction due to bodily tides in the earth. The result was the development of his theory of the tidal evolution of the earth-moon system, resulting from the effects of tidal retardation. If the earth is now being retarded and the moon receding, then in the remote past the earth must have been rotating much more swiftly and the moon must have been much closer. Darwin calculated that a minimum of 57 million years ago (he believed the actual lapse of time was magnitudes greater) the day would have been 6 hours 45 minutes, the month would have been about 1 day 14 hours, the obliquity would have been 9 degree less, and the moon's distance from the earth would have been 36,000 miles. Darwin did not believe this whole process had to be pre-geological, and he saw much to aid the geologist: the change in obliquity could affect climate, the trade winds would be augmented and the ocean currents affected, the shorter days and nights would lead to more violent storms, and the higher and more frequent tides would increase oceanic denudation. 
From dynamical principles, it is clear that as long as the day and month are not equal, tidal friction must act, and Darwin was determined to find the initial condition of the earth and moon. Using the principle of the conservation of moment of momentum, Darwin altered his analysis to find a day-month equal to 5 hours 36 minutes, but this was a position of dynamically unstable equilibrium, for if the month were ever less than the day, then the moon would fall into the earth. Since the moon exists, something caused the equilibrium to tip in the other direction. At first, Darwin suggested that the contraction of the earth as a cooling body may have been the deciding circumstance. But with a day-month of 5 hours 36 minutes, only 6000 miles separated the surfaces of the two bodies. This clearly indicated to Darwin a rupture into at least two bodies of a primeval planet rotating in about 5 hours. Darwin hypothesized that the resonance of the enormous solar tides with the gravitational oscillation of an inhomogeneous earth could rupture the primeval planet. Thus was born Darwin's fission theory of the genesis of the moon, a theory largely accepted for the next fifty years. 
This initial series of papers catapulted Darwin into the scientific elite. In 1879 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and by the mid-1880s he was well on his way to becoming a central figure of the scientific aristocracy of late Victorian and Edwardian Britain. In 1883 he succeeded James Challis as Plumian professor of astronomy and experimental philosophy at Cambridge and won the Telford medal of the Institution of Civil Engineers. On 22 July 1884 he married Maud du Puy (1861-1947) of Philadelphia; in the same year he was awarded the royal medal, which he jokingly referred to as a wedding present. The couple soon moved into Newnham Grange (later Darwin College), Cambridge. Their four surviving children included the artist Gwen Raverat (1885-1957) and the physicist Sir Charles Galton Darwin (1887-1962). They also had a son who was born and died five days later in 1899. 
As his eminence grew, so did Darwin's scientific responsibilities. He spent significant amounts of time on committee and government work. His work on oceanic tidal theory, through which he became the government clearing-house for the organization and reduction of tidal observations throughout the British empire, led to his being recognized as the world's leading authority on the tides. In turn, he wrote the standard reference articles (for example, 'Tides', in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'), assisted foreign governments, and developed a tide predictor and a tidal abacus. His book, 'The Tides and Kindred Phenomena in the Solar System' (1898) -- a semipopular account of nearly the whole compass of his scientific work, based on the Lowell lectures he gave at Boston in 1897 -- became a scientific bestseller and was translated into German, Hungarian, Spanish, Italian, and other languages. In addition Darwin was an influential member of the Seismological Congress and the meteorological council to the Royal Society. 
Darwin's theory of tidal evolution also led to three other important series of papers containing some of his most significant and sophisticated mathematical work. In the first of these series the changes in the earth-moon system led him to consider what the figure of the earth must have been in past times, and this in turn led him later to consider the whole theory to the second order of small quantities. By the 1890s Darwin was considered Britain's leading geodesist, and he urged his country's membership in the International Geodetic Association, of which he later became vice-president. In the second series Darwin considered the initial conditions of stability of a primeval planet preceding rupture. These studies of the figures of equilibrium of rotating fluid masses brought Darwin into a close relationship with Henri Poincare. Darwin's researches elucidated the pear shaped figure of equilibrium Poincare had shown to exist. In the third series Darwin began by attempting to discover how a Laplacian ring could coalesce into a planet but was quickly diverted to a study of periodic orbits. In these papers, also involving the work of Poincare as well as of the American astronomer G. W. Hill, Darwin calculated numerous classes of orbits by a complex numerical procedure, and, even more importantly, attempted to determine their stability. 
Darwin's researches laid the groundwork for the startling growth of the geophysical sciences. If this period saw the emergence of geophysics in Britain, then the following half-century saw the discipline's consolidation into a vibrant and vital aspect of twentieth-century science. Geophysicists of the second and third generations knew well the guiding influence of Darwin. Sir Harold Jeffreys paid his tribute by dedicating the first great classic in the field, 'The Earth' (1924), to the memory of Sir George Howard Darwin, 'Father of Modern Geophysics and Cosmogony'. 
Physically, Darwin was of average height but slight in build. His personality was marked by a childlike naivety and unassuming modesty. A romantic streak suffused his interests and activities. He keenly loved heraldry, history, and travel and was fluent in several languages and odd dialects. Although traditional in morals, Darwin was delighted by the new consumer technologies. For example, he made sure his family was among the first in Cambridge to ride bicycles with pneumatic tyres and to become connected to the telephone system. He was an avid tennis player in his younger days, and he took up archery late in his life, joined the Royal Toxophilite Society and even won the Norton cup and medal in 1912. 
By the end of his career Darwin had been honoured with numerous presidencies, vice-presidencies, medals, and memberships in the leading scientific societies of the world. In 1911 he was awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society, the country's highest scientific distinction. Darwin was particularly pleased at being made a knight commander of the Bath in 1905 after his successful presidency of the British Association for the Advancement of Science on its tour of south Africa following the South African War, and by Cambridge University Press's decision to publish his collected 'Scientific Papers' (5 vols., 1907-16). 
Darwin died at Newnham Grange on 7 December 1912 of cancer of the pancreas and was buried at Trumpington. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 32719


Darwin, Sir Horace (1851-1928), civil engineer and manufacturer of scientific instruments, was born at Downe, Kent, on 13 May 1851, the ninth child of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882), the naturalist, and his wife, Emma (1808-1896), daughter of Josiah Wedgwood. Their father's poor health and his writing activities left the boys to find their own entertainment in their quiet rural surroundings. Their mother employed governesses for all her children's primary education and in due course Horace followed his brothers to Clapham grammar school. He found the teaching there, apart from mathematics, dull and old-fashioned, so his father sent him to study under a private tutor at Southwold, from where he went to Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1874, with the accolade of senior optime in the mathematical tripos. He served a three-year apprenticeship with Easton and Anderson, engineers, of Erith, Kent, where his lasting interest in scientific instruments was first aroused. On completion of this training he returned to Cambridge, where he remained for the rest of his life. 
Darwin began earning his living as a consulting engineer on land reclamation and drainage schemes but his university friends were soon asking him to design and construct new types of instruments and apparatus which they needed, particularly in the natural sciences school, where research techniques were becoming more dependent on precision measurements and recording of events. After working with various scientists and mechanics on different projects, Darwin entered into a formal partnership in 1878 with A. G. Dew Smith to establish the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company. This became a limited company in 1880 with Darwin as its chief shareholder, and from 1891 he was in sole control. When, in response to its success, larger premises were needed, money was forthcoming from shares taken up by Darwin's family and friends. The company was associated from the outset with prominent figures in the university; it specialized in constructing apparatus for their individual needs and underpinned this with the production of basic apparatus for schools and colleges, and for industry. It became widely known as 'Horace Darwin's shop' and its reputation grew apace, supported by Darwin's flair for design and the skilled workforce who served him. Darwin himself contributed in large part to the marked improvement in British scientific instrument design which took place between 1880 and 1930, as industry came to rely on instruments for process control. Darwin frequently aired his strong views on the place of the designer in industry, in lectures and in print: he argued that the designer should be a mechanical engineer with much scientific knowledge and well acquainted with the available methods of manufacture. 
In 1880 Darwin married the Hon. Emma Cecilia (Ida), daughter of Thomas Henry Farrer, first Baron Farrer; they had one son (killed in action in 1915), and two daughters. Darwin became an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1877 and a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1878. He served on numerous local and university boards and committees, and as a JP, and held office as mayor of Cambridge in 1896-7. In 1903 he was elected FRS. 
Darwin was one of the founder members of the advisory committee for aeronautics set up in 1909 and his company soon became involved in this new industry, building the apparatus needed for wind-tunnel and other airframe tests, and designing and making aircraft instruments. During the First World War he also served as chairman of the inventions committee. He was created KBE in 1918. Darwin died at his home, The Orchard, Huntingdon Road, Cambridge, on 22 September 1928, and was buried in St Giles's cemetery, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 32720


Dashwood, Edmee Elizabeth Monica (1890-1943), novelist, was born on 9 June 1890 at 6 Walsingham Terrace, Aldrinton, near Hove, Sussex, the elder of the two daughters of Comte Henry Philip Ducarel de la Pasture (1840/41-1908) and his wife, Elizabeth Lydia Rosabel, 'nee' Bonham (1866-1945). Her father was directly descended from the maharaja of Purnea, and his French grandfather had fled to England in 1791. He occupied himself with country pursuits and Catholicism, while her mother, whose father was a diplomat, wrote lucrative fiction under the name Mrs Henry de la Pasture. Edmee, as she was called until adulthood, thereafter Elizabeth or E. M. D., was brought up in both London and Devon and later in Monmouthshire. Educated by French governesses and at several schools, she was bilingual but was 'allowed to read for only an hour a day' (Delafield, 'Beginnings', 66); unsurprisingly, tyrannical mothers appear often in Elizabeth's novels. In 1910 her mother married for a second time. Her new husband was Sir Hugh Charles Clifford (1866-1941), colonial administrator, and later high commissioner for the Malay States and British agent in Borneo. Edmee, who had failed to ensnare a husband, entered a convent in Belgium, which she left after nine months, an experience she wrote about while recuperating (in a manuscript published in Powell's 'Life'). 
Elizabeth became a nurse in Exeter in 1914 and 'in the odds and ends of time permitted to VADs [voluntary aid detachments]' (Delafield, 'Beginnings', 73) wrote her first novel, 'Zella Sees Herself' (1917), the first of five novels with a strong Catholic element which also endorse the comment that 'in women novelists, the analysing habit is very frequently devoted to the study of egoism' (Johnson, 178). Like all the novels to follow, it was published under the pseudonym E. M. Delafield, a loose translation of her maiden name. 'The War Workers' appeared in 1918, as did 'The Pelicans' (in fact written first), which centred on the suffocating love between two sisters. Meanwhile, Elizabeth worked at the Ministry of National Service in Bristol, continuing to write 'as a matter of course, regardless of interruptions.... All that I have tried to do is to observe faithfully, and record accurately, the things that have come within my limited range' (Delafield, 'Beginnings', 73, 78). The next year came 'Consequences', about a girl who enters a convent and then cannot adjust to life outside. 
On 17 July 1919 Elizabeth was married, at St James's, Spanish Place, London, to Major (Arthur) Paul Dashwood (1882-1964), the second son of Sir George Dashwood, and left for Malaya, where her husband worked as a civil engineer. In 1920 she gave birth to a son. But an expatriate life based on the club proved uncongenial and the Dashwoods returned to Britain in 1922, moving to Croyle House near Kentisbeare in Devon. A daughter was born in 1924 and her husband became a land agent, although Elizabeth's earnings were always to be essential. By now her witty, incisive style of writing was fully established, as she continued to follow her mother's advice to write 'about something of which I had personal experience' (Delafield, 'Beginnings', 68). Thus 'The Way Things Are' (1927) concerned a woman not unlike herself, married to a husband not unlike Paul Dashwood; this was described by a contemporary as 'her 'completely' perfect novel' (Ferguson, 166). In 1924 Elizabeth became president of the local Women's Institute, a post she retained until the end of her life. Criminology had always been an interest, and in the same year she became the first woman to sit on her local bench; 'A Messalina of the Suburbs' (1924) was based on the Thompson Bywaters trial. 
By now Elizabeth was writing a great deal of journalism -- 'she was valued for her ability to see everyday life in terms of comic desperation' (Powell, 69) -- and was always at work on a novel, publishing over thirty, as well as several other books of sketches, essays, short stories, and parodies, in the years between 1917 and 1943. She was on the board of 'Time and Tide', to which she contributed, and in late 1929 filled a space in the magazine by beginning the hugely successful 'The Diary of a Provincial Lady' (1930), so characteristic of its author's self-deprecating humour and lightly satiric observation. That year, too, Elizabeth's play 'To See Ourselves' was produced in London and the novel 'Turn Back the Leaves' appeared. In 1932 she published probably her best book, 'Thank Heaven Fasting', 'an almost unbearably poignant account of the struggles of a young girl of respectable family in Edwardian times to find a husband -- any husband -- as a passport to some kind of grownup life' (Colegate). In 1937 E. M. Delafield wrote 'Nothing is Safe', a novel about the tragic effect of divorce upon children, as well as a travel book on Russia, where she had been the year before. On the outbreak of the Second World War, she lectured for the Ministry of Information and spent some weeks in France. But the death of her newly called-up son in late 1940, most probably by his own hand, was something from which she never recovered. 
Elizabeth was described as 'a witty, extremely soignee person, with a gift for laughter' (Kunitz and Haycraft), and her friend Lady Rhondda 'used to wonder how that frail looking creature could stand the strain of the unending round of never ceasing work. I suppose it would be true to say that in the end she did not' ('Time and Tide'). E. M. Delafield, a warm, kind, and generous woman completely without personal vanity, died of cancer at her home, Croyle House, near Kentisbeare, Devon, on 2 December 1943 and was buried on 6 December in Kentisbeare churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 32721


Daubeney, Sir Henry Charles Barnston (1810-1903), army officer, born at Ripon, Yorkshire, on 19 December 1810, was eldest son of Lieutenant-General Henry Daubeney KH, and his first cousin, Elizabeth, daughter of Charles Daubeny, archdeacon of Sarum. After education at Sandhurst he was commissioned ensign in the 55th foot (later 2nd battalion Border regiment) in 1829. He served in it for thirty years, until promoted colonel. In the Coorg campaign, in south India (1832-4), he served with his regiment with the northern column under Colonel Waugh; he was present at the assault of the stockade of Kissenhully, and at the attack on that of Soamwarpettah. There he was in charge of one of the two guns attached to the column, and he saved it from capture during the retreat. The British losses were three officers and forty-five men killed and 118 men wounded, but the raja of Coorg, who was opposing the British advance, was defeated and deposed on 10 April 1834. 
Daubeney served with his regiment during the Chinese War of 1841-2, and as a captain commanded the light company at the repulse of the enemy's night attack at Chinhai (Zhenhai), and at the storm and capture of Chapu (Zhapu) (18 May 1842). He was on the staff as major of brigade to Major-General Schoedde at Wusang, Shanghai, and Chinkiang Fu (Zhenjiang fu), and was mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted brevet major on 23 December 1842, and was made CB on 24 December 1842. 
Daubeney was promoted major (25 November 1845) and went through the Crimean campaign of 1854. On 26 October 1854 he helped to repulse the sortie of the Russians from Sevastopol. At Inkerman, on 5 November 1854, Daubeney, at the head of thirty men of his regiment, made a flank charge; without firing a shot he forced his way through the attacking Russian column, compelling the enemy to fall back in confusion. He was commended in dispatches and was gazetted to a substantive lieutenant-colonelcy on 12 December 1854 for his services at Inkerman, but he declined a promotion which would have removed him from the seat of war and placed him on half pay, while his regiment was serving in the field. General Sir John Pennefather recommended him for the Victoria Cross, but being a regimental field officer he was held to be ineligible. He received the next year the reward for distinguished service, the Legion d'honneur, and the fourth class of the order of the Mejidiye. From 1858 to 1869 he was inspector of army clothing. Promoted major-general on 6 March 1868 and lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877, he was made KCB on 30 May 1871, was appointed colonel of his regiment on 3 February 1879, became general on 4 March 1880, and was made GCB on 24 March 1884. 
On his retirement in 1880 Daubeney resided at Osterley Lodge, Spring Grove, Isleworth, Middlesex, where he died on 17 January 1903. He was married three times: in 1840, to Amelia (died 1857), only child of Samuel Davy Liptrap of Southampton, with whom he had two sons; in 1859 to Henrietta Anne (died 1876), only daughter of Charles Jacomb of Upper Clapton, Middlesex; and in 1878 to Eliza, second daughter of Charles Carpenter of Brunswick Square, Brighton, who survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32722


Davenport, Harold (1907-1969), mathematician, was born on 30 October 1907 in Huncoat, near Accrington, Lancashire, the elder child and only son of Percy Davenport, a clerk, and, later, the company secretary, at Perseverance Mill, and his wife, Nancy, daughter of John Barnes, the owner of the mill. From Accrington grammar school Davenport won scholarships to Manchester University where, in 1927 at the age of nineteen, he graduated with first-class honours in mathematics. In Manchester he came to the notice of E. A. Milne, who encouraged him to enter for a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was successful and in 1929 was classed as wrangler in part two of the mathematical tripos and declared by the examiners to have deserved special credit in the most advanced subjects. 
When Davenport first went to Manchester he had an interest in the history of mathematics and thought up the so-called 'birthday paradox' to calculate the number of people needed for a fifty-fifty chance that two share the same birthday. There were no signs of an early commitment to arithmetical questions -- he even considered seriously a career in chemistry -- but in 1929 all doubts had vanished, and Davenport became Professor J. E. Littlewood's research student, with number theory as his chosen field. Littlewood was then at the height of his fame and Cambridge was soon to become, thanks to his celebrated partnership with G. H. Hardy, a world centre for mathematics. Davenport used his opportunity to the full. His first investigations, into the distribution of quadratic residues, involved pioneering studies of character sums and exponential sums; the skills he acquired then he put to good use in many subsequent researches. Indeed, Davenport assimilated his mathematical experiences so well that they were always readily available for his own and his students' use. By the summer of 1930 his first two papers were in the course of publication, in 1931 he was Rayleigh prizeman, and in 1932 he was elected to a Trinity fellowship. 
A long visit to Helmut Hasse in Marburg in 1931 taught Davenport the power of modern algebra in the study of arithmetical questions, as well as giving him a fluent command of German, and their joint work proved to be notably influential. In Germany, Davenport met H. Heilbronn in Gottingen, and, by the time Heilbronn arrived in Cambridge as a refugee in 1933, the two had formed a friendship which led to a successful and lifelong collaboration. Several of their earliest papers were skilful applications of the celebrated circle method of Hardy and Littlewood to novel additive problems, and Davenport himself at this time made several highly original contributions to Waring's problem. He was, for example, the first to prove the best possible result that every sufficiently large integer is representable as the sum of sixteen fourth powers of integers. Years later the mastery he thus gained in all aspects of the circle method was to stand him in good stead in his work on values taken by quadratic and cubic forms in many variables. This work, whether done alone, with collaborators such as B. J. Birch and D. J. Lewis, or by students under his direction, is perhaps the most enduring part of Davenport's mathematical testament. 
However, that was still in the future; in 1937, after the expiry of his fellowship, Davenport joined L. J. Mordell as an assistant lecturer in Manchester and set himself to study the geometry of numbers. Although Davenport was by now a scholar of international renown -- in 1938 he received the Cambridge ScD, in 1940 he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society and won the Adams prize of the University of Cambridge -- the Manchester period completed his mathematical education. In 1941 Davenport went to the chair of mathematics at the University College of North Wales in Bangor, where in 1944 he married a colleague from the modern languages department, Annie, daughter of James J. Lofthouse, engineer; there were two sons of the marriage. 
In 1945 Davenport became Astor professor of mathematics in University College, London. He drew to him scholars and students from all parts of the world, and when, in 1958, he moved to the Rouse Ball chair of mathematics at Cambridge he recreated there the vitality of his London seminar. Many of his former students demonstrated awe-inspiring qualities; three were winners of Fields medals, 'the Nobel prize of mathematics', and Davenport was proud of them but careful of his many other less able students. He corresponded tirelessly with yet more students (in his beautiful handwriting), giving freely of his enthusiasm, wisdom, and patience. 
In 1956 Davenport embarked on his important researches on quadratic forms and his success released a new vitality. From now until his death, and especially after his return to Cambridge, the scale and range of his mathematical activities increased. At the time of his death he was the unquestioned leader of the important British school of number theory. 
Davenport was shy and reserved and in later years could put a slight deafness to good use. He was very conservative by temperament, and one of his favourite sayings was that all change was for the worse. He was always accessible, entirely without arrogance, and genuinely modest. While he admired talent enormously, he thought his own achievements more the result of tenacious study and perseverance. He was an outstanding lecturer and exceptionally lucid writer, and his book 'The Higher Arithmetic' (1952) is a minor classic. 
Davenport was awarded the senior Berwick prize of the London Mathematical Society in 1954, and in 1957-9 he was president of the society. He received the Sylvester medal of the Royal Society in 1967. In 1964 he had been elected an ordinary member of the Royal Society of Science in Uppsala, and in 1968 he received an honorary DSc from the University of Nottingham. He spent the summer term of 1966 at the University of Gottingen, as Gauss professor, the first Englishman to hold this distinguished visiting appointment. He died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, on 9 June 1969. His wife survived him. 
Heini Halberstam', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32723


Davey, Horace, Baron Davey (1833-1907), judge, was born in Camberwell, Surrey, on 29 August 1833, the third son of Peter Davey (died 1879), a prosperous wholesale coal and coke merchant in London, and his wife, Caroline Emma, daughter of William Pace, rector of Rampisham-cum-Wraxall, Dorset. He entered Rugby School in August 1848, being placed in Mayor's house, and won an open scholarship to University College, Oxford, in 1852. Davey matriculated on 20 March of that year, and went on to enjoy a highly distinguished academic career. Having gained a double first class in classics and mathematics, in both moderations (1854) and the final schools (1855-6), Davey was elected Johnson's mathematical scholar in 1857, senior mathematical scholar in 1858, and Eldon law scholar in 1859. He graduated BA in 1856 and proceeded MA in 1859. He was a fellow of University College from 1856 to 1864. 
Davey had been admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 19 January 1857 and was called to the bar on 26 January 1861. On 5 August 1862, at St George's, Camberwell, he married Louisa Hawes, daughter of John Donkin of Ormond House, Old Kent Road, London, a civil engineer; they had two sons and four daughters. In his first few years of practice, Davey served on the staff of a short-lived series of law reports -- the 'New Reports'. He was an equity reporter from November 1862 to August 1863 and a House of Lords reporter from November 1863 to August 1864. His colleagues at the 'New Reports' included Farrer Herschell (subsequently lord chancellor) and Roland Vaughan Williams and James Stirling (both subsequently lord justice of appeal). Davey joined the chambers of John (later Sir John) Wickens at 8 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, regarded at the time as the most distinguished school of equity pleading, and subsequently devilled for Wickens himself, who was junior counsel to the Treasury in Chancery matters. Ashton recounts in his memoirs that during this time Davey would slave over the numerous briefs which had been assigned to Wickens, while the latter 'lay on his stomach before the fire and read novels of every kind in various languages'. Wickens was clearly impressed with his devil's work, confiding in Edward (later Lord) Macnaghten that in Davey he had at last found a pupil of whose success he felt assured. Davey acquired a substantial junior practice in the Chancery courts, and when Wickens was raised to the bench in 1871 Davey succeeded to a considerable portion of his practice. He was appointed secretary to his old master, Vice-Chancellor Wickens, in 1871, and was later secretary to Vice-Chancellor Hall from 1873 to 1874. 
Davey took silk, 'with strange misgiving and much hesitation' according to Lord Macnaghten, on 23 June 1875, electing to practise in the court of Sir George Jessel MR, where his main opponent was Joseph Chitty. He elected to 'go special' in 1881. Davey's reputation as a senior is generally regarded to have been unrivalled. He was the acknowledged leader of the chancery bar for well over a decade -- Lord Macnaghten said that from about the time of Davey's speech in the Lord St Leonards will case until his promotion to the bench, 'there was no case of importance in the Court of Chancery in which he was not retained.' He also had a strong House of Lords practice, Viscount Alverstone later recalling that, 'of all the men who were largely engaged in appeal cases before the House of Lords, I think Sir Horace Davey... was among the most brilliant.' Further, given his wide knowledge of numerous foreign legal systems, he was much in demand as counsel before the judicial committee of the privy council. The cases of note -- many of them still good law -- in which Davey appeared as senior counsel are simply too numerous to list, although it might give some indication of his great versatility and importance as counsel to note that 'Speight v. Gaunt' (1883), 'Learoyd v. Whiteley' (1887), and 'Derry v. Peek' (1889) were all argued by him. 
Davey's outstanding success at the bar was due to the classic combination of remarkable intelligence, great versatility, and sheer hard work: Viscount Haldane, one of Davey's pupils, thought him 'the finest advocate on pure points of law that I have ever seen... [i]n legal matters he had a mind like a razor, and was accurate to the last degree' (Haldane, 35); Lord Macnaghten said that he seemed 'as much at home in arguing a point of practice as he was in explaining a complicated invention or illustrating and applying one of the great principles of equity or dealing with the mysteries of ecclesiastical law or some constitutional question before the Privy Council'; and he would usually begin work at four or five in the morning, and thought nothing of working solidly through the weekend. Perhaps his success before the privy council was further attributable to his belief that cases before that tribunal 'should be drawn in such a form that old gentlemen could read them in their libraries after dinner without referring to anything else' (Ashton). His success did not, however, stem from gifts of oratory or forensic advocacy. The anonymous author of 'Pie Powder' wrote that 'the intellectual effort necessary to follow his utterances was always considerable; and the absence of anything like animation in his voice and delivery was so ostentatious, that one sometimes wondered how he had forced himself into prominence at all' -- even his former pupil Haldane accepted that 'he could not cross-examine well, nor could he address a jury.' But these were not the characteristics necessary to achieve success at the chancery bar or before the highest appeal courts -- what mattered there was detailed knowledge of the law and clarity of argument, and in those fields Davey excelled. Haldane writes of his being retained in an 'almost overwhelming' number of cases, and at the peak of his success he earned in excess of $25,000 per annum (Haldane, 36). 
Davey also harboured political aspirations, but here success largely eluded him. He was elected MP for Christchurch, in the Liberal interest, in April 1880, but lost his seat in the general election of November 1885. In spite of his poor parliamentary performances, and indeed despite his not at the time having a seat in the Commons, he was appointed solicitor-general by Gladstone on 16 February 1886. He received the customary knighthood on 8 March of that year. His tenure of this office was again undistinguished, and he was obliged to relinquish it when the Gladstone administration fell in August 1886. In that same year, Davey sought re-election to the Commons, unsuccessfully contesting both Ipswich and Stockport. Eventually, he won a seat in Stockton-on-Tees in a by-election of December 1888, but despite his large majority he failed to retain the seat in the July 1892 general election. Davey soon afterwards acquired judicial office, and the 1892 election marked the end of an undistinguished political career. Davey's lack of political success is widely acknowledged. Haldane wrote of his 'deficiencies in the House of Commons', and the 'Law Journal' noted that 'Sir Horace Davey was... not of the stuff of which successful politicians are made'. One obvious reason for this lack of success was Davey's inability to court the electorate. His public manner was somewhat austere, and just as he lacked the urbanity to succeed at 'nisi prius' work in the lawcourts, so he was unsuited to the showmanship of the hustings. His poor powers of oratory must also have impeded his political advancement -- someone of Davey's oratorical shortcomings could simply not have hoped to make a name for himself as a parliamentarian. Haldane recalls, for instance, his old master's speech on the 'Irish Crimes Bill' -- although he set aside all other work to prepare for it, on the day 'it went off', according to John Morley, 'like a magnum of soda water that has stood for two days with the cork out'. There is no doubt that Davey very much desired political success, but it was not to be. He had to be content with making his mark on legal, rather than political history. 
Given his almost unrivalled reputation at the bar, it should have occasioned little surprise when Davey was raised to the bench. He was appointed directly to the Court of Appeal on 23 September 1893, in place of his friend Sir Charles Bowen who had been created a lord of appeal-in-ordinary. He was sworn of the privy council one month later, on 23 November. Davey spent less than a year sitting as a lord justice of appeal, although in that time he heard some notable cases, such as 'Monson v. Tussauds Ltd' (1894), and acquired a reputation for both patience and urbanity in the execution of his judicial role. His intellectual abilities, never in doubt at the bar, he applied with similar success on the bench. 
Davey was appointed a lord of appeal-in-ordinary on 13 August 1894, taking the place of Lord Russell of Killowen who had accepted an invitation to become lord chief justice. On the same day he was created a baron for life by the style of Baron Davey of Fernhurst, in Sussex. Davey was to sit in the appellate committee of the House of Lords and in the judicial committee of the privy council from 1894 until his death some thirteen years later. His judicial output was consequently prolific, and involved matters ranging from legal technicalities to some of the great 'causes celebres' of the day. Among the latter were 'Russell v. Russell' (1897), where Davey formed part of a bare majority of law lords who refused to grant Lord Russell a judicial separation on the grounds of Lady Russell's cruelty (she having made certain allegations, which she continued to make after she no longer believed them to be true, to the effect that Lord Russell had engaged in homosexual activity), and 'General Assembly of the Free Church of Scotland v. Lord Overtoun' (1904), a major case concerning the fundamental doctrines of the Free Church and some $2 m. worth of its property. 
Davey was also involved in a number of legal, rather than social, 'causes celebres', cases which continue to be recognized instantly by modern legal practitioners. Examples of such cases include 'Salomon v. Salomon' (1896), the seminal authority on the nature of incorporation; and 'Allen v. Flood' (1898), a landmark decision on the propriety of the activities of trade unions (and one that led to considerable infighting between the Liberal and Conservative factions of the law lords, not the first or last time that the Liberal Davey would clash with staunchly Conservative colleagues like the lord chancellor, Halsbury). 
But perhaps the finest testament to Davey's judicial abilities is the considerable number of his judgments which, despite their being a century old, remain good law. Cases like 'Walter v. Lane' (1900) (the major ruling on reporters' copyright); 'Burland v. Earle' (1901) (concerning the fraud on the minority exception to the rule in 'Foss v. Harbottle', 1843); 'Noakes & Co Ltd v. Rice' (1901) and 'Bradley v. Carritt' (1903) (both concerning the rules governing collateral benefits in mortgage law); and 'Ruben v. Great Fingall Consolidated' (1906) (establishing the effect of a forged share certificate on a company) continue to be studied and cited by legal students and practitioners, guaranteeing Davey a degree of immortality among successive generations of lawyers. 
In 1905, towards the end of his life, Davey pressed a claim to the woolsack in the Campbell-Bannerman administration, although nothing came of this. Edmund Gosse (the librarian of the House of Lords) attributed this lack of success at least partly to Davey's long absence from active party politics and to the cold personality which had earlier worked against him in his efforts to forge a reputation in parliament. He cannot have been helped by the fact that his ally Lord Spencer was prevented by ill health from advising on the appointment of the Campbell-Bannerman cabinet. 
Davey the judge was, like Davey the barrister, almost peerless in his time. Atlay considered him and his colleague Lord Lindley to be 'two of the very greatest judicial intellects of [their] generation', while Lord Macnaghten wrote of 'how much he added to the strength of the House of Lords and the Privy Council', referring to his 'weight of authority' and 'wealth of learning', and adjudging him 'the most accomplished lawyer of his day'. Davey sat alongside some very strong and very eminent judges, not the least of whom were Lindley, Macnaghten, and Herschell, but it is fair to say that his immense knowledge, carefully weighed judgments, and incisive legal mind fully entitle him to be ranked alongside those and other great names of the Victorian and Edwardian bench. Arguably the very greatest barrister of his day, Davey was certainly also one of the greatest judges. 
Davey's cold public persona has already been highlighted -- it cost him dear in his efforts to establish a political career. This reputation is not ameliorated by Edmund Gosse's diary entries, the author noting, in reference to Davey, that '[h]is long, melancholy nose is drawn up in a perpetual sneer', while 'his parchment cheeks and stealthy hyena-like tread freeze conversation whenever he makes an appearance'. Davey was, nevertheless, a member of the Athenaeum, Oxford and Cambridge, and National Liberal clubs, and was apparently a fine companion to those of his intimate acquaintance, and greatly loved by his family. Harrison also refers to the 'inexhaustible culture' of Horace Davey -- he had always a particularly keen interest in classical and modern European literature, and also formed a small collection of contemporary paintings. 
Davey received many accolades in addition to those already mentioned. He was made an honorary fellow of University College, Oxford, in 1884, and was awarded an honorary doctorate of civil law ten years later (he had been standing counsel to the University of Oxford from 1877 to 1893). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 24 January 1895, was chairman of the Incorporated Council for Law Reporting for England and Wales, and was elected treasurer of Lincoln's Inn in 1897. The following year he chaired the royal commission appointed to make statutes for the reconstituted University of London, and in 1905 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. 
Lord Davey died of acute bronchitis at his London residence, 86 Brook Street, on Wednesday 20 February 1907. He was survived by his wife, and was buried on 23 February at Forest Row, East Grinstead. His position on the appellate committee of the House of Lords was taken by Lord Collins, the former master of the rolls. 


@@@@@


doc= 32724


David, Albert Augustus (1867-1950), bishop of Liverpool and headmaster, was born in Exeter on 19 May 1867, the second son of the Revd William David, then principal of the Exeter Diocesan Training College for schoolmasters and afterwards priest-vicar of the cathedral, and his wife, Antonia Altgelt. After attending Exeter School he won a classical scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford, where he took a first in both classical moderations and Greats. He was successively a lecturer at his college, a master at Bradfield College and Rugby School, and then a fellow of his college. He was ordained priest in 1895. David married Edith Mary, daughter of the late Thomas William Miles, of the public works department, India, in 1909, and they had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1905 David became headmaster of Clifton College. A tall and imposing presence, he was a great success with masters, boys, and the school's trustees. He introduced physical drill into the curriculum, expanded the chapel and grounds, and increased pupil numbers. But when he moved back to Rugby as headmaster in 1909, he did not repeat this success. He had become interested in the progressive educational theories of a controversial American psychologist, Homer Lane, some of which he now sought to implement. He was concerned that the public schools did nothing for the less able boy, and sought to reform the curriculum to promote creativity and free expression. He later expanded on these ideas in his book 'Life and the Public School' (1932). David encouraged masters at Rugby to experiment with new teaching methods, and allowed one of them, J. H. Simpson, to institute a system of self-government for his class, in which boys were constituted into a court to discipline their peers. Such innovations went too far for many of his older masters, who felt that he was jeopardizing the discipline and reputation of the school, and one of them, G. F. Bradby, wrote a comic novel, 'The Chronicles of Dawnhope' (1921), satirizing David's progressive regime. 
David, who had been made DD in 1910, had already refused four offers of bishoprics when he was appointed bishop of St Edmundsbury and Ipswich in 1921. He had barely made a start in his new diocese before being translated to Liverpool in 1923. As only the third Anglican bishop of Liverpool, he inherited an unfinished cathedral, consecrated in 1924. David also had to confront the city's sectarian divisions, which erupted into violent attacks by protestant mobs on Anglo-Catholic churches and on the Anglican cathedral in 1932. 
But the most serious sectarian controversy of his episcopate came from an unlikely source, Unitarianism. David was a liberal churchman, and during the First World War he had been prominent in Life and Liberty, the campaign for church self-government which was led by his old pupil from Rugby William Temple. But in 1933-4 David found himself in conflict with Temple, who was by then archbishop of York, over whether Unitarians should preach in Anglican churches. David was a proponent of reunion with the nonconformists, and to this end gave permission for the prominent Unitarian L. P. Jacks to preach at a special service in Liverpool Cathedral in 1933. This was a controversial move. Many Anglicans held that Unitarians were not Christians because they denied the Trinity. David defended his action on the narrow grounds that Jacks had preached at a special service, and when the dean, F. W. Dwelly, invited another Unitarian, Lawrence Redfern, to preach at a regular cathedral service, the bishop reproved him. But this legalistic distinction did not satisfy critics like Lord Hugh Cecil, who accused David of promoting heresy. In 1934 the bishops of the northern province, led by William Temple, rebuked David for inviting non-Christian ministers to preach at Anglican services. 
David remained bishop until 1944, raising $85,000 for his diocese before retiring to Cornwall. He was elected an honorary fellow of Queen's College, Oxford, in 1920, and received an honorary DD from Glasgow University in 1937. Besides his work on the public schools, he published a number of devotional books, and a pamphlet, 'Who are Christians?' (1934), justifying his conduct in the unitarianism controversy. 
David died at Trebetherick, Cornwall, on 24 December 1950. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32725


David, Sir (Tannatt William) Edgeworth (1858-1934), geologist, was born at the rectory at St Fagans, Glamorgan, on 28 January 1858, the eldest child of William David ('c'.1823-1897), rector of St Fagans, and his wife, Margaret Harriette, 'nee' Thomson ('c'.1834-1903). He was a descendant of the David family of Radyr Court, Cardiff, and on his mother's side from James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, the Abbe Edgeworth de Firmont, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, and Maria Edgeworth. He received his early education from his father, attended Magdalen College School, Oxford, and then became a scholar at New College, Oxford; he obtained a first class in classical moderations in 1878. 
David's decision not to take holy orders prompted a bout of ill health which caused him to break his studies and travel to Canada and Australia. In 1880 he graduated in the pass schools, being particularly influenced by John Ruskin and the geologists Joseph Prestwich, Charles Tanfield Vachell, and his relative William A. E. Ussher. He continued to study geology at the Normal School of Science and Technology (later the Royal College of Science), under John Wesley Judd. In 1882 he was appointed assistant geological surveyor in New South Wales, under the direction of Charles S. Wilkinson. While travelling to Australia he met his future wife, Caroline Martha (Cara) Mallett (1856-1951), whom he married in Sydney on 30 July 1885. David remained with the Geological Survey for nine years and produced highly praised reports and maps on tin mining, fossil occurrences, petrology, underground water, and particularly coal deposits of the Hunter River region; the last ensured that a source of gas-coal was kept in government rather than private control. 
In 1891 David was appointed to the chair of geology at the University of Sydney, where he quickly became famous for his teaching ability, especially on his field excursions. Above medium height, he was tough and wiry, good at ice skating and skiing, and untiring in the field. With Thomas Anderson Stuart, David became involved in the preparations for the first expedition (1896) of the Royal Society to Funafuti in the Ellice Islands. When this proved unsuccessful he gained support for two further expeditions; he led the second (1897), accompanied by his wife, and planned the third (1898). The drilling to a depth of more than 1000 feet on the island went a long way towards supporting Darwin's theory of the origin of coral atolls. For this work David received the Bigsby medal of the Geological Society of London, and was elected FRS in 1900. He was known as Tavita by the inhabitants of Funafuti, a name he used for some publications in 1897 and 1898. 
David's interest in glaciation, initiated in Wales, and the subject of his first publication, was stimulated with the recognition of late Palaeozoic glaciation in Australia. He pursued this matter in India in 1906, 'en route' for Mexico for a meeting of the International Geological Congress, and continued to publish on this subject until his death. In 1907 he seized the opportunity to visit Antarctica with Ernest Shackleton's expedition, having used his influence to obtain Australian funding for it. He then applied retrospectively for university permission to remain in Antarctica and led the successful expeditions to the summit of Mount Erebus and to the south magnetic pole. These exploits and the popular lectures he gave around Australia to pay the expenses of the expedition made him widely known, and he was appointed CMG in 1910. David was instrumental in gaining funding and personnel and advising for various Antarctic expeditions up to 1930. 
During the early years of the First World War, David gave patriotic lectures, and in 1915 persuaded the Australian government to use Australian miners by raising a battalion of Australian tunnellers. He enlisted, aged fifty-seven, and in 1916, with the rank of major, travelled to France, where he used his expertise in underground water and drilling with great success. He was particularly responsible for the great mining operation under Messines Ridge, which destroyed a German vantage point on 7 June 1917. Despite a fall down a mine shaft he remained active, and was mentioned in dispatches three times. In June 1917 he was appointed chief geologist and attached to the inspector of mines at general headquarters, British expeditionary force. He was awarded the DSO in 1918 and promoted lieutenant-colonel. In 1920 he was appointed KBE, but rather against his will. 
After returning to Sydney, David began a serious attempt to compile a comprehensive 'Geology of the Commonwealth of Australia', which he had begun some years earlier. His offer to resign in 1922 to concentrate on the book was rejected by the university, which obtained funding to allow him to take leave for several years. He travelled widely in Australia to check important localities and discuss material with colleagues, but was deflected from his writing by involvement in the Pan-Pacific Congress held in Australia in 1923. He retired in 1924. 
Despite travelling to England in 1925-6 to write, David continued to be deflected from his proposed book by other interests, notably Precambrian life. He believed he had found evidence of both small and large forms in Precambrian rocks near Adelaide and worked on these until his death, but was particularly disappointed when the Royal Society rejected his paper on the subject. 
David's 'Geological Map of the Commonwealth of Australia' was published in 1931 (and reprinted in 1932 with accompanying notes) to general acclamation. The notes summarized his knowledge and ideas about Australian geology. Written in just a few weeks, it was an extraordinary achievement, and the culmination of an outstanding career. David realized he would never complete his much larger proposed work, which was taken over after his death by W. R. Browne and finally published in 1950, being essentially Browne's work rather than David's. 
After a fall when he was alighting from a tram at Sydney University, David collapsed and died, on 28 August 1934 at the Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney. His death produced an extraordinary reaction around Australia. The commonwealth and state governments moved unprecedented acts of sympathy and provided a state funeral at Sydney (Church of England) Cathedral on 30 August, which was attended by thousands. He was cremated at the Northern Suburbs crematorium, Sydney. He was survived by his wife, his son, and two daughters. 
From his earliest days in Australia, David was heavily involved in the scientific societies, particularly the Royal and Linnean societies of New South Wales and the Australian Association for the Advancement of Science. He was first president (1921-2), and councillor until his death, of the independent Australian National Research Council, the forerunner of the Australian Academy of Science, which supported the development of the government-sponsored Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and later Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). He received many awards, including the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London (1915), the patron's medal of the Royal Geographical Society, and honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford, Manchester, Cambridge, Wales, Sydney (all DSc), and at St Andrews (LLD). 
Despite these activities and awards, David had contacts with farmers and railway navvies as well as premiers and generals, and his word was highly regarded by all. He combined in a rare way aspects of the romantic and the practical, but was essentially an interpretative rather than a creative genius. Although he contributed nothing original to the principle or method in geology, he saw order in complexity and the relations between things unlike or far apart, which led him to support the theory of continental drift of Alfred Wegener. 


@@@@@


doc= 32726


Davids, Thomas William Rhys (1843-1922), orientalist, was born at Colchester on 12 May 1843, the eldest son of Thomas William Davids (1816-1884), ecclesiastical historian and Congregational minister at Colchester, and his wife, Louisa Winter. He was educated at Brighton School, Colchester, before a period of private tuition. He then went to New College, Finchley Road, London, from 1860 to about 1861, and finally studied Sanskrit under A. F. Stenzler at Breslau University until 1863. He went to Ceylon in 1864 and joined its civil service in 1866. In Ceylon he studied the Pali language and early Buddhism under native teachers. Here he found his vocation. He published articles on local inscriptions, and in 1870 became a member of the Archaeological Commission. In August 1871 he was appointed assistant government agent at Anuradhapura, but soon fell out with his superior and after less than a year was forced to leave. Though his offence amounted to little worse than slovenly bookkeeping, he was dismissed from the service (after appeal) in 1873. He returned to England in 1874. He was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1877 but practised little. 
Rhys Davids's first major publication was 'Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon' (1877); but it is as a scholar of Pali and of early Buddhism that he is remembered. In 1877 he wrote 'Buddhism' for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. This can claim to be the first book in English on Buddhism to meet modern scholarly standards. Reprinted more than twenty times, it has been influential, not least for its implied analogies between Theravada Buddhism and protestantism on the one hand as against Mahayana Buddhism and 'popery' on the other. In 1880 the publication of Victor Fausboll's 'Jatakas' in Pali led Rhys Davids to contemplate a translation, but he abandoned this idea (after a notable first volume -- 'Buddhist Birth Stories', 1880) in order to produce, for the series of 'Sacred Books of the East' (published by the Clarendon Press), 'Buddhist suttas from the Pali' (1881), which was followed by three volumes of translations (in collaboration with Hermann Oldenberg) of 'Vinaya texts' (1881-5) and 'Questions of King Milinda' (1890-94). These translations have stood the test of time. Rhys Davids married in 1894 Caroline Augusta (died 1942), daughter of John Foley, vicar of Wadhurst, Sussex; they had one son, killed in action during the First World War, and two daughters. Caroline Rhys Davids herself wrote many books on Buddhism. 
In 1881 Rhys Davids founded the Pali Text Society on the model of the Early English Text Society. It soon became the world's foremost publisher of Pali texts, translations of those texts, and auxiliary works. At the end of the twentieth century it was still publishing the journal of Pali studies which he founded, and kept about 300 volumes in print. Rhys Davids himself edited, with Joseph Estlin Carpenter, the text of the 'Digha Nikaya' (3 vols., 1899-1910) and volume 1 of the commentary thereon. He also began a translation, finished by his wife, of the same text (3 vols., 1899-1921); its title, 'Dialogues of the Buddha', recalled Plato's Socratic dialogues, with which he believed the 'Digha Nikaya' to rank. His introductions to the individual dialogues are notable for their cultural sensitivity, while his translations, though not wholly free from error, are perhaps as fluent and appropriate as any yet made of Buddhist scriptures. 
Of Rhys Davids's books about Buddhism not already mentioned, the chief are 'The Origin and Growth of Religion as Illustrated by... the History of Indian Buddhism' (Hibbert lectures, 1881), 'Buddhist India' (1903), and (his own favourite) 'Early Buddhism' (1908). He contributed many articles to Hastings's 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics', and the chapter on early Buddhism to volume 1 of the 'Cambridge History of India'. He began his Hibbert lectures by condemning the tendency of western scholarship to examine other religions merely with a view to discovering where they agreed with Christianity; and in his conclusion he compared the western discovery of oriental civilizations to the discovery that the earth is not the centre of the universe. As a historian of religion he was an evolutionist and owed much to E. B. Tylor. His interpretation of Buddhism stressed its rational and humanistic aspects. 
Rhys Davids was honorary professor of Pali and Buddhist literature at University College, London, from 1882 to 1912. From 1904 to 1915 he was professor of comparative religion at the University of Manchester; the post was the only one of its kind in Britain, perhaps (as he claimed) in the world. He was secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland from 1888 to 1904, and was an original fellow of the British Academy, which he helped to found. In 1894 he was granted a civil-list pension of $200 a year. 
In 1902 Rhys Davids suggested an international project to produce a Pali-English dictionary. When the First World War finally put paid to this plan, he decided to launch a provisional dictionary himself. Leaving Manchester, he secured William Stede as a full-time co-editor, and issued the first volume in 1921, and the second in 1922, the year of his death. The final instalment was published by Stede in 1925. Without Rhys Davids's energy this result could not have been achieved. He died at his home, Middleshaws, at Chipstead, Surrey, on 27 December 1922. 
Rhys Davids was a lifelong Liberal. He combined enthusiasm with a keen sense of humour, and was at his best when discussing religion, politics, and the historical evolution of ideas. He delighted in placing his materials and ideas at the disposal of his friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 32727


Davidson, Andrew Bruce (1831-1902), Hebraist and theologian, was born on 25 April 1831 in the farmstead at Ellon, north Aberdeenshire, the son of Andrew Davidson (died 1863) and Helen Bruce (died 1876). His parents were keenly interested in the ecclesiastical and theological controversies that were to lead to the Disruption of 1843 and the founding of the Free Church of Scotland, and Davidson was consequently brought up, from the age of twelve, in the Free Church, which he served for the whole of his life. He went to Aberdeen grammar school in 1845, and in 1846 he entered Marischal College, Aberdeen; he graduated in 1849. 
After teaching at the Free Church school in Ellon, Davidson entered the Free Church college in Edinburgh, New College, in 1852, and during his four years there he visited the University of Gottingen, where he studied under H. G. A. Ewald. In 1856 he was licensed as a preacher and in 1858 he became an assistant at New College to the professor of Hebrew, John Duncan (1796-1870), whom he succeeded as professor of Hebrew and oriental languages in 1863. He held the post until his death. From 1870 to 1884 he was a member of the committee that produced the Revised Version of the 'Bible'. His scholarship was recognized by the award of several honorary degrees: LLD, Aberdeen (1868); DD, Edinburgh (1868) and Glasgow (1901); and LittD, Cambridge (1900). 
While in some ways enigmatic, Davidson was an important transitional figure in the history of biblical scholarship in Britain. His views on critical matters were sufficiently traditional and orthodox in their account of recent criticism to allay any suspicions about his suitability for the chair at New College. At the same time he did not close the door to biblical criticism, and the first volume of his commentary on 'Job' (1862) was a landmark in British scholarship. It was a profound exegesis of the text rather than a doctrinal tract, and it was mildly critical in tone. However, the rapidly moving tide of criticism in the 1860s and 1870s raised considerable problems for Davidson, who was quoted as saying, 'I dislike the old, I distrust the new' (Strahan, 108). 
Several of Davidson's pupils published the notes taken at his lectures, but the most interesting are the unpublished notes of his most distinguished and most controversial pupil, William Robertson Smith. These show that in 1868-9 Davidson was combining elements of traditional Scottish orthodoxy with the mildly critical positions of German scholars such as G. F. Oehler and F. A. G. Tholuck. Davidson also mentioned more radical critical views and clearly kept in touch with the latest developments, but he taught within a theological framework shared by Oehler, Tholuck, and his teacher, Ewald. This presented the 'Old Testament' as a record of God's progressive self-revelation, each stage of which was suited to the receptive ability of the Israelites. However, the version of this position adopted by Davidson could not easily contain the radical implications of the theories of K. H. Graf and Abraham Kuenen, and, later, Julius Wellhausen, which placed the prophets before the law, and when Robertson Smith was put on trial by the Free Church for advocating such views Davidson failed to declare himself openly to be on Smith's side. 
Towards the end of his life Davidson became cautiously more critical, especially in articles for James Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Bible'; but by then the critical cause had been largely won. Davidson's apparent ambivalence has occasioned sharply differing verdicts. To some he was a disappointment, left behind by the tide of criticism that he had helped to begin. For others his caution in distrusting the new was justified, and he was praised for having helped to produce a generation of younger critical scholars. 
Davidson was a consummate Hebraist and his 'Introductory Hebrew Grammar' (1874) and 'Hebrew Syntax' (1894) have taught generations of students, with revised editions, for more than a hundred years. His great love of Hebrew prophecy was exemplified in his commentaries on 'Ezekiel' (1892), 'Nahum', 'Habakkuk', and 'Zephaniah' (1896), and the posthumously published 'Old Testament Prophecy' (1903). This last work, together with his 'Theology of the Old Testament' (1904), was not prepared for publication by Davidson himself, and the value of these as a guide to his thought has been disputed. 
In appearance Davidson was small and slight, needing spectacles for long distances and able without them to read the smallest print. His genuine modesty was epitomized by the fact that he constantly reminded his friends that he was not the great Dr Samuel Davidson but only A. B. Davidson of New College, Edinburgh. However, for all his modesty and his undemonstrative nature he was a riveting lecturer, and in his quiet, unassuming way he helped to change the face of 'Old Testament' scholarship in Britain. He died, unmarried, in Edinburgh, on 20 January 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 32728


Davidson, Charles (1824-1902), watercolour painter, was born on 30 July 1824 in London, the son of John Davidson, a tailor. Both parents, who were Scottish, died when he was a baby. After leaving school in Fulham, he was apprenticed to a seedsman and market gardener in Brompton, but left after a year to study music. He turned to painting and studied for some years with John Absolon, a member of the New Watercolour Society. On 8 December 1842 he married Ann Topham, daughter of Richard Topham, pawnbroker, and sister of the painter Francis William Topham. They had two sons and four daughters, one of whom, Annie Laura, married the painter Frank Holl. 
Davidson was elected an associate of the New Watercolour Society in 1847 and a member in 1849, but he left it for the Old Watercolour Society; he was elected an associate in 1855 and a member in 1858. A friend of John Linnell, Samuel Palmer, and the Varleys, he soon built up a reputation for his English landscapes and domestic rural scenes. He exhibited over 800 paintings at the Old Watercolour Society between 1844 and 1902, and 114 at the New Watercolour Society. Four of his paintings were shown at the Royal Academy between 1844 and 1854, including 'Bolton Abbey on the River Wharfe' (1846) and 'Walmer Church in Sunshine after Rain' (1854), and he also exhibited at the British Institution and the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists. Prince Albert bought his 'Haymaking at Priory Park, Near Reigate' as a Christmas present for Queen Victoria in 1856. Eight of his watercolours are in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. 
Davidson lived for many years near Samuel Palmer in Redhill, Surrey, and also painted a lot in Wales. In 1882 he moved to Trevena, Falmouth, Cornwall, where he died on 19 April 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 32729


Davidson, John (1857-1909), schoolteacher and writer, was born on 11 April 1857 at Barrhead, Renfrewshire, the son of Alexander Davidson, a minister of the Evangelical Union, and his wife, Helen Davidson, 'nee' Crockett. When he was nine the family moved to Greenock, Renfrewshire, where his father had been appointed to the ministry of the church in Nelson Street. Greenock, an industrial town and port on the Firth of Clyde, is undoubtedly the setting of Davidson's major autobiographical poem, 'A Ballad in Blank Verse of the Making of a Poet' ('Ballads and Songs', 1894). 
From 1870 to 1871 Davidson was employed in the chemical laboratory of Walker's, the Greenock sugar firm, and subsequently became an assistant in the office of the town's public analyst. Such employment contributed to the making of a poet whose subject matter would draw on science. In 1872 he returned to his old school at Greenock, Highlanders' Academy, as a pupil teacher. Intellectually restless, with no academic cast of mind, he spent only one year (1876-7) as a student at Edinburgh University. He was subsequently a teacher of English at Alexander's charity school, Glasgow (1877-8), Perth Academy (1878-81), Kelvinside Academy, Glasgow (1881-2), and Hutchinson's charity school, Paisley (1883-4). After a year as a clerk in the Glasgow office of a thread firm, he returned to teaching at Morrison's academy, Crieff, Perthshire (1885-8), where he protested at the rector's cruelty to the pupils; his short story 'The Schoolboy's Tragedy' is an indictment of petty authoritarianism in Scottish education. Although in his play 'Smith: a Tragic Farce' (1888) Davidson called schoolteaching 'mental boot-blacking', he was remembered as an inspirational instructor, particularly in his classes on poetry. 
On 23 October 1885 Davidson married Margaret Cameron McArthur, daughter of John McArthur, dean of guild of Perth, and his wife, Menzies Grant McArthur, 'nee' McDonald. They had two sons, Alexander and Menzies. Davidson's last teaching post was at a private school in Greenock (1888-9); this also marked the virtual end of his residence in Scotland, with the subsequent move to London and the south of England. He was to return to Scotland for brief writing retreats in the early 1900s, most notably to Blairlogie at the foot of the Ochil hills near Stirling, another part of Scotland much celebrated in his writing. 
The bulk of Davidson's early work, composed while he was still in Scotland, is in the form of verse-drama: 'Diabolus amans' (1885); 'Bruce' (1886), a historical play based on the warrior-king of Scotland, Robert the Bruce; and 'Smith: a Tragic Farce' (1888), concerning a Nietzschean-style 'Overman' who despises the constraints of bourgeois mediocrity. In deploying drama Davidson allowed his characters to articulate ideas to which he could avoid making his own overt commitment; nevertheless, and although he rejected his father's Christianity, his quasi-autobiographical characters display an evangelical fervour in their quest for personal and intellectual fulfilment as against conventional pieties. Existential assertiveness animates the protagonists of 'Thirty Bob a Week', the monologue of a poor but proud clerk, and 'A Ballad of a Nun'; these are two of the most notable (and in the latter case notorious) poems of Davidson's 'annus mirabilis', 1894. 
Davidson's Victorian earnestness is offset by a pre-modernist, carnivalesque humour, seen in such novels as 'The North Wall' (1885; reprinted in 1891 together with a selection of short stories in 'The Great Men, and A Practical Novelist'), 'Perfervid: the Career of Ninian Jamieson' (1890), and the play 'Scaramouch in Naxos' (1890), which looks forward to twentieth-century reworkings of 'commedia dell'arte'. 'A Full and True Account of the Wonderful Mission of Earl Lavender' (1895) is a spirited spoof on 1890s high camp. He evolved a concept of irony which delighted in the coexistence of extreme opposites; accordingly, he could deny that he subscribed to any one-sided set of beliefs. For example, although influenced by Nietzsche, he disclaimed discipleship. Even so, it is missionary zeal rather than transcendent irony which characterizes such later work as the five blank verse 'Testaments' published between 1901 and 1908, and the unfinished trilogy of plays, 'God and Mammon' (1907-8). Such deeply philosophical poetry expounds a scientific materialism and atheistic humanism: man is matter evolved to its highest form, and the individual of the species must assert his or her will. 
For most of the period between 1890 and 1907 Davidson and his family lived in London where he worked as a journalist, contributing regularly to 'The Speaker' and also to 'The Star', the 'Yellow Book', and the 'Glasgow Herald'. He was a publisher's reader for two houses: John Lane during the 1890s, and Grant Richards from 1907 to 1909. He became a member of the Rhymers' Club but maintained a typical aloofness; he was ambivalent in his attitude to nineties decadence, and his fellow poets (notably W. B. Yeats) regarded him as a serious, tough-minded Scot. Journalism, like teaching, he viewed as an economic necessity, distracting him from his vocation as a poet; however, it did provide him with raw material for his poetry, as in 'Fleet Street Eclogues' (1893; 2nd ser., 1896). Financial, family, and professional problems led to a breakdown late in 1896, followed by two years' recuperation at Shoreham on the Sussex coast. In 1899 he received a grant from the Royal Literary Fund and in 1906 was awarded a civil-list pension. His last two years were spent in Penzance, Cornwall, where the family had moved in 1907 to escape the pressures of London; this did not stop him becoming ill and depressed. On 23 March 1909 he failed to return from his customary coastal walk. Six months later his body was recovered from the sea, at Mousehole harbour, near Penzance, and although the coroner returned a verdict of 'accidental death', Davidson's own final utterances had demonstrated an inclination towards suicide. On 21 September he was, according to his own wishes, buried at sea, 7 miles off Penzance. 
Davidson influenced the careers of two of the greatest English-language poets of the twentieth century: T. S. Eliot acknowledged his discovery of Davidson's urban images, so crucial to the making of the poet of 'The Waste Land'; C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) responded to the scientific materialism and its paradoxically mystical possibilities. The standard edition of Davidson's verse is 'The Poems of John Davidson', edited by Andrew Turnbull in two volumes and published by the Scottish Academic Press in 1973. His fiction is far from negligible, and his essays reinforce his position as an early modernist; above all, however, it is his poetry which has secured his reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 32730


Davidson, John Colin Campbell, first Viscount Davidson (1889-1970), politician, was born in Aberdeen on 23 February 1889. He was the second child and only son of Sir James Mackenzie Davidson (1856-1919), ophthalmic surgeon and pioneer of radiology, and his wife, Georgina Barbara Watt (died 1927), daughter of the Revd William Henderson of Aberdeen. The family originated as farmers near Scone in Perthshire, but Davidson's grandfather John Davidson (1808-1893) emigrated to Argentina in 1825 and prospered there; the income from the family's estates enabled Davidson to follow his interests and refuse payment for the various positions which he held. The family were staunchly Church of Scotland, and Davidson's early years imbued him with a strong faith and the ethic of 'your work always comes first' (Davidson, 5). He was educated at Fretherne House preparatory school, Westminster School (1903-7), and Pembroke College, Cambridge, graduating with a third in part one of the law tripos in 1911. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1913 but never practised, for by this time he had already begun a different career. 
On 10 April 1919 Davidson married (Frances) Joan Dickinson (1894-1985) ['see 'Davidson, (Frances) Joan]. Always known as Mimi, she was an attractive and popular personality who shared her husband's outlook and supported his work. She succeeded him as MP for Hemel Hempstead from 1937 to 1959, and became a life peer as Baroness Northchurch in 1963. It was a close and happy marriage and resulted in two sons and two daughters. 
In May 1910 Davidson became an unpaid assistant private secretary to the colonial secretary, Lord Crewe. He continued to serve his successor, Lewis Harcourt, from November 1910 to May 1915, when the formation of the first coalition brought Davidson into the orbit of the new colonial secretary and Conservative Party leader, Andrew Bonar Law. The latter was swiftly impressed by Davidson's industry, and he became more than a trusted aide. A close friendship developed based upon a paternal relationship. Law dissuaded Davidson from leaving Whitehall for military service, and when he became chancellor of the exchequer in the Lloyd George coalition in December 1916 insisted that Davidson move with him to the Treasury. Davidson continued as Law's private secretary until the latter's patronage smoothed his entry into the House of Commons as MP for Hemel Hempstead in November 1920. This was not a change of course, for immediately Davidson became Law's parliamentary private secretary (PPS), discharging the same tasks but with better political access and contacts. 
When Law retired on health grounds in March 1921 Davidson became parliamentary private secretary to Stanley Baldwin, which was almost a case of staying in the family. Baldwin was also close to Law and knew Davidson well from having served -- initially at Davidson's suggestion -- as junior minister at the Treasury in 1916-19. During 1921-2 Davidson shared with Baldwin and a range of junior ministers an increasingly negative view of the Lloyd George coalition. The revolt against this was a movement at many levels within the Conservative Party involving constituency pressure, back-bench MPs, junior ministers, and restive peers. The range of dissent gave it weight, but its greatest weakness was the lack of a credible leader. Davidson played an important role by helping to persuade Law to come out of retirement and attend the Carlton Club meeting on 19 October 1922 at which Lloyd George and the existing Conservative leaders were overthrown. 
Law resumed the Conservative leadership and became prime minister, and with Baldwin's approval Davidson at once returned to his side as Law's PPS. It was in this position that a few months later Davidson played a significant -- and controversial -- historical role. When Law's terminal illness forced him to retire in May 1923 he declined to recommend whether Curzon or Baldwin should be his successor. At the request of the king's private secretary, Lord Stamfordham, Davidson wrote a memorandum which came down firmly in favour of Baldwin. This document accompanied Law's resignation letter and was handed over by its bearer, Law's private secretary Ronald Waterhouse. Although the latter suggested that it represented Law's own undisclosed view, Stamfordham and the king were aware of its authorship. It played a smaller part in the choice of Baldwin as prime minister than was once supposed, but nevertheless had some influence -- if only because it provided arguments for the choice which the crown was disposed to take. 
Davidson's relationship with Law had brought him into the inner counsels of the Conservative Party by 1923, and his friendship with Baldwin was to keep him there for the next fourteen years in a variety of roles. This was also a filial relationship across generations -- indeed, Davidson met his wife through Baldwin, as she was a friend of one of his daughters. Baldwin spent much time in the Davidsons' company; Mimi was a frequent companion in his favourite relaxation of long country walks, and they regularly holidayed with the Baldwins as well. Davidson shared his leader's political aims and moral vision, while being willing to devil on the detail and take care of confidential matters. In Baldwin's first ministry he became chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster; this was outside the cabinet, but an ideal position from which to advise and assist. He combined this office with the position of chief civil commissioner, responsible for preparing plans to cope with a paralysing industrial stoppage; later, in the general strike of 1926, he served as deputy chief civil commissioner with responsibility for government publicity, overseeing the activities of Winston Churchill and the 'British Gazette'. 
In the general election of 1923 Davidson was defeated at Hemel Hempstead but he recovered the seat in 1924. In Baldwin's second government he was given junior office as parliamentary secretary at the Admiralty. Davidson played a part in the dispute over the naval budget in 1925 between Bridgeman, the first lord of the Admiralty, and Churchill, the chancellor of the exchequer. In this, as on other occasions, his constant vigilance for signs of disloyalty and intrigue led to a distorted picture which added to existing tensions. From 1922 onwards Davidson was almost paranoid in suspecting that the former coalitionists were seeking to reverse their defeat, and he saw hidden plots behind almost anything which they did or said, a reflection of his own tendency to intrigue. His loyalty and dedication were absolute, and in November 1926 Baldwin moved Davidson to the position where this was of paramount importance, as chairman of the Conservative Party organization. From then until his departure in June 1930 Davidson's aim was to serve his leader: he had no thought of promoting his own career, regarding the office as a thankless task and 'a blind alley' (Davidson to Hoare, 30 Dec 1929, CUL, Templewood MS VI/1). 
Davidson's period as party chairman was the most important and visible phase of his career. Although there were difficulties, his tenure is considered to have been one of the most significant in the development of the Conservative electoral machine in the twentieth century -- a period in which it had been an important factor in the party's success. Davidson was not the founder, for the basis had been laid by his predecessors after the creation of the party chairmanship in 1911-14 and in the early 1920s. His achievements were therefore not quite as sweeping as he later tended to suggest, but he reshaped and energized the central organization after a period of electoral turmoil and haphazard evolution. He made a significant contribution in three main areas: rationalizing the basic structure, developing new areas, and expanding the scale of operations. 
The reorganization of the central office which Davidson introduced in 1928 laid down the basic structure which continued, with cosmetic changes, for the next six decades. The active departments of central office were drawn together into two main groups. The first embraced all the traditional organizational services, and was headed by the principal agent; the second dealt with publications and propaganda, and the new post of director of publicity was created to oversee it. This reform was intended to establish clear lines of authority and ensure better co-ordination between related sections, and also to emphasize the importance of publicity -- for new methods were the key to reach the vastly enlarged electorate. Davidson was adept at securing able individuals, and appointed the three men who held the key posts until 1945: Robert Topping, Joseph Ball, and Patrick Gower. 
The priority which Davidson gave to new areas of organization resulted from the democratic electorate created in 1918 and the equalization of the franchise for both sexes at the age of twenty-one in 1928. He was strongly committed to further strengthening the women's side of the party organization, recognizing their importance both as voters and active fund-raisers in the constituency associations. This had been developing since the early 1920s, and Davidson continued to enhance it, giving more resources and seeking to raise its prestige and professionalism. To underline this, in 1928 he appointed the head of the women's department, Marjorie Maxse, to be deputy to the principal agent. He also continued the attempts to promote the trade unionists' wing, the labour advisory committees; this was much more difficult ground, but significant in view of the industrial strife of the 1920s and the rise of the Labour Party. His more original initiatives lay in three other areas: youth, publicity, and political education. The employment of organizers at central office and in the regions led to a considerable expansion of the junior imperial league. The publicity budget was more than doubled, links with the provincial press improved, new party journals founded, and a torrent of leaflets produced. He was open to new methods, using a professional advertising firm and introducing the effective travelling cinema vans. He encouraged political education at local and regional level, and raised $200,000 to provide a national centre which party members could attend; this opened in 1930 at Ashridge in Hertfordshire as the Bonar Law Memorial College. His final contribution came in his last months as chairman, and is often identified with others. However, after much discussion over the previous years, it was Davidson who established the Conservative Research Department in October 1929 -- he secured Baldwin's approval, raised the funds, found the premises, and appointed Ball as its director -- though Neville Chamberlain was more important in making the department a success. 
Davidson presided over a huge expansion of staff and spending. By 1928 central office employed 296 persons in London and the regional offices, a level attained again only at the peak of the Woolton machine in 1949-51. Although Davidson did not hold the formal post of party treasurer in fact he did much of the fund-raising. This was an area at which even his critics admitted he was effective, and he raised $1 million before the general election of 1929. In his memoirs Davidson identified himself with having stamped out political corruption through the sale of honours, a scandal which had tarnished the Lloyd George coalition. In practice what this meant was not an end to rewards for faithful contributors, but a return to the former discreet and indirect methods. 
Not everything in Davidson's tenure was positive, and the problems mounted after the defeat in 1929. He faced his share of criticism over its timing and over the uninspiring campaign themes of 'Safety first' and 'Trust Baldwin'. In its wake concern grew that Davidson was too close to the leader to act as an effective channel of communication. This was all the more important as the party chairman was also chairman of the executive committee of the national union -- a link which was severed on Davidson's departure. He could be prickly and tended to engage in clumsy manoeuvres against Baldwin's critics on the right. By 1930 he had alienated a range of figures, including his own deputy chairman, the otherwise inoffensive Lord Stanley. These problems came to a head as Baldwin came under pressure from Lord Beaverbrook's 'empire crusade' campaign in 1930. A truce was negotiated in March, but collapsed during May partly owing to Davidson's misjudgements over tactics and publicity. He had by now become a liability who was weakening Baldwin's position, but the latter was reluctant to drop him. The nettle was grasped by Neville Chamberlain, who told Davidson bluntly in April that he had to go; after further delay, Chamberlain pressed again and Davidson resigned on 29 May. 
Although Davidson felt he had been sacrificed he soon resumed his position as a key figure in Baldwin's inner circle. He remained a trusted adviser and friend during the rest of Baldwin's leadership, but most of his work was behind the scenes and is difficult to assess. In March 1931 he helped at a vital moment to persuade Baldwin not to resign the party leadership. In the National Government Davidson served outside the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster from November 1931 until May 1937. He was knighted in 1935. Much of his attention in the early 1930s focused upon the India question, as this was the most divisive issue within the Conservative Party. He worked to secure support for the bipartisan policy which Baldwin had endorsed since 1929, and to defeat the diehard critics led by Winston Churchill. He took a public part as chairman of the Indian States inquiry committee, visiting India in early 1932. This examined the relationship between the princely states and the proposed federal structure, and he was able to secure a cautious agreement which assisted progress without alarming Conservative opinion at home. In general, his role was not to influence Baldwin's decisions, but to encourage and support him in the path which he had chosen. This was illustrated in the abdication crisis in 1936, when he was a key voice close to Baldwin urging the need for decisive action. When Baldwin retired in May 1937 Davidson also left active politics. The closeness of the relationship was underlined when Davidson was given a viscountcy, the peerage normally given to those of cabinet rank; he took the title of Viscount Davidson of Little Gaddesden, Hertfordshire. 
Business concerns, and especially the family's Argentine estates, occupied much of Davidson's time from 1937 until the Peronist government broke the connection in the 1950s. In the Second World War he was an adviser and then controller of production at the Ministry of Information from October 1939 to July 1941. After this he was an honorary adviser on commercial relations with South America, making an official tour there in 1942. On his return in 1943 he founded the Hispanic and Luso-Brazilian councils, which led to the establishment of Canning House in London as a centre to promote closer links with South America. Davidson continued to work for this, and made frequent visits to the continent in the late 1940s and 1950s. His contribution was recognized by honours awarded by several countries and the presidency of the Anglo-Argentine Society. In 1960 he began compiling material for a volume of memoirs, including a number of tape-recorded conversations. However, a cerebral atheroma in 1962 and further serious illness at the end of 1963 meant that he could not complete this. His memory was not affected, and a volume which blended the incomplete memoirs with documents from his extensive archive was edited by Robert Rhodes James. It appeared in 1969, shortly before Davidson's death on 11 December 1970 at his London home, Said House, Chiswick Mall, Chiswick. 
The publication of the memoirs drew attention to Davidson's role behind the scenes, in particular as aide and confidant to Bonar Law and Baldwin. Throughout his career Davidson did not seek any independent position, and he was most comfortable with a place in the background as the loyal lieutenant. His role as the perennial insider raised concerns that he was an 'eminence grise'; doubt and resentment about the extent of his influence meant that he collected enemies, and his fortunes depended upon his patron. Discreet and industrious, he devoted his efforts to persons and causes that he regarded as greater than himself. His most prominent position, as chairman of the Conservative Party from 1926 to 1930, was simply an extension of this role as the leader's right hand, while his fall from this office illustrated his defects as a politician. In character and appearance Davidson seemed more of an administrator than a politician: he possessed a certain stuffiness and tendency to focus upon detail, and was not an imposing figure either in the House of Commons or in public. He was of medium height, and in his middle years gained weight while his hair thinned; he was normally seen in public as a bland and owlish figure whose most distinctive feature was his round black spectacles. 


@@@@@


doc= 32731


Davidson, Sir John Humphrey (1876-1954), army officer and politician, was born in Mauritius on 24 July 1876, the son of a merchant, George Walter Davidson, and his wife, Johanna Smith Humphrey. He was educated at Harrow School from 1890 to 1893, and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, before joining the 1st battalion of his regiment, the King's Royal Rifle Corps, in Mauritius in 1896. The battalion was in South Africa when war broke out against the Boer republics in October 1899. Davidson had a good war, serving with his battalion at the battle of Talana and in the operations around Ladysmith in Natal, and later on attachment to locally raised irregular cavalry units pursuing the Boer commandos. By the end of the war he had won the DSO and been mentioned in dispatches, and had been promoted captain. 
After the war Davidson served in Malta, and with the international force in Crete, before being nominated for entry to the Staff College, Camberley, in 1905. On 12 December 1905 he married Margaret, daughter of John Peter Grant, of Rothiemurchus, Inverness-shire. They had one daughter. In a succession of staff appointments before the First World War, Davidson (or Tavish, as he was known universally throughout the army on account of his Scottish origins) demonstrated his considerable talent for staff work: as general staff officer, grade 3, in the directorate of military training at the War Office from 1908 to 1910; as brigade major of the 5th infantry brigade between 1910 and 1912; and as instructor in training and tactics and general staff duties at the Staff College from 1912 to 1914. 
On the outbreak of war Davidson, now holding the rank of major, took up his duties as general staff officer, grade 2 (intelligence) for the 3rd army corps and took part in the principal engagements of the 1914 campaign: the battles of the Marne, the Aisne, and first Ypres. Towards the end of that year his talent for staff work was brought to the attention of Sir Douglas Haig, the commander of the First Army corps, when, on attachment to that corps, Davidson organized the relief of the Indian corps from their difficult position on the River Lys. On the formation of the First Army under Haig's command in January 1915 Haig selected Davidson as his principal operations officer. In this capacity Davidson took part in the planning of the principal British engagements of the 1915 campaign, Neuve Chapelle, Aubers Ridge, and Loos. 
When Haig replaced Sir John French as commander-in-chief of the British armies in France and Flanders in December 1915 Davidson accompanied him to general headquarters (GHQ) as director of military operations. Like Colonel John Charteris, Haig's much maligned director of military intelligence, Davidson, as one of Haig's trusted inner circle, had unrestricted access to his chief and was in a position to influence his decisions. Davidson's task was, after strategic consultation with the French commander-in-chief, to put his chief's tactical intentions into concrete form and pass them on to subordinate army commanders and executive field officers. In such a role Davidson was a key link in the operational chain of command, accompanying his chief to most allied and army commanders' operational conferences. Yet Davidson was more than a mere messenger, for it was his tactical appreciations and operational instructions that formed the basis of British military doctrine and action during Haig's period of command. Although identified by one of Haig's biographers as among the 'circle of simpering awestruck admirers' surrounding the commander-in-chief (de Groot, 220), Davidson was more than a mere cipher for his chief's views. He was not afraid to incur Haig's wrath, as when, during the preparations for the Anglo-French offensive of spring 1917, he reported his unfavourable impression of the military situation on the French front. 
Like his fellow officers Davidson was learning his trade in the testing school of battle on the western front. While it is impossible to quantify the influence Davidson exercised over the details of operational planning, it would be naive to assume that he was entirely innocent of the charges subsequently levelled against GHQ of tactical inflexibility and poor strategic judgement. Yet Davidson's measured and thorough approach to operational planning stands out; it is perhaps unfortunate that in the planning of the third battle of Ypres in the summer of 1917 his argument for a steady succession of limited offensives did not prevail over the more ambitious schemes of Haig and the commander of the Fifth Army, General Sir Hubert Gough. Unlike Charteris, Davidson remained secure at GHQ until the end of the war, and so must take some credit for the new combined arms operational methods which swept the British army to success in the Last Hundred Days of war. By 1918 Davidson had risen to the rank of major-general. Among numerous British and foreign honours and decorations for his war service Davidson was awarded the Legion d'Honneur in 1916, and appointed CB in 1917 and KCMG in 1919. He left the army in 1922. 
At the end of the war Davidson entered parliament unopposed as MP for the safe Unionist seat of Fareham in Hampshire. As a member of parliament he took an active interest in service questions, taking a leading role on the House of Commons army committee. He was a determined advocate of the reorganization of Britain's peacetime defence administration to create a unified Ministry of Defence, and led the army committee's 1920 deputation to the prime minister advocating such a ministry. In and outside parliament Davidson took an active interest in ex-servicemen's welfare; in parliament as chairman of the parliamentary select committee on the training and employment of ex-servicemen; and outside parliament as a founder and chairman of the King's Roll National Council and president of the Union Jack Club. 
Davidson resigned his parliamentary seat in 1931 to concentrate on his business interests. He held a number of company directorships, including a seat on the board of the armaments manufacturer Vickers. Between 1937 and 1949 he was chairman of the Bank of Australia. He was colonel commandant of his regiment from 1937 to 1945. Yet his most formative experience remained his period of service at GHQ in the First World War. In later life he published 'Haig: Master of the Field' (1953), a belated but impassioned defence of his former chief, and indirectly of his own part in the British army's victory. 
Davidson died at Glack, Daviot, Aberdeenshire on 11 December 1954. He left a small collection of private papers, which were deposited at the National Library of Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 32732


Davidson, John Thain (1833-1904), minister of the Presbyterian Church of England, was born on 25 April 1833 at Broughty Ferry, near Dundee, one of the twin sons of David Davidson (died 1843), parish minister of Broughty Ferry, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Dr Ireland of Leith. His grandfather, Dr David Davidson of Dundee, and his great-grandfather were also ministers of the Church of Scotland. John's father left the established church in 1843, and, after his death a few months later, his mother moved to Edinburgh, where many leaders of the Free Church visited their house. Davidson was educated at Edinburgh high school and at Edinburgh University, and studied for the ministry at the Free Church Theological College. 
After a few months in charge of a mission station at Craigmill in Perthshire, and as a probationer in Free St George's, Montrose, Davidson was ordained on 19 February 1857 a minister of the Free Church at Maryton, near Montrose, and remained there until 1859, when he was inducted minister of the Presbyterian church at Salford. On 4 October 1859 he married Isabella, daughter of M. M'Callum of Glasgow. They had two sons and six daughters. 
In 1862 Davidson moved to the Presbyterian church, Colebrooke Row, Islington, where he greatly increased the size of the congregation. He then turned his attention to non-churchgoers, and from 1868 held services in the Agricultural Hall every Sunday afternoon, for twenty-three years. Speakers included the earls of Shaftesbury, Aberdeen, and Kintore, the bishops of Ballarat and Bedford, Canon Fleming, the vicars of Islington, Holloway, and Clerkenwell, Dr Guthrie, and Dr Talmage; the meetings were soon attracting regular attendances of 4000. From 1878 he also delivered monthly sermons to young men in Islington, and published some of these in 'Talks with Young Men' (1884), 'Forewarned, Forearmed' (1885), 'The City Youth' (1886), 'Sure to Succeed' (1888), 'A Good Start' (1890), and 'Thoroughness' (1892). 
In 1872 Davidson was elected moderator of the synod of the Presbyterian church of England, and was awarded a DD by Montgomery College, Alabama. After nearly thirty years in Islington, in 1891 he became minister of St Andrew's Presbyterian Church, Ealing. Davidson died at his home, 23 Park Hill, Ealing, on 7 November 1904, and was buried in the churchyard at Stoke Poges. 


@@@@@


doc= 32733


Davidson, Randall Thomas, Baron Davidson of Lambeth (1848-1930), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at 15 Inverleith Place, Edinburgh, on 7 April 1848, of pure Scottish blood. He was the eldest son of Henry Davidson (1810-1889), timber merchant of Leith, and his wife, Henrietta (died 1881), third daughter of John Swinton, formerly an army officer, who added the name of Campbell when he inherited estates at Kimmerghame, Berwickshire, from a maternal aunt. Henry's father, the Revd Thomas Randall, had changed his name to Davidson in 1794 as a condition of inheriting an estate at Muirhouse, near Edinburgh. Henry's father, grandfather, and great-grandfather were presbyterian ministers, the last being a chaplain to Queen Anne. Both Henry and his wife were devoutly religious, though this did not prevent Henry enjoying hunting and music, nor operating a modestly profitable business, which enabled him to leave $4145. 
Henry had been educated at the high school in Edinburgh, and then the famous Edinburgh Academy, where a lifelong friendship had been forged with Archibald Campbell Tait, subsequently to be archbishop of Canterbury. It was the Tait, lowland Scots connection which was to be decisive for Henry's son. Randall Thomas Davidson was baptized at home on 18 May 1848 according to the presbyterian form. He was to be reminded of this in 1905 when Princess Victoria Eugenie's baptism at Balmoral was discounted by the Spanish Roman Catholic bishops. Young Randall enjoyed the lowland countryside, narrowly escaping drowning on one occasion. In 1862 he entered Harrow School, where he came under the influence of two Anglican clergy: Henry Montague Butler, and Brooke Foss Westcott, later to be bishop of Durham. He was confirmed into the Church of England at the age of fourteen by his father's old friend A. C. Tait, then bishop of London. 
In the school holidays in 1866 Davidson narrowly escaped death while returning from an expedition to shoot rabbits. A friend accidentally pulled his trigger and blasted a hole the size of an orange in Davidson's lower back. A large portion of the pelvis and the muscles of his hips were damaged. For the rest of his life Davidson had to disguise his disabilities. The damage to the hip muscles meant that he was always liable to attacks of lumbago. More difficult to cope with was the need to wear a truss to hold a hernia on the right side. The rupture often came down when Davidson was preaching but he devised cunning coping strategies. 
After school Davidson had a dismal three years at Trinity College, Oxford, where his poor physical condition culminated in a breakdown in 1871 in the middle of his final examinations. On the basis of the few papers he had done he was awarded a third class in law and modern history. Davidson had never been drawn to any other life work than the ordained ministry, and seems to have been totally unaffected by the intellectual and theological battles which were being passionately fought in Oxford. After more foreign travels he began his ministerial studies as one of the lodgers of Charles John Vaughan, master of the temple, who also directed his reading and criticized his sermons. Another breakdown in health led to a tour of Egypt and Palestine with three old Oxford friends, one of whom was Crauford Tait, the archbishop's son. Largely through Crauford's influence Davidson was accepted for ordination in the diocese of Canterbury, as curate of Dartford. The archbishop's only requirement seems to have been the removal of his heavy moustache, and he was ordained deacon in 1874 and priest in 1875. Davidson now aspired to succeed at the centre of the ecclesiastical and national life of England. The year after ordination he put his name down for the Athenaeum, and declined all offers of advancement which would take him away from the home counties. In 1877 he was invited, at Crauford's suggestion, to succeed him as private secretary and resident chaplain to the archbishop. The following year Crauford died and on 12 November Davidson married his sister, Edith Murdoch Tait ('b'. 1858), the nineteen-year-old second daughter of the archbishop. Mrs Davidson was a charming hostess and devoted clergy-wife. The marriage was described by his successor, Cosmo Gordon Lang, as a 'perfect union of mind and spirit'; they had no children. For the next four years Davidson occupied an increasingly influential role at Lambeth Palace where the archbishop, reeling under the double blow of the deaths of both son and wife in six months, came to rely heavily on his judgement of men and situations. Tait now found the palace unbearably claustrophobic and took to drafting letters with his secretary as he paced round the gravel paths of Lambeth, once insisting on assessing diocesan statistics while they rode together on horseback along the Embankment on a breezy day. Gradually Davidson found himself suggesting courses of action and forms of words which he knew from experience reflected the mind of the archbishop, who came to place total confidence in his son-in-law. It was in this position that Davidson largely took over the correspondence generated by the ritualism controversy in 1881, and played a significant role in torpedoing Anglican overtures to the Salvation Army in 1882, which he thought concentrated too much power in the office of the general. When Tait died in 1882 it was to Davidson that Queen Victoria turned for an account of the deathbed scene. An invitation to Windsor followed; the queen was much impressed by the young Scot, confiding in her journal the belief that 'Mr. Davidson is a man who may be of great use to me' (Barker, 397). The 34-year-old chaplain quickly became the trusted confidant of the 63-year-old queen. 
Soon Davidson was steering the queen into the choice of Edward White Benson, bishop of Truro, as new archbishop, who, recognizing Davidson's competence and sound judgement of people, retained him as chaplain until he was in 1883, at the queen's request, appointed dean of Windsor, and her domestic chaplain. Queen Victoria soon turned to him for spiritual consolation, beginning in 1884 when her youngest son, Leopold, duke of Albany, died. Davidson, though attentive, was more than a tame chaplain-courtier. He incurred the royal wrath in the same year when he counselled the queen against the publication of further 'Leaves from a Highland Diary', which would have contained revelations about her servant John Brown that were open to satire. That she trusted his judgement can be seen from her unfailing consultation with him between 1883 and 1901 about senior ecclesiastical appointments. Until Benson's death in 1896 Davidson had a unique influence in shaping the attitudes and decisions of both sovereign and primate. Benson wrote to him almost every day, and particularly depended on his advice in 1888-90 during the trial of Edward King, high-church bishop of Lincoln, for alleged ritual illegalities. King was largely exonerated: Davidson's role was to shape church and public opinion through writing leading articles for 'The Times', and in liaising with Lord Halifax, the Anglo-Catholic lay leader. 
Davidson's grasp of Anglican affairs and key personalities was consolidated by his work as assistant secretary of the Lambeth conference of 1881, attended by 100 bishops from the Anglican dioceses of the British empire, United States, and elsewhere. His 'Life of Archbishop Tait' (1891), written with William Benham, showed a mastery of recent developments in the Church of England and a sure judgement in their interpretation. 
In 1891 the queen reluctantly consented to Davidson's appointment to the bishopric of Rochester, which then included south London. The muck-raking 'Pall Mall Gazette' described her choice as 'a royal job'. About ten days after his consecration Davidson vomited blood and was confined to his house in Kennington for six months. He suffered three more spells of illness during his four years in south London. In 1893 he attended a meeting of leaders from all religious traditions called by the editor of the 'Daily Chronicle' to discuss the coal strike, in which he urged the importance of a living wage. In 1894-5 he largely drafted Archbishop Benson's rejection of the project hatched by Lord Halifax and the Abbe Portal to ask the pope to recognize the validity of Anglican orders. 
In 1895 Davidson accepted translation to the diocese of Winchester, which involved less evening work, as well as renewing his access to the queen, who spent much time, and ultimately died, at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight. The country air restored his health. He was almost immediately drawn into controversy with Robert William Radcliffe Dolling, a fervent Anglo-Catholic priest in charge of Winchester College's mission at Landport. Dolling had a long history of provoking bishops, which came to a head with the dedication of the large, new St Agatha's church. Davidson, whose appointment had been publicly criticized by Dolling because of his health problems, discovered only three days before the opening that it contained a third altar to be used for masses for the dead. Davidson immediately saw Dolling and tried to reach a compromise which would bring his practices within Anglican rules. But compromise was impossible and Dolling resigned immediately and left the diocese. His supporters castigated Davidson, and the episode led one high-church journalist to conclude that it left its mark in forming his determination not to be the archbishop who drove the high-church party out of the Church of England. 
When Archbishop Benson died in 1896 Davidson lost his influence at Lambeth Palace and had to endure the sarcasm of the new archbishop, Frederick Temple, who suspected him of having wanted the appointment himself. The queen vetoed the offer of the bishopric of London in 1897, on the grounds that his health would not stand it, and when Lord Salisbury offered it again in 1901, Davidson himself refused for the same reason. He now divided his time between the diocese, the House of Lords where he was a frequent speaker (especially on licensing and education), and national church policy. Between 1898 and 1901 Davidson was actively involved in seeking a way through the ritual controversy and corresponded at length with Sir William Harcourt, the elderly former Liberal politician, who was an Erastian in church matters and resented any deviations from the 'Book of Common Prayer'. (Harcourt lived at Malwood which was in the Winchester diocese.) Davidson devoted his episcopal charge of 1899 to a comprehensive treatment of the whole subject. His grasp of the issues led in 1901 to his first meeting with the prime minister, A. J. Balfour, who recorded that 'the Bishop has the art of stating with great clearness and sympathy the gist of opinions from which he differs' (Bell, 3rd edn, 349). His advice on public primary education was sought and valued by Balfour in framing the 'Education Act' of 1902. Once the bill had been introduced Davidson was on hand to suggest tactics as well as to defend principles. To counter the vehement nonconformist opposition, led by the Baptist minister Dr John Clifford, he suggested to Balfour 'that it would be well to let Clifford publish his letters as a pamphlet and thus commit himself more deliberately to them before any attempt is made to show their falsity' (Bell, 3rd edn, 377). When Temple died Balfour nominated Davidson as his successor and he was enthroned at Canterbury on 12 February 1903. 
Davidson saw his task as holding the Church of England together, maintaining its historic position in the national life, and providing a Christian witness in moral, social, and political matters. Through his membership of the House of Lords, and of Grillions and 'the Club', Davidson gave time to making friendships with men of weight. He particularly cultivated the friendship of leading politicians with a Scottish background: Lord Rosebery, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, and A. J. Balfour. His constant presence in the Lords, at official dinners, and in small gatherings of the governing elite was a continuation of the policy of Archbishop Tait. 
Within a month of his appointment Davidson was challenged by 100 Unionist members of parliament to take firm action against clergy who were ignoring the law and introducing Roman Catholic ceremonial practices. Davidson's reply was resolute. The actual number of flagrant lawbreakers was, he thought, small, but for them 'the sands [of time] have run out' (Bell, 3rd edn, 399). Feeling in the Commons was such that Balfour felt he would be obliged to appoint a select committee of the House of Commons. Davidson feared that such a step would infuriate even moderate high-churchmen by asserting the authority of the Commons over the church. Only someone steeped in parliamentary procedures would have realized the advantage of persuading Balfour instead to appoint a royal commission on ecclesiastical discipline, which met from 1904 to 1906. After amassing evidence the commissioners were unanimous in concluding that certain specific illegalities should be made to cease, but also that the law of public worship was 'too narrow for the religious life of the present generation' ('Report of the Royal Commission on Ecclesiastical Discipline', 1906, 75-6). The commission thus opened the door for the revision of the prayer book which was to cause such controversy in 1927 and 1928. 
In his first public utterances as archbishop on matters of national controversy Davidson was criticized by nonconformists and Liberals for appearing to provide Christian underpinning for his tory patron. In February 1904 he showed concern over the compounds set up in the Transvaal in which imported Chinese indentured labour was to be confined. But against opposition cries of 'Chinese slavery' Davidson seemed to moderate his concerns when in a later speech he described imported labour as a 'regrettable necessity'. This last phrase, plucked from its context, was used in speeches and newspaper cartoons to vilify the archbishop. In June 1905 further criticism came when Davidson, who disliked public demonstrations, refused to receive a delegation of unemployed working men who had marched to London from Leicester led by a Christian socialist clergyman, Lewis Donaldson. Even dutiful Anglican clergy bridled in the spring of 1906 when it was announced that the king's niece, Princess Victoria Eugenie, was to marry King Alfonso X of Spain. The public silence of the archbishop at the conversion of the eighteen-year-old granddaughter of Queen Victoria to the Roman Catholic faith, in order to marry into what to British popular protestant prejudice seemed a degenerate Spanish Catholic court, gave the impression of lamentable weakness. In fact Davidson was privately outraged by the insistence of the Spanish Catholic hierarchy that the princess should not only convert but also receive Catholic baptism. He was indefatigable in his advice to the royal family but unwilling publicly to oppose the evident wish of the young princess. 
In 1907 Davidson maintained the traditional Anglican opposition to the 'Deceased Wife's Sister Marriage Bill'. When it was carried he noted that for: 'the first time in the history of the Church of England, has the law of the State been brought on one specific point into direct open, overt contrast with, and contradiction of, the specific and divine law laid down in the authoritative regulations of the national church. (Bell, 3rd edn, 552)' His advice to clergy was that such marriages should not be held in Anglican churches, but that those in such marriages should not, on that ground, be refused holy communion, or otherwise deprived of the church's ministrations.Davidson's leadership was severely tested by the new Liberal government's attempts to pass an education bill which would remove those features of the 1902 act considered unjust by nonconformists. The bill introduced by Augustine Birrell in 1906 seemed to Davidson to violate the deep-seated Anglican conviction that the Church of England had a God-given duty to provide a national system of church schools for the nation. Although unwell with gastric influenza he left his bed to attend three private meetings with Conservative leaders at Lord Lansdowne's house to consider tactics. Balfour wanted the peers to insert amendments which would be unacceptable to the Liberal majority in the Commons, but Davidson wrote from his bed to urge caution and compromise. Rumours that the archbishop was willing to make concessions enraged the National Society, the organization that provided and controlled Church of England schools. In December, Davidson voted with the Conservative peers to defeat the bill, but during the following year he worked hard for a settlement with Walter Runciman, who had taken over the government's attempts to get an agreed solution through parliament. This time Davidson could not deliver the agreement of his church. Though supported by the bishops, the Representative Church Council voted overwhelmingly to reject the measure, and it was abandoned by the government. 
Davidson presided at the Lambeth conference of 242 Anglican bishops in 1908, and the unofficial Pan-Anglican Congress which immediately preceded it. Throughout the summer groups of overseas bishops and their wives were invited by the archbishop and Mrs Davidson to spend two nights at Lambeth Palace, where networks were forged and local knowledge transmitted. It was to Davidson at Lambeth that Anglican bishops invariably turned when confronted by difficulties. He had been the first archbishop of Canterbury to cross the Atlantic and pay an official visit to the United States of America and Canada in 1904. 
In 1910 Davidson, after much hesitation, was persuaded to attend the World Missionary Conference at Edinburgh under the chairmanship of the American Methodist layman Dr John R. Mott. Though called to consider missionary difficulties, the conference has come to be regarded as the birthplace of the modern ecumenical movement. Mott had been determined that it should be as carefully balanced and, as far as possible, genuinely representative of all the Christian bodies in the world. The archbishop of Canterbury was an obvious adornment for such a gathering, but Mott knew that Davidson's natural caution was likely to prevent his acceptance of an invitation. Therefore Mott first secured the attendance of two high-church bishops, Gore and Talbot, whose judgement was known to be respected by Davidson. Once assured that he would be joining such company he agreed to attend, and was ultimately inspired by the occasion into delivering an uncharacteristically prophetic speech. 
The debates over Lloyd George's 'people's budget' and the 'Parliament Act' exposed Davidson to more charges of political partisanship. When the 'Finance Bill' was rejected by the House of Lords in November 1909 Davidson and most of the bishops abstained, thereby incurring the odium of supporters of both government and opposition. In that debate he expressed the belief that the bishops could, and should, speak with authority on religious, educational, social, and moral questions, but were wise to avoid more overtly party political issues. However the new archbishop of York, Cosmo Lang, and Bishop Gore had supported the government, and Bishop Browne of Bristol had voted with the Unionists. After the two general elections in 1910 Davidson played an important part in the consultations in August 1911 preceding the final division on the 'Parliament Bill', limiting the powers of the House of Lords. When it was announced that the new king George V had agreed to the creation of sufficient peers to secure the passing of the bill Davidson, after taking the advice of Sir William Anson, led most of the bishops in support of the bill, primarily to prevent the creation of 500 new Liberal peers, which might have resulted in a weakening of the prestige of the House of Lords as a platform for episcopal pronouncements. 'Beaten by the bishops and the rats' was Unionist MP George Wyndham's comment ('Life and Letters of George Wyndham', ed. MacKarl and Wyndham, 1925, 2.699). 
In the years before the First World War, Davidson had taken a restrained interest in the efforts of the Anglo-German friendship movement. He was, not surprisingly, jittery about the number of Lutheran pastors making a visit to London in 1908, which he feared might cause a high-church commotion if they were admitted to communion at Anglican altars. In 1909 he urged Bishop Boyd Carpenter to join the British delegation to Berlin because 'it would be disastrous were it to appear as if the Nonconformists were anxious for friendliness with Germany, while we Churchmen were only anxious to build more Dreadnoughts' (Bell, 3rd edn, 592). Another issue of the day was the disestablishment of the church in Wales, which was enacted in 1914, and operative from 1920. Davidson firmly resisted this both in and out of parliament. 
Intercommunion between Anglicans and Christians belonging to other denominations became a contentious issue early in the twentieth century. The beginnings of the ecumenical movement both in Britain and overseas at a time when the Anglo-Catholic tradition was gaining in influence in the Church of England opened new possibilities for doctrinal conflict. Davidson's gifts for conciliation were stretched to the limit in the ecclesiastical implosions provoked by the Kikuyu controversy of 1913-14. Two sets of questions about Christian belief and church order came together. Increasing scepticism about the plausibility of biblical miracles found some support in new developments in biblical criticism. This seemed to have implications for the foundations of Christian belief. Bishop Charles Gore of Oxford wanted the whole matter to be thrashed out in the public arena of the convocation of Canterbury, and he sought the repudiation of books by Anglican clergymen which denied or cast doubt on the virgin birth and physical resurrection of Jesus. The archbishop knew that biblical scholarship in the universities could not be restricted, and that attempts to pre-empt academic conclusions would show the church up as myopic, pedestrian, mindlessly dogmatic, and anti-intellectual. He took counsel with Bishop F. H. Chase of Ely and Bishop E. S. Talbot, who both supported the safer course of a discussion at a private meeting of bishops. Gore was dissatisfied with the refusal of the bishops to take his view, and in 1913 alarmed Davidson by talking of resignation. 
A year later this theological debate was absorbed into a wider church conflagration. Ignited by a small gathering of missionaries from various denominations at Kikuyu in east Africa to plan a more effective deployment of missionary forces, and concluding with a service of holy communion, conducted by the bishop of Mombasa, the event came to be invested with symbolic significance by all discontented with the present state of the Church of England. The bishop of Zanzibar, Frank Weston, emerged as champion of Anglo-Catholic hardliners. He confronted the archbishop with a fierce denunciation of the participation of the bishops of Mombasa and Uganda in a communion service with free churchmen, raising the huge question of what the Church of England really stood for. Was it primarily a national church, offering its ministry to all the peoples of the British empire, or was it a eucharistic community, presided over by episcopally ordained priests and restricted exclusively to those baptized and confirmed? 
Davidson had already set out his position in February 1912 when he delivered a visitation charge, which was published under the title of 'The Character and Call of the Church of England'. Chapter 3 answered those who asked, 'What does our Church stand for?' In reply, Davidson emphasized 'the historical continuity of the Church's corporate and organic life' which he interpreted as 'a sacramental, governmental, ministerial, and even ritual system which, with adaptation to local requirements has come down to us from Apostolic days'. The archbishop went on to legitimize 'New Testament' scholarship by asserting that 'we stand for the unfettered study of Holy Scripture, for the liberty of private judgement'. 
The first stage of what became an increasingly acrimonious controversy revealed the immense gap between the clerical and lay mind and showed that the sacerdotal concept of ministry which had been gaining ground among the clergy was alien to the thinking of the laity. Anglo-Catholic realization of the situation produced a strategic switch from questions of church order to doctrine. In insisting on the historicity of the virgin birth and the physical resurrection of Jesus, high-churchmen and evangelicals could stand together, and many followed Bishop Gore in wanting to require Anglican clergymen to affirm unequivocally the historical statements in the creed about the virgin birth and physical resurrection of Jesus. But Davidson persuaded convocation in April 1914 instead to support a motion which declared only that 'the denial of any of the historical facts stated in the Creeds goes beyond the limits of legitimate interpretation'. This resolution was amplified a few months later when Davidson expressed the opinion that the most recent speculations of the distinguished Oxford theologian William Sanday did not fall outside those limits. Three years later Davidson was forced to reconsider those limits by the indignation aroused by the appointment of Hensley Henson to the bishopric of Hereford. 
The outbreak of war with Germany in 1914 swept Kikuyu from the public mind. Davidson, who valued his contacts with German theologians such as the Berlin professor Adolf von Harnack and had always considered war between the two great protestant powers 'unthinkable', found it difficult at first wholly to remain detached from the unbalanced emotions of war. When the spy mania was at its height even the archbishop felt it his duty to pass on to the Metropolitan Police his suspicions that a tobacconist with a shop near Woolwich might be a German spy. Anxiety about the outcome of military engagements led in 1914 to hourly telephone calls from Mary Benson's house in Sussex, where illness turned a short break into a three-week stay. In 1915 Lord Bryce's report apparently authenticating German war crimes led Davidson to claim that 'we are at this moment fighting against what is veritably the work of the Devil'. But while he shared the nation's patriotic concerns and did not hesitate to take the lead, when requested by the government, in the production of a response by British religious leaders to the manifesto of the German church leaders in support of the war, Davidson generally rose above the narrow chauvinism of many of his clerical colleagues. He rebuked a clergyman who insulted a royal princess for her German family ties, and held out against conscripting the clergy for combatant service until the final manpower shortage of 1918. He then told the government that the Church of England no longer opposed clerical conscription, but the clause was dropped following the refusal of the Irish Catholic hierarchy to allow their clergy (unlike priests in France) to become soldiers. Throughout the war years Davidson believed that it was the duty of the church to steady the nation and prevent any sudden swings of national mood or moral lurches. In July 1915 he set up a small group to assess the spiritual needs of the nation and suggest an appropriate way forward. This led to the National Mission of Repentance and Hope in 1916, but uncertainty about its aims and objectives and the subdued public mind produced a disappointing response. Davidson was anxious to prevent the deterioration of moral standards. He questioned the wisdom of the amount of money being given in separation allowances to soldiers' wives, and succeeded in preventing unmarried partners receiving the same amount as of right. In this matter Lloyd George considered his attitude 'a piece of blatant hypocrisy', though he was glad to have the archbishop's support for the even more hypocritical 'king's pledge' to abstain from alcohol for the duration of the war. In 1918 Davidson raised with the War Office and in the House of Lords the toleration of brothels close to army camps. 
Davidson was to protest every year of the war 'quietly but firmly' (his chaplain George Bell's words) against the British government's methods of warfare. In February 1915 Asquith was, according to Davidson, 'taken aback by the bluntness' of his criticism, in a conversation, of the false information put out to hide British military reverses. In May 1915 the use of poisoned gas was forthrightly condemned by the archbishop in a private letter to Asquith. The bombing of Freiburg in April 1917 in retaliation for the sinking of two hospital ships appalled tender consciences. Louise Creighton, a bishop's widow, and formidable leader of churchwomen, implored Davidson 'in the name of the Church' to denounce 'these horrible and futile reprisals against Germany'. But the archbishop's instinctive reaction was to shrink from publicly embarrassing the wartime government. 'It often happens that private pressure is more useful, although it does not appease our public sympathisers who prefer to say that we are doing nothing', he replied to her. 'I have been familiar with that difficulty through all my public life.' Eventually he put down a question in the Lords. 'One must be very considerate for the Government,' he wrote, 'remembering that they have to carry with them the Allies as well as to decide for themselves. Heroics on such a question, though very tempting, are not very practicable and not very fair to the Government.' But even to question the policy of reprisals was interpreted as hampering the war effort, and the duke of Argyll was given much newspaper coverage for his injunction to the bishops to 'stick to their belfries' (Bell, 3rd edn, 832). Two months later Davidson responded to the ferocious public mood created by the bombing of London by a public exchange of letters with his doctor, Sir Thomas Barlow. The archbishop reminded him of a resolution earlier passed by the bishops objecting to 'a policy of reprisal which has, as a deliberate object, the killing and wounding of non-combatants' (Bell, 3rd edn, 833). By October Davidson could write: 'I am regarded apparently as the representative mouthpiece of those who object to reprisals undertaken with the deliberate object of injuring non-combatants' (ibid., 837). The hate mail flooded into Lambeth Palace. 
The First World War exacerbated tensions within the church, particularly between Anglo-Catholics and liberal thinkers. The determination of Lloyd George in 1917 to nominate Dean Hensley Henson to the see of Hereford was against Davidson's advice and caused an angry agitation. Henson had a reputation as a provocative preacher. He had defended scholars such as J. M. Thompson, B. H. Streeter, and William Sanday, who had questioned the literal interpretation of the virgin birth and resurrection. Bishop Charles Gore called on the bishops to refuse to join in Henson's consecration, and yet again threatened his resignation. All the alarm bells in Davidson's mind were set ringing. He feared that this might be the moment of disruption which he had spent his life trying to avoid. He went behind the smears of the fearful and turned to Henson's published writings, which he found far less heterodox than expected. He then composed a short statement to reassure Gore, which Henson accepted but did not sign. An exchange of letters was then made public in which Henson confirmed that he could join wholeheartedly in the saying of the creed, and had no wish to alter it. Henson later considered that Davidson had been panicked by a report from his secretary that men on the London underground had been overheard making ribald remarks about 'some kind of an atheist' being made a bishop. He considered that excessive moral pressure had been applied by Davidson to get him to sign, which he had done with much reluctance, and only with the addition of a statement that he stood by his published work. Gore now withdrew his protest and Henson became an outstanding bishop. 
The war had shown up the gap between church and nation, and gave rise to demands for a more effective and imaginative effort for religious renewal. In 1916 Dick Sheppard gathered together a group of young enthusiasts under the banner of 'Life and liberty' with William Temple at their head. The archbishop was wary of impetuous raw enthusiasm and in its early days distanced himself. Private correspondence with Temple reassured him, and with masterly skill Davidson arranged a partnership between the new movement and the highly respectable but half-baked Church Self-Government Association set up following a report prepared for the archbishops by a committee chaired by the earl of Selborne. By this means energies were diverted into campaigning for the establishment of a church assembly with limited devolved powers. Through undertaking to pilot the measure through parliament Davidson kept ultimate control of the movement and its outcome, which though disappointing to Sheppard, brought into being bureaucratic structures which took further the archbishop's goals for the more effective management of the church. 
In 1920 Davidson presided again over the Lambeth conference which made an 'Appeal to All Christian People' and in the mood of post-war optimism invited dialogue between Christians of different traditions. As chief pastor of the nation which had won the war he had tremendous international prestige, which was recognized by his unopposed election as president of the World Alliance for the Promotion of International Friendship through the Churches. Church leaders in nations which had not done well out of war now looked to Davidson as a kind of protestant pope, who was thought to have significant influence on the British government. Appeals for support came from Christian minorities in eastern Europe, the Near East, and from the Orthodox in Soviet Russia. In 1922 the Greek Orthodox ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople, Melitios Metaxarchis, recognized Anglican orders, cynics said as part of a desperate bid to save St Sophia from the Turks. Anglo-Catholics, encouraged by their growing strength at home, expanded conversations between Viscount Halifax and the French Abbe Portal into an unofficial exchange of views between Anglican and Roman Catholic theologians led by the Belgian Cardinal Mercier at Mechelen (Malines). Archbishop Davidson agreed to take note of the conversations, after learning that Pope Pius XI was already doing so. 
In 1923 Davidson thought seriously about resigning, because he did not feel comfortable 'with the modern social interpretation of Christianity'. His offers to mediate in strikes on the railways in 1919 and the coalmines in 1921 had not been taken up. His immediate reaction to the general strike in 1926 was to follow Asquith's denunciation in the Lords, but to add that every effort should still be made to reach a settlement. This left open the possibility of conciliation, and the archbishop was besieged by concerned individuals as disparate as R. H. Tawney and Lord Londonderry, who saw him as possibly the last hope in breaking the deadlock. Prodded by Henry Carter, a Wesleyan leader, and Prebendary P. T. R. Kirk of the Industrial Christian Fellowship, Davidson worked with them and others on 6 May to produce an appeal for the resumption of negotiations, involving 'simultaneously and concurrently' the cancellation of the strike; the government subsidy of the coal industry to be continued temporarily; the cancellation of the wage reductions. That afternoon Davidson had secured the agreement of Ramsay MacDonald for the Labour Party but the prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, insisted that the strike must be called off before any talks could begin. Davidson's lame response was that he could not make any alterations without the approval of the parties who had agreed the statement, and that they could not be contacted in time. The BBC, on the advice of J. C. C. Davidson, deputy civil commissioner, refused to allow the archbishop to make a broadcast. 'This was the low-water mark of the power and influence of the BBC,' commented its historian, Asa Briggs. The archbishop was criticized by those who feared appearing to give in to the unions, but he was cheered in the streets, and in many places workers marched to church for services of thanksgiving. In fact the appeal was important in overcoming the long-standing suspicion among many trades unionists that the Church of England was part of the establishment, but Davidson preferred to play down its significance: 'I think myself that the direct importance of the Appeal to which I gave expression has been somewhat exaggerated but its indirect importance has evidently been very great'. A part echo of this episode can be seen in the actions of Davidson's old schoolmaster, B. F. Westcott, who in 1893, as their bishop, had given the Durham miners the opportunity to return to work with dignity. 
Davidson's final years as archbishop were preoccupied with the unfinished business of the royal commission of 1904. Letters of business had been issued to the convocations in 1906 requiring them to report on the desirability of changes in the law relating to the conduct of worship. These proposals were brought before the crown and the newly created church assembly in 1920. Immense interest was generated by the variety of proposals put forward for consideration. In 1925 Davidson reported that he had received 800 memorials on the subject. In June 1927 the church assembly voted to authorize the permissive use of a revised prayer book, alongside the prayer book of 1662. Controversy centred on the reserved sacrament, which been introduced into many parishes during the war, and on the alternative order for holy communion. Critics of the revision were not convinced by Davidson's judgement that the changes were only differences of emphasis and not of doctrine. Nor did he reassure those feared that the revisions would not be enforced by the bishops as the only permissible alterations. On 15 December 1927 the House of Commons, swayed by the cry of 'No Popery', rejected the measure by thirty-three votes. Davidson commented that the arguments against were 'of the sort which are to be found in 'Barnaby Rudge'' (Bell, 3rd edn, 1346). 
The archbishop and bishops decided to reintroduce the measure with minor modifications to meet protestant objections. Reservation was now rigorously limited to times and places of special need, but the new measure carried even less support in both church and Commons, and on 14 June 1928 was once again defeated. 
Davidson resigned on 12 November 1928, his golden wedding anniversary, and two days later he was created Baron Davidson of Lambeth. His resignation was not a consequence of the defeat of his policy on the prayer book, to which he had not been vitally committed, but to enable his successor to prepare for the Lambeth conference of 1930. He died at his home, 10 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, on 25 May 1930, and was buried on 30 May in the cloister of Canterbury Cathedral. 
As archbishop of Canterbury for longer than anyone since the Reformation, Randall Davidson presided over the denominationalization of the Church of England. Dependent for his own advancement on the patronage of royalty and family friends, he pushed forward the professionalization of the clergy and transformed Lambeth Palace and Church House into the bureaucratic centres of a world communion. Archbishop William Temple, who regarded himself as a surrogate son, formed the view that he was 'not in the least mystical' and was unlikely ever to have spent much time in private prayer, but he was regular, direct, and sincere in his religious observances. Temple also commented that Davidson's 'power of work was astonishing'. Information was processed by him at amazing speed, and filed in the memory for recall at will. Temple always remembered watching him work through the report of a royal commission for a Lords debate. 'He turned over the pages with a steady, slow swing, giving to each about the time required for reading aloud two sentences of average length.' 
Davidson's achievement was to maintain the comprehensiveness of the Church of England and to ensure liberty of thought. He maintained a Christian vision in British society at a time when international and class conflict could have obliterated institutional religion. Yet in 1927, the year after his intervention in the general strike, the figures for Easter communion were higher than they have ever been, before or since. Before the First World War, Davidson was regularly invited to comment on national political matters by national leaders, but afterwards ecclesiastical business left little time, and the rise of the Labour Party gave him fewer opportunities. Davidson's great skill was as a chairman, where he usually managed to secure unanimity. He was a naturally cautious man, inclined to worry; it was once said of him that 'he saw the shadows of tigers behind all the bushes in the jungle'. Again it was said that he elevated expediency into a principle. For nearly fifty years he exercised more influence in Anglican affairs than anyone else. 


@@@@@


doc= 32734


Davie, Thomas Benjamin (1895-1955), pathologist and university principal, was born on 23 November 1895 at Prieska, Cape Colony, the fifth of the six children of Thomas Benjamin Davie, law agent and auctioneer, and his first wife, Caroline Charlotte Halliday (died 1900). With Scottish ancestry on both sides, Davie spoke English at home but, after attending Prieska junior school from about 1901 to 1906, had an Afrikaans education at Paarl Boys' High School and Victoria College, Stellenbosch, Cape of Good Hope. At Stellenbosch he attained a BA in chemistry (1914) and a teachers' certificate (with distinction, 1916). His subsequent career as a secondary school science teacher in the Orange Free State and the Transvaal was interrupted by two years' training in Britain as a Royal Flying Corps pilot during the First World War. As an army volunteer suppressing labour militancy in Johannesburg during the Rand Revolt of 1922, he sustained a serious injury and, during a long hospital bound recuperation, he decided to give up schoolteaching for medicine. The previous year he had married Vera Catherine Roper (1893-1976), daughter of Thomas Roper, a Wesleyan minister; they had one daughter who died in infancy. 
Like a number of young South Africans before him, Davie chose Liverpool University for his medical studies. Enrolling as a 28-year-old, his commitment, intellectual ability, and relative maturity soon won him many distinctions, as well as the ready confidence of patients. He graduated MB ChB (1928) and MD (1931). He received his MRCP in 1931, the same year that he became pathologist to the Walton Hospital, Liverpool. Thus did Davie begin his career in pathology, which culminated in chairs at Bristol University (1935-8) and Liverpool University (the George Holt chair of pathology, 1938-45, and the chair of applied pathology, 1945-7). During this time he co-authored a standard pathology textbook with his mentor at Liverpool, Professor J. H. Dible, entitled 'Pathology: an Introduction to Medicine and Surgery' (1939), and published a number of articles on the pathology of various diseases and on the storage of blood for transfusion. His view of pathology as the 'grammar of medicine and surgery', a process which was the subject of living, rather than morbid, anatomy, informed his emphasis on clinical training and research. 
A gifted and popular teacher, Davie also showed particular aptitude for organization and administration at Bristol and Liverpool, where he reorganized the pathology departments and fostered greater contact between them and local hospitals. During the Second World War he worked tirelessly to improve blood transfusion and clinical pathology services for the Ministry of Health, notably establishing the first blood bank at Liverpool in 1939. He was elected FRCP in 1940. As the first full-time dean of the medical faculty at Liverpool (1945-7), he worked on post-war reorganization and expansion within the faculty. His qualities as a tactful and outstanding administrator secured his appointment as principal and vice-chancellor at the University of Cape Town in March 1948. Acute rheumatoid arthritis and other medical problems, which began to manifest themselves shortly after his return to South Africa, hampered Davie's work. Nevertheless, he applied himself energetically to the development of the university, which had been hindered by the war. Davie fostered academic and commercial contacts, raising money to expand research and teaching, initiated a scheme whereby the medical school staff became part-time employees of provincial hospitals too, and encouraged the establishment of new, interdisciplinary departments. In a broader sphere, he was instrumental in creating the South African Committee of University Principals. 
The issue which loomed largest in Davie's principalship was, however, an attempt by the newly elected National Party government to bar black students from the few 'open' universities which admitted them. Davie opposed this, initially because he objected to state intervention in university policy per se and later from a broader philosophical position which defined true universities as necessarily open to all -- they had to make available 'the whole of knowledge to every one who can benefit by it'. In doing this, Davie hoped that universities would encourage better relations between English, Afrikaans, and black South Africans by fostering 'that toleration to ideas which characterizes the really educated man'. He led the opposition to university apartheid by the 'open' universities, a campaign which was ultimately unsuccessful: the Nationalist government passed legislation in 1959 to bar black students from entering these universities. 
By 1955, seriously ill yet determined as ever not to yield to adversity, Davie travelled to England to represent his university and receive honorary doctorates from Oxford and Liverpool universities. This opportunity did not arise, however, as he died in London on the night of 13/14 December 1955. His body was cremated at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. He was survived by his wife. Before path-breaking cortisone treatment for his illness swelled his features, he had been a tall, distinguished looking man who was dynamic, genial, and approachable. He inspired affection, loyalty, and admiration: as a contemporary observed, 'One always felt that life was good when one was in his company.' Davie is remembered today chiefly for his role in defining and upholding the ideal of academic freedom, the freedom for institutions to decide 'who shall teach, what we teach, how we teach and whom we teach'. This vital contribution has been commemorated in an annual T. B. Davie memorial lecture at the University of Cape Town since 1959 which reaffirms the university's commitment to the principle of academic freedom. 


@@@@@


doc= 32735


Davies, Charles Maurice (1828-1910), author, was born in Wells, Somerset, of Welsh origin. In 1845 he entered Durham University as a scholar of University College and graduated BA in 1848 with a second class in classical and general literature, MA in 1852, and DD in 1864. He was elected a fellow of the university on 1 November 1849 and was ordained deacon in 1851 and priest in 1852. After serving various curacies he settled down to educational work in London. In 1856 he married Jane Anne Greenaway. Meanwhile, his religious views underwent a change. Once an active supporter of the Tractarian movement, he soon adopted broad church principles and published anonymously a series of sensational novels attacking high-church practices, among them 'Philip Paternoster' (1858), 'Shadow Land' (1860), and 'Verts, or, The Three Creeds' (1876). He also published translations of Sophocles' 'Antigone' and 'Oedipus tyrannus', and Plautus's 'Captivi'. 
After holding the headmastership of the West London collegiate school (1861-8) Davies devoted himself mainly to journalism. In 1870 he represented the 'Daily Telegraph' in France on the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War and was arrested as a suspected spy while searching Metz for his colleague, George Augustus Sala. Among his other contributions to the 'Daily Telegraph' was a series of independent studies of religious parties in London, which attracted attention. His articles were collected into a volume entitled 'Unorthodox London' (1873; 2nd edn, 1875). This was followed by 'Heterodox London, or, Phases of Free Thought in the Metropolis' (1874), 'Orthodox London, or, Phases of Religious Life in the Church of England' (1874-5), and 'Mystic London, or, Phases of Occult Life in the Metropolis' (1875), all of which were on the same lines. On leaving the service of the 'Daily Telegraph' he went to Natal in South Africa to work under Bishop J. W. Colenso. After 1882, however, he abandoned holy orders. On his resettling in London, he was employed after 1893 in superintending a series of translations, undertaken at the instance of Cecil Rhodes, of the original authorities used by Edward Gibbon in his 'Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire'. Nearly thirty scholars worked under his supervision and over a hundred volumes were completed. Davies retired from active work in 1901, and died at his home, 50 Connaught Road, Harlesden, London, on 6 September 1910. His funeral service was held at All Souls Church, Harlesden, on 10 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 32736


Davies, Clement Edward (1884-1962), lawyer and politician, was born on 19 February 1884 at Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire, the youngest of the seven children of Moses Davies, auctioneer, and his wife, Elizabeth Margaret Jones of Llanerfyl, Montgomeryshire. Clement Davies was sent to the local English school, but won a scholarship to Llanfyllin county school when it was founded in 1897. He went on to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was a senior foundation scholar, obtained first-class honours in both parts of the law tripos (1906-7), and was law student (1907-11). He won prizes in criminal law, constitutional law, and the law of real property, and was awarded the bar prize and certificate of honour in the bar finals in 1909, when he was called by Lincoln's Inn. Shortly before this he had been a lecturer at Aberystwyth University College, but in 1909 he joined the north Wales circuit before transferring in 1910 to the northern circuit. In that year he moved to London and rapidly developed a successful commercial practice. He had the capacity to read quickly and accurately, once mastering twenty-five briefs in a morning. He also published works on agricultural law and the law of auctions and auctioneers. 
In 1913 Davies married Jano Elizabeth (1881-1969), daughter of Morgan Davies, a Welsh surgeon with a practice in London. She was a graduate in classics and modern languages of the University of Wales, and had studied in Paris before becoming a teacher; she was the youngest headteacher of her time in London. She was a linguist and an excellent public speaker and was to bring valuable support to her husband's political work. They had three sons and one daughter. Three of the children each died at the age of twenty-four; one son and the daughter were both accidentally killed while on active service. 
On the outbreak of war in 1914 Davies volunteered for military service, but was posted instead to the office of the procurator-general as adviser on enemy activities in neutral countries and on the high seas. He was later seconded to the Board of Trade's department concerned with trading with the enemy. After the war he was successively secretary to the president of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division (1918-19) and to the master of the rolls (1919-23). From 1919 to 1925 he was a junior counsel to the Treasury. He took silk in 1926 and in 1935 he was appointed chairman of the Montgomeryshire quarter sessions, a post that he held, and was most assiduous in filling, until his death. He gave up practice in 1930 when he joined the board of Unilever, and remained a board member until 1941, when he resigned in order to concentrate on his political work. 
From his youth onwards Clement Davies had been fascinated by radical politics. One of his forebears had voted for the 'Reform Bill' of 1832. Politics were in the air he breathed as a young barrister when he worked as junior counsel with John Simon and F. E. Smith, both destined to become lord chancellor; and quite late in life Davies would speak of the Asquith government as though he had been in parliament at the time. But it was not until 1929 that he felt able to contest a seat and was returned at the general election as a Liberal for Montgomeryshire, which he represented for the rest of his life. He was rooted in the county of his birth and made his home there at Meifod. Inevitably, he became entangled in the party disputes which followed the formation of MacDonald's National Government in 1931. At the general election of that year he held his seat unopposed as a Liberal National. He did so again at the election of 1935, although by this time the Liberal Party, led by Sir Herbert Samuel, had withdrawn its support of the government and was in opposition. 
It was in his Liberal National phase that Davies did his most valuable work as a back-bencher, serving on a number of committees, and especially as chairman of an inquiry into the incidence of tuberculosis in Wales. Between 1937 and 1938 he made the most searching inquiries and found grave inadequacies in the provision of public health services and housing. His legal training and political sense here complemented each other perfectly. His report was not published until 1939, and most of the remedies had to await the post-war period, but it nevertheless represented a landmark in the development of health administration in Wales. 
At the beginning of the war in 1939 Clement Davies became the chairman of an action committee in the House of Commons which sought the most effective prosecution of the war and which was supported by members of the three main parties in the house. Davies was among an increasing number who had become convinced that there must be a coalition government in which all three parties should be represented, and his action group was important in mobilizing opposition to the Chamberlain government. In the critical debate on the Norwegian campaign, 7-8 May 1940, it was Clement Davies who, on the second day, persuaded Lloyd George to speak -- a speech which Churchill described as Lloyd George's 'last decisive intervention in the House of Commons'. The concluding vote was a moral defeat for the government, and on 10 May 1940 Churchill became prime minister. Lord Boothby, who worked closely with Davies in the action committee as its secretary, later described him as 'one of the architects -- some may judge the principal architect' of the Churchill coalition government. But this assessment exaggerates Davies's importance and there was to be no place for him in the coalition, which Boothby took as proof of his own belief that Churchill 'did not treat his friends well' (James, 245-6). 
In 1942 Davies rejoined the independent Liberal Party and, notwithstanding his Liberal National past, became its leader in 1945 in succession to Sir Archibald Sinclair, who had been defeated in Caithness and Sutherland. With Frank Byers as his chief whip, Davies planned an ambitious programme of recovery for the party after the debacle of 1945. He was determined to maintain Liberal independence and dismissed as 'unworthy subterfuge' Churchill's appeal for an electoral arrangement with the Conservatives before the general election of 1950, which the Liberals contested on a wide front (Gilbert, 505). But in the absence of an electoral pact only nine Liberals were returned, the number falling to six in 1951, when the Liberal vote fell to a mere three-quarters of a million -- a performance that was barely improved upon in 1955. At the party conference the following year, Davies surprised the assembly by announcing his intention of 'handing over the wheel and going below' (Grimond, 188). Jo Grimond was his designated successor. Davies's difficulties had been made greater by a debilitating struggle with alcoholism, which he managed mostly to keep from public view. By 1960, though, he had made the decision not to contest the next election. 
As leader Davies had to contend with deep divisions within Liberal ranks. The need to reconcile such disparate elements as Hopkin Morris and Lady Megan Lloyd George led him to adopt contradictory positions, and Lady Violet Bonham Carter, who ultimately held considerable affection for Davies, thought him 'a jelly fish who drifts on every tide... & goes wherever he is pushed or pulled' (V. Bonham Carter to Gilbert Murray, 6 April 1950, Lady Asquith MSS). She was critical, too, of his decision not to seek an electoral alliance with the Conservatives when it was offered -- he had even refused office in Churchill's 1951 government. But by maintaining Liberal independence in the party's darkest hour he may also have ensured its future. Emlyn Hooson, who succeeded him as member for Montgomeryshire in 1962, believed that his 'greatest contribution was to hand over the Party to Grimond as a still recognized political entity, with all the trappings and organization of a much larger Parliamentary Party' (private information). From this basis Grimond effected a significant Liberal revival after 1956. 
Clem Davies was a kindly man who made friends in all parties in the House of Commons. He was devoted to parliament as an institution, and his respect for it, with his awareness of the chafings of poverty, made him a sturdy advocate of a decent standard of pay for all members. Liberal organization during his leadership was not taut and he was a radical evangelist by temperament rather than a party boss, but he would spread the gospel of Liberalism anywhere with zeal. He had an agreeable voice and spoke frequently in the country, and particularly liked to talk to students at the universities. The ease with which he found himself in his public speeches developing Patrick Henry's theme 'Give me liberty, or give me death!' almost endeared him to his critics, though some bemoaned his 'chapel' oratory. Such causes as social reform, collective security, and world government enthused him, and towards the end of his career he found deep satisfaction in his work as president of the Parliamentary Association for World Government. He was nominated, unsuccessfully, in 1955 for a Nobel peace prize. 
Davies was sworn of the privy council in 1947. He was elected an honorary fellow of Trinity Hall in 1950 and a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1953. In that year he received the freedom of Welshpool and in 1955 an honorary LLD from the University of Wales. He died at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London, on 23 March 1962. 
His widow, Jano Davies, survived him. She was involved in women's movements, attending the International Women's Congress in Istanbul in 1935 as a delegate. In 1939 she was a founder of the Women's Voluntary Services for Wales, and from 1941 to 1945 was a member of the commission on reconstruction for Wales. In 1947 she was appointed high sheriff of Merioneth. 


@@@@@


doc= 32737


Davies, David, first Baron Davies (1880-1944), politician and philanthropist, was born on 11 May 1880 at Llwynderw, Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, the only son of Edward Davies (1852-1898) and his wife, Mary (died 1888), daughter of the Revd Evan Jones of Llandinam. He was educated at Merchiston Castle, Edinburgh, and at King's College, Cambridge, where he was placed in the third and second classes respectively of the two parts of the historical tripos in 1901 and 1903. His father, Edward, died young in 1898, and David inherited the vast industrial empire created by his grandfather David Davies (1818-1890), 'top sawyer', in railway construction, coalmining in the Rhondda valleys, and building the docks at Barry. The grandson took over these immensely profitable concerns, to which he added directorships of the Great Western Railway and the Midland Bank. From the outset, he was a multi-millionaire. 
Early on, Davies followed the family tradition of public service and benefaction mainly in Wales. He was a prominent member of the councils of the university colleges in Wales and of the court of the national university, and from 1926 served as president and chairman of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. The college owed much to him, with his funding of an imposing new chemistry laboratory named after his father, Edward (opened by H. H. Asquith in 1907), and later purchases of land and property. Davies was also much involved with the founding of the National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth in 1911, and he served as its president from 1927. His munificence extended also to housing development and support of his own Calvinistic Methodists in the Presbyterian Church of Wales, while his two sisters, Gwendoline Elizabeth Davies and Margaret Sidney Davies ['see under 'Davies, Gwendoline], made Gregynog Hall a rare centre of culture and the arts in the inter-war years. 
Davies's most striking initiative, however, was the Welsh National Memorial Association, in memory of Edward VII, launched by Davies in 1911 with a gift of $150,000 and with Thomas Jones appointed as its executive secretary, in order to combat the scourge of tuberculosis in Wales. There followed a research centre in Cardiff and the David Davies chair of tuberculosis at the Welsh National School of Medicine in 1921. The association set up residential sanatoria throughout Wales and was credited with a significant drop in the mortality rate from the disease. However, the Clement Davies committee in 1939 found that tuberculosis was still more serious in Wales than anywhere else in Britain. The association's limitations, for instance in not dealing with aftercare, later became clear, for all its commendable role in heightening public consciousness. 
Like his grandfather, Davies hankered after a political career, and he was returned unopposed as Liberal member for Montgomeryshire in the general election of January 1906. Most unusually, he was nominated by both Liberals and Unionists in the constituency, and was indeed far from radical in his social and political views. Socially, as a large landowner who rode enthusiastically with the Llandinam hunt, he had traditional views on landlord-tenant relations and opposed many of Lloyd George's land reform proposals. At his election he was a tariff reformer who disliked Irish home rule and who had opposed the Welsh Liberals' 'revolt' against the 1902 'Education Act'. However, he gave broad support to Lloyd George's 'people's budget' and subsequent welfare measures. In general, however, Davies was an inactive MP during his tenure of the Montgomeryshire seat until 1929. He was returned unopposed in both elections in 1910 and in 1918, 1922, and 1923, and the local Liberal association went into decay while Davies busied himself with his industrial and philanthropic interests. 
Davies's career, like that of many others, entered a quite new phase with the outbreak of war in August 1914. He fought in France as commander of the 14th Royal Welch Fusiliers and was made a major. However, in July 1916 he became parliamentary private secretary to Lloyd George, newly appointed to succeed Kitchener as secretary for war. In the complex political manoeuvres of autumn 1916 he was prominent in urging his fellow Liberal members that Lloyd George replace Asquith as prime minister. When Lloyd George became premier in December 1916 he made his fellow Welshman Davies one of the five initial members of his private secretariat or 'garden suburb'. Davies's responsibilities included war strategy and munitions, and he accompanied Lord Milner on his visit to Russia in January 1917. However, he proved a dissatisfied aide to Lloyd George and produced a stream of unsolicited criticisms from 'Dafydd Pob Man' ('David Everywhere'), as he called himself. The prime minister sacked him with singular brutality in June 1917. 
Thereafter Davies was a frequent critic of Lloyd George. Although he received the coalition's 'coupon' of endorsement in 1918, he attacked the post-war government on many fronts, including the disendowment settlement for the Welsh church. By contrast, he voiced support for the Irish peace treaty and offered up to $1 million to purchase 'The Times' in August 1922 as a pro-Lloyd George newspaper. However, he strongly attacked Lloyd George's radical land proposals in the 'green book' in 1925 as rank socialism and announced thereafter that he would not stand at the next election. He tried unsuccessfully to nominate a successor, but Clement Davies was chosen in the face of the sitting member's hostility and succeeded him as Liberal member for Montgomeryshire at the general election of 1929. 
By this time David Davies was consumed by a mighty cause, which dominated the remainder of his life: the League of Nations, established after the Versailles peace settlement in 1919. Created Baron Davies of Llandinam, Montgomeryshire, on 21 June 1932, he campaigned ceaselessly for the league in speeches and writings, through the National Press Agency which controlled the 'Review of Reviews' and 'Everyman', and in two books, 'The Problem of the Twentieth Century' (1930) and 'Force' (1934). Above all, there was a powerful pressure group, the League of Nations Union, of which he was founder and trustee, along with figures such as Lord Robert Cecil and Professor Gilbert Murray. Davies passionately championed the effective pursuit of collective security by giving the backing of force to the league covenant and giving new authority to the International Court. His particular theme was the creation of an international police force, especially an air force. However, critics felt his vision of nation states merging their sovereignty in a new world order to be a pipe dream. Many members of the union were far less enthusiastic than Davies for military sanctions, and in 1932, after the ineffective world disarmament conference, he founded the New Commonwealth Society to promote his ideas for an international equity tribunal whose decisions would be enforced by an international police force. He was much disillusioned at the failure of the league to stop the Italian invasion of Abyssinia and the Japanese invasion of China, and in the Lords and on the public platform expressed his feelings of 'humiliation and dismay' ('Hansard 5L', 110, col. 1422, 4 Oct 1938) over Chamberlain's and Halifax's appeasement policies and especially Munich. 
Davies's passion for the league extended into his public activities in Wales. In 1919 he endowed the Woodrow Wilson chair of international politics at Aberystwyth, which was first held by Sir Alfred Zimmern; in 1936 he protested bitterly when the college appointed E. H. Carr, a mordant critic of the 'utopianism' of league supporters like Davies. Thereafter, although he remained president of the college, he steadily withdrew from active involvement in its affairs. More positively, in 1938 he provided the Temple of Peace and Health in Cathays Park, Cardiff, as a centre for both the Welsh League of Nations Union and the National Memorial Association. It was to continue as an educational agency for world citizenship. During the war he wrote in favour of a federated Europe. In 1951, after his death, the David Davies Memorial Institute of International Studies was founded to continue his work in promoting international co-operation and integration, and conflict resolution. 
On 13 April 1910 Davies married Amy (died 1918), the daughter of Lancelot Penman of Broadwood Park, Lanchester. They had a daughter who died in infancy and a son, David, known as Michael. On 9 December 1922 Davies married again, his second wife being Henrietta Margaret (died 1948), daughter of James Grant Fergusson of Baledmund, Pitlochry, Scotland. They had two sons and two daughters. Davies died suddenly at Deildre, Llandinam, on 16 June 1944. He was succeeded as second baron by his son from his first marriage, David, who was killed in action in Holland three months later. 
Davies was an imperious, impatient idealist who stamped his personality on Welsh, and to a degree on British, life over three decades. An active freemason, he was generous and public-spirited, given to embracing great crusades for causes such as health or world peace. He was also passionately committed to temperance. But he was liable to assume that his wealth alone would decide outcomes and that colleagues and opponents could be steamrollered into submission, whether in the parliamentary or the university world. He was a prickly colleague, who almost inevitably fell out with Lloyd George, but Thomas Jones and many others found themselves drawn by his charisma and vision. His positive impact on the public life of Wales was immense. 


@@@@@


doc= 32738


Davies, Sir (Henry) Walford (1869-1941), composer and organist, was born on 6 September 1869 in Willow Street, Oswestry, Shropshire, the seventh child and fourth surviving son of John Whitridge Davies (died 1885), accountant, and his wife, Susannah, daughter of Thomas Gregory, jeweller. After attending Mr Owen's school in Willow Street, Oswestry, he was admitted a chorister at St George's Chapel, Windsor, in January 1882 under Sir George Elvey (who was succeeded only months later by Walter Parratt). In February 1885 he left the choir when his voice broke, but he quickly returned in May as assistant organist and secretary to Dean Randall Davidson. In order to eke out a living he secured a series of organist appointments in London -- Park Chapel (1885-90), St George's, Campden Hill (1890), St Anne's, Soho (1890-91) and Christ Church, Hampstead (1892-7) -- which culminated with the Temple Church in 1898. In 1885 he became acquainted with Mr and Mrs Thomas Matheson of 15 Cannon Place, Hampstead, the venue of the Hampstead Popular Concerts. A lifelong friendship developed, notably with Mrs Matheson (the 'M. G. M.' of many dedications), who, as mentor, undertook Davies's education in earnest. He entered for the Cambridge MusB in 1889, but his exercise (a cantata, 'The Future', to words by Matthew Arnold) failed the following year. However, Sir Charles Stanford strongly urged him to re-enter and the exercise was passed in 1891. In 1890 he gained a composition scholarship at the Royal College of Music, where he studied composition under Sir Hubert Parry (with a brief interlude under Stanford in 1893), modal counterpoint under W. S. Rockstro, piano with Herbert Sharpe, and the violin (later) with Haydn Inwards. Owing to the tuition he had enjoyed under Parratt at Windsor he declined to study the organ. When his scholarship ended in March 1894 he undertook some counterpoint teaching for Gladstone, and when Rockstro died in 1895 he was appointed teacher of counterpoint, a post he retained until 1903, though not without some scruple. In 1896 he failed the counterpoint paper for the Cambridge MusD, and though he passed it in 1897, Stanford (professor of music at the university) had nevertheless informed him of its shortcomings. Davies thought of offering his resignation to Parry (who was by now director of the Royal College of Music), but he was persuaded to reconsider. Matters did not improve when his doctoral exercise, a short oratorio 'The Days of Man', was initially rejected. Davies was openly critical of Cambridge, which naturally infuriated its professor, Stanford. On the acceptance of Stanford's corrections Davies was forced to apologize, but his relations with Stanford remained strained for some years to come. He proceeded to the MusD in 1898. 
On his appointment as organist at the Temple Church in 1898, one which he held for the next twenty-one years, Davies's position in British musical life began to assume greater prominence. He conducted the London Church Choirs' Association (1901-13), succeeded Stanford as conductor of the London Bach Choir (1902-7), and became well known as an organist (particularly as an exponent of Parry's late organ works) and as a teacher (his most famous pupil being Leopold Stokowski). During the war years he was initially involved with the Music in Wartime movement, but gave this up for a more musically active role, organizing concerts for the troops in France and assisting with musical events for the Fight for Right movement (which included the commissioning of Parry's choral hymn 'Jerusalem'). In 1918 he was raised to the rank of major in the RAF. 
Davies's connection with Wales began in 1919 when he was appointed professor of music at University College, Aberystwyth, and chairman of the National Council of Music for the University of Wales. He resigned the former in 1926 but retained the latter post until his death. The resignation of his position at the Temple in 1923 opened the way the following year for further career opportunities, including his appointment as Gresham professor of music (succeeding Sir Frederick Bridge) and a long association with radio, marked by the Cramb lectures from Glasgow, broadcast for the first time from Savoy Hill. Moreover, at the age of fifty-four, on 4 September 1924, he married (Constance) Margaret Isabel Evans ('b'. 1898), daughter of William Evans, canon of St David's and rector of Narberth; she was twenty-eight years his junior. On his appointment as a musical adviser for the BBC in 1926 Davies became well known for his programmes such as 'Music and the Ordinary Listener' (1926-9), his wartime children's broadcasts (1939-41), and 'Everyman's Music' (1940-41). Between 1927 and 1932 he was organist at St George's Chapel, Windsor, after which he retired from full-time work, though he continued to be active as a lecturer, broadcaster, writer (his book 'The Pursuit of Music' was published in 1935), conductor, and adviser, not least in his role as master of the king's musick after Elgar's death in 1934. In recognition of his services to music in Britain he was knighted in 1922, having already been made OBE in 1919. He was created CVO in 1932 and was promoted to KCVO in 1937, in part owing to his role in the musical organization of the coronation of King George VI. He also accepted honorary degrees from Leeds (LLD, 1904), Glasgow (LLD, 1926), Dublin (MusD, 1930), and Oxford (DMus, 1935) and was made a fellow of the Royal College of Organists (1904), the Royal Academy of Music (1923), and the Royal College of Music (1926). At the outbreak of the Second World War he moved to Bristol to be with the BBC's department of religion. He died at Glencairn, Wrington, near Bristol, on 11 March 1941, and after a funeral service at Bristol Cathedral on 14 March his ashes were laid in the cathedral garden. 
As a composer Davies was profoundly influenced by Brahms (whom he met at Ischl in 1896) and even more so by Parry, who lies behind the corpus of chamber works and a symphony from Davies's student days, and whose neo-Bachian, ethical preoccupations can be felt in the series of large-scale choral works -- namely 'The Temple' (Worcester, 1902), 'Everyman' (Leeds, 1904), 'Lift up your Hearts' (Hereford, 1906), 'Noble Numbers' (Hereford, 1909), and the 'Song of St Francis' (Birmingham, 1912) -- written during the heyday of his career as a festival composer before the First World War. Yet Davies did not live up to his early promise (which enjoyed its zenith in 'Everyman') and his career as a composer fell away after the war. His name is still familiar to church musicians and to educators, but he is best remembered today as a miniaturist, for his 'Solemn Melody' (1908), written for the Milton tercentenary celebrations, the introit 'God be in my head' (from 'Songs of Church and Home', 1908), an attractive version of 'O little town of Bethlehem', a frequently sung carol arrangement of 'The holly and the ivy', and the 'RAF March Past' (1921). These pieces best show Davies as the professional composer of 'Gebrauchsmusik', but the intensity of expansive lyricism, organic construction, and harmonic adventure, such as one finds in his sadly neglected early setting for baritone and string quartet of Browning's 'Prospice', op. 6 (written after a life-threatening attack of peritonitis in 1890), provides a glimpse of a powerful symphonic imagination that he failed to consolidate in his later works. 


@@@@@


doc= 32739


Davies, (John) Llewelyn (1826-1916), theologian, was born at Chichester on 26 February 1826, the eldest son of the Revd John Davies DD (1795-1861), an evangelical divine, rector of Gateshead from 1840 to 1861, and his wife, Mary Hopkinson (died 1886). (Sarah) Emily Davies, the educationist, was his sister. Davies was educated at Repton School and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1844-8). In 1848 he was bracketed fifth in the classical tripos with his friend David James Vaughan, also of Trinity, with whom he had been elected to a Bell university scholarship in 1845; in 1850 the friends were elected fellows of their college together, and they subsequently (1852) collaborated in translating Plato's 'Republic'. As an undergraduate Davies was already interested in political and social questions, and he was president of the union in 1847 and 1849. After taking his degree he for a time taught private pupils, among whom was Leslie Stephen. About this time he came under the influence of Frederick Denison Maurice, whose teaching Davies's clear mind was to make acceptable to many who found Maurice himself elusive. Taking orders in 1851 Davies first held a curacy, unpaid, at St Anne's, Limehouse, and was then for four years (1852-6) incumbent of St Mark's, Whitechapel. At this time he became closely associated with Maurice's circle, especially Thomas Hughes, Charles Kingsley, and John Malcolm Forbes Ludlow, in the work of the co-operative movement, and in the establishment of the Working Men's College in Great Ormond Street in 1854. In 1856 he was appointed to the crown living of Christ Church, Marylebone, which he held for thirty-three years. It was mainly a poor parish, but the rector's preaching drew hearers from other parts of London. 
In 1859 Davies married Mary (died 1895), the eldest daughter of Sir Charles John Crompton and his wife, Caroline, 'nee' Fletcher. They had six sons (three of whom were fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge) and one daughter, Margaret Caroline Llewelyn Davies, who, after attending Girton College, Cambridge, played an important part in the working men's co-operatives. 
Davies combined other public activities and interests with his clerical work. He was a warm friend of the movement for the higher education of women, in which his sister, Emily, played a prominent part. From 1873 to 1874 and again from 1878 to 1886 he was principal of Queen's College, Harley Street, which had been founded by Maurice in 1848 for the advancement of women's education. He supported the extension to women of university degrees and of the parliamentary franchise. He was a member of the first London school board; he favoured unsectarian religious teaching in elementary schools, and he suggested the formula known as the 'Cowper-Temple clause', which was embodied in the 'Elementary Education Act' of 1870. In politics Davies was a strong but independent Liberal: he was opposed to Gladstone's home-rule measures, but rejoined the Liberal Party when free trade was threatened. He was strongly in sympathy with trade unionism, and raised his voice to vindicate the movement at a time when it was far from popular. Thus in 1872 he addressed a great meeting at Exeter Hall in support of combinations among agricultural labourers, and the next year at the church congress he vigorously combated clerical prejudice against trade unions. 
Like many of his Cambridge friends, Davies was an enthusiastic walker and an original member of the Alpine Club, making the first ascents of the Dom and the Taschhorn. He wrote several articles for the 'Alpine Journal' and for 'Peaks, Passes, and Glaciers'. It was chiefly, however, as a broad churchman that Davies was known. 'St Paul and Modern Thought' (1856), his commentary on 'St Paul's epistles' (1866), and his 'Order and Growth' (Hulsean lectures, 1891) exemplify his thinking. He joined in establishing the National Church Reform Union (1870), which aimed at making the Church of England more truly national and comprehensive. His views on the relation between church and state probably stood in the way of ecclesiastical preferment, for which he seemed marked out by his practical ability, his earnestness, moderation, and fairness of mind, as well as by the position which he held in the religious and social life of London. There he was esteemed by many who held widely differing opinions. His marriage brought him into close relation with the English advocates of positivism, two of whom, Henry Crompton and Edward Spencer Beesly, were his wife's brother and brother-in-law respectively. Davies held strongly that Christian theology should seek instruction 'from the progressive development of life and knowledge' (preface to his 'Theology and Morality', 1873). While he gave his allegiance especially to Maurice, his standpoint was in general that of his friends B. F. Westcott, J. B. Lightfoot, and F. J. A. Hort, the contemporary leaders of liberal theology at Cambridge. His preaching was not rhetorical and made no parade of learning, the qualities which rendered it remarkable being depth of conviction, independence of thought, and an unfailing clearness of exposition. When Davies left London in 1889, on being presented to the Trinity College living of Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland, a valedictory address, to which was attached a remarkable list of signatures, recognized the combination in him of a 'clear and firm assertion of Christian truth with a generous appreciation of all earnest thought and feeling' and a 'habitual sympathy with rich and poor alike'. 
Davies held his Westmorland living for twenty years, adapting himself successfully to the new conditions of life and work, and throwing himself vigorously into the educational business of the town and county. He was also chaplain to the queen (1876-1901) and to the king (1901-16). In 1895 his wife died. He retired in 1908 at the age of eighty-two, and passed the remaining eight years of his life with his daughter at Hampstead. He died there on 18 May 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 32740


Davies, Robert (1816-1905), benefactor, born at Llangefni, Anglesey, on 1 April 1816, was the second son of Richard Davies (1778-1849), a general storekeeper at Llangefni, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Owen Jones of Coed Hywel, near Llangefni. He was educated at the national school, Llangefni, and at a private school in Chester. As he and his two brothers grew up, their father extended his business, opening a branch for importing timber and iron at Menai Bridge, which he placed under the management of his eldest son, John, who died unmarried in 1848 and to whose business ability the successful development of the family firm was largely due. An iron foundry at Caernarfon was put under Robert's charge, while a store at Redwharf Bay was entrusted to the youngest son, Richard. The shipping and freight business which the brothers operated at Menai Bridge was extremely successful, and as the firm established itself as one of the largest shipowning concerns in the district, the other businesses were disposed of and the three brothers settled in the area. 
While at Caernarfon Davies had taken an active part in the work of a ragged school in the town and in subsequent years he had charge of a class of children in a Sunday school of which he was for a short time superintendent. With these exceptions, and that of serving as high sheriff of Anglesey for 1862, he took no part in public work. About 1862 he settled at Bodlondeb, a house overlooking the Menai Strait, near Bangor, and here he led a somewhat eccentric and parsimonious life, letting his share of the profits of the business accumulate. After 1885 he began giving money, generally anonymously or under assumed names, towards liquidating the debts of his own denomination, the Calvinistic Methodists. He was popularly credited with giving $1/2 million towards chapel debts, although his donations probably did not much exceed $150,000. His other benefactions were $177,000 to endow the Welsh Methodist mission in India, $10,000 to an orphanage (of the same connection) at Bontnewydd, near Caernarfon, and $10,000 to the British and Foreign Bible Society (of which he was a vice-president). At a cost of $5000 he built an English chapel for the Calvinistic Methodists at Menai Bridge (where he was commemorated by a window and tablet), and gave $1200 towards restoring the Welsh chapel at the same place, to the building of which he and his brother had contributed generously. His gifts to educational institutions included $1000 to the founding of the normal college at Bangor in 1856 and $1000 to the University College, Bangor (1884), and financial assistance in the establishment and maintenance of a British School at Menai Bridge. His almsgiving for many years took the eccentric form of a weekly distribution of 12 pounds of flour to between seventy and a hundred people, who personally collected this dole from Bodlondeb every Tuesday. 
Davies died unmarried and intestate at Bodlondeb on 29 December 1905, and was buried on 2 January 1906 with his parents in the parish churchyard of Llangefni. His estate was valued at more than $400,000. 
His younger brother, 


