@@@@@


doc= 32741


Davies, (Sarah) Emily (1830-1921), suffragist and promoter of higher education for women, was born on 22 April 1830 in Southampton, the fourth child and second daughter of John Davies DD (1795-1861) and his wife, Mary Hopkinson (died 1886), the daughter of a businessman from Derby. At the time of her birth her father was acting as a locum in Southampton for a vicar who was seeking a cure for gout at Droitwich. John Davies was himself an invalid, who regularly moved his family's home in his search for bracing air to relieve his nervous disability. In her early childhood Emily's father was a parish priest in Chichester, where he also ran a school. He gave up both to concentrate on his writing, a luxury funded by Mary Hopkinson's allowance from her father. The family moved to Normandy in 1836, and then returned to settle near Chichester. 
John Davies was a respected scholar whose work 'An Estimate of the Human Mind' (1828; new edn, 1847) had led to his name being proposed in 1830 for the chair of moral and political economy at the newly established London University. An evangelical Anglican and a strict sabbatarian, his publications included 'Splendid Sins' (1830), an attack on wealthy sabbath-breakers. In 1839 the bishop of Durham, Edward Maltby, appointed him rector of Gateshead, co. Durham, where the family lived until 1861. 
Emily Davies's three brothers were all formally educated along conventional upper-middle-class lines: (John) Llewelyn Davies and William Stephen Davies both attended Repton School before proceeding to Cambridge in preparation for the church, and the third brother was articled to a solicitor. Emily and her elder sister Jane were denied any serious schooling either at home or outside it, and were expected to content themselves with home duties such as needlework and, later, good works in their father's parish. In later life Emily stated that she resented the strict division between the education and privileges given to her brothers and the dull, repetitive, restricted life she and Jane were required to endure. Her two escapes seem to have been wandering about the slums of Gateshead and visiting her neighbours. Through two friends, Annie and Jane Crow, she met one of her lifelong allies, Elizabeth Garrett. 
The demands of family duties fell heavily on Emily in the 1850s, when she was the companion to two of her siblings who were suffering from tuberculosis. She nursed Jane at Torquay from 1855 until her death in 1858. She was then sent to Algiers to join her younger brother, Henry. There she met another lifelong ally, Barbara Bodichon ('nee' Leigh Smith), who was wintering there with her sister Annie. Her encounter with the Leigh Smith sisters appears to have been Emily Davies's first exposure to feminist ideas and to female political campaigning. Her inchoate and disorganized distaste for the traditional life of a clergyman's daughter and for the injustice of gender inequalities in the upper-middle-class family were crystallized and directed into what became the campaigns for women's suffrage and women's higher education. 
The deaths in 1858 of Emily's brothers Henry and William, the latter a naval chaplain who died in China of wounds previously sustained in the Crimea, left Emily alone with her parents in Gateshead. She visited Llewelyn and his wife in London in the spring of 1859, and returned for a longer visit in September. Llewelyn, the sibling to whom Emily seems to have been closest, was a member of F. D. Maurice's circle and one of the earliest members of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, the platform for launching many mid-Victorian feminist campaigns. While in London Emily encountered the women who formed the Langham Place group, the 'English Woman's Journal' (founded by Barbara Bodichon and Bessie Rayner Parkes in 1858), and the Society for Promoting the Employment of Women (SPEW, founded in 1859). With Elizabeth Garrett she attended the lectures of Elizabeth Blackwell, the first woman doctor of medicine, who was visiting England; a meeting with Blackwell inspired Garrett to seek the opening of the medical profession to women. 
Back in Gateshead during 1860-61, Emily founded a Northumberland and Durham branch of the SPEW, and letters from her advocating women's education and employment were published in a Newcastle newspaper. Following the death of her father, Emily and her mother moved to London in January 1862. From then until her death Emily was involved with campaigns to raise the status of middle-class women in Britain. In June 1862 her paper 'Medicine as a profession for women' was presented at the congress of the Social Science Association (it was read for her by Russell Gurney). In the same year she canvassed support for the efforts of Elizabeth Garrett and her father to open London University degrees to women. Between 1862 and 1864 she wrote for the 'English Woman's Journal', acting as editor during 1863, and was a founder of the 'Victoria Magazine' -- though she and her friends broke with this new journal when its publisher, Emily Faithfull, was named in the Codrington divorce case. Rigorous avoidance of women with questionable reputations was normal practice among early feminists, who were careful not to expose their campaigns to accusations of immorality. 
The first success which Emily Davies achieved as a feminist campaigner was as secretary (from October 1862) to the committee set up to secure the admission of women to university examinations. As a first step, admission was sought to the local examinations for schoolboys established at Oxford and Cambridge five years earlier. In October 1863 the committee, chaired by Henry Alford, dean of Canterbury, and supported by prominent women educationists such as Frances Mary Buss and Elizabeth Bostock, persuaded the Cambridge local examination syndicate to open its examinations to girls on an experimental basis. Given only six weeks' notice, Emily Davies found eighty-three girls to present themselves (twenty-five from Miss Buss's North London Collegiate School). While not all were proficient (especially in arithmetic), many passed and none was hysterical or seized by brain fever and there was no scandal. In October 1864 a memorial organized by Emily Davies and signed by nearly a thousand teachers and more than a hundred 'ladies of rank and influence' requested that the Cambridge examinations be permanently opened; the proposal was accepted in the following year. 
Davies then successfully lobbied the schools inquiry commission (the Taunton commission), set up in December 1864, to include girls as well as boys in its investigations of middle-class education. She gave oral evidence to the commission on 30 November 1865, the first of nine female witnesses (the others were Frances Buss, Mary Eliza Porter, Frances Martin, Eleanor Elizabeth Smith, Susan Kyberd, Gertrude King, Dorothea Beale, and Elizabeth Wolstenholme). Her appearance was significant: it was the first time women had given evidence in person to a royal commission as expert witnesses, and she and Miss Buss, who gave evidence on the same day, were nervous, but impressed the commissioners with their 'perfect womanliness'. The report of the commission, signed in December 1867, was a landmark in the feminist campaign for a serious secondary education for middle-class girls. 
In March 1865 Davies's allies in these successful campaigns formed a ladies' debating group, the Kensington Society, so called because it met at the Kensington home of Charlotte Manning. Emily Davies was secretary of the society, whose other members included Helen Taylor, Sophia Jex-Blake, Barbara Bodichon, Dorothea Beale, Frances Buss, Frances Power Cobbe, Elizabeth Garrett, Isa Craig, and Elizabeth Wolstenholme. Through this group Emily Davies began for the first time to work for women's suffrage, helping to obtain nearly 1500 female signatories to a petition in its favour, which John Stuart Mill presented to the House of Commons on 7 June 1866. The group later quarrelled over the issue of votes for married women, with Davies and Bodichon wanting to campaign, initially, for the vote for single women and widows only, while Helen Taylor and Mill wished to include married women, on the principle of making suffrage equal for women and men. When a permanent suffrage committee was formed in November 1866, Emily Davies acted briefly as secretary, having refused to hold the position on a permanent basis. She was concerned that her involvement in the suffrage question might damage what had become her chief personal interest: that women should have access to a university education. 
In 1866 Emily Davies published her first and most influential book: 'The Higher Education of Women' (new edn, 1988), probably an extended version of a paper which she had intended to read at the Social Science Association congress in 1865. Pressing the case for opening both professional careers and university courses to women, it was well received in the press and by reviewers; it challenged the medical and religious arguments against degrees for women, and argued, like Mill, that many differences between men and women were matters of convention, not of biology. 
In the same year Davies founded, at a meeting in her home, the London Schoolmistresses' Association, to which she was secretary until its dissolution in 1888; among its first members were Frances Buss, Jane Chessar, Charlotte Manning, and Fanny Metcalfe. It was at a meeting of schoolmistresses in Manchester, on 6 October 1866, that she reached the conclusion that there was a strong demand for a college for women. The transformation of Queen's College, Harley Street, in London, into an institution for preparing women over eighteen to take London degrees appeared the most easily available option. When this proved impossible to achieve, Davies formed an executive committee, which met for the first time on 5 December 1867 to raise $30,000 to build a college for women in Cambridge. The earliest members were Lady Augusta Stanley, Henry Alford, Emilia Gurney (wife of Russell Gurney), Charlotte Manning, Henry Richard Tomkinson, Fanny Metcalfe, G. W. Hastings, James Heywood, H. J. Roby, J. R. Seeley, and Sedley Taylor. Barbara Bodichon joined in 1869 and Lady Stanley of Alderley in 1872. 
Rejecting the idea of separate lectures for women, and obsessively focused on a residential college where young women would take the same courses and exams as men, Emily Davies set out on a controversial and lonely course. Her policy stood apart from that promoted by another group at Cambridge headed by Henry Sidgwick and Anne Jemima Clough, who successfully petitioned the Cambridge senate to institute special examinations for women over the age of eighteen. During the discussions on the constitution of her proposed college, in August 1868, Davies was adamant that the students should follow the ordinary Cambridge course taken by male students, even though the existing Cambridge curriculum and examination system were acknowledged to be archaic and in need of change. Here she was uncompromising: curricular and examination reform could not be pioneered by women without devaluing both the women and the reform. She was, it is now clear, right; but she made some enemies and lost many potential supporters by insisting that women students should be subjected to the existing Cambridge curriculum and system of assessment. 
By July 1868 the executive committee had obtained promises of only $2000 and the prospect of a new building seemed distant. Later in that year Davies found a villa (Benslow House) to rent at Hitchin, Hertfordshire, and the first five students came into residence there in October 1869. Thus began Girton College, Emily Davies's most enduring memorial. 
While the first students were staying in the house at Hitchin, reliant on men coming from Cambridge to teach them, Emily Davies and her committee were concentrating on building the real college at Girton, a village outside Cambridge. A physical separation from the male students, and from the city of Cambridge itself, where there were still considerable numbers of prostitutes, was seen as essential to protect the respectability of the young women embarking on their university studies. An alternative institution for women in city premises, however, supported by Henry Sidgwick, opened with Miss Clough as its head in October 1871. It later became Newnham College. Despite her increasing isolation and her difficult position as an 'outsider' in Cambridge, Emily Davies persisted with her plans. The target to be raised for the proposed college was lowered to $10,000 of which $7200 was donated, the rest having to be borrowed. She obtained the services of Alfred Waterhouse, architect of the Manchester assize court, to draw up plans, and the now famous red-brick edifice rose from a muddy field in Girton. 
The new building opened in October 1873, though in a raw state with piles of sawdust and lit by candles; the first winters were bleak and cheerless. Emily Davies, who supervised the move from Hitchin, had in 1872 become resident mistress -- a post earlier held by her friends: Charlotte Manning (until 1870), Emily Shirreff (1870), Annie Crow (Mrs Austin), (1870-72), and, briefly, after Annie Crow fell ill, by Barbara Bodichon and Lady Stanley of Alderley. Emily Davies herself resigned as mistress in 1875, and was succeeded by Marianne Frances Bernard. Emily Davies resumed the secretaryship of the executive committee, but ill health forced her to resign in 1877. She continued as treasurer until 1882, and became honorary secretary from then until 1904. Adamantly opposed to the mistress joining the executive committee, Emily Davies often experienced uneasy relations with the younger women who were tutors or mistresses of Girton. With Louisa Lumsden, Constance Maynard, Elizabeth Welsh, and Constance Jones, all better educated than Emily herself, she had personality clashes, and disagreements over the rules and procedures that should govern the students' lives, the place of religion in the college, and spending priorities between research and further building. She continued to regard increasing the accommodation of the college, to give more women the opportunity of a university education, as having first claim on funds. Between 1875 and 1902 she pushed through an ambitious programme of expansion. 
Emily Davies remained committed to opening university degrees to women on the same terms as men. Her manifesto 'Women in the Universities of England and Scotland' (1896) condemned the attempts to create separate arrangements for women, together with women's continued exclusion from Oxford and Cambridge degrees. But she praised the civic universities in England, and the Scottish and Welsh universities, which granted degrees to women on the same terms as men. In 1901 the University of Glasgow conferred on her the honorary degree of LLD. Her collected essays with a preface by Constance Jones were published as 'Thoughts on some Questions Relating to Women' (1910). 
Emily Davies had been elected to public office as a member of the London school board, representing Greenwich, in the first election held under the 'Education Act' of 1870. She did not stand for re-election in 1873, concentrating instead on Girton. After giving up formal office at Girton in 1904, she returned to active suffrage work and became secretary in London of the National Society for Women's Suffrage, whose committee she joined in 1889. She led a suffrage deputation to Henry Campbell-Bannerman on 19 May 1906, but broke with the London society in 1912 when the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, to which it was affiliated, came out in support of the Labour Party. She then joined the Conservative and Unionist Women's Franchise Association and became one of its vice-presidents. 
In 1912 Girton celebrated the jubilee of Emily Davies's move from Gateshead to London, fearing that she would not live to see the college's own jubilee. In 1914 she moved to Hampstead, where she was a neighbour of her brother Llewelyn until his death in 1916. By then she had outlived most of her friends. The death in 1917 of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson left Emily Davies as the sole surviving member of the original Langham Place group; she was the only one still alive to cast a vote in the general election of December 1918, the first after women won the parliamentary franchise. She died at her home at 17 Glenmore Road, Belsize Park, London, on 13 July 1921, and was buried two days later at St Marylebone cemetery, East Finchley. 
During her lifetime Emily Davies was a controversial figure among both opponents of and enthusiasts for the higher education of women. Her uncompromising position on Girton (insisting on exactly the same curricula and examinations for women as for men, and very strict conformity to the conventions of ladylike dress and deportment) alienated many one-time supporters in her lifetime and led to her posthumous excoriation by twentieth-century eugenicists and Freudians such as Meyrick Booth and Arabella Kenealy. Her obsession with buildings rather than scholarship, and her uneasy relations with the tutors and mistresses of Girton, led early historians of the college to react against her. However, subsequent writers have taken a more sympathetic view of her adoption of an uncompromising position, her stubbornness, and her fiery rhetoric, and she has been presented as the heroine of a speculative popular biography. Late twentieth-century historians of Cambridge have similarly been rather more enthusiastic in their evaluations of Emily Davies's contribution to the modern university than were writers in the first half of the century. 
While Emily Davies's practical achievements are now recognized, her contribution to the history of ideas remains controversial. While some see her as essentially an activist and committee woman, others see her as an original thinker who combined radical ideas on gender with an inherent social conservatism. Central to this dispute is the question of beliefs and tactics. Davies's tactics were clearly to work with 'establishment' figures. Whether she shared their beliefs about society, or merely paid lip-service to them to achieve her feminist goals, must remain a point of contention. 


@@@@@


doc= 32742


Davies, William Henry (1871-1940), poet and writer, was born at his paternal grandfather's public house, Church House inn, Portland Street, Newport, Monmouthshire, on 3 July 1871, the younger son of Francis Boase Davies (1843-1874), an iron-moulder, and his wife, Mary Ann Evans ('b'. 1839/40). William Davies's father died when his son was three, and on his mother's swift remarriage he, his sister, and his mentally disabled brother were adopted by their grandparents. His grandfather, a native of Cornwall, had been master of a small schooner. Davies attended the Temple Street School and Alexandra Road School in Newport; he was an unruly schoolboy, but had a passion for reading. Later on, in 'Who's Who', he chose to describe himself as having 'picked up knowledge among tramps in America, on cattle boats, and in the common lodging-houses in England'. 
On leaving school Davies was apprenticed to a picture-frame maker, but having been left an allowance of 10's'. a week by his grandmother, at the age of twenty-two he obtained from his trustee an advance of $15 for passage-money to the USA, reaching New York with only a few dollars. He then began that career which he later described in his 'Autobiography of a Super-Tramp' (1908; many subsequent impressions): tramping thousands of miles in the United States in five or six years, most often begging, but sometimes working at fruit-picking; riding illicitly on freight trains; and making eight or nine trips to England as a cattle-man. He then returned home for a few months, in which time he spent half of his allowance, none of which he had touched since he had been in America, and which had accumulated to $120. He then decided to go to the gold-diggings in the Klondike; at Renfrew, Ontario, while attempting to board a moving train, he fell, and the wheel severed his right foot at the ankle. It was found necessary to amputate the leg at the knee, but he was well nursed and was able to return to Wales within five weeks. He soon moved to London, where he lived in common lodging houses on his allowance, less 2's'., which he sent back every week to Newport. After more than two years in London, which continued to be his base, he made several walking tours as a pedlar of laces, pins, and needles, sometimes varying this life by preaching on street corners. 
By 1905 Davies's poems had been rejected by several publishers, until he approached C. A. Watts & Co., with a letter of recommendation from George R. Sims. Recognizing the merit of the poems, they agreed to pay for the printing of 'The Soul's Destroyer, and other Poems', partly on the assurance that Davies would do his utmost to dispose of copies among likely purchasers. He sent them to various people, requesting each of them either to send him a half-crown or to return the book. Among the recipients was (George) Bernard Shaw, who became actively interested. At his suggestion Davies sent copies to Philip Edward Thomas, Israel Zangwill, Edward Garnett, St John Adcock, editor of 'The Bookman', and others. Favourable reviews appeared; Davies mentions with especial gratitude notices by Arthur Symons and Arnold Bennett. Edward Thomas, he says, 'gave me a fine boom in several influential papers... and became a practical friend, finding me a small cottage in the Weald of Kent [at Sevenoaks]... my rent, coal and light being paid mysteriously by Thomas and his friends'. In 'Who's Who' Davies stated briefly: 'became a poet at the age of thirty-four; been one ever since'. Between 1905 and 1939 he produced a score of slim volumes of verse: the 'Collected Poems' of 1943, with an introduction by Osbert Sitwell, contains 636 pieces. Following on the early reviews, one newspaper wrote up Davies's story. 
At Sevenoaks Davies wrote his 'Autobiography', which was published with a preface by Shaw at the suggestion of Garnett and Thomas. Shaw's wife, Charlotte, paid for the typesetting and the casting of the plates, of which she made a present to Davies. It was no doubt the preface that made Davies known to a large public, but Shaw states that it was for the sake of the poems that he wrote the preface to the 'Autobiography'. He had recognized at once that Davies was a poet: it was with some amusement that he wrote of the placid style of the prose book, in which tramps 'argue with the decorum of Socrates, and narrate in the style of Tacitus', and in which Davies's loss of a leg is mentioned with the utmost casualness. Davies also wrote four novels, two of which, 'The True Traveller' (1912) and 'The Adventures of Johnny Walker, Tramp' (1926), are semi-autobiographical, bridging the gap between the 'Autobiography' and 'Later Days' (1925). In 1924 he wrote an introduction to Defoe's 'Moll Flanders', which is generically related to his other novels. In 1923 he published 'True Travellers: a Tramp's Opera in Three Acts', in prose with interspersed lyrics. This was to be produced at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, where 'The Beggar's Opera' had been successfully revived, but the scheme fell through. Davies's other prose works are 'Beggars' (1909), 'Nature' (1914), and 'My Birds and my Garden' (1933). He selected and edited two anthologies, 'Shorter Lyrics of the Twentieth Century, 1900 to 1922' (1922) and 'Jewels of Song' (1930, reissued 1938). He was joint editor, with Austin Osman Spare, of a monthly magazine called 'Form' (October 1921 to January 1922), to which he contributed the editorials, each with incidental poems. 
In 1919 Davies was granted a civil-list pension, which was twice increased. In 1926 the University of Wales conferred on him the honorary degree of LittD. On 5 February 1923 he married Helen Matilda (died 1979), daughter of William Payne, farmer, who came from Sussex: his happiness with her is recorded and reflected in 'The Lover's Song-Book' (thirty poems, 1933), reprinted as 'Love Poems' (1935), with the number of poems increased to fifty. The story of his search, at the age of over fifty, among the poorer areas of London, for a suitable wife, and of his first meeting with Helen Payne, aged twenty-three and pregnant, at a bus stop, is told with engaging frankness in 'Young Emma', published in 1980, after his wife's death. This account was read with much admiration by Shaw in 1924; he wished to retain the manuscript a while longer for his wife to read, but he advised Davies's publisher, Cape, that to publish at that time would be damaging to the author's reputation. 'Young Emma' is also of particular interest to social historians of London after the First World War. 
Davies died, childless, at Nailsworth, Gloucestershire, on 26 September 1940. Since the publication of 'The Essential W. H. Davies' (1951), and 'The Complete Poems of W. H. Davies' (1963), his poetry has become the subject of several re-evaluations. Following D. H. Lawrence's early remark that Davies is 'like a linnet that's got just a wee little sweet song' ('DLitB', 19, 1983, 108), Davies's poetry has been compared with that of the Elizabethans, with Blake's 'Songs of Innocence', with the poetry of Robert Burns, and with Wordsworth's work. The publication in 1985 of 'W. H. Davies: Selected Poems' led to a further resurgence of interest, when a reviewer in the 'Times Literary Supplement' (25 January 1985, 79) described Davies as an 'undercover poet' with an 'instinct for conjuring disquietingness from the seemingly banal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32743


Davies, William John Abbott (1890-1967), rugby player, was born on 21 June 1890 in Pembroke, the eldest of the four children and the only son of William George Davies, a shopkeeper, of Pembroke, and his wife, Florence Meyrick. Davies, who was known by the nickname Dave, was educated at Pembroke Dock grammar school, the Royal Naval College, Keyham, and the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. He was a Pembroke dockyard apprentice in 1905 and went to Greenwich College in 1910. He proved himself to be a gifted athlete and games player at Greenwich, but he did not take up rugby football seriously until he was nearly twenty years old. As a boy, he played more soccer than rugby, and he was about to play a game of hockey when he was pressed into service to play a game of rugby instead. His playing career quickly developed with the United Services Club, Portsmouth, and, within three years, he was capped for England as a fly-half. 
Davies played a full international season for England in 1913, when he won five caps, before the outbreak of the First World War, in which he served in the Grand Fleet, first in the 'Iron Duke', and then in the 'Queen Elizabeth'. After the war he returned to Admiralty work in Portsmouth as assistant constructor and was appointed OBE in 1919. He resumed playing rugby football for the United Services Club, Portsmouth, and began his club and international half-back partnership with C. A. Kershaw. The two played together for England for four seasons after the First World War, and were so successful that England never lost a match when they were in the team. Indeed, when Davies retired from regular first-class rugby at the end of the 1922-3 season, he had never appeared in a losing England team in the international championship, even though he had won twenty-two caps over a period of eleven years spanning the war. England's only defeat in that time in a match in which Davies played was against South Africa in 1913. 
Wavell Wakefield of Kendal, one of England's greatest rugby forwards, who played half his distinguished international career in the same team as Davies, said of him: 'As 'Dave' was born in Wales, I am pretty sure he was qualified to play for Wales, even though I believe his parents came originally from the West Country. However, he chose to play for England instead, and that was a happy decision for us, because no international team can function properly without a sound partnership at half-back, and Kershaw and Davies were wonderfully effective.... 'Dave' was always immaculate. He was always calm, and always appeared to be in control of the situation. He never had a hair out of place, his boots shone, and his playing kit was impeccable. It was an enduring ambition of his opponents, particularly the forwards, to disturb that calm by dumping him unceremoniously on his backside in the mud, but I cannot remember that they ever succeeded! Some of Kershaw's passes were pretty erratic, but 'Dave' had such a fantastic pair of hands that he picked them up without any fuss. He was perfectly happy to do so, because the length of 'K's' pass enabled him to stand so far away from the forwards that he had great flexibility of operation. 'Dave' had the ability to wait for his chance, too, and by doing so, he often lulled the opposition into a false sense of security. He usually made only one break in each half, but when he did so, it was decisive. He and Kershaw were both in the Navy and they were firmly established as the best half-backs in England when I won my first cap in 1920. I have often thought since how much easier it made the game for the rest of us.' In 1923 Davies married Margaret Bleecker, daughter of Major Ernest Glanville Waymouth, of the Royal Artillery. They had a son and a daughter, both of whom became medical doctors. Davies's widow, who in 1979 was still living only 2 miles from the Rugby Football Union's ground at Twickenham, recalled that her husband used to practise with C. A. Kershaw almost every day when they were playing for the United Services at Portsmouth. 'What they did may have looked easy, but it was born of long and hard practice', she said. Davies captained the Royal Navy and Hampshire and he became an England selector for three years when he retired. In the year of his retirement (1923) he played in the centenary match at Rugby School, exactly 100 years after William Webb Ellis had supposedly first picked up the ball and run with it, 'thus originating the distinctive feature of the Rugby game'. This assertion is open to some doubt, but few would dispute that Davies was one of the best fly-halves who played for England. 
When his playing days were over, Davies continued his work at the Admiralty. He was attached to the staff of the commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet at Malta between 1935 and 1938, and in 1939 was appointed by the Admiralty as chief constructor. He was assistant director of warship production in 1942, superintendent of warship production on the Clyde in 1946, and director of merchant shipbuilding and repairs between 1949 and 1950. 
Davies was president of the civil service football club between 1937 and 1966. In 1951 he became a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights. He wrote two books on rugby football: 'Rugby Football' (1923) and 'How to Play Rugby Football' (1933). He died at home at 109 Cambridge Road, Teddington, Middlesex, on 26 April 1967. 
John Reason', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32744


Davies, Sir William Llewelyn (1887-1952), librarian, was born at Plas Gwyn schoolhouse, near Pwllheli, on 11 October 1887, the third child and younger son of William Davies and his wife, Jane Evans, both natives of Llanafan, Cardiganshire. His father, formerly the earl of Lisburne's gamekeeper, was then similarly employed at Broom Hall, near Pwllheli, but joined the staff of Sir Arthur Osmond Williams, of Castell Deudraeth, when his son was five years old. Davies was brought up at Minffordd, near Penrhyndeudraeth. He was educated at Porthmadog county school (1900-03), Penrhyndeudraeth pupil-teacher centre (1903-6), and the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where he graduated BA (1909) with upper second-class honours in Welsh and proceeded MA (1912) following research on a family of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Ardudwy poets. He held various teaching posts from 1909 until the beginning of 1917; during a period in Cardiff (1914-17) he also lectured part-time in Welsh at the university college there in 1916. Subsequently he served in the Royal Garrison Artillery, and later as a commissioned officer in the army education service. 
In September 1919 Davies was appointed first assistant librarian under John Ballinger at the young National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth. When Ballinger retired in 1930, Davies succeeded him as chief librarian, a position which he held until his death. He continued the work, so successfully begun, of building up in Wales a national library which would rank among the great libraries of the world. His experience as Ballinger's deputy, his interest in Welsh history and literature, and his ability to communicate in both Welsh and English served him in good stead. He proved to be an effective organizer and a conscientious worker. During his period as librarian Davies was able to complete the construction of the first library building. The first stage was opened in 1937 but he did not live to see the opening of the completed building in 1955. 
Davies was convinced from the outset that one of the library's most important functions was to collect and preserve the mass of manuscript and documentary material relating to Wales which was scattered (often in a state of neglect) throughout the principality and farther afield. His task was made easier by changing economic conditions, which brought about the disintegration of large estates and the vacating of old country houses. The list of individual owners, institutions, and official bodies who responded to his diplomatic persuasion to transfer their records to the library, either absolutely or on permanent loan, is a notable one. Of particular importance was the housing at the library of the Calvinistic Methodist archive (1934), a number of Baptist and Congregationalist records, and the Church in Wales records (1944-5). Of the approximately 3.5 million documents housed in the library when Davies died, all but 200,000 or so were acquired during his period of administration. Collection and preservation, however, were only the beginning: he also aimed to make the records available to researchers without undue delay. This was achieved by substituting handy, typewritten, brief-entry schedules and handlists for printed detailed calendars, and by the compilation of subject indexes: the printed 'Handlist of Manuscripts' began to appear in 1940. Equally anxious to persuade other authorities to preserve the records in their custody, he urged the various county councils of Wales to establish records committees and he gave to municipal, ecclesiastical, and other bodies and to individuals valuable advice and practical assistance. He kept the National Library of Wales in close touch with other institutions with similar aims through his membership of the Historical Manuscripts Commission, the Society of Antiquaries, the executive committee of the Council for the Preservation of Business Archives, and the British Records Association, of which he was a vice-president representing the interests of Wales. 
The preservation of records was only part of Davies's service to Welsh culture. He was also responsible for organizing the lending of books to adult study classes throughout Wales, for operating in eleven counties the regional libraries scheme for Wales and Monmouthshire, and for the selection, acquisition, and distribution of books for patients in the sanatoria of Wales. During the Second World War he established a national committee to provide Welsh books for those serving in the forces. During the war also he undertook the responsibility of housing some of the manuscripts and books of the British Museum in a specially constructed tunnel in the library grounds, as he described in an article in the 'Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion' in 1946. Davies missed no opportunity, through lectures, broadcast talks, and publications, of bringing his library into closer contact with the Welsh people. In 1937 he published 'The National Library of Wales: a Survey of its History, its Contents, and its Activities', and two years later he launched the 'National Library of Wales Journal', which he edited for fourteen years. He was also honorary editor of the journals of the Welsh Bibliographical Society (1932-49), the Cardiganshire Antiquarian Society (until 1951), and the Merioneth Historical and Record Society (1949-51). In addition he was associate editor (from 1947 until his death) of 'Y bywgraffiadur Cymreig', the Welsh biographical dictionary published in 1953 by the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion, to which he contributed some 200 entries on gentry families, antiquaries, and bibliophiles. A member of numerous academic and other cultural bodies, he was a leading spirit in every organization promoting the intellectual life of the principality. 
Most of Davies's published work relates to his work as librarian and he had little opportunity to follow his research interests. Parts of his MA dissertation appeared in the 'Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion' (1931) and an article on David Samwell (died 1799), an eighteenth-century poet, in the 'Transactions' for 1938. 
Davies had married in 1914 Gwen, daughter of Dewi Llewelyn, grocer and baker, of Pontypridd, and afterwards adopted the additional name of Llewelyn; the couple had one daughter. Davies was knighted in 1944 and received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Wales in 1951. In the year of his death he was high sheriff of Merioneth. He died at home at Sherborne House, Aberystwyth, on 11 November 1952, and his ashes were scattered in the grounds of the library following cremation at Pontypridd on 14 November. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32745


Davis, Charles Edward (1827-1902), architect and antiquary, was born on 29 August 1827 near Bath, the son of Edward Davis, architect, and his wife, Dorothy ('nee' Walker), the widow of Captain Johnston. His father practised in Bath, and had been a pupil of Sir John Soane. In 1833 he restored Prior Birde's Chapel in Bath Abbey church, and in 1834 he published a series of engravings entitled 'Gothic Ornaments, etc. of Prior Birde's Oratory', from drawings by Stephen Burchell. He also designed several houses, including Twerton House, near Bath (1838), and laid out the Victoria Park at Bath, which was opened in 1830. 
Charles Edward Davis began the study of architecture as his father's pupil. In 1858 he married Selina Anne, the eldest daughter of Captain Howarth. They had no children. In 1863, having won a competition for the cemetery buildings on the Lower Bristol Road, Davis was appointed city architect and surveyor to the corporation of Bath. He held these offices for nearly forty years. In 1863 he designed an escritoire, Bath's wedding gift to the princess of Wales, which was presented in 1869. 
Davis is particularly noted for his work on the mineral baths. In 1869 he started an exploration of the site of the hot springs of the old King's bath; he found extensive remains of Roman thermal work and later published 'The Excavations of the Roman Baths at Bath' (9th edn, 1887; first published in 'Transactions of the Bristol and Gloucestershire Archaeological Society', 8, 1883-4, 89-113). In 1877-8 he was successful in exposing the Roman well beneath the King's bath. In 1880-81 he discovered the Great bath and in 1884-6 the Circular bath, both Roman. 
With a view to collecting information on the nature and management of spas, in 1885 Davis made a tour of the chief continental springs. He applied the knowledge he gained to various improvements which were made at Bath, and he was also consulted by other English corporations who owned natural baths, such as those at Harrogate and Droitwich. He remodelled the spa baths at Woodhall, Lincolnshire, in 1887. 
The old Queen's bath, which had been constructed in 1597 and named after Anne, wife of James I, was removed in the course of the Roman discoveries of 1885. Davis's principal new design was for the new Queen's bath (1886-9). This work, and the incidental restoration, met with criticism on structural as well as archaeological grounds. Reports were made on behalf of the Society of Antiquaries by J. H. Middleton and W. H. St John Hope. An independent opinion was sought from Alfred Waterhouse, whose report, dated 14 January 1887, decided that the new works, though somewhat slender in construction, were not likely to be unstable and that on the whole Davis had struck the right balance between utility and antiquarian values. 
Besides his work for the corporation, Davis had an extensive private practice. He designed the church dedicated to St Peter and the schools at Twerton, restored several churches, including Northstoke, Somerset (1888), and St Thomas a Becket at Widcombe, Somerset, and was architect of the Imperial Hotel, Bath, which was opened in 1901. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1854, and published 'Mineral Baths of Bath: the Bath of Bathes Ayde in the Reign of Charles II' (1883) as well as several pamphlets on the same subject. 
The rank of major by which Davis was generally designated was due to his commission in the Worcestershire militia; he had also been a member of the Bath volunteer rifles. He died at his home, Dinmore, 18 Bathwick Hill, Bath, on 10 May 1902. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32746


Davis, Henry William Carless (1874-1928), historian, was born at Ebley, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, on 13 January 1874, the eldest of the five children -- three sons and two daughters -- of Henry Frederick Alexander Davis, solicitor, of Ebley, and his wife, Jessie Anna, third daughter of William Carless MD, of Stroud. He and his brothers and sisters were brought up in somewhat straitened circumstances by their mother, who was a woman of character and ability. She removed in 1884 to Weymouth, opened there a school for young children, including her own, and managed it so successfully that she was subsequently (1903) appointed first headmistress of Weymouth College preparatory school. Henry Davis entered Weymouth College in 1886, made his mark there as a boy of unusual capacity, and in 1891 proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, with a Brackenbury history scholarship. Except to his close friends, who admired his qualities, and to his tutors, who recognized his promise, he was not well known in college; but he came to the front when, after gaining first classes in classical moderations (1893) and 'literae humaniores' (1895) as well as the Jenkyns exhibition, he was elected in 1895 to a fellowship at All Souls College. 
Davis's interest in history had been awakened at school by the teaching of the Revd Thomas Brace Waitt; and at Oxford, under the guidance of Arthur Lionel Smith, of Balliol, he found in that subject his true bent. He therefore abandoned his intention of entering the civil service, and settled down to the career of a student and teacher of history and especially of medieval history. Save for a short spell of teaching at University College, Bangor (1896-7), he lived in All Souls from 1895 to 1902, where among his friends and contemporaries were Herbert Hensley Henson, afterwards bishop of Durham, John Simon, and C. Grant Robertson. In 1897 he won the Lothian prize. In the same year he was appointed to a lectureship at New College, and thus began his twenty years' experience as a college tutor at Oxford, in the course of which he built up a great reputation as a scholar and teacher of the most exacting standard. In 1899 he exchanged his post at New College for a lectureship at Balliol, and on the expiry of his All Souls fellowship in 1902 he was appointed an official fellow of his old college. 
Davis had already published 'Balliol College' (1899) in the series 'College Histories', 'Charlemagne' (1900), a life for the 'Heroes of the Nations' series, as well as articles, from 1901, in the 'English Historical Review'. But it was the appearance in 1905 of his book 'England under the Normans and Angevins' which revealed the full measure of his gifts as a historian and made his name. The book at once became a standard authority and by 1930 had reached a tenth edition; but it was the only substantial contribution to narrative medieval history which Davis made. He wrote in 1911 a masterly little summary, 'Medieval Europe', in the 'Home University Library' series, and many articles and reviews in historical journals, but after 1905 he devoted a great part of his literary energies to editorial work, preparing an edition of Jowett's translation of Aristotle's 'Politics' (1905), a revision of William Stubbs's 'Select Charters' (1913), and embarking upon a valuable, if ambitious, calendar of royal charters, 'Regesta regum Anglo-Normannorum' (vol. 1, 1913), which, as events proved, he was never able to complete, though it was later finished by others. 
Davis's influence as a teacher, however, was of greater moment than his reputation as a writer. Few Oxford tutors can have inspired in their pupils more genuine respect and regard. If his austere manner, steady gaze, and precise speech compelled attention and a touch of awe, closer acquaintance revealed behind the reserve a friendly soul, much quiet humour, and above all an unstinting devotion to his pupils' needs. He lacked entirely the infectious enthusiasm of a teacher like A. L. Smith, but he set an example of hard work and fine scholarship which won immediate response from almost everyone whom he taught. His lectures were very carefully prepared and delivered, and largely attended, but he made no effort to draw big audiences. With his writing and teaching he combined much examining and administrative work. He was junior dean of Balliol from 1906 to 1910, an examiner in the final school of modern history from 1907 to 1909 (and again 1919-21), and Chichele lecturer in foreign history in 1913; he served on the board of his faculty from 1905, on the general board of the faculties from 1913, and became a curator of the Bodleian Library in 1914. He was much interested in women's education and joined the council of Somerville College in 1908. 
Davis married in 1912 Jennie Rosa, only daughter of Walter Lindup, of Bampton Grange, Oxfordshire; three sons were born of the marriage, including Ralph Henry Carless Davis (1918-1991), medieval historian, and Godfrey Rupert Carless Davis, secretary to the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts. 
The First World War made a complete break in Davis's university activities and came near to deflecting the whole course of his career. After collaborating in the production of the series of 'Oxford Pamphlets' on the war, and publishing a dispassionate analysis, 'The Political Thought of Heinrich von Treitschke' (1914), he went to London early in 1915 and helped to organize the 'trade clearing house', a bureau of commercial intelligence arising out of the postal censorship, sponsored by the Admiralty and the Board of Trade. By the following summer the trade clearing house had expanded into the war trade intelligence department, forming a constituent part of the ministry of blockade under the ultimate control of the Foreign Office. Of this department Davis was the vice-chairman for three and a half years. Davis himself wrote subsequently an official, but unfinished, 'History of the Blockade' (1920), which describes in detail the elaborate departmental machinery which was devised to put the blockade of the enemy powers into execution. In his own department his organizing ability, power of rapid decision, and almost limitless capacity for work, backed by his fine personal qualities, were a source of inspiration to his colleagues, and attracted the notice of the cabinet. After the armistice he served on the large British delegation to the peace conference in Paris from December 1918 until March 1919, and then for a few weeks, at the invitation of Sir Arthur Steel-Maitland, undertook the duties of acting director of the department of overseas trade in London. He was made CBE in the new year honours of that year. 
An opportunity of high appointment in the public service was now presented to Davis, had his ambition lain in that direction; but he decided otherwise, and in April 1919 returned to Oxford, where for two years he resumed the routine of college and university work. It was at this time that he undertook the editorial direction of the 'Dictionary of National Biography', which had been conveyed in 1917 to the University of Oxford to be continued by the Clarendon Press ['see 'Smith, Reginald John]. Arrangements had to be made for the continuation of the dictionary from 1911, to which year it had been brought down by the previous editor, Sir Sidney Lee. The names to be included in the dictionary, and contributors of the biographical notices, were selected by Davis and his co-editor, J. R. H. Weaver, in consultation with an Oxford committee and a number of external advisers. Alike in his dealings with contributors and in his conscientious treatment of the material Davis was an exemplary editor. He had a deft and skilful touch, and although he worked with great rapidity he never spared himself the more laborious part of the routine. The volume for which he was responsible appeared in 1927, bringing the dictionary down to the end of the year 1921. He wrote a short preface and contributed several articles. The volume reduced by almost a half the number of entries for a decade, as compared with Lee's volume on the 1900s, and reflected the view of the delegates of Oxford University Press that Lee's plans for the twentieth-century coverage of the dictionary were too expensive. 
In 1921, shortly after he had embarked on the editorship of the dictionary, and in the midst of the heavy routine of Oxford teaching after the war, Davis accepted an invitation to occupy the chair of modern history at Manchester University. His health had suffered from the strain of his war work, and the new post promised him more leisure for his own studies. He settled at Bowdon, and spent there three and a half busy but quiet years. His studies now took a modern turn -- owing partly to the requirements of his professorship and partly to his interest in post-war political questions. When, therefore, he was elected Ford's lecturer at Oxford for 1924-5, he took as his subject 'The Age of Grey and Peel' (posthumously published in 1930). He gave the lectures in Hilary term 1925, and in the course of that term he was appointed to succeed Sir Charles Firth as regius professor of modern history at Oxford. He thereby became a fellow of Oriel College. In the same year he was elected an honorary fellow of Balliol College and a fellow of the British Academy. 
Davis returned to Oxford as regius professor in the summer of 1925. In addition to the duties of his chair he undertook much committee work, both for his new college and for the university. As a curator of the Bodleian Library he was called upon to take a prominent part in the discussions on the question of the extension of the library and to move in congregation, in May 1928, the official proposals for Bodleian extension in their earliest form (subsequently modified by the report of the Bodleian commission, and finally adopted by the university in 1931). Outside his university activities he was appointed in 1925 to serve on the unemployment insurance committee under the chairmanship of Lord Blanesburgh, and in 1927 he went to Geneva as British representative on a committee of experts charged by the International Labour Organization to investigate and report upon factory legislation in several European countries. These public services -- the aftermath of his wartime reputation -- made heavy demands on his time and energies during 1926 and 1927. 
Davis succeeded to the regius chair of modern history at Oxford at a time when changes in the syllabus were deemed desirable, but as it turned out he had not time to initiate reforms. His ideas on the needs of the school would probably have taken shape in accordance with the views expressed in his inaugural lecture, 'The Study of History', delivered in November 1925. For the moment his commitments were heavy enough. He was getting ready for press his Ford lectures, the 'Dictionary of National Biography, 1912-1921', and the 'Report' of the Blanesburgh committee, editing 'Essays in History Presented to Reginald Lane Poole' (1926), and preparing his Raleigh lecture for the British Academy, 'The Great Game in Asia' (delivered in November 1926) -- one of the liveliest of his writings. In the midst of such activities, while engaged in examining at Edinburgh University, he died of pneumonia, at 19 Great King Street, Edinburgh, after a few days' illness, on 28 June 1928. He was buried at Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford. 
Davis was a young-looking man, whose features and reddish hair changed little during middle age. His expression was rather grave, his manner reserved but modest, his gaze singularly penetrating, in spite of short sight, and his words ever to the point. His learning, never paraded, was very great in range and depth. But, as his career shows, he was not in the least the don or scholar of convention. People of the most diverse types found his qualities of mind and heart peculiarly attractive, and his circle of friends in Oxford and outside was very large. Few who met him failed to feel the impress of his high intelligence and unsullied character. His influence upon the Oxford of his time was very great; yet his comparatively early death seemed to many to have left his fullest powers unrevealed and his greatest work unaccomplished. 


@@@@@


doc= 32747


Davitt, Michael (1846-1906), Irish nationalist, was born in Straide, co. Mayo, on 25 March 1846, the second child of Martin Davitt and his wife, Catherine. Both parents were of peasant origins, but Davitt's father received a good early education and spoke English and Irish. The family survived the great famine of 1846-9, but emerged impoverished and in arrears of rent. They were evicted in 1850, Michael Davitt always claiming a 'remembrance' of the event. The family emigrated to Haslingden, east Lancashire, in November 1850, and Davitt was brought up in the closed world of the poor immigrant Irish community, with its strong nationalist values and, in his case, with a deep hatred of landlordism. After attending infant school Davitt began work in a mill at the age of nine, but lost his right arm in an accident on 8 May 1857, when he was ordered to tend a machine normally supervised by a seventeen-year-old boy. He then attended the local Wesleyan school, where he received a good education from a liberal-minded schoolmaster. In August 1861 he went to work again, this time as an errand boy with a local postmaster and printer, and later became a bookkeeper and typesetter. He attended evening classes at the mechanics' institute and came under the influence of Ernest Jones, the veteran Chartist leader, whose radical ideas included land nationalization, and the support of Irish independence. 
In 1865 Davitt joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), or 'Fenian' movement, which enjoyed strong support among working-class Irish immigrants. Davitt soon became a 'centre' of the Rossendale 'circle' of the IRB (a group of some ten to a hundred men, under the command of their 'centre'). He was involved in the abortive plot to seize Chester Castle to obtain weapons on 11 February 1867 as a prelude to a Fenian uprising in Ireland, but evaded the law. He helped organize a body of young men to defend Roman Catholic churches against protestant attacks in 1868 in the Haslingden area, and in the same year he became organizing secretary and arms agent for the IRB in England and Scotland, acting as a link between the 'centres' and the supreme council of the IRB. He used his job as a 'hawker' (travelling salesman) as a cover for his activities. He first came to the attention of the police in 1867, and was arrested at Paddington Station on 14 May 1870. At his trial for treason-felony a letter was cited to prove his complicity in planning murder, though in fact Davitt had written it to another member of the IRB to dissuade him from an assassination attempt on the life of a young member of the organization seen talking to a detective. Davitt was sentenced to fifteen years' penal servitude, feeling that he had received neither a fair trial nor the best effort from his defence lawyer. 
It was while in prison, in Millbank, Dartmoor, and Portsmouth, that Davitt revealed the tenacity of his character, and his ability to express his views even in the most trying circumstances. In August 1872 he managed to smuggle a letter out of prison criticizing the prison regime, which was published in several Irish and English newspapers, and which led to an inquiry by the home secretary into Davitt's allegations of harshness and cruelty. Upon his release in 1877 he prepared a pamphlet (published in 1878) which was the basis of his evidence before the royal commission on the working of penal servitude. Davitt always claimed that he had been victimized while serving his term, but he had frequently broken the rules, and was no worse treated than any other prisoner; as a self-recognized 'political' prisoner, Davitt's real source of grievance was that he was treated like any ordinary convict. Davitt was released in December 1877 as a 'ticket-of-leave' man, which authorized his freedom unless he should be convicted of some indictable offence in the United Kingdom, in which case the licence should be forfeited. 
Davitt immediately renewed his connections with the IRB. He and other released prisoners were given a hero's welcome on landing in Ireland. His life from now on was one of constant movement, within Ireland and between Ireland and Great Britain. His release was due to the efforts of the Home Rule Party in pressing for an amnesty for Irish nationalist prisoners, and Davitt made contact with the rising star of the home-rule movement, Charles Stewart Parnell. By this time the land question was assuming a new urgency, with Irish agriculture suffering a decline. It was a combination of the land question, Fenianism, and constitutionalism between 1878 and 1880 that created the politics of Parnellism, a unique blend of agrarian agitation and parliamentary leadership. 
In July 1878 Davitt went to the United States of America, where he met the leader of Irish American Fenianism, John Devoy. Here he called for an end to landlordism and for Irish independence, but his orthodox Fenianism was modified when he was attracted to the idea floated by Devoy of a compact with the home-rulers who supported Parnell against the more moderate leadership of Isaac Butt, since the 'end excused the means'. In December 1878 Davitt returned to Ireland, where rural distress was now becoming more acute, and tenants were organizing to defend themselves against high rents and evictions. The first tenant right meeting to develop a strategy, held at Irishtown, co. Mayo, on 20 April 1879, was the result of local initiative; a second meeting at Westport on 8 June was larger, and again locally inspired, but Davitt attended this meeting and called for Irish freedom and an end to the evil of landlordism, ridding Ireland of 'the land robbers who seized it'. Davitt's moment had come. He saw the need to channel the energies of the agitation into some more enduring organization, and in August 1879 he founded the Mayo Land League, with its slogan 'The land of Ireland belongs to the people of Ireland.' Davitt and his colleagues succeeded in persuading Parnell to take the initiative in converting the Mayo league into a national land league. The second 'new departure' combined constitutional and revolutionary agitation, but, unlike that of 1878, it was one that gathered widespread popular support. By now the government was seriously concerned about the revolutionary potential of the league, and Davitt was arrested in Sligo in November 1879. He had become convinced that Parnell must be supported; this cost Davitt his place on the supreme council of the IRB in May 1880, though he remained in its ranks for some years. 
Davitt turned to Parnell as the only constitutional politician who could help achieve his aims; privately, he still spoke of the need to arm and prepare for violent conflict. But his breach with Fenianism widened as he committed himself ever more closely to the 'new departure'. In May 1880 he went to America to organize the American Land League. Here he quarrelled with Fenians who declared that independence must come before land reform. In September 1880 Parnell called on tenants to 'shun' those who broke the Land League's instructions, and on his return to Ireland in November 1880 Davitt embarked on a hectic phase of activity, including a visit to Ulster in January 1881 to address protestant and Presbyterian farmers, warning all tenants not to accept Gladstone's land reforms (including the so-called 'three Fs': fair rent, free sale, and fixity of tenure). But his appeal to the farmers of Ulster was undermined by his nationalist rhetoric, and his references to the 'Irish race'. He was arrested in December 1880 but was released when the jury could not agree. Davitt described the jury as 'packed', even though the trial was manifestly fair and the judge showed him every consideration. 
In February 1881 Davitt proposed a rent strike to the league executive in Dublin, arguing long after the event that such a move would have led to a 'kind of civil war' but insisting that the end justified the means, since all 'modern Irish history' showed that 'the only way to obtain reform for Ireland was by insurrection' (Moody, 'Davitt', 458). Whether or not this was the case, the league in October 1881 accepted the rent strike, but declared that it was the 'one constitutional weapon' in its hands. Meanwhile Davitt on 3 February 1881 had his ticket-of-leave revoked, and he was sent to prison in Portland. While there, he was elected MP for County Meath, but disqualified. Davitt was by now developing his ideas on the land question. He had earlier taken an interest in the writings of Henry George, the American economic thinker, and while in prison in Portland he embraced the theory that land nationalization, not peasant proprietorship, was the key to Ireland's prosperity. By the time Davitt was released, in May 1882, Parnell was presiding over the demise of the Land League, and seeking to reach an accommodation with Gladstone. Davitt's supreme moment in Irish politics was now over. He went to America between June and July 1882, after which he produced a plan for a 'National Land and Industrial Union of Ireland', but Parnell opposed this. In September 1882 Davitt met Parnell at the latter's house, Avondale, where Davitt agreed to co-operate in Parnell's plan for a new national organization, and to set aside his plans for land nationalization. The Irish National League was under the official control of the Irish Parliamentary Party, and Davitt later described it as a 'parliamentary substitute' for a 'semi-revolutionary organisation'. When in 1890-91 the Parnell divorce case split the party, Davitt first only asked Parnell to retire from the leadership of the party for six months, but later denounced Parnell on the grounds that he had deceived his colleagues and was morally disgraced. In so doing, he revealed a rather unpleasant talent for personal invective, though he was much provoked by what he now saw as Parnell's attempt to arouse young men to revolution, and by Parnell's taunts over Davitt's inconsistency. 
Davitt's support of the Irish National League earned him a further, and final, spell in prison in 1883. In 1885 his health broke down, and he toured the Middle East and Italy. He now became a kind of post-revolutionary figure even though he was only in his forties. He lectured on humanitarian issues in Britain, America, New Zealand, and Australia. In December 1886 he married Mary ('b'. 1861), daughter of John Yore of St Joseph, Michigan; they had two sons and three daughters. In 1887 he visited Wales to support land agitation. In January 1891 at Cork he founded the 'Irish Democratic and Trade and Labour Federation', urging a common interest between the British and Irish working man. He founded and edited a journal, 'Labour World', from September 1890 until May 1891. He visited South Africa in 1900 and denounced British imperialism. In 1903 he investigated Russian antisemitism, and went to Russia again in 1904, when he conversed with Tolstoy at Yasnia. He was returned to parliament for North Meath in 1892, North East Cork in 1893, and Mayo in 1895-9, and welcomed Gladstone's second 'Home Rule Bill' as a 'pact of peace' between England and Ireland. He supported Indian nationalism. He made a brief return to agrarian radicalism in 1898, when the United Irish League was active in the west of Ireland, but he denounced the 1903 Wyndham settlement for land purchase. He strongly supported the British Labour Party in the general election of 1906, mainly because he believed it would deliver Irish self-government. He died at 19 Lower Mount Street, Dublin, of blood poisoning on 31 May 1906, and was buried at Straide, co. Mayo. His wife survived him. 
Davitt was at the height of his political influence in the years 1879-82. Thereafter his influence declined, but his version of the land war -- that it was a straight fight between landlord and peasant -- became the accepted account following the publication of his deeply influential 'The Fall of Feudalism in Ireland' (1904). He had the strengths and weaknesses of the revolutionary: he exploited the agrarian crisis of 1879-81, but expected too much from the farmers, whom he described in 1885 as responding to 'self-interest', not 'self-sacrifice'. Davitt was an ascetic man, accepting no tribute for his work other than a house, known as Land League Cottage, at Ballybrack, co. Dublin. He was handsome, brave, and proud, but betrayed a lack of self-confidence and an impatience with those who disagreed with him. Like the old Fenian he was, he harboured suspicions of clerical influence, but, although for a time he ceased to be a communicant, he was an orthodox Roman Catholic, and was never a 'Godless revolutionary' on the continental model. 


@@@@@


doc= 32748


Dawber, Sir (Edward) Guy (1861-1938), architect, was born at King's Lynn, Norfolk, on 3 August 1861, the younger son of John Stockdale Dawber of King's Lynn and his wife, Lois Ellen Edwards. He was educated at King's Lynn grammar school, and was then articled for four years to William Adams, an architect practising in that town. He subsequently moved to Dublin, where he became an assistant in the office of Thomas Deane. There Dawber spent his spare time measuring and sketching the fine Georgian buildings of the city. He had been there only a year when political troubles caused an interruption in building, and so he moved to London to join the office of Ernest George. George had a reputation as a designer of imposing mansions in the country and picturesque houses in the West End of London; and his office was noted as a nursery of genius. In his evenings, at this period, Dawber attended the Royal Academy Schools. In 1887, however, overwork strained his eyes, and George sent him to be clerk of works on a great house at Batsford in Gloucestershire. This apparent interruption to his career proved, in fact, to be his opportunity; for he applied himself with his usual zest to an intensive study of the beautiful but then little-known architecture of the Cotswolds. Soon he decided to begin practice on his own account there, and for his office hired a room in the village institute at Bourton on the Hill, at a rent of 9died a week. Small commissions began to come to him at once, and in 1891 he opened an office in London. From that date up to the time of his death a steady stream of attractive designs, especially (although not exclusively) for country houses, flowed from his versatile and painstaking pencil. A complete list of them is given in the 'Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects' for 9 May 1938; typical examples include Nether Swell Manor, Burdocks, and Eyford Park in Gloucestershire, Hamptworth Lodge in Wiltshire, and the Foord almshouses at Rochester. 
Honours came freely to Dawber in later life. He was elected ARA in 1927 and RA in 1935; he served as president of the Royal Institute of British Architects between 1925 and 1927, having been elected an associate in 1889 and a fellow in 1903; and he was awarded the royal gold medal for architecture in 1928. He was knighted in 1936. He took a prominent part in establishing in 1926 the Council for the Preservation of Rural England, of which he became vice-president and chairman. A friendly, genial man, looking more like a country squire than an artist, he seemed to typify in his person the spirit of rural England which he understood so well; and his charming country houses and gardens invariably melted into their natural surroundings. 
Apart from his consummate skill in the English tradition and his sensitive handling of all the building crafts, Dawber was a talented painter in watercolour, whose sketches showed a luminous quality far removed from prosaic architectural drawing. He contributed notes and sketches to two books illustrating 'Old Cottages and Farm-Houses in Kent and Sussex' (1900) and 'Old Cottages, Farm-Houses, and other Stone Buildings in the Cotswold District' (1905). 
In 1896 Dawber married Mary, daughter of Alexander Eccles, of Roby, near Liverpool, who survived him. They had no children. He died at home at 64 Hamilton Terrace, London, on 24 April 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 32749


Dawkins, Richard MacGillivray (1871-1955), scholar of classical and modern Greek, was born on 24 October 1871 at Surbiton, Surrey, the eldest child of Richard Dawkins (1828-1896), a captain in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Mary Louisa (died 1897), the daughter of Simon McGillivray (or MacGillivray) and granddaughter of Sir John Easthope. In 1878 his father retired with the rank of rear-admiral and made his home at Stoke Gabriel near Totnes. Dawkins received his schooling at Totnes grammar school (1881-4) and Marlborough College (1884-90). He was an awkward, ungainly, and short-sighted boy with a dislike for all forms of organized games which he retained throughout his life: his schooldays were unhappy, nor did he achieve any distinction in the classroom. He did, however, acquire a taste for botany which enriched his later life. From school he went to King's College, London, to train as an electrical engineer. In 1892, before completing his course, he became apprenticed to Cromptons, a firm of electrical engineers, at Chelmsford. He did not find engineering congenial and these years in lonely lodgings were not happy. As the result of a temporary interest in theosophy, he characteristically determined to teach himself Sanskrit; he continued to read Greek and Latin classics, learned a good deal of Italian and some German, and even started upon Icelandic, Irish, and Finnish. 
After the death of his father in 1896 and that of his mother in the following year, a small legacy enabled Dawkins to forsake the engineering profession and enter Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1898 at the age of twenty-six. He was a self-taught scholar without the customary grooming in Latin and Greek, but he was fortunate to find himself in the hands of Peter Giles and James Adam. In 1899 the college gave him a scholarship, in 1901 he was placed in the third division of the first class of part one of the classical tripos, in 1902 he obtained a first class with distinction in part two, and an honourable mention in the examination for the Chancellor's medals, and a Craven studentship. In 1904 he became a fellow (and in 1922 an honorary fellow) of Emmanuel College. 
Dawkins had first been admitted to the British School at Athens in 1902, during which time he held a Craven studentship. He toured the Greek islands including Karpathos, pursuing his philological interest and in particular the study of Greek dialects. For two years he was in charge of Robert Carr Bosanquet's excavations in eastern Crete at Palaikastro (1904-5). In 1906 he was appointed director of the British School, and was responsible for four seasons of excavations at Sparta, work initiated by his predecessor Bosanquet just before his resignation. This work set a new standard in methods of excavation for Greece, but the outbreak of war delayed publication; 'Artemis Orthia', published by the Hellenic Society, did not appear until 1929. Dawkins, who had hoped to initiate a major excavation at Knidos on the Turkish mainland, conducted a further stratigraphic excavation at Phylakopi on Melos in 1911, a site previously explored by the British School. Further fieldwork was carried out on Crete which included excavation at the Kamares cave (1913). His other achievement from this time at Athens was the book 'Modern Greek in Asia Minor' (1916), a study of the curious dialects of Greek spoken by the inhabitants of the Cappadocian plateau, mainly researched in three journeys in 1909, 1910, and 1911. 
In 1914 Dawkins resigned the directorship of the British School at Athens; a very substantial legacy from his mother's cousin, J. A. Doyle, who died in 1907, had given him financial independence. The inheritance included a Victorian house, Plas Dulas in Denbighshire, which may have been the inspiration for Llanabba in Evelyn Waugh's 'Decline and Fall' (1928); an Oxford rumour suggested that Dawkins had additionally inherited a pack of foxhounds. The outbreak of war saw him at Trebizond. Dawkins returned to Wales and in the early months of the war he noted in a letter to one of the fellows at Emmanuel that he was drilling with what he termed 'the local volunteer corps of old gentlemen'. After six months in censorship at the British legation in Athens, he served from 1916 to 1919 as an intelligence officer, with the rank of temporary lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, in eastern Crete, an area well known to him from his days at Palaikastro. His commission was delayed as he insisted on retaining his moustache. In a letter to P. W. Wood, one of the fellows at Emmanuel, Dawkins wrote of how he suffered from seasickness, and how one night in a storm he had been thrown from his hammock onto the deck; but he added, 'I must not grumble'. 
In 1920 Dawkins was appointed to the Bywater and Sotheby chair of Byzantine and modern Greek in the University of Oxford and in 1922 Exeter College made him a fellow. Before he was elected to a fellowship he was greatly supported by John Myres, who as a Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve officer had delivered Dawkins to Crete from Athens. His major work during his tenure of the chair was a translation with commentary of the medieval Cypriot 'Chronicle of Makhairas' (2 vols., 1932) which records the history of the Lusignan dynasty between 1359 and 1432. In 1939 when he retired under the age limit Exeter College made him an honorary fellow with rooms in college. To the end of his life he kept his zest and interest in young people and he was to generations of Oxford undergraduates a source of real education. He was to act as the senior member of the Hypocrites' Club in Oxford during the 1920s. Osbert Lancaster records, in his lively account of Dawkins in 'With an Eye to the Future' (1967), the incident when cackling laughter drew attention to Dawkins perched in a chestnut tree within Exeter College. Except for music, for which he had no ear, his tastes were catholic: he knew about plants, pictures, and European literature. 
As a critic, whether of books or men, Dawkins was positive and to the end of his long life, though always intolerant of humbug, enviably receptive to new ideas. He had a wide linguistic knowledge and could talk French, Italian, and modern Greek as rapidly as natives. He knew most parts of the Mediterranean including north Africa and had an unrivalled knowledge at first hand of the Greek-speaking peoples from Pontus in the east to Calabria in the west. In this last period of his life he turned his attention to the subject matter of folk-tales which he had earlier taken down as texts for philological purposes, regularly publishing in 'Folklore'. In 1926 he was to become a founder member, with J. R. R. Tolkien, of Kolbitar. In 1950 he published 'Forty-Five Stories from the Dodekanese' from manuscripts which had been presented by W. H. D. Rouse to the University of Cambridge. This was followed by 'Modern Greek Folktales' (1953) and 'More Greek Folktales' (1955), the importance of which was due to the examination of the relative popularity of and the changes undergone by types of Indo-European folk-tales in a definite and exceptionally well-recorded area. In 1947 he broke his thigh, which as it failed to heal required him to walk with an iron brace and sticks, but this did not diminish his incessant industry. Articles and reviews continued to pour out from his somewhat erratic typewriter and his rooms remained a focus of hospitality for promising young men and congenial seniors. Himself an original, he liked originals. His taste in men as in books was catholic. By no means all his friends were academical and his range of acquaintance extended from Norman Douglas, of whom in 1933 he published a perceptive study, to the egregious Baron Corvo (Frederick William Rolfe). Dawkins fell down dead in Parks Road, Oxford, on 4 May 1955 on a visit to Wadham garden. He never married. He was elected FBA in 1933, proceeded DLitt at Oxford in 1942, and was an honorary DPhil of the universities of Athens (1937) and Salonika (1951). A pencil drawing of Dawkins was made by Henry Lamb, whose sister Dorothy had excavated with Dawkins at Phylakopi in 1911. Dawkins himself is recorded as saying of the image, 'The mouth's all wrong. It's the mouth of a liar and a boaster' (Bowra, 252). 


@@@@@


doc= 32750


Dawkins, Sir William Boyd (1837-1929), geologist and palaeontologist, was born on 26 December 1837 at the vicarage, Buttington, near Welshpool, the only son of the Revd Richard Dawkins and his wife, Mary Ann Youngman. He was educated at Rossall School, an Anglican public school near Fleetwood, and then went up to Jesus College, Oxford, in 1854. It was there that his career as a geologist began, with a first-class degree in natural sciences (1860) and the encouragement of the professor of geology, John Phillips. As an undergraduate he met J. R. Green (later a distinguished historian) and a mutual interest in history led to a pact: Green would deal with the history of Britain in the written record, while Dawkins resolved to explore the prehistory as revealed by geology and archaeology. 
At that time there was widespread interest in human prehistory and particularly in the survival of human implements and other remains. As an undergraduate Dawkins turned his attention to cave research. In 1859 he began the excavation of a hyena den at Wookey Hole, near Wells, Somerset, which launched him into a lifetime's interest in extinct mammalia and also a lifelong link with that county. In 1861 he became the first recipient of the Burdett-Coutts scholarship, then recently founded at Oxford to promote the study of geology. Between 1861 and 1869 he was a member of the Geological Survey of Great Britain and became a junior colleague of T. H. Huxley at the Royal School of Mines in Jermyn Street, London. For eight years he mapped parts of the Wealden and other formations in Kent and the Thames valley, which furthered his interest in mammalian remains in the river gravels. This led to the publication of numerous memoirs and papers, exploring subjects as diverse as the dentition of the woolly rhinoceros and the origins of the cave lion, and to his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1867. 
In 1866 Dawkins married Frances Evans (died 1921), the daughter of a clerk to the Admiralty. Three years later Huxley's recommendation took Dawkins to Manchester, where he was to spend the rest of his working life. His first appointment was as curator of natural history at the old Manchester Museum in Peter Street. Founded in 1821, the museum housed both natural history and geological specimens, which by Dawkins's day had fallen into desuetude and were neglected by students and the public alike. Dawkins began cataloguing and sorting the collections, and also lectured in geology at Owens College. In 1872 he became the first lecturer in geology at Owens, when the subject was split from the natural history department of William C. Williamson. He was appointed professor in October 1874 (occupying the chair until his retirement in 1908), though he continued as an adviser to Manchester Museum -- which by then had become part of the university -- and did what he could to develop its collections and publicize its work with his lectures. 
Dawkins's reputation for his work on natural history was still growing, particularly for his researches on English fossil mammals and early man. Between 1875 and 1878, for example, he made further excavations in caves in the Creswell crags, near Worksop, on the border of Derbyshire. He also travelled widely to the continent, Australia, and America. Besides his lecturing and prolific output of papers, he wrote two books, 'Cave Hunting' (1874), and 'Early Man in Britain and his Place in the Tertiary Period' (1880). The first was a pioneering attempt to correlate within a single volume the growing mass of material which had been unearthed in numerous European countries; the second was intended as a companion to Green's 'A Short History of the English People' (1874). Dawkins also collaborated with W. Ayshford Sandford on 'British Pleistocene Mammalia', which was issued in several parts by the Palaeontographical Society between 1866 and 1872. 
To his contemporaries Dawkins was an appealing mixture of Victorian man of letters and cave-hunter, a man who was perhaps: 'at his best in the open air at some such place as Arbor Low which, with vivid imagination, he could people with the black-haired, long-headed men of prehistoric times whose every-day life was an open book to him. ('Transactions of the Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Society', 46, 1929, 141-3)' However his personal papers show that after the 1870s -- to the evident dismay of many of his more traditional colleagues -- he was increasingly drawn to 'applied' (or engineering) geology. In 1882 he became adviser to one of the pioneering attempts to bore a channel tunnel. That scheme proved abortive, but led to his involvement with the Kent coalfield, which was discovered (through his guidance) in 1890. In the early 1880s he was also a consultant on the Humber Tunnel project. He advised on water supply at Hull, Dover, Eastbourne, Brighton, Worthing, Croydon, and other places and after 1877 also paid particular attention to the water supply from chalk in London by providing consultancy to various private and parliamentary bodies. Apparently, on questions of water supply 'he was more often engaged as an expert witness in the Law Courts than any other geologist of his day' ('Manchester Guardian', 16 Jan 1929). His work also encompassed environmental damage and in 1892 he supported efforts to obtain compensation for those who suffered the effects of subsidence due to brine pumping in the Northwich salt district. Abroad he consulted for diamond mining firms in South Africa, oil shale prospectors in Australia, and Italian Carrara marble quarries. 
Dawkins's industrial geology reached a peak between 1890 and 1910. His work was an important bridge between academe and industry in Manchester, where after the 1870s a number of academics -- for example, Sir Henry Roscoe in chemistry and Sir Arthur Schuster in physics -- were busy transforming Owens College into an advanced training and industrial research centre that owed much to the German model. Dawkins used the expertise he gained as a consultant to inform his teaching at the university and at Manchester Museum, where he widened the subject matter and gave it a practical bent. As museum curator he organized free public lectures on Saturday and Sunday afternoons. At the university, as professor of geology, palaeontology, and mining, he was attuned to the opportunities and commitments that stemmed from a location close to the northern coalfields, the salt deposits of Cheshire, the lead mines of Derbyshire, and the iron and copper mines of north Lancashire and Cumberland. In 1905 he instituted teaching classes for mining students and also appointed an assistant lecturer, so that he himself would have more time for the practical side of geology. 
Dawkins was a man of great energy, who even at the age of ninety-one insisted on travelling to London to propose a toast at a Geological Society dinner. He also had a taste -- some have said weakness -- for the limelight of archaeological discovery. A great publicist, he had a number of acrimonious arguments that led to much press reporting. His industrial geology, especially the discovery of the Kent coalfield, brought him to even greater prominence. Among the honours that inevitably followed were the Lyell medal (1889) and the Prestwich medal (1918) awarded by the Geological Society of London, and a knighthood, conferred on him in 1919. He lived in some style (his income doubtless boosted by his engineering consultancy) first in Fallowfield, Manchester, and then at Richmond Lodge in Bowdon, Cheshire, surrounded by books and his collections of antique furniture and 'cloisonne' enamels (which he later donated to Manchester City Art Gallery). Dawkins's first wife died in 1921 and the following year he married Mary, 'nee' Poole, the widow of Hubert Congreve. 
He died at Richmond Lodge on 15 January 1929, survived by his daughter, Ella (died 1969), and by his second wife. His remains were cremated at Manchester crematorium. He bequeathed his books and many of his papers to the town of Buxton, which later established a Boyd Dawkins room at its museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 32751


Dawson, Bertrand Edward, Viscount Dawson of Penn (1864-1945), physician, was born at Duppas Hill, Croydon, on 9 March 1864, the fourth son and fifth child of Henry Dawson, architect, and his wife, Frances Emily, daughter of Obadiah Wheeler. He was educated at St Paul's School and University College, London: he lived at University Hall when Henry Morley was principal. In 1884 he entered the London Hospital as a medical student; he graduated BSc in 1888 and qualified in 1890, becoming MRCS in the same year. He became MD and MRCP in 1893, and FRCP in 1903. 
Dawson earned his living through hospital appointments and as a lecturer, and in 1896, when he became assistant physician at the London Hospital, he launched himself as a private consultant. He had consulting rooms in Harley Street, and from 1903 in Wimpole Street until the building was bombed in 1940. As was customary at the time, his interests ranged widely. His textbook chapters dealt with diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, influenza, rheumatoid arthritis, and the physical examination of the stomach and intestines. 'The Lancet' later described his contribution to clinical medicine as 'respectable rather than remarkable' ('Lancet', 353). Remembering these years of struggle, with few opportunities for research, in later life he took an active part in the foundation of a postgraduate medical school at London University (pressing that it should be sited at Kenwood, in Hampstead). On 18 December 1900 Dawson married Minnie Ethel Yarrow (1879-1972), daughter of Alfred Fernandez Yarrow, shipbuilder and also a principal patron of the London Hospital; they had three daughters. Dawson became full physician at the London Hospital in 1906 and was appointed physician-extraordinary to King Edward VII, a post which he retained with King George V until 1914, when he became physician-in-ordinary. In 1911 he was appointed KCVO. 
After the outbreak of the First World War, Dawson, who had become commandant of the 2nd London General Hospital in the Territorial Army in 1908, went to France as consulting physician with the acting rank of major-general. He attended the king after he had suffered a serious fall from his horse on a visit to the front in France in 1915, and remained in the country until 1919. Although his time was largely occupied with hospital organization, Dawson used his experiences of war to write on paratyphoid, trench fever, infective gastroenteritis, and influenza; he also organized an official investigation into cases of jaundice in the trenches, which proved to be the newly described Weil's disease. Nor was Dawson oblivious of the manifestations of battle stress in the troops, and he set up four base camps in France at Wimereux, Etaples, Rouen, and Etretat, which were specially concerned with studying and treating 'soldiers' heart'. 'The years in France convinced Dawson that while the 'diseases of invasion' were receding before the advance of medical knowledge the 'diseases of stress' would multiply with the quickening pace of life' ('DNB'). 
As in the case of recruits for the South African War, the First World War also revealed that the British standard of fitness was low. Dawson saw that it was going to become the duty of the medical profession as much to promote national health as to cure sickness in the individual. In particular, whatever the difficulties, the 1911 'Insurance Act' had to be linked with a universal health service. In July 1918 Dawson developed his ideas in two Cavendish lectures entitled 'The nation's welfare: the future of the medical profession', given before the West London Medico-Chirurgical Society. Their audiences may have been small, but the influence of the lectures was immense. Widely publicized in both 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal', they were reprinted as a pamphlet (to which Dawson added the term 'health centre', used for the first time). As a result he was drawn into the government consultations concerning the formation of a ministry of health, and in 1919 he was made chairman of the consultative council on medical and allied services set up by Christopher Addison, the first minister of health. 
This council was the first body in Britain to focus public opinion on systematized health services. Its report (the 'Dawson Report'), published in 1920, foreshadowed by many years a national health service, the recommendations being repeated in the Beveridge report of 1942, the government white paper of 1944, and the National Health Service legislation of 1946. Possibly adopting the terminology from education (provided by Sir Arthur Morant, the first permanent secretary of the Ministry of Health), the report proposed a health service based on primary and secondary health centres (corresponding respectively to subsequent general-practitioner health centres and district general hospitals), with teaching hospitals at their head. Crucially, Morant died of influenza in 1920, financial retrenchment was in the air, and the report received a lukewarm official reception. Dawson was opposed to a compulsory full-time salaried service, and during the 1920s he became increasingly antagonistic towards a state medical service 'which he identified with the threat posed by communism' (Webster, 210). From advocating state collectivism in the provision of medical care he now promoted co-operation between existing agencies (ibid., 221). 
In 1920 Dawson was created a baron, taking the title of Lord Dawson of Penn, of Buckinghamshire. In 1936 he became Viscount Dawson. He was the first medical man to enter the Lords as an active member of the profession. As its virtual spokesman he championed the special functions of the teaching hospitals, and in 1936 he opposed the 'Voluntary Euthanasia (Legalization) Bill' in a characteristic speech: 'We do not lay down edicts for these things. It is a gradual growth of thought and feeling that entwines itself into the texture of our thoughts.... This is something which belongs to the wisdom and conscience of the medical profession and not to the realm of law. ('DNB')' A man of profound religious conviction, he supported the reform of the prayer book. Dawson was disturbed by what he perceived as a decline in Christian belief and teaching, and saw this reform as a means of reconciling old ideas with new. In 1937 he supported the 'Matrimonial Causes Bill' and a year later was mainly responsible for the 'Infanticide Bill'. 
Dawson also continued his private practice and hospital teaching, and his work as examiner for the London Hospital and Royal College of Physicians. In these years he held many hospital appointments; he served (from 1929) on the advisory committee to the Ministry of Health, the council of the King Edward's Hospital Fund, and the Medical Research Council; and he became chairman of the army medical advisory board. From 1928 to 1930 he was president of the Royal Society of Medicine and in 1932 he was elected president of the British Medical Association (BMA) for its centenary year. From 1931 to 1938 he was president of the Royal College of Physicians, and widened its reputation by encouraging active participation by its junior fellows and the election of doctors who were members of the salaried government service rather than clinicians. 
Dawson was a freethinker and liberal (so much so that the king had queried his elevation to the Lords), and though he sat on the Liberal benches in the Lords he was not constrained by party opinions. As an undergraduate he had been influenced by Charles Bradlaugh and T. H. Huxley, and he showed an interest in social and political problems that was to persist for the rest of his life; he wrote an early Malthusian pamphlet. He championed sanatoria and spas for preventive health, through the National Fitness Council, and he chose the church congress to promote his advanced views on birth control, which included criticism of the Lambeth conference. At the end of his life he was proselytizing for the formation of an academy of medicine which would represent all its diverse strands (as did his proposal for a national health service and its reliance on health centres); this scheme was many decades ahead of its time. 
By the Second World War, Dawson had lost his earlier radicalism and was against significant state intervention in medicine. A member of the medical planning commission (MPC) set up in 1940 by the BMA to consider health service for the nation, Dawson argued that it was essential that voluntary hospitals should be saved and suggested a dual system whereby voluntary and municipal hospitals existed under the aegis of a central hospitals board. However, when he read the MPC draft interim report of 1942 he saw it as too favourable to socialized medicine and urged instead 'the inevitability of gradualness' (Webster, 223). Given his increasing conservatism it was not surprising that he was re-elected president of the BMA in September 1943 following the death of Sir Beckwith Whitehouse, who had himself been 'an uncompromising defender of tradition' (Webster, 225). Dawson was by this time approaching the end of his life and had little involvement in the negotiations between the government and medical profession over the establishment of a national health service. By now, in fact, he had come to see health centres as a step on the road to a full-time salaried service and had thus 'drifted into condemning the institutions of which he was the virtual founder' (Webster, 226). 
Much of Dawson's public prominence came from his care of the royal family. Dawson had been called into consultation during the last illness of Edward VII (though he did not sign the authorized account published in 'The Lancet'), but his main responsibility was for the health of George V. In 1929 George V suffered a near fatal illness, developing from a streptococcal infection of the chest into a large abscess. As the king lay seemingly dying, on 12 December, Dawson's syringe found the abscess and he drew off 16 ounces of fluid. Some medical colleagues were nevertheless indignant that Dawson had failed to consult the thoracic specialist Arthur Tudor Edwards in the matter. This was not the only time when Dawson's treatment of his royal patients had angered colleagues. After a dispute over the care of one of the royal children, Lord Moynihan composed the jingle: '
Lord Dawson of Penn 

Has killed lots of men 

So that's why we sing 

God Save the King. 
(Rose, 358)' The king, however, respected Dawson and liked his direct approach. Dawson was by no means unaided when dealing with royal illnesses: during the crisis of 1929 eleven doctors stood round the royal bed. In 1936 Dawson was in continual attendance during the king's final illness. It was Dawson who composed on a menu card the celebrated lines, 'the King's life is moving peacefully towards its close', having modified this from what he described as 'a very commonplace' final bulletin used for Edward VII. Dawson's private Sandringham notebook also shows that he indeed ensured a peaceful conclusion to King George's life; to this end, during the death agony, he injected three-quarters of a grain of morphine and one grain of cocaine into a distended jugular vein. 
Like many other famous men, Dawson was a paradox. No more than an ordinary clinician, he yet had far more influence on health care and delivery than many others, though his ideas were rediscovered and developed only many years later. He was a less than consummate politician, but his enthusiasm and commitment were sufficient to persuade people about important issues beyond the delivery of health care, such as contraception. Much of his success in these matters was due to his charm and his capacity to inspire trust in such people as Archbishop Lang and Lloyd George, with whom he visited Hitler at Berchtesgaden in 1936. He also appeared to have time for everybody (he was notoriously unpunctual). Dawson received many honours and appointments: CB (1916), GCVO (1917), KCMG (1919), and KCB (1926); honorary degrees from McGill University and the universities of Pennsylvania, Oxford, Edinburgh, Bristol, Padua, Athens; and honorary fellowships of the American College of Surgeons and the Royal College of Surgeons, London. Dawson died of bronchopneumonia at 2 Weymouth Street, London, on 7 March 1945, and his peerage became extinct. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32752


Dawson, (George) Geoffrey (1874-1944), newspaper editor, was born at Skipton in Craven, Yorkshire, on 25 October 1874, the eldest child of George Robinson (died 1907), banker, and his wife, Mary (1847-1903), daughter of William Mosley Perfect. In 1917 he assumed by royal licence the name and arms of Dawson via his mother's eldest sister, Margaret Jane Dawson, the family being descended from a long line of landowners from Langcliffe Hall, Settle. 
In 1887 Geoffrey Robinson went to Eton College as a king's scholar, and he found his years there an enjoyable experience (in later life he was to serve as a fellow of the college). He went on to Magdalen College, Oxford, as a demy in 1893, obtaining firsts in classical moderations (1895) and 'literae humaniores' (1897). He was later (1926) made an honorary fellow of Magdalen, and the university awarded him an honorary DCL in 1934. In 1898 he entered the civil service by open examination. His first position was in the Post Office, but after only a year he was transferred to the Colonial Office, under Joseph Chamberlain as colonial secretary. In 1898 Robinson was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, an honour which he shared with his lifelong friend Edward Wood, Lord Halifax. 
When the South African War broke out in 1899, Robinson had only a junior position in the South African department of the Colonial Office, but this happy coincidence affected the whole of his future career. In 1901 he was promoted assistant private secretary to Chamberlain, and later in that same year he obtained the same position with the high commissioner for South Africa, the imperialist Alfred Milner. Following the British conquest of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, the high commissioner became the administrator (later governor) of the two former republics with his headquarters in Johannesburg. There, in a red-brick villa in the suburbs, Robinson was a faithful member of Milner's famous 'kindergarten', whose number also included Robert Brand, Lionel Curtis, Patrick Duncan, Richard Feetham, Lionel Hichens, and later Philip Kerr ['see also 'Milner's Kindergarten]. The same brotherhood, inspired by Milner's devotion to the British empire, set up the publication 'Round Table' in England. 
When Milner went back to Britain, he left several of the kindergarten behind in key posts, at a time when South Africa was recovering from years of bitter struggle. In 1905 Robinson left the civil service on being appointed, largely through Milner's influence, editor of the 'Johannesburg Star', and he held the editorship until 1910, during the period of office of William Waldegrave Palmer, second earl of Selborne, Milner's successor as high commissioner. From 1906 onwards he was also the South Africa correspondent of 'The Times', which gave him a platform for a journalistic career in London. For the moment, however, Robinson remained in Johannesburg, a supporter of conciliation with the Boers and the process which culminated in the foundation of the Union of South Africa under Louis Botha in 1910. 
In 1911 Robinson returned to London and became a full-time staff member of 'The Times' under its owner, the press magnate Lord Northcliffe. In August 1912, aged only thirty-seven, Robinson was appointed editor on the retirement of George Earle Buckle. At the outset of his editorship, Robinson seems to have 'routinely acquiesced in Northcliffe's views and prejudices' (Koss, 207), though Buckle urged him to stand up to Northcliffe. Others thought that Robinson wrote too many editorials and took too much upon himself. But differences between them emerged with the passage of time: Northcliffe, for example, was far more critical of the government about the Dardanelles fiasco in 1915-16 than was Robinson. 
Robinson's successor, Henry Wickham Steed, later suggested that Robinson was too much under the influence of his mentor Milner. Although Steed may have overstated this influence, Robinson was a member of the Milnerite 'ginger group', along with Lloyd George, Milner himself, Leo Amery, and Edward Carson, which plotted Asquith's downfall; Robinson's leader of 4 December 1916 was one instance of the important role which 'The Times' played in securing Asquith's removal as prime minister in 1916. 
During 1918-19 tensions between Dawson (as he had now become) and Northcliffe became acute (he had already offered to resign once), as the owner of the paper became more bombastic and intemperate. Dawson's departure in February 1919 was inevitable, although it seems to have owed as much to Northcliffe's frustrations with the politicians of the day as to any deficiencies in editorship. Somewhat unreasonably, Northcliffe blamed Dawson for the government's alleged flabbiness. Before his departure, Dawson had the opportunity to observe the post-war peace negotiations in Paris with defeated Germany. 'All the world is here', Dawson wrote; 'It's like a gigantic cinema-show of eminent persons' (Dawson, letter of 18 Jan 1919, Dawson papers). But he had found Northcliffe's 'irresponsible Hun-baiting' (Lentin, 152) intolerable, and resigned his post. Already the seeds of Dawson's incarnation as an arch-appeaser had been sown. 
As so often in Dawson's life, All Souls College provided a refuge and an encouragement, and on giving up the editor's chair he became estates bursar to the college. On 14 June 1919 he married Margaret Cecilia Lawley, the younger daughter of Sir Arthur Lawley, later sixth Baron Wenlock, who had been lieutenant-governor of the Transvaal from 1902 to 1906. They had one son and two daughters. The South African link was also renewed, as Dawson took up a directorship in the Consolidated Gold Fields of South Africa Company. He was, in addition, secretary to the Rhodes Trust from 1921 to 1922, and became a trustee in 1925. The interest in journalism was maintained by a temporary editorship of the 'Round Table', preserving the links with his Milnerite past. 
Northcliffe, whose political machinations had been largely futile, died in August 1922, and this created the opportunity for Dawson to return to 'The Times' as editor for a second time in January 1923. The new owners, John Jacob Astor and John Walter, were not interventionists in the Northcliffe mould, and Dawson's second term as editor lasted for nineteen years. A contemporary journalist found him at the peak of his power in the office of 'The Times' to be 'urbane and friendly' (Grant Duff, 66). For most of this period, too, he was a pivotal figure in British politics, so that in 'the 1930s it can be said that Dawson was privy to more Cabinet thinking and secrets than most members of the government, whether the Prime Minister was MacDonald, Baldwin, or Chamberlain' (Cockett, 12). During the internal crisis over King Edward VIII's abdication in December 1936, Dawson's opposition to the royal position was crucial, as the other newspapers looked to 'The Times' for a lead. Dawson had been concerned before the crisis burst that the contents of the American and foreign press 'have been percolating more and more in this country' (Jones, 289). 
Dawson's closest relationship was with Lord Halifax, whose Eton, Oxford, and high Anglican antecedents he shared. Chamberlain shared his outlook on Anglo-German relations, but Dawson's influence over Stanley Baldwin may not have been as great as has sometimes been suggested. In 1936 Dawson supported Ribbentrop's proposal (via Thomas Jones) for Baldwin and Hitler to meet, though not in Berlin, but 'in Brussels or on the sea' (Jones, 220). No such meeting ever took place, which supports the more recent view that Baldwin kept his own counsel if advisers like Dawson 'were too unsympathetic to his own opinions, or intruded on sensitive questions' (Williamson, 72). 
In reality, Dawson knew little about European affairs, and this weakness was exacerbated by his failure to appoint a foreign editor to succeed Harold Williams at 'The Times' on the latter's death in 1928. His 'life moved between Printing House Square, Eton, All Souls and the moorland estate he inherited from an aunt in 1917' (Cowling, 128). He was on safer ground with domestic issues, although he could be condescending about Labour politicians like MacDonald and Thomas. He was a friend of leading Conservatives such as William Ormsby-Gore, Samuel Hoare, Thomas Inskip, and Anthony Eden as well of the Astors. A regular visitor to Cliveden, he could be counted upon to share Nancy Astor's pro-appeasement, pro-Chamberlain leanings ['see 'Cliveden set]. 
Dawson was a mainstream Conservative. He was suspicious of the Labour Party, but believed that 'The Times's' policy of fair play for the government of the day should be maintained when Labour came to power in 1924 and again in 1929, and was an important influence in convincing Baldwin and MacDonald to go to the country as a national coalition in 1931, following the formation of the National Government. He supported MacDonald and Wedgwood Benn over reform in India, and in the early 1930s gave strong backing to Baldwin, Hoare, and Lord Irwin (Halifax) in the internal struggle within the Conservative Party over Indian reform, having toured there and written a series of articles in 'The Times' advocating the policy which led to the 'Government of India Act' (1935). Briefly in the later 1930s he seemed to be trying to revive the peace movement of the early thirties in concert with his friend Lord Lothian (the former Philip Kerr), the former member of Milner's kindergarten. But he was unenthusiastic about the League of Nations. Sometimes he could be daring, as when advocating Churchill's inclusion in the 1924 Conservative government, even if 'he was astounded at the use to which he was put' (Middlemas and Barnes, 283) at the exchequer. Yet he rightly saw that Baldwin was the key figure in Conservative politics then, as he was to be in the National Government after 1931. He wrote in a magisterial tone, saying that Baldwin's contribution to the cohesion of the National Government 'was a matter which history will assess and which perhaps only Mr MacDonald can yet appreciate' ('The Times', 7 June 1935). 
It would be wrong also to see Dawson as merely a conduit for government opinions. During Italy's invasion of Ethiopia in the Abyssinian crisis of 1935-6, which brought about the resignation of Dawson's friend Samuel Hoare as foreign secretary, 'The Times' was critical. It published many letters attacking government policy, and Dawson 'sketched out a leader trying to show the Government the strength of public feeling' (Wrench, 326). The leader duly appeared on 16 December 1935 under the unflattering heading 'A corridor for camels', a devastating critique of the government's attempt to hand over part of Ethiopia to Mussolini in collaboration with the French. Dawson saw no particular need to appease Mussolini, and 'as a Milnerite imperialist, he was suspicious of any attempt to upset the status quo in Africa' (Waley, 57). In this he differed from Chamberlain, who always favoured accommodation with the Italian dictator. 
Dawson's views on appeasing Germany, although supported by his long-standing deputy Barrington-Ward, caused divisions in the office of 'The Times'. The paper's in-house historian, Stanley Morison, later claimed that Dawson had censored the reports of the Berlin correspondent of 'The Times', Norman Ebbutt, though this account was disputed by G. L. Pearson, Dawson's chief foreign sub-editor (and an opponent of appeasement), and others. Ultimately, Ebbutt was expelled from Germany in the summer of 1937, despite Dawson's attempt not to upset Nazi susceptibilities. For an anti-appeaser like Churchill's friend Robert Boothby, Dawson then became 'the Secretary General of the Establishment, the fervent advocate of Appeasement' (Rhodes James, 175). Dawson's position has been variously explained: an ignorance of Europe and of European history; too close a rapport with particular politicians; an empirical outlook lacking in principle (Rowse, 115). It is arguable, however, that his support for the Munich agreement stemmed primarily from his imperial concerns; he believed that war with Germany over Czechoslovakia in the autumn of 1938 'would have been misunderstood and resented from end to end of the Empire' (Dawson to Neville Chamberlain, 8 Nov 1940, Dawson papers, 81, fol. 48). 
In the later phase of his second editorship, Dawson's leadership of 'The Times' underwent a dramatic transformation. Previously stigmatized as a proponent of appeasement, Dawson advocated an energetic war policy and criticized Chamberlain's stewardship in the 'phoney war'. The noted military correspondent B. H. Liddell-Hart was forced to leave 'The Times' in October 1939 because of his defeatism. The damage had been done, however, and 'The Times' suffered a considerable loss of prestige because of its earlier associations with appeasement. His health failing, Dawson resigned from his post as editor on 30 September 1941. His last years were spent in retirement in north Yorkshire until his death at one of his homes, 24 Lowndes Street, London, on 7 November 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 32753


Dawson, George Mercer (1849-1901), geologist and anthropologist, was born in Pictou, Nova Scotia, on 1 August 1849, the son of Sir John William Dawson (1820-1899), geologist, and Margaret Ann Young Mercer ('b'. 1829/30). His father became principal of McGill College in 1855, and the young Dawson attended Montreal high school in 1858. Tuberculosis of the spine (Pott's disease), which left him with some permanent physical disabilities, then confined his schooling to home. Nevertheless, from 1868 to 1869 Dawson studied at McGill, and in 1870 published a paper on the geographical distribution of foraminifers he had dredged for at Gaspe. 
In 1869 Dawson travelled to England and enrolled at the Royal School of Mines, Kensington, where the intensive scientific training included fieldwork with the Geological Survey. Although his father remained notoriously anti-Darwinian, Dawson's studies with Thomas Huxley encouraged a modern evolutionary approach. Graduating with distinction and awards in 1872, he returned to Canada, where he taught at Morrin College, Quebec, before joining the international boundary survey from Lake of the Woods to British Columbia in 1874. 
Dawson's 'Report' (1875) established him as a brilliant field geologist, and guided future railway building and settlement in western Canada. He illuminated metamorphic and glacial influences upon Pleistocene structures; turned attention to Cretaceous formations, fossiliferous and younger than the Precambrian Shield of central Canada; added hundreds of specimens to the Kew and British Museum collections; mapped Tertiary lignites as crucial fuel sources; and documented locust invasions. 
Dawson reaffirmed his remarkable ability to observe and extrapolate over vast expanses of complex terrain when he joined the geological survey of Canada (GSC) in 1875. Through arduous initial explorations in British Columbia and the Red, Assiniboine, Souris, Skeena, and Peace River regions, he related the British Cretaceous to the American Laramie formations. He also linked metamorphism in Canada to volcanic activity elsewhere. While retaining the older hypothesis that drifting icebergs best explained western Canada's surficial geology, Dawson gradually admitted evidence of continental ice sheets, especially in British Columbia. To significant theoretical accomplishments he added invaluable inventories of natural resources in these lands. 
In British Columbia, Dawson also conducted important anthropological groundwork. He advocated education and even assimilation of indigenous peoples to prevent their outright extinction. A visit to the Queen Charlotte Islands in 1878 reinforced Dawson's appreciation of Haida culture as highly evolved. The shocking contrast of their diminishing population prompted rich ethnological appendices to his geological report (1879), with warnings that Haida concepts of property demanded government consideration. Further pioneering researches in ethnology brought appointments by the British Association for the Advancement of Science, to direct studies of north-western tribes in 1884 and to chair an ethnological survey of Canada in 1897. 
Dawson also discovered fossil evidence of dinosaurs near Lake of the Woods in 1874, and subsequently along Red Deer River (Alberta). As his anthropological collections called for a national repository that became the Canadian Museum of Civilization, his palaeontological collections grew into the department of vertebrate palaeontology of the National Museum of Natural Sciences. Meanwhile, his geological fieldwork proceeded apace along the Bow and Belly rivers, and into the Rocky and Selkirk mountain ranges. His enthusiasm for exploitation of Albertan coal inspired both entrepreneurs and the House of Commons standing committee on immigration and colonization. Numerous authoritative publications included a cumulative geological map (1887); a study of the mineral wealth of British Columbia (1889), encouraging lode mining in the cordilleras; and an eloquent plea for continued exploration and mapping in Canada (1890). 
In 1887 Dawson led a survey into the Yukon territory, long rumoured to harbour placer gold deposits. When glacial patterns supported these hopes, he delineated access routes and a location for the disputed Alaska boundary. Dawson's report sold out two editions, and was widely believed to have heralded the gold rush in the Klondike, which his survey had not actually reached. Dawson City was accordingly named for him in 1898. 
Dawson's remarkable field achievements multiplied his administrative responsibilities. He became an assistant director of the GSC in 1883, then acting director while A. R. C. Selwyn travelled abroad in 1885-6. Honours included fellowship in the Royal Society of London and the Geological Society of London's Bigsby medal in 1891; appointment as CMG for aiding Britain in the Bering Sea dispute in 1892; several honorary doctorates; the associate editorship of the 'Journal of Geology' (Chicago); and the presidency of the Royal Society of Canada in 1893. He succeeded Selwyn as director of the GSC in 1895. 
Dawson's accession fulfilled a long-time ambition. While the GSC's morale and public image required refurbishing, he also hoped to emphasize detailed mapping. The election of Wilfrid Laurier's Liberal government in 1896 and the Klondike gold rush instead intensified public expectations of mineral resources. Like Selwyn, Dawson heeded both scientific and economic calls, suffering criticism for failing to increase funding while his own honours continued to pour in. In 1897 he presided over the geological section of the BAAS in Toronto, led a transcontinental geological excursion by rail, and won the Royal Geographical Society's gold medal. In 1898 he became vice-president of the Canadian Institute of Mining, and in 1900 president of the Geological Society of America. 
Allegedly a chain-smoker, Dawson succumbed to bronchitis, dying at Victoria Chambers, Ottawa, on 2 March 1901, shocking many who took his awesome accomplishments for granted; he was buried in Montreal. Although the GSC's internal rivalries and structural difficulties remained unresolved, he had raised the institution to new scientific heights. Eloquent tributes fitted the indefatigable explorer whose work laid the foundation for immense wealth and economic expansion in Canada's new century. 


@@@@@


doc= 32754


Dawson, John (1827-1903), racehorse trainer, was born at Stamford Hall, Gullane, East Lothian, on 16 December 1827. He was a younger son in the family of seventeen children of George Dawson (died 1846), who had previously trained horses at Bogside, in Ayrshire, and his wife, Jean Alison. Three brothers who survived infancy, Thomas (died 1880), Joseph (died 1880), and Matthew Dawson, also became successful trainers. All were brought up about their father's training stable at Gullane. Thomas, the eldest, left Gullane in 1830, and settled at Middleham, in Yorkshire, where he trained for Lord Eglinton. In 1838 he was joined by his brother Matthew as head lad, and later Joseph and John also served there. 
In 1855 Dawson married Grant Peddie, and two years later he left Middleham and bought Roden House, at Compton, Berkshire, a village which adjoins Ilsley where his brother Joseph trained. In 1861 he moved to Warren House, Newmarket, where he lived for the remainder of his life. Shortly after settling at Newmarket he was appointed private trainer to Prince Batthyany, although others were invited by the prince to keep horses there. When Prince Batthyany died in 1883 his executors sold his horses and John Dawson thus missed the chance to train the outstanding St Simon, that opportunity instead going to his brother Matthew, who trained for the purchaser of the horse, the duke of Portland. 
Dawson died at his home on 13 May 1903 and was interred in Newmarket cemetery. He had given up training in 1900 with four classic wins to his credit. His son George took over the Warren House stables. Another son, John Alfred Dawson, was a trainer at Newmarket. A daughter, Helen Rose, married the jockey Fred Archer in 1883 but died in childbirth the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 32755


Dawtry, Frank Dalmeny (1902-1968), probation service organizer, was born on 17 January 1902 at 54 Cromwell Street, Walkley, Sheffield, the son of Wycliffe Bright Dawtry, cabinet-maker, and his wife, Alice Jackson Ross. His father was a Unitarian and keen Liberal, who had been apprenticed as a pattern maker by his father, a renowned foundry foreman, when the use of cast iron was at its height. The youngest and most delicate of four brothers, Dawtry won a scholarship to the Sheffield central secondary school, but left at fifteen owing to a breakdown in health. After a period as office boy and later junior clerk in a Sheffield steelworks, he was thrown out of work for almost two years after the trade recession of 1921. This early experience of unemployment made him familiar with the problems faced by the less fortunate members of the community and at this time he became a member of the Independent Labour Party. 
In 1923 chance led him to the field of work to which he was to devote his energies for the next forty years. He was appointed clerk bookkeeper to the Sheffield Council of Social Service and within four years became secretary of its personal services committee. At the same time, after a brief apprenticeship with the Wakefield Discharged Prisoners' Aid Society, he was appointed secretary and thus began his close co-operation with the Probation Service. On 19 October 1931 at Port Erin, Isle of Man, Dawtry married Dora Anna, a schoolteacher, whose father, James Robinson Corrin, a local builder and a member of the House of Keys, was appointed MBE on 29 October 1957, the same day as Dawtry, who was advanced to OBE in 1967. They had no children. 
Dawtry worked hard to co-ordinate the work of the other local discharged prisoners' aid societies and during this time made weekly visits to both Leeds and Wakefield prisons, where he organized discharge committees and was responsible for the welfare of the prisoners. On the foundation of the National Association of Discharged Prisoners' Aid Societies in 1937 Dawtry was the first to be appointed resident Discharged Prisoners' Aid Society secretary and welfare officer at HM Prison, Wakefield. Additionally he was involved with the first local open prison and the training centre for prison staff. He found a ready acceptance from both prisoners and staff at Wakefield and spent much time visiting and helping prisoners' families. He also travelled extensively, lecturing about prisoners and their needs and enlisting financial support for what was still a voluntary society. 
Revised methods of training prisoners were developed, and when the new system was extended to Maidstone prison in 1944 Dawtry was appointed organizer there. However, two years later, feeling that the continued existence of capital punishment in Britain could not be reconciled with his view of the good society, Dawtry resigned and became secretary of the National Council for the Abolition of the Death Penalty. Almost at once he initiated a misleadingly successful campaign, for no sooner had the death penalty been suspended for a trial period than public pressure caused the question to be reconsidered, and it had to be reimposed by the home secretary. However, the number of executions was substantially reduced until the eventual abolition of the death penalty in 1965. 
In 1948 Dawtry became general secretary to the National Association of Probation Officers, for which cause he worked untiringly until his retirement in January 1967. He commenced long overdue negotiations on the pay and conditions of service of probation officers. Largely because of his personal influence and his wise and dedicated efforts, the voice of the service was increasingly heard in matters of policy relating to its duties and the prevention and treatment of delinquency. During those years of almost constant change in the scope and nature of its functions, he focused and expressed the view of the service in a way which enabled it to contribute increasingly, from its wealth of practical experience, to the many legislative and other decisions which led to the creation of the modern probation and aftercare service. 
For many years, and up to the time of his death, he was on the executive of the Howard League for Penal Reform and an active member of the Institute for the Study and Treatment of Delinquency. He was a founder member of the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders, was equally involved with the National Association for Mental Health, and was on the council of the National Citizens' Advice Bureaux. He was a convinced pacifist and founded the Sheffield No More War movement, serving as secretary until it amalgamated with the Peace Pledge Union, of whose council he was a member. He was also a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts as well as belonging to many other bodies which reflected his concern for peace, justice, and beauty. In May 1963 the University of Leeds conferred on him the degree of master of arts, 'honoris causa'. 
After his death at his home, 2 Limes Road, Weybridge, on 5 October 1968, a Frank Dawtry memorial was established whereby a public seminar on a subject in the field of the treatment of offenders, the prevention of crime, and the administration of justice is held regularly in the University of Leeds. 
His warmth of personality and love of people, particularly the underdog and the victim of inequality in society, were translated into a life of service without thought of personal reward. To care was to do. He fully understood the importance of political action in furthering the causes for which he was concerned, and had a close association with the House of Commons, where the lord chancellor honoured him with a retirement dinner to express the appreciation of his parliamentary and civil service friends. 
He had an intense love of cricket, and for forty years was a keen member of Yorkshire County Cricket Club. His slight figure was familiar and respected on the international scene as well as at the smallest probation branch conference, where his lively mind and imagination were alert to the impact and potential of new ideas. Modest and dedicated, with a keen sense of humour, he was a visionary who translated his visions into achievements, not only for the Probation Service but in the whole field of penology. 
Kenneth Thompson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32756


Day, Sir John Charles Frederic Sigismund (1826-1908), judge, was born at The Hague on 20 June 1826, the eldest son of Captain John Day (1779-1843), a half-pay officer, of Englishbatch, near Bath, and his Dutch wife, Emilie (1789/90-1836), daughter of Jan Caspar Hartsinck. His Roman Catholic parents sent him to school first at St Mary's College, Oscott, then in 1841 to Downside Priory, where he gained his BA from London University in 1845. He also spent time at Freiburg and learned four foreign languages. Admitted to the Middle Temple on 29 October 1845, he was called on 26 January 1849 but, having independent means, did not immediately commence a career at the bar. However, having suffered financial losses and with a growing family to support from his marriage on 1 October 1846 to Henrietta Rosa Mary Brown (1824-1893), a banker's daughter, he began to practise, going the home circuit. 
Day's fee earnings grew steadily, from $200 in 1855 to $2000 in 1866, and he increased his income and reputation by his writings. He co-authored an edition of Roscoe's 'Nisi prius' and in 1861 brought out an annotated edition of the 'Common Law Procedure Act' of 1852, which became the standard work on a statute of great importance to practitioners. He exploited his lugubrious and highly expressive countenance to great effect with juries and was a masterly cross-examiner whose favoured tactic was to rely wholly on destroying the other side's case and not to call his own evidence at all. Known as Settling Day for his tendency to compromise suits, he did not take silk until 1872 but immediately came to the forefront as the fashionable counsel for breach of promise actions and election petitions; he also became standing counsel to the London Omnibus Company. Pupils, including the future lord chancellor Robert Finlay, testified to his excellence as a pupil master. A bencher of his inn from 1873, he was treasurer in 1896. However, though he had a big and varied practice, he was less effective 'in banco' (full court sittings) than at 'nisi prius' (where a single judge presided), and seldom appeared before the House of Lords or privy council. Day continued to go on circuit, where his dry wit made him highly popular. He deplored the decay of circuit life and traditions in the railway age and set his own example in upholding them by frequently travelling on horseback between the circuit towns. 
Having earlier turned down an offer to go as chief justice to Queensland, Day was made a judge of the Queen's Bench Division on 3 June 1882 and was knighted on 29 June. He was not a great success, for though by no means deficient in learning, he had no deep interest in the law and was indifferent to his reputation among lawyers and public. In civil cases, although speedy and usually correct, he annoyed litigants by often seeming uninterested and occasionally slumbering; in revenue cases in particular his attitude bordered on open contempt for the whole proceedings. 
Day had evidently 'decided he would do most good by devoting his main energies to enforcing the moral law' (Day, 117) and now became Judgment Day, the readiness with which he resorted to the severest punishments earning him a fearsome reputation. He took great pains over his sentencing. One of the first judges routinely to provide himself with a full record of the criminal's previous convictions, he acquired first-hand knowledge of conditions in Liverpool by walking the worst streets at night with only his marshal and a single detective. He was a great believer in the efficacy of the lash -- he was said to have ordered 3766 lashes on 137 criminals -- and his especially fierce retribution for offences of violence made him popular in the northern cities; Liverpool was particularly grateful for his stern handling of the High Rip and Logwood gangs in 1887. However, his severity shocked many lawyers and occasionally outraged public sensibilities, as when he gave penal servitude for life to a seventeen-year-old. It was said that he, Phillimore, and Wills 'judged men by their own high standard of righteousness' (Rowlands, 100) and it was felt that 'where sexual immorality was concerned he knew no compassion, and seemed lost to all sense of proportion' ('DNB'). It was known at the bar, however, that some of his heaviest sentences were pronounced for their deterrent effect and were reduced in private immediately afterwards. 
Although he eschewed politics, Day became involved in political controversies because, as one of very few Roman Catholics on the English bench, he was a natural choice for inquiries into Irish affairs. In 1886 he chaired a commission on the recurrent Belfast riots, and though his refusal to allow cross-examination of witnesses brought him into sharp conflict with the leaders of the Irish bar, the general tenor of his report was sufficiently favourable to the Roman Catholics for Lord Salisbury's administration to assume that he would be acceptable to them to investigate (alongside Hannen and A. L. Smith) the charges levelled against Parnell and other Irish nationalist leaders in the pamphlet 'Parnellism and Crime'. But the other parties had not been consulted and Day's appointment was bitterly assailed by the nationalists, who cited disparaging remarks about the Irish he had apparently uttered years before on assize. John Morley for the Liberals joined in, quoting a private letter from Judge Adams, one of the Belfast commissioners, which described Day as 'a man of the 17th century in his views, a catholic as strong as Torquemada, a tory of the old high-flier and non-juror type'. Ministers vigorously defended their choice. Throughout the protracted proceedings of the commission Day maintained an almost unbroken silence and an air of profound boredom. He was credited with insisting on early proof of the authenticity of the damning letters attributed to Parnell, the exposure of which as forgeries provided the great sensation of the hearings, but he offered Hannen only half a page of notes towards the report. 
Though Day's deadpan witticisms from the bench were relished by lawyers, his eccentric aversion to counsel's moustaches (he continued to affect the full side whiskers fashionable in his early manhood) and increasing deafness were not. He eventually resigned on 2 November 1901 and though sworn of the privy council he never sat on the judicial committee. His first wife had died on 26 March 1893 and on 19 May 1900 he married Edith, daughter of Edmund Westby, who survived him until at least 1921. He retired to Falkland Lodge, near Newbury, where he died on 13 June 1908. He was buried in the Kensal Green Roman Catholic cemetery. Two of his six sons became Jesuit priests and two others entered the law, one of whom became a master of the Supreme Court. His fourth son, Joseph Mary Day, was a mechanical engineer. One of his three daughters became a nun. 
Though his Catholicism was devout and uncompromisingly traditional, Day consorted comfortably with men whose religion and politics differed widely from his. His closest friend was William Willis, a Baptist and radical who as a county court judge was as renowned for his leniency to debtors as Day was for his severity to offenders. Willis was his most frequent companion on the holidays where Day indulged his liking for long walks at a great pace. He was also a fine swimmer and enjoyed yachting. 
From an early age Day collected art and displayed a discriminating, if rather narrow, taste. He was among the first to recognize the merits of the Barbizon school and, braving his wife's disapproval, which sometimes led him to smuggle his purchases into the house, he amassed an impressive collection which included a dozen works by Corot and three by Millet. It realized more than $100,000 when it was sold after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 32757


Day, Lewis Foreman (1845-1910), decorative artist and industrial designer, was born at Peckham Rye, Surrey, on 29 January 1845, the son of Samuel Hulme Day, wine merchant in the City of London, of an old Quaker family of Essex, which claimed descent from John Day (1521/2-1584), the Elizabethan printer. His mother was Mary Ann Lewis. After attending a school in France, he entered Merchant Taylors' School in January 1858, and on leaving continued his education in Germany for eighteen months. After a short time as a clerk he went, at the age of twenty, into the works of Lavers and Barraud, glass painters and designers. Day then moved to the workshops of Clayton and Bell, makers of stained glass, where he remained for two years; his principal work being to design the cartoons. In 1870 he worked for Heaton, Butler and Bayne on the decoration of Eaton Hall, Cheshire, and in the same year he started his own business in London. In 1873 he married Ruth Emma Morrish with whom he had a daughter, Ruth. 
Day took from his early training a special interest in stained glass design, gradually acquiring a wider reputation as a designer for textiles, pottery, carpets, wallpapers, silver, and many other branches of manufacture. His designs were always carefully adapted to the material in which they were to be carried out, and to the processes of manufacture which had to be employed. He belonged to the same school of artist-craftsmen as William Morris and Walter Crane, and his influence on contemporary ornament, if not so fully recognized as that of those two artists, was considerable. An important educator in design, many of the best-known designers of his day were taught by him and benefited from his belief in natural forms of ornament and high standards of craftsmanship. 
Day was one of the first promoters of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society and a founder in 1882 of the Fifteen, a group of artists interested in the role of design in daily life, and of the Art-Workers' Guild, of which he was at one time master. He was also seen as a 'forerunner, of a still transitional character' (N. Pevsner, 'Pioneers of Modern Design', 1936, repr. 1991, 26), of the modern movement: Pevsner noted Day's remark that ''whether we like it or no, machinery and steam power and electricity for all we know, will have something to say concerning the ornament of the future'' (ibid.). A course of Cantor lectures at the Royal Society of Arts in 1886, 'Ornamental design', was followed by the publication of many important volumes on ornament and decoration, including 'Anatomy of Pattern' (1887), and 'The Planning of Ornament' (1887). 
From 1897 to his death Day was almost continuously a member of the council of the Royal Society of Arts. His services to the government department, originally that of science and art, and afterwards the Board of Education were much appreciated. From 1890 onwards he examined in painting and ornament, and later with William Morris, Walter Crane, and other decorative artists examined works sent in by schools of art for national competitions. Shortly before 1900 he gave courses of lectures on ornamental art at the Royal College of Art, South Kensington, and he also inspected and reported on provincial schools of art where ornamental work was studied and practised. When the Victoria and Albert Museum was established in its new building (1909) he was a member of the committee appointed to report upon the arrangement of the collections, and he greatly influenced the scheme which was eventually adopted. 
Of his published works Day was most satisfied with 'Windows' (1897; 3rd edn 1909), the fruit of an exhaustive study of continental stained glass pursued in holiday tours over twenty years. He contributed many articles to the 'Magazine of Art', the 'Art Journal', and the 'Journal of Decorative Art'. His monograph on his friend William Morris was published in an extra number of the 'Art Journal' in 1899. He was also author of 'Instances of Accessory Ornament' (1880); 'Every Day Art' (1882; 2nd edn 1894; Dutch trans. 1886); 'Alphabets Old and New' (1898; 3rd enlarged edn 1910); (with Mary Buckle) 'Art in Needlework' (1900; 3rd edn 1908); 'Lettering in Ornament' (1902); 'Pattern Design' (1903); the South Kensington handbook 'Stained Glass' (1903); 'Ornament and its Application' (1904); 'Enamelling' (1907); and 'Nature and Ornament' (2 vols., 1908-9). He died at his house, 15 Taviton Street, Gordon Square, on 18 April 1910, and is buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32758


Day, William Henry (1823-1908), racehorse breeder and trainer, born on 9 August 1823 at Danebury, Hampshire, was a younger son of John Barham Day (1793-1860) and an Irish woman whose surname was Goddard. His father, known as Honest John, founded the famous Danebury racing stable, where he had for patrons the duke of Grafton, Lord George Bentinck, and Lord Palmerston, among many others. His grandfather John Day of Houghton Down Farm, Stockbridge, was racing adviser to the prince of Wales (later George IV) and acquired the reputation of being able at a sitting to drink two more bottles of wine than any of his companions. He was the Gloomy Day depicted in a celebrated caricature made by Robert Dighton on the Steyne at Brighton in 1801. 
William was educated privately with his cousin Russell Day, afterwards a Church of England priest and a master at Eton College, by his uncle Henry Thomas Day LLD, rector of Mendlesham, Suffolk. After entering his father's stable at Danebury, he acquired some fame as a jockey, and rode Lord George Bentinck's horse Grey Momus when it won the Ascot Cup in 1838. His eldest brother, John (1814-1882), was to succeed the father at Danebury; consequently William started training at Woodyates, Cranborne Chase, Dorset. There on the downs he trained many good winners, usually ridden by his brother Alfred. These included James Merry's Lord of the Isles and his own Promised Land, which carried off the Two Thousand Guineas in 1855 and 1859 respectively, Sir F. Johnstone's Brigantine, which won the Oaks and Ascot Cup in 1869, and many good handicap horses. Day also won in 1859 the Goodwood Cup with Promised Land, which finished fourth in the Derby. Day's patrons included Lord Ribblesdale, the marquess of Anglesey, Lord Coventry, and Lord Westmorland. In 1846 he married his cousin Ellen, daughter of James Day, veterinary surgeon, of Kenford, Devon. They had five sons. 
In 1873 Day sold off his stud, which realized over $25,000. For a time he gave up training, but resumed operations in 1881, when J. R. Keene sent him some horses, including Foxhall, which won the Grand Prix, the Cesarewitch, and the Cambridgeshire in 1881, and the Ascot Cup in 1882. Day afterwards trained a few horses at Salisbury, but finally retired in 1892. In 1873 he had formed a large breeding stud at Alvediston, near Salisbury, having over sixty thoroughbred brood mares. Cast-off, the dam of Robert-the-Devil, winner of the St Leger in 1880, was bred there, and for a time Flying Duchess, the dam of Galopin, the Derby winner of 1875, was also at Alvediston. 
Day used his experiences at Alvediston in writing 'The Horse: how to Breed and Rear him' (1888). He also wrote several articles on turf politics in the 'Fortnightly Review'. His 'The Racehorse in Training' (1880), which was translated into French, was one of the first attempts to treat the subject scientifically; his two volumes of memoirs are rather less reliable. 
Of medium height, but tall for a jockey, and possessed of an iron will, Day was a model man of business. Like his father, who, on Sunday evenings, used to read Hugh Blair's sermons to the stable lads until they fell asleep, he was most punctilious in the discharge of his religious duties. He was only too well aware of the temptations which racing presented. For his patrons he won stakes to the value of over $200,000. At one time a comparatively rich man, he lost the bulk of his fortune by speculating in poor land. Day died at Shirley, Southampton, on 29 August 1908, and was buried by the side of his wife at the parish church, Pentridge, near Cranborne Chase, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 32759


Deacon, George Frederick (1843-1909), civil engineer, was born at Bridgwater, Somerset, on 26 July 1843, the eldest son of Frederick Deacon, a solicitor of that town, who afterwards practised in Preston and was at one time sheriff of Lancashire. His mother was Katharine, third daughter of William H. Charlton, vicar of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London. He was educated at Heversham grammar school and apprenticed at seventeen to Robert Napier & Sons of Glasgow. During his apprenticeship he studied at Glasgow University under Professor W. J. Macquorn Rankine and Professor William Thomson. 
On Thomson's recommendation Deacon was appointed assistant to Cromwell Fleetwood Varley, engineer to the Atlantic Telegraph Company, and under him he took part in 1865 in the laying of the second Atlantic cable by the steamship 'Great Eastern'. The cable was lost off Newfoundland and Deacon was subsequently occupied in London on schemes for its recovery. From late 1865 to 1871 he practised at Liverpool as a consulting engineer, making so special a study of the Mersey estuary as to become a recognized authority in regard to it. He also lectured on civil engineering and mechanics at Queen's College, Liverpool. Between 1871 to 1880 he was borough and water engineer of Liverpool, a dual appointment which he held for eight years. 
As borough engineer Deacon was responsible for the construction or reconstruction of about 70 miles of sewerage and he set up a rubbish-disposal system for the town. He laid the inner-circle tramway rails in 1877, on a system of his own, besides introducing wood pavement into Liverpool and improving the method of set paving by adopting a solid concrete foundation for the wearing surface. For this achievement he was awarded the Institution of Civil Engineers' Watt medal and a Telford premium. 
As water engineer his work was of even greater importance. In 1873 he invented the Deacon waste-water meter, which enabled sources of leakage and waste to be located. In 1875 he was awarded a second Telford medal and premium. He also devised forms of electrical meters for river currents. In 1880 new sources of water supply for Liverpool became necessary, and Deacon projected a scheme, which was adopted in 1879, for the utilization of the River Vyrnwy in north Wales. Thereupon he resigned the duties of borough engineer in order to devote himself entirely to those of water engineer, which he discharged until 1890. 
The works which Deacon designed, in conjunction with Thomas Hawksley, included the fine masonry dam in the valley of the Vyrnwy, forming a lake 1121 acres in extent and having an average depth of 70 feet -- the first reservoir in Great Britain closed by a high masonry dam. The dam had a maximum height to the overflow level of 144 feet, and impounded about 13,000 million gallons of water. From this lake the water was conveyed to Liverpool by an aqueduct 76 miles in length, which traversed three mountain tunnels and crossed under or over several railways and beneath a number of canals and rivers, including the Mersey. Hawksley and Deacon were joint engineers of the undertaking until 1885, when Hawksley retired and the undivided responsibility fell upon Deacon. The works, opened by the duke of Connaught in July 1892, gained for Deacon the Institution of Civil Engineers' George Stephenson medal and a Telford premium. 
In both branches of his work in Liverpool, Deacon won for himself a high reputation. Every question or problem was studied with the scientific thoroughness with which his former teacher and lifelong friend, William Thomson (who became Lord Kelvin in 1892), had imbued him. He regarded no practical detail as too small for earnest study and attention. He recognized, too, the aesthetic claims of constructional work. 
In 1890 Deacon established a consulting practice in Westminster. In that capacity he constructed waterworks for Kendal, Merthyr Tudful, Todmorden, Biggleswade, Milton (Kent), and other places. At his death he was engaged upon the plans of works, subsequently constructed, for supplying Birkenhead from the River Alwen, and of new works for Ebbw Vale. He reported in 1890 to the international Niagara commissioners on the utilization of the falls; in 1897, in conjunction with Sir Benjamin Baker, to the London county council on the water supply of London; and in the same year, in conjunction with Dr W. C. Unwin and John Carruthers, on the Coolgardie, Australia, water supply scheme. 
Deacon was elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 3 December 1872, became a full member on 6 January 1874, and was a member of the council from November 1900 until his death. He was also a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and a fellow, from 1893, of the Royal Meteorological Society. He was president of the mechanical science section of the British Association at its Toronto meeting in 1897, as well as of many professional societies. In 1902 the University of Glasgow conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. 
Deacon had considerable artistic talent and in all his works attempted to combine utility with beauty and harmony with the surroundings. As a parliamentary witness he was in frequent demand and, having taken pains to master his subjects, his evidence carried weight. Indefatigable himself, he drew the best from his assistants. 
He married first, on 16 November 1869, at Douglas, Isle of Man, Emily Zoe, eldest daughter of Peter Thomson, of Bombay, and second Ada Emma (died 1912), eldest daughter of Robert Pearce of Bury St Edmunds. A son and three daughters were born of the first marriage. Deacon died suddenly at his office, 16 Great George Street, Westminster, on 17 June 1909, and was buried at Addington, Surrey, near his country residence. In 1910 two memorial windows were placed in Llanwddyn church, near Vyrnwy Lake, one by members and officials of the corporation of Liverpool, and the other by his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 32760


Deakin, Alfred (1856-1919), prime minister of Australia, was born on 3 August 1856 at 90 George Street, Fitzroy, Melbourne, the younger child of William Deakin (1819-1892), business manager, of Towcester, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Bill (1822-1908), of Llannarth, Cardiganshire. Deakin's parents were married in October 1849 and left England for Australia two months later, disembarking at Adelaide, where their daughter, Catherine Sarah, was born in July 1850. When gold was discovered in 1851, William Deakin briefly tried his luck on the Victorian goldfields, but by 1853 the family was living in Melbourne, where Deakin senior became the manager of a coaching business. 
Deakin was brought up in a small, close-knit family in which he was the centre of attention. His sister, Catherine, was his nurse and mentor, and in later years his confidante and admirer. At the age of four he joined Catherine at a boarding-school in the country, before attending Melbourne Church of England grammar school from 1864 to 1871. A precocious child with a passion for books, he preferred to indulge his own elaborate fantasies rather than pursue his studies, but his talents were recognized and he did well enough to matriculate. At Melbourne University, between 1872 and 1877, he studied law and seized such opportunities as the small academic community offered for intellectual discussion and debate. He also became involved in the spiritualist movement, playing a leading part in its Sunday school, the Progressive Lyceum, and becoming president of the Victorian Association of Progressive Spiritualists in 1878. In 1877 he published an extraordinary spiritualist allegory, 'A New Pilgrim's Progress', which was the product of his seance experiments with automatic writing and which he believed, at the time, to have been inspired by the spirit of John Bunyan. 
Deakin was admitted to the bar in 1877, but an introduction in 1878 to David Syme, owner of the Melbourne 'Age', deflected him into the much more appealing practice of journalism. Syme persuaded Deakin to forsake the free-trade beliefs he had absorbed at university for the protectionist programme espoused by the 'Age'; he also helped Deakin's nomination in the liberal interest for a by-election in 1879 for the Victorian legislative assembly, which he won by a narrow margin. Deakin's debut in parliament at the age of twenty-two proved dramatic when he concluded his maiden speech by resigning because of controversy surrounding the conduct of the poll. He lost the second by-election by fifteen votes, but finally won the seat at a general election in 1880. 
Deakin was a striking, even handsome, young man, 6 feet tall and slim with dark hair and a trim beard. Always fluent and articulate, he was an eloquent speaker whose versatile, light baritone voice was reinforced by his graceful presence. Many recalled that his dark, glowing eyes contributed to the effect. A bachelor when he entered politics, on 3 April 1882 Deakin married the nineteen-year-old Elizabeth Martha Anne 
(Pattie; 1862/3-1934)
, daughter of Hugh Junor Browne, a wealthy distiller, and his wife, Elizabeth. He had met her through the spiritualist movement, but the Brownes, conscious of Deakin's lack of means and uncertain prospects, agreed to the marriage only reluctantly, and there was no dowry. With the beginning of his political career Deakin distanced himself from spiritualist organizations, but he retained an investigative interest in spiritualist phenomena. 
Deakin's arrival in parliament coincided with the end of a period of divisive politics involving constitutional conflict between the legislative council, elected on a restricted property franchise, and the popular assembly. At a time when Victoria was entering a phase of heady prosperity, the mood encouraged political compromise, and when a coalition government of conservatives and liberals, led by James Service and Graham Berry, took office in 1883, Deakin, a supporter of Berry, became minister for public works and water supply. In 1885 his rapid rise was confirmed when, with Berry's retirement, he became the leader of the liberals and chief secretary in the government now headed by Duncan Gillies. He and the coalition government remained in office until 1890. 
The government's legislative programme was largely uncontroversial, but in 1885 Deakin introduced a 'Factories and Shops Bill', a basic regulatory measure which drew opposition from the legislative council and was passed only in modified form. Much less contentious was his enthusiasm for irrigation: having chaired a royal commission on water supply in 1884 he led a mission to California to investigate irrigation schemes. Although the state-aided schemes introduced in Victoria were not without their problems, Deakin played a significant part in developing public awareness. In 1885 he published 'Irrigation in Western America', and a later visit to India, sponsored by 'The Age', resulted in 'Irrigated India' in 1893. 
In 1887 Deakin represented Victoria at the colonial conference which was timed to coincide with Queen Victoria's golden jubilee, and which was seen by the imperial government as an opportunity for coaxing the colonies into making a greater contribution to imperial defence. Deakin attracted attention when, responding to prime minister Salisbury's opening speech, he asserted that Victorians knew no distinction between 'colonial' and 'imperial' interests, and made it clear that Victoria would press its case concerning the empire's role in the Pacific. Deakin was not the only Australasian representative to urge the imperial government to be firm in its negotiations with France over the New Hebrides, but as a native-born colonist he was regarded with particular interest. He returned home to a hero's welcome. 
By 1890 Victoria's economic boom had burst, and the national maritime strike of that year ushered in a period of industrial dislocation and depression. Deakin's own financial speculations had been disastrous and he had been associated as chairman or director with several dubious companies. With the defeat of the coalition government he retreated to the back bench for a decade, devoting himself, as a kind of creative penance, to the cause of federation. He emerged through the 1890s as the acknowledged leader of the federal movement in Victoria. Practical concerns about the depression, defence, and Asian immigration all contributed to the growing interest in federation, but Deakin, a member of the Australian Natives' Association (which only native-born colonists were eligible to join), sought to give the movement a higher, national focus. At the conventions of 1891 and 1897-8 he advocated a democratic constitution and sought to limit the powers of the senate as a states' house, but he also played a major role in negotiating the essential compromises between divergent colonial interests. When in 1898 the Victorian government and 'The Age' hesitated to endorse the proposed 'Constitution Bill', Deakin, in a celebrated speech at Bendigo, helped turn the tide, and Victoria voted overwhelmingly for the bill at referendums in 1898 and 1899. 
In 1900 Deakin journeyed to England, together with representatives of the other colonies, to negotiate with colonial secretary Joseph Chamberlain points at issue with the imperial government concerning the constitution. Most in contention was a clause preventing appeals to the privy council in matters involving interpretation of the constitution, which Chamberlain proposed to delete. Deakin, together with Edmund Barton of New South Wales and Charles Kingston of South Australia, campaigned vigorously against Chamberlain: a compromise preserved the right of appeal, but by leave of the Australian high court, and left the power further to limit such appeals with the parliament of the Australian commonwealth. Learning of Chamberlain's capitulation, the three leaders joined hands and danced in a gleeful circle. The incident entered political folklore after Deakin recorded it in his history of the federal cause, 'The Federal Story' (1944). 
In London, Deakin was introduced to the proprietor and the editor of the 'Morning Post' and was afterwards invited to act as the newspaper's Australian correspondent. Remarkably, he was to retain this position through the rest of his political career, often commenting on his own successes and failures. As a journalist of old, he probably gained some satisfaction from this well-kept secret, but the $500 a year it earned him also helped the family's finances. 
When Barton, his colleague and fellow Protectionist, formed the first commonwealth government in 1901, Deakin joined it as attorney-general, and, on Barton's appointment to the high court in 1903, succeeded him as prime minister, holding that office in 1903-4, 1905-8, and 1909-10. During his first two periods of government, when no party commanded a majority in the house of representatives, Deakin and his Protectionists governed with the support of the infant Labor Party. In Victoria the labour movement had been committed to protection, and Labor members in the 1890s had often been regarded as the left wing of the liberal Protectionist Party. Like a number of middle-class liberals and radicals, Deakin had responded to the onset of the depression and mass unemployment by seeking legislative means of addressing 'the social question'. Thus the Protectionists and the Labor Party had found common ground in advancing factory legislation, direct taxation, and old age pensions. In the new commonwealth parliament, however, not all Labor members were supporters of tariff protection, and Deakin had to find new means of cementing the alliance. In promoting what was called the 'new protection', he sought to ensure that protection for the manufacturer was matched by regulated wages and conditions for the worker. Although high court decisions impeded its implementation, the new protection became the slogan of the liberal-Labor alliance. 
Deakin is usually seen as the key figure in the first decade of the Australian commonwealth when the nation's institutional structure was created and its founding policies were enshrined in legislation. The establishment of the high court and the commonwealth arbitration court, the introduction of the restrictive immigration policy (commonly known as the white Australia policy), the commitment to defence (including compulsory military training), could, along with tariff protection, all be seen as part of the programme of nation building. If politics were becoming more polarized, there nevertheless appeared to be a degree of consensus underpinning the Deakinite project. 
Although the alliance with the Labor Party was productive, Deakin complained of the unsatisfactory state of federal politics with 'three elevens' in the field. In 1908, when Labor withdrew its support from the Protectionists and itself formed a government, Deakin negotiated a fusion with his former enemies, the conservative Free-Traders, and returned to office in 1909. With protection now secure as the national policy, Deakin believed he had won good terms for the merger, but many saw the fusion as a betrayal of his liberal principles, and at the 1910 election the Labor Party was swept into office with majorities in both houses. He had the satisfaction of leading the successful 1911 campaign against Labor's proposed amendments to the constitution extending commonwealth power, but in 1913, his health seriously impaired, he retired from politics. 
Deakin was both a nationalist and an imperialist. He had no qualms about supporting Britain in the South African War, and during the 'Dreadnought scare' of 1909, when he was briefly in opposition, he was in the forefront of the agitation for Australia to offer Britain a dreadnought. He was also aware of Australia's own defence priorities, and invited the American 'great white fleet' to visit Australian ports in 1908. While attending the Imperial Conference of 1907, Deakin, a supporter in principle of imperial federation, sought a more active role for the self-governing dominions, but his advocacy of imperial preference fell on deaf ears. It was perhaps unfortunate that his views were more appealing to British Conservatives than to the dominant Liberals, so that the publicity he attracted in England cast him as an oppositional figure. While Deakin was not beyond enjoying the attention accorded him, both he and his wife were critical of the social outlook and morality of the Edwardian society which feted the colonial representatives, and, like many Australian visitors, they were disturbed by the prevalence of urban poverty. Throughout his career his democratic instincts prevented him from accepting any imperial honours. 
As a liberal leader at a time when the party system was taking shape, Deakin occupied a strategic position, and his alliance with the emergent Labor Party helped lay the political foundations of the new nation. Deakin was as sincere in his commitment to social reform as he was to federation, yet he was also a consummate politician who was more artful than he cared to admit. He was a man of wide cultural and intellectual interests, whose circle of acquaintances included poets, painters, and musicians. While his public image is suggested by the nickname Affable Alfred, he was an intensely private man who valued the inner life. Some years after his involvement with spiritualism he became interested in theosophy, but for the most part his undogmatic Christianity found expression within the home, which he once described as 'the city of refuge'. 
Deakin had been conscious of his declining mental powers as early as 1907. He died on 7 October 1919, at his home, Llanarth, Walsh Street, South Yarra, Melbourne, of meningo-encephalitis. He was given a state funeral and buried on 9 October at St Kilda cemetery, Melbourne, with Anglican rites. He was survived by his wife, Pattie, his three daughters, Ivy, Stella, and Vera, and his sister, Catherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 32761


Deakin, Arthur (1890-1955), trade unionist, was born at Holland Street, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, on 11 November 1890, the son of a domestic servant, Annie Deakin. His birth certificate did not record the name of his father. At the age of ten he moved with his mother and stepfather to Dowlais in south Wales, where, when he was thirteen, he started to work for the steel firm Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds for 4's'. a week. He joined the National Union of Gasworkers and came under the influence of Keir Hardie, then member of parliament for Merthyr Tudful, of which Dowlais was a part. 
In 1910 Deakin moved to Shotton in north Wales and took a job with another steel firm as a roll turner. While working there he met an active trade unionist, Jack George, whose sister, Annie (1885/6-1970), he married on 30 May 1914. She was the daughter of Robert George of Connah's Quay, Flintshire. They had two sons. For a brief spell Deakin was a member of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, but in 1911 he moved over to the expanding, heterogeneous Dock, Wharf, Riverside, and General Workers' Union, which gave ample scope to his incipient qualities of leadership. Within three years he was an active lay member, and in 1919 he became a full-time official of the union. Until that year he belonged also to the small British Roll Turners' Society, of which for a brief period he was general secretary. When in 1922 the Dockers' Union became part of the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU), Deakin was elected assistant district secretary for the north Wales area, where the high unemployment of the next ten years strongly conditioned his attitudes and responses. In 1919 he became an alderman of the Flintshire county council and in 1932 its chairman. 
In 1932 Deakin moved to London, where until 1935 he was national secretary of the general workers' trade group of the TGWU. He toured the country examining the problems of his group and so impressed Ernest Bevin, the general secretary of the union, with his organizing ability that in 1935 he was appointed assistant general secretary. He worked closely with Bevin through a difficult time for the union, for in 1938 some of its members seceded to form a union for busmen; and Bevin himself was showing signs of strain from overwork. 
When in 1940 Winston Churchill invited Bevin to become minister of labour in the wartime coalition government, Deakin took Bevin's place in the union. He continued as acting general secretary until Bevin retired from union office in March 1946, when Deakin was elected general secretary in his place, with a majority of 59,105 votes over the combined votes of the other five candidates. 
Although from 1940 until 1946 Deakin was the formal head of his union, the largest in Britain and one of the largest in the world, his work was done in the shadow of Bevin, whose reputation among the ordinary members was almost legendary and who never effectively relinquished his control of union activities. Deakin himself was essentially a Bevin creation and perhaps the most loyal supporter of a man upon whom he modelled himself to the extent of copying some of his public mannerisms. On the general council of the Trades Union Congress, where he took Bevin's place, he was a useful but not an influential member. The council had been dominated by Bevin and its general secretary, Sir Walter Citrine; with Bevin's departure Citrine remained firmly in control, unaffected by Deakin's presence. Deakin became a member of the government's war transport council and of the committee established to advise the production executive. In one respect he achieved notoriety during the war. When he visited Sweden in 1943 as a fraternal delegate to the congress of the Swedish Transport Workers' Union he conferred with a Finnish trade union leader on the possibilities of negotiating a peace treaty; for this he received much adverse publicity. 
A new phase in Deakin's career began in 1946, when he became leader of the TGWU in his own right. After the resignation of Citrine from the Trades Union Congress and a period of uncertainty in the leadership of the movement, the position gradually clarified and settled. By 1948 Deakin had emerged as the most dominant figure in British trade unionism, influential also in the international movement. 
Like so many men who find themselves thrust into positions of power and responsibility, Deakin developed to meet the situation. People who knew him under Bevin could never have imagined his filling the role which he subsequently attained in post-war Britain. A Labour government was in office and the country faced extreme economic difficulties. Both factors demanded that trade unions break with their traditional attitudes. They required a close collaboration with the government and the acceptance of attitudes about productivity and profits which unions had traditionally rejected. After an initial hesitation, Deakin gave the government his unconditional support. He urged unions to try to increase productivity and advocated a policy of wage restraint. He possessed a deep loyalty to the labour movement which was epitomized for him by the Labour government. In his eagerness to support the government he stifled much useful criticism of its activities, for he disliked anything which could be misconstrued by the general public or used for political purposes. He was more than an advocate. As far as he could he applied the policy of wage restraint in his own union and incurred the displeasure of some of his more militant members. But if he thought his policy was right no amount of criticism would deter him. At times he risked the unity of his organization and faced large-scale unofficial strikes rather than make expedient concessions. No government could have had a more loyal supporter. 
Deakin travelled widely as a member of the international committee of the Trades Union Congress and as the most prominent representative of his own union. He was a member of the executive board of the World Federation of Trade Unions and did much to heal the breach between its communist and non-communist members. During his tenure as chairman of the board, however, he led a walkout of the non-communist delegates and helped to form the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions in 1949. Thereafter he became uncompromisingly anti-communist in his attitude towards foreign affairs, national domestic affairs, and the running of his own union; in 1949 he persuaded the TGWU to ban communists from holding office. 
The attitude of Deakin towards communists was in part a reflection of his attitude towards opposition. He believed in the sanctity of majority decisions and was intolerant of those who opposed them. He attacked minorities in his union and in the Labour Party with invective and organizational measures. He would defy procedures and conventions to get his own way and was often accused by his antagonists of being a dictator. By his public manner -- outspoken, brusque, and intolerant -- and by his approach to the handling of internal union affairs, he lent support to the accusation. The administrative problems of his union increased as it expanded from 743,349 members in 1940 to 1,305,456 in 1955, and by and large Deakin coped with them. But he disliked delegating authority and maintained a strict control over even the smallest administrative detail in his union's head office. He would sometimes speak on behalf of his union without consulting the general executive council which constitutionally controlled him. Deakin believed in positive leadership. 'I cannot and will not be a cipher', he told his members. Yet he never forgot the source of his power and always made sure that on the major issues he had the majority of his ordinary members behind him. He was sentimental about his relations with the lay members of his union. Nothing hurt him more than the suggestion that he was out of touch with them. A cartoon which depicted him with his head in the clouds caused him considerable anger. He did much to improve contacts between officials and lay members, which he hoped to advance through developing educational provisions within the union. The TGWU introduced pioneering training schemes for shop stewards and branch officials, and under his guidance the education department became large and influential. 
The public image of Deakin lent itself to caricature. He dressed flamboyantly, smoked large cigars, and courted publicity. But in essential ways both the public image and the caricatures gave a misleading impression. Deakin was modest and shy. He lived quietly and modestly in a small semi-detached house in a north London suburb where his evenings, when free from union business, were spent at home with his wife. He did not drink alcohol and was a member of the Primitive Methodist church. He did not make friends easily and found communication on an individual level difficult. But those with whom he had a close relationship came from various walks of life and different political affiliations. In this respect he was paradoxical. He tended to distrust Labour Party politicians and his personal relations with them were uneasy, whereas he could get on very well with self-made employers and with Conservative politicians. Thus he found it easy to make the transition from a Labour to a Conservative government in 1951. But he never transferred his distrust of Labour politicians to the party itself, and he disapproved of those trade union leaders who moved into industrial management. 
Deakin was often accused of seeking honours, yet he twice refused a knighthood. He was appointed CBE in 1943 and CH in 1949, and was sworn of the privy council in 1954; these he regarded as honours to the labour movement rather than to himself. He retained his trade union and political influence until his death, which took place on 1 May 1955 at the Royal Infirmary, Leicester, after he had been taken ill while addressing a May day rally in that city. 
V. L. Allen', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32762


Deane, Sir James Parker (1812-1902), judge, the second son of Henry Boyle Deane of Hurst Grove, Berkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Wyborn of Hull House, Shelden, Kent, was born at Hurst Grove on 25 June 1812. He went to Winchester as a colleger in 1824, and matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 29 June 1829, as a law fellow of founder's kin. In 1833 he obtained a second class in the final classical school and a third in the final mathematical school. He graduated BCL on 28 May 1834, proceeded DCL on 10 April 1839, and was admitted a member of the College of Advocates on 2 November following. He had entered the Inner Temple as a student on 8 November 1837, and on 29 January 1841 he was called to the bar by that society. He was made a QC on 16 January 1858, and became a bencher of his inn on 30 April 1858; he served in the office of treasurer in 1878. Deane wrote 'On the exercise of private judgement' for the clergy, produced work on the law of blockade, and edited the 'Wills Act Amendment Act' of 1852. 
In 1854 Deane was appointed legal adviser to Admiral Sir Charles Napier, who commanded the British fleet in the Baltic. He was present on board HMS 'Duke of Wellington' at the bombardment of Bomarsund, and formed one of the landing party. On the abolition of Doctors' Commons in 1858 Deane transferred to the courts of probate and divorce, where he obtained a large practice. An effective speaker and a vigorous advocate, he adapted himself to juries and to the 'viva voce' examination of witnesses more readily than some of his colleagues. His most conspicuous appearances, however, were in the ecclesiastical courts, in which the practice and the traditions of 'the Commons' still flourished, and for a quarter of a century there were few ecclesiastical cases of interest or importance in which Deane was not retained; the most celebrated of these, perhaps, were those of 'Boyd v. Phillpotts', in which the legality of the Exeter reredos was challenged, 'Rugg v. Kingsmill', and 'Rugg v. Bishop of Winchester'. He also appeared in the case of 'Martin v. Mackonochie', which began in 1867 and lasted until 1882; in its earlier stages he appeared on behalf of the defendant. 
Deane was a strong Conservative in politics, and in the general election of November 1868 he contested the City of Oxford against Edward Cardwell and William Vernon Harcourt but was heavily defeated. In 1872 he was appointed vicar-general of the province and diocese of Canterbury on the resignation of Sir Travers Twiss; he had already been made chancellor of the diocese of Salisbury in 1868 by Bishop Hamilton. In 1868 he also became Admiralty advocate-general. From 1872 to 1886, under the title of legal adviser to the Foreign Office, he carried out the duties of the now obsolete office of queen's advocate. In this capacity he prepared the British case in the arbitration between Great Britain and Portugal over the territory south of Delagoa Bay, and he advised the government throughout the long disputes arising from the action of the 'Alabama' and her consorts in the American Civil War. 
On 1 August 1885 Deane was knighted and in 1892 he was sworn of the privy council. His duties as vicar-general did not interfere with his forensic work, and he held the leading brief in the famous case of the missing will of the first Lord St Leonards, tried in 1876. He continued to practise at the bar until increasing deafness forced him to retire. In 1890 he sat as vicar-general beside Archbishop Benson and his episcopal assessors in the proceedings against Bishop Edward King of Lincoln, and on the occasion of the confirmation of Winnington Ingram as bishop of London at Bow church on 17 April 1901 the turbulent conduct of the 'opposers' almost got beyond his power of control. His last public appearance was at the confirmation of Dr Francis Paget as bishop of Oxford a few months later. 
Deane and Dr T. H. Tristram QC (died 1912) were the last of the 'civilians' trained in 'the Commons' and they were described in Dickens's 'David Copperfield' and Warren's 'Ten Thousand a Year'. Deane married Isabella Frances (died 1894), daughter of Bargrave Wyborn, at Eastry in 1841. He died at his home, 16 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 3 January 1902, having resigned his offices a few days previously. He was buried at Brookwood cemetery. The only son to survive him was Sir Henry Bargrave Deane, a judge of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of the High Court of Justice, and the author of 'The Law of Blockade' (1870). 


@@@@@


doc= 32763


Dearmer, Percy (1867-1936), liturgist and historian of Christian worship, was born in London on 27 February 1867, the younger son of Thomas Dearmer ('c'.1817-1877), artist and drawing master, who died when Percy was ten years old, and his wife, Caroline Miriam Turner ('c'.1831-1911), who was proprietor and head of Somerset House, a school for girls in Maida Vale. He was educated at Streatham School, at Westminster School (1880-81), at a private school at Vevey, Switzerland, and at Christ Church, Oxford (1886-9), where he read modern history. 
At Christ Church Dearmer came under the influence of the historian F. York Powell and the future bishop of Oxford T. B. Strong. Powell converted him to socialism, Strong to tractarianism. Further Oxford friendships -- with James Adderley, Charles Gore, and others -- guided these enthusiasms into a coalescence which was Christian socialism. He threw himself into the work of first the Guild of St Matthew and then the Christian Social Union, of the London branch of which he was secretary from 1891 to 1912. But at heart he was an artist; his most creative work revealed this, and his permanent contribution both to the church and to national life is to be found in his profound understanding of the true relation between religion, particularly worship, and art. He saw art as not merely decoration but an essential and integral component of the worship offered to God by the church. No one did more in his time to raise the standards of art in public worship, and he is one of the few clergymen to have been awarded the distinction of the honorary ARIBA. 
Dearmer was ordained deacon in 1891 and priest in 1892 at Rochester and after serving four curacies (which ranged from St Anne's, South Lambeth, to Berkeley Chapel, Mayfair), he was appointed in 1901 to the vicarage of St Mary's, Primrose Hill, where he remained until 1915, and there he was able to put his convictions into practice. Leading artists of all kinds gathered round him, including the designer and stained-glass artist Mark Travers, and St Mary's became known throughout the country through his publications and his establishment in 1912 of the Warham Guild for the design and supply of vestments and ornaments of the type recommended in 'The Parson's Handbook' (1899, 12th edn 1931). This, his most important book, was an attempt to recall the church to the native English tradition ('the English Use') in matters of liturgy and ceremonial rather than imitating Roman Catholic usages. His involvement in the Alcuin Club (founded 1897) was another means of advocating that distinctive style of church furnishing adopted in numerous Anglican churches in the first half of the twentieth century. He also made vigorous and imaginative efforts to improve the quality of church music, and was largely responsible for editing the 'English Hymnal' (1906), 'Songs of Praise' (1925), and the 'Oxford Book of Carols' (1928) in which he involved Ralph Vaughan Williams, Martin Shaw, and Gustav Holst, which revolutionized congregational hymn singing. 
During the First World War Dearmer was chaplain to the British Red Cross ambulance unit in Serbia where his wife, (Jessie) Mabel Pritchard (1872-1915), daughter of Surgeon-Major William White and his wife, Selina, whom he had married on 26 May 1892, died of enteric fever in 1915. Mabel Dearmer was a noted novelist and playwright. On 19 August 1916 he married Nancy 
(Nan; 1889-1979)
, only daughter of Arthur and Marian Knowles. With his first wife Dearmer had two sons: the younger, Christopher, died of wounds received at Gallipoli in 1915; his elder son, Geoffrey Dearmer (1893-1996), lived to 103 and was one of the last First World War poets to survive. With his second wife, who survived him, he had one son, Antony, who was killed in action with the RAF in 1943, and two daughters. After the war Dearmer resided in Chelsea and busied himself in manifold activities, the Church of England not seeming able to harness his talents. He was the first professor of ecclesiastical art at King's College, London (1919-36), and was lecturer in art there (1924-32). In 1920 he became secretary of the recently founded League of Arts (he was chairman from 1921 to 1936), and, along with Miss Maude Royden, with whom he worked until 1924, he established the Guildhouse. To the relief of his many friends, to whom his lack of preferment had become a scandal, in 1931 he was nominated to a canonry at Westminster Abbey, where -- perhaps too late in life -- his gifts had full scope and opportunity. He made a distinctive contribution to the preaching and ceremonial in the abbey and developed remarkable powers as a broadcaster of services for children. Always striking in appearance and highly individual in speech and manner, Dearmer was an original, independent thinker, informed by a thorough scholarship in his own subjects, although in later life he risked this being dissipated by an over-great and sometimes ephemeral output. He died suddenly, of coronary thrombosis, at his residence at 4 Little Cloister, on 29 May 1936, and his ashes were interred in the Great Cloister, Westminster Abbey, on 3 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 32764


Debenham, Frank (1883-1965), geographer and polar scientist, was born at Bowral, New South Wales, on 26 December 1883, the second son of the Revd John Willmott Debenham, vicar of Bowral and schoolmaster, and his wife, Edith Cleveland. He attended the school run by his father and, after his death in 1898, by his mother, and from there went to the King's School, Parramatta (1900-02), and Sydney University (1902-6) from where he graduated BA in arts. He then taught at Armidale School, before re-entering Sydney University in 1908 and graduating BSc in 1910, having majored in geology. Edgeworth David, who was then professor, had been with Sir Ernest Shackleton in the Antarctic between 1907 and 1909. When Robert Falcon Scott was recruiting for his second ('Terra Nova') expedition in 1910 he wished to associate Australia with it and, having secured Griffith Taylor in London, when in Sydney asked Debenham to join him. 
In the Antarctic Debenham's work, geological and cartographical, was done first (1910-11) on the western side of McMurdo Sound. He visited the Koettlitz glacier, the Ferrar glacier, and other features in the foothills of the Royal Society range. An injury to his knee sustained while playing football prevented his going on the ill-fated polar attempt and in 1911-12 he went to Granite harbour and the Mackay glacier. One of his most significant contributions to the work of the expedition, and subsequently to his pupils at Cambridge, was his expertise in plane-table mapping. He convinced Scott and other members of the expedition of its value not only at base camps but also on sledge journeys. Scott in his diary recorded that Debenham was 'a well-trained, sturdy worker, with a quiet meaning that carries conviction; he realizes the conceptions of thoroughness and conscientiousness'. 
After leaving the Antarctic in 1913 Debenham went with other members of the expedition to Cambridge to work up his results. He graduated BA in 1919 and MA in 1922. His studies were interrupted by the outbreak of war in 1914. He joined the 7th battalion, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry, and after service in France and then Salonika, where he was severely wounded and shell-shocked, he was demobilized as a major and returned to Cambridge. 
In 1919 Debenham was appointed to the Royal Geographical Society's lectureship in surveying and cartography at Cambridge. In 1919 he was elected into a fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, where he was a tutor (1923-8). In the immediate post-war years the geographical tripos was founded and in addition to continuing his Antarctic work Debenham gave himself wholeheartedly to the building up of the department. 
By that time Debenham was the only surviving member of the Antarctic expedition who had both the local knowledge and the cartographic expertise to complete the charts. In 1921 he co-wrote two reports on the geology of Antarctica and later wrote his 'Report on the Maps and Surveys' of the 'Terra Nova' expedition (1923). His maps were still in use in the late 1950s. His suggestion that some of the Scott Mansion House fund should be used to build an institute for polar research was accepted and he was appointed director in 1926. In 1934 the Scott Polar Research Institute was opened, and it owed much to the enterprise and planning of Debenham. The institute took on its later enlarged form after his death, but he delighted in the gift from the Ford Foundation for the great addition to the original building, although he himself was not wholly reconciled to the fact that polar exploration had ceased to be the preserve of the amateur and had been taken over by sustained government-funded research. 
The department of geography expanded continuously from its foundation. Debenham became a reader and head of department in 1928 and was primarily responsible for its move to Downing Place. During its expansion after 1933 Debenham's skill and interest as a planner were again invoked. In 1928 the twelfth international geographical congress was held in part in Cambridge and Debenham acted as secretary of the executive committee. In 1931 he became the first professor of geography in Cambridge. The new department was in full use by 1936, and during the Second World War its activities were numerous. Debenham had a great gift for teaching practical survey methods and making and recording astronomical and other observations. Apart from his normal teaching which still continued, he was notably successful in training a large number of service cadets who were attached for six-month courses. Two of the London departments were also billeted in Cambridge and with Debenham's help and encouragement found a welcome and temporary home there. Meanwhile, the Scott Polar Research Institute housed a section of the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty. He retired as director in 1946. 
After the war unprecedented numbers of students came to the department of geography and these years, until Debenham's retirement in 1949, were perhaps the most satisfying of all, because they showed so clearly his role in making Cambridge a leading world centre for both geography and polar research. 
After retirement Debenham for some years was very active. He travelled extensively in central Africa and made an interesting study of the water resources of the Bangweulu swamp. Debenham's flair for teaching, planning, and inspiring students and colleagues in their academic work and explorations was universally acknowledged in his lifetime and in the tributes which appeared after his death. Curiously, however, they somehow obscured the significance of his own writing and editorial work which was sustained and solid. He published numerous papers and books of which the most scientifically important were the early reports of his Antarctic work, which appeared at a formative time for glaciology. His books included 'The Polar Regions' (1930), 'In the Antarctic' (1952), and 'Antarctica; the Story of a Continent' (1959), and he edited Bellingshausen's 'Antarctic Narrative' for the Hakluyt Society in 1945. He was the founding editor of the 'Polar Record' (1913). He also wrote teaching texts in geography and cartography and contributed largely to the high-quality and innovative relief maps in the Reader's Digest 'Great World Atlas' (1961). 
Lord McNair said that Debenham 'was one of the most modest and unselfregarding persons that I have ever known... He was a good organizer and knew how to get the best out of those working with him -- mainly because he was generous in giving credit to others and because he inspired their affection and confidence. (address, memorial service)' He respected and encouraged scholarship in others, and the tributes paid after his death show him to have been almost universally liked.Debenham had an extremely happy domestic life. On 27 January 1917 at St Philip's parish church, Kensington, he married Dorothy Lucy, daughter of J. T. Lempriere of Melbourne; they had two sons and four daughters. He and his wife (Deb and Mrs Deb) were most hospitable and gave a memorable welcome to former colleagues and students. In the last years of his life he suffered from heart trouble and deafness and spent much of his time at his desk, but was always glad to talk to friends for a short time. 
In 1919 Debenham was appointed OBE. In 1948 he received the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society of which he was a fellow (from 1914), vice-president (1951-3), and honorary fellow (from 1965). He received the David Livingstone centenary medal of the American Geographical Society in 1948, and he received honorary degrees from the universities of Sydney (1959), Western Australia (1937), and Durham (1952). 
Debenham died in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 23 November 1965. He is commemorated by two buildings at Cambridge, and a mountain and a glacier in Antarctica were named after him. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32765


Bunsen, Sir Maurice William Ernest de, first baronet (1852-1932), diplomatist, was born in London on 8 January 1852, the second son of Ernest Christian Ludwig de Bunsen (1819-1903), of Abbey Lodge, Regent's Park, London. He was the grandson of Christian von Bunsen, Baron von Bunsen, who was Prussian minister in England from 1841 to 1854, and the biographer Frances von Bunsen ['see under 'Bunsen, Christian von]. His father, a soldier, courtier, and mystical writer, became a British subject in 1849. His mother, Elizabeth (died 1903), daughter of Samuel Gurney, was one of the Gurneys of Earlham and a remarkable character; she was a niece of Elizabeth Fry, with whom she travelled abroad. 
De Bunsen was brought up with a Quaker background in the cultured and cosmopolitan atmosphere of Abbey Lodge, and was educated at Rugby School and Christ Church, Oxford. He entered the diplomatic service in 1877. In his third post, at Madrid, he was commended for his dignity and discretion when left in charge of the legation at a difficult time. After three years (1891-4) as secretary of legation in Japan, he was, in 1894, appointed charge d'affaires and consul-general at Bangkok, where he was in the confidence of the king and the Siamese authorities in their struggle against French pressure. He was first secretary at Constantinople (1897-1902) in the days of Abdul Hamid and the Cretan troubles, and was then transferred to Paris as first secretary. He was appointed CB in 1895, CVO in 1903, and KCVO in 1905, in which year he went as minister to Lisbon. 
In 1906 de Bunsen was sworn of the privy council and appointed KCMG, GCVO, and ambassador at Madrid, where he and his wife were popular and enjoyed the friendship and confidence of Alfonso XIII and his queen. Perhaps de Bunsen's most conspicuous diplomatic achievement was his unofficial mediation, in 1911-12, at the invitation of both parties, in the dispute over Morocco between France and Spain, which materially helped to bring about a peaceful settlement. He was appointed GCMG in 1909. In 1913 he succeeded Sir Fairfax Cartwright as ambassador at Vienna, where he kept the British government in close touch with the complicated political developments preceding the outbreak of war. 
De Bunsen returned from Vienna on 14 August 1914 and served as assistant undersecretary in the Foreign Office from March 1915 to March 1918. He chaired an important committee, known as the de Bunsen committee, on the future of Britain's role in the Middle East, which reported in May 1915, adumbrating a British sphere of influence in Palestine to the exclusion of France. De Bunsen led a successful mission to seven South American states as ambassador on special mission, a post he held from April 1917 until October 1918, when he retired from the service. He was on 1 January 1919 created a baronet. He was subsequently active in the City and in the Royal Geographical Society and other such bodies. 
De Bunsen's good looks and appearance went well with his courtesy, fearless character, and complete honesty. In the service he stood out among contemporary diplomatists for his ability to reconcile opposing parties and to bring the representatives of clashing interests to discuss their differences with reason and temper. He was looked upon as the ideal chief, for kindness, example, and hospitality. A keen sportsman and a good shot, he was also a lover of literature and well informed on many subjects. His most notable accomplishment was in public and personal relationships and in the art of living. 
De Bunsen's family life was a happy one. In 1899 he married Berta Mary, elder daughter of Armar Henry Lowry Corry, who was in the Foreign Office; she was a niece of M. W. Lowry Corry, Lord Rowton, Disraeli's secretary. They had four daughters. He died at his house, 43 Ennismore Gardens, London, on 21 February 1932, his wife surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32766


Burgh, William George de (1866-1943), philosopher, was born at New Wandsworth, London, on 24 October 1866, the son of William de Burgh, barrister and civil servant, who died when de Burgh was twelve, and his wife, Hannah Jane, daughter of Captain Thomas Monck Mason RN. He went to Winchester College, thence as a postmaster to Merton College, Oxford, where he was awarded a second class in classical moderations (1887) and a first class in 'literae humaniores' (1889). Some difficult years followed in which he was briefly an assistant master at Derby School and, living at Toynbee Hall, was appointed in 1892 as censor of studies at Balliol House and Wadham House, university settlements in London. In 1896 he found his life work on appointment as lecturer in Greek and Latin in the University Extension College at Reading, where he remained until 1934. On 26 January 1897 he married Edith Mary, daughter of William Francis Grace, vice-consul at Mogador, with whom he had two daughters and one son. 
For many years de Burgh's teaching burden was excessive; he soon added philosophy to his curriculum and became professor of the subject in 1907; he taught classics until 1910. His administrative cares were hardly less absorbing: from the first he had faith in the future of Reading, and he had the satisfaction of guiding the development of the college into a university (its charter was received in 1926). The credit for this achievement is generally ascribed to W. M. Childs, and de Burgh was willing that this should be so; but while the acquisition of the necessary funds was Childs's work, the academic statesmanship was de Burgh's. Childs, de Burgh (deputy vice-chancellor, 1926-34), and F. H. Wright, the registrar, 'formed a kind of inner cabinet' (Holt, 42) which ran the university's affairs. 
The enforced leisure of 1914-18 was used by de Burgh to prepare work for publication, and 'The Legacy of the Ancient World' (1924, rev. edn, 1947) proved the most successful of his books. Although his intellectual gifts were highly regarded by his pupils and by the Oxford philosophers who were his contemporaries and friends, their wider recognition was belated: he was Gifford lecturer at St Andrews (1937-8) and Riddell memorial lecturer at Newcastle (1938); not until 1938 was he elected to a fellowship of the British Academy. The reason for this may have lain in his disinterestedness; for himself he sought neither fame nor reward. He had a strong sense of duty as a categorical imperative, and in fulfilling his obligations the only standard he failed to satisfy was his own. Inflexible when any matter of principle was at stake, he was nevertheless warm-hearted and genial, an unfailing tonic to his friends. His sympathy with the young, his forensic gifts, and his vitality were the secret of his success as a teacher. He knew all the students in his faculty individually and was remembered for his influence upon them (Holt, 86). 
Tall, slim, and erect, de Burgh made walking his only physical recreation; his other diversions lay in art, literature, light verse, and the complexities of the railway system. His radiance of personality had its roots in the religious faith expressed in his motto, 'A cruce salus', the keynote of his life. A student of scholasticism, yet much influenced by modern idealism, he endeavoured to construct a distinctively Christian philosophy by developing a philosophical argument to the truth of the gospel. His project was unfashionable at a time when protestant theologians were disparaging reason and when few philosophers were interested in religion, but his argument, based on the experience of a lifetime and elaborated by the resources of his vigorous mind, was found impressive by those in sympathy with his views. He suffered a stroke in the summer of 1942 while walking on the Dorset downs and died at his home, The Cottage, Toller Porcorum, Dorset, on 27 August 1943, survived by his wife. He was buried at Toller Porcorum on 30 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 32767


Chair, Sir Dudley Rawson Stratford de (1864-1958), naval officer, was born in Lennoxville, Canada, on 30 August 1864, eldest son of Dudley Raikes de Chair, of French Huguenot descent, and his wife, Frances Emily, eldest daughter of Christopher Rawson, of The Hurst, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey. His parents returned to England in 1870 and in 1878 he joined the 'Britannia' where Prince Edward and Prince George were also cadets. 
As a midshipman de Chair attracted national attention through being captured by some of the Egyptian cavalry of Arabi Pasha when alone on a special mission. He was released after six weeks when Cairo was taken and was later selected by Sir Garnet Wolseley to take the dispatches to Alexandria. 
With the exception of a short period as torpedo lieutenant in the flagship 'Royal Sovereign' (1893-4), de Chair served as an instructor in the 'Vernon', the torpedo school at Portsmouth, from 1892 until his promotion to commander in 1897. In that year he was appointed commander in the flagship of his uncle, Sir Harry H. Rawson, at the Cape station. In 1899 he became commander in the 'Majestic', in which ship he remained until his promotion to captain in 1902. 
In that year de Chair was appointed naval attache at Washington, where his next three years were spent. Returning to seagoing duties, he next commanded successively the cruisers 'Bacchante' and 'Cochrane'. In 1908 he was brought into contact with Sir John Jellicoe, then controller of the navy, serving as his assistant controller until 1911. After a further spell of sea time as captain of the 'Colossus' he returned to the Admiralty on promotion to flag rank in 1912 and on 1 March 1913 he succeeded David Beatty as naval secretary to the first lord, Winston Churchill. He had met Churchill previously and had been impressed with his charm of manner and keen interest in naval affairs. But although Churchill had selected de Chair for this appointment, the latter was not as happy in it as Beatty had been. He found Churchill's ebullient zest and headstrong, sometimes impetuous, methods disturbing and had not the great wealth which Beatty had enjoyed to live fully in the circles which his chief frequented. In June 1914 he became admiral of the training squadron and at the outbreak of war he was moved to the cruiser 'Crescent' in command of the 10th cruiser squadron. 
The particular task of this squadron was the patrol of the North Sea from the Shetlands to the Norwegian coast as a blockade to Germany, and in his command of this task force until March 1916 de Chair made an important contribution towards the winning of the war. Owing to his efficient organization the number of ships which slipped through was negligible and as the war progressed the effect of the blockade became more apparent. For his services de Chair was appointed KCB in 1916. 
De Chair relinquished his command to take up a post under the Foreign Office as naval adviser to the ministry of blockade. His experience made him eminently suitable for this work, as A. J. Balfour explained to him, but de Chair, as he revealed in his autobiography, was 'almost heartbroken' at giving up his command and active naval service. However he found the minister, Lord Robert Cecil, sympathetic and understanding. 
De Chair's valuable work in this appointment continued until September 1917, when he was given command of the 3rd battle squadron, stationed in the channel, with the task of attacking the German high seas fleet, should it come out. That it never did was frustrating and disappointing to him, and he was further dismayed to learn of the dismissal of Jellicoe as first sea lord in December. When his successor, Sir Rosslyn Wemyss, asked de Chair to accept a post on the Board of Admiralty, he refused outright, telling Wemyss that he could not do so as he 'felt so keenly the disgraceful manner in which Jellicoe had been treated' (de Chair, 238). This outspokenness did de Chair no good and shortly afterwards he was relieved of his command and placed on half pay. He had been promoted vice-admiral in 1917. In July 1918 he was appointed admiral commanding coastguard and reserves; in 1920 he was promoted admiral; and in 1921-3 he was president of the inter-allied commission on enemy warships, and was then placed on the retired list. 
The same year he was appointed governor of New South Wales, where he remained until 1930. During his term his determination and strength of character were fully tested in the political crisis of 1926, when the Labour premier, J. T. Lang, introduced a bill to abolish the legislative council, the state's second chamber. De Chair agreed to appoint twenty-five new Labour members to the council, but when the bill was defeated by forty-seven votes to forty-one he refused to appoint more. This led to strong attacks on his action by the Labour Party and to an examination of the powers of the state governors in Australia. 
He married in 1903 Enid (died 1966), third daughter of Henry William Struben, of Transvaal Colony; they had two sons and a daughter. The elder son, Henry Graham Dudley de Chair, became a commander in the Royal Navy; the younger, Somerset Struben de Chair, author of 'The Golden Carpet' and other works, was for twelve years a member of parliament. 
After his retirement Dudley de Chair lived mainly in London. He served in the Home Guard from 1940 to 1942. He died at his home, The Elms, Rottingdean, on 17 August 1958 and, after cremation, his ashes were scattered, in accordance with his wishes, in the English Channel from the 'Hardy'. 
In addition to the KCB, de Chair was appointed KCMG (1933), received the American DSM, and was a commander of the Legion d'honneur. McGill University conferred on him an honorary LLD. 
Possessing much personal charm, de Chair was a man of great loyalty and integrity, direct in his manner and at times somewhat inflexible. As a leader some found him uninspiring, but Jellicoe termed him 'a very first-rate sea officer suited to any command afloat'. De Chair followed a code of ethics which frequently worked to his personal disadvantage and like Jellicoe, whom he greatly admired, he never allowed his judgement to be affected by personal considerations and never courted publicity. 
G. K. S. Hamilton-Edwards', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32768


Deedes, Sir Wyndham Henry (1883-1956), army officer, civil administrator, and social worker, was born on 10 March 1883 at 19 Westbourne Place, Belgravia, London, the second son of Colonel Herbert George Deedes, assistant under-secretary of state for war, and his wife, Rose Eleanor (died 1940), daughter of Major-General Lousada Barrow of the Madras staff corps. The Deedes family had risen to the ranks of the landed gentry three hundred years before, making its fortune in the woollen trade near Dover. Deedes's own father had inherited two neighbouring properties in Kent, Sandling Park and Saltwood Castle, but had pursued a career in the army. 
Deedes's childhood home was Saltwood, but he spent much time in London. He was educated at Eton College from the age of nine, but it was not a happy experience. A gentle, rather grave, little boy, he left school, in his own eyes, 'absolutely uneducated' and joined the army almost at once. In February 1901 he received his commission in the King's Royal Rifle Corps and was soon bound for South Africa, where he impressed his commanding officer. He was a devout Anglican, and his care for the soldiers in his command and an interest in social issues were already evident. He even helped his men dig trenches. 
Between 1903 and 1910 Deedes was successively stationed at Bermuda, Ireland (where he was aide-de-camp to his uncle, General Knox), England, and Malta. By 1906 he was a lieutenant. In February 1908 he was dispatched to Malta, there serving as aide-de-camp to the governor, Sir Harry Grant. A gifted linguist, he had already taught himself Dutch and German; and it was in Malta that he began to learn the language which would change his life: Turkish. He applied to join the gendarmerie in the British district of Macedonia, and he arrived in Constantinople in February 1910. There Deedes made the acquaintance of as many Turks as he could and perfected his knowledge of their language. At this time he also met the young Robert Graves. He was subsequently transferred, first to Smyrna, then to Tripoli, superintending an area stretching from the Mediterranean to the southern fringe of the Libyan desert: four times the size of France. Here he found the gendarmerie in a desperate state. They were only a handful. They had few clothes and no barracks. They had not been paid. Deedes himself had no money and no maps. He was only twenty-seven. But still he relished the challenge. By the time he left, in July 1911, and returned to Smyrna the gendarmerie was 1500 strong and impressively efficient. 
At this time Deedes was profoundly influenced by reading the 'Prevention of Destitution' (1911), by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and he wrote to his mother from Smyrna that he could think of no better way to live than to spend himself in charity organization work. Nevertheless, he was placed on a government commission in the east of Anatolia, landing at Samsun in July 1913 and taking the works of John Stuart Mill, Thomas Huxley, and Charles Darwin with him into the Anatolian highlands. In 1913 he was seconded by the Foreign Office to the Turkish government to assist Talaat, minister of the interior. He went gladly, beginning to write articles on Turkey for the 'Nineteenth Century'. He then became a civil inspector, a position granted by the sultan, and worked on a scheme to resettle refugees in Bursa. However, the outbreak of the First World War forced his return to Britain. Highly respected for his knowledge of Turkish, he was reunited with the intelligence department at the War Office, visiting the Turkish embassy frequently, and watching the effects of British diplomacy critically as Turkey swung into the German camp. 
Deedes was still at the War Office when the Gallipoli campaign was first drafted and he was pessimistic about its prospects. Between February 1915 and January 1916 he served on the expedition as a staff captain. He was given his own section, I(B), with a brief to keep an eye open on guides, interpreters, and dubious characters, and also to hunt for spies. An outstanding officer who saw issues with a rare clarity, he had the courage to press, with a number of junior officers, for strategic change. When, after twelve futile months, withdrawal took place, I(B) played a valuable part in ensuring the secrecy, and the success, of the evacuation. Deedes himself was three times mentioned in dispatches and in January 1916 was awarded the DSO. 
By now Deedes had been transferred to the intelligence service in Cairo and Alexandria. In Cairo he joined forces with those who were planning the Arab revolt, among them T. E. Lawrence, with whom he worked closely but apparently without any personal rapport. In 1916 he became a major; in 1917 brevet lieutenant-colonel. When General Allenby entered Jerusalem on 11 December Deedes was one of the party. Shortly afterwards he was stationed there to help administer the city, conciliate in disputes, work for displaced peoples, and orchestrate the efforts of relief agencies in the city. It was here he encountered, perhaps for the first time, the aspirations of the Zionist movement (with which he was later to identify) and in April 1918 he met Chaim Weizmann. In that year the two became firm friends, discussing ideals and collaborating in saving a Jewish settlement scheduled for eviction as a security hazard. 
In 1918 Deedes was made temporary brigadier-general, one of the youngest in the army. In 1919 he was seconded to the Foreign Office for work in Egypt. His distinctive gifts for sympathetic but dispassionate diplomacy, and his rare linguistic expertise, had earned him a reputation in influential quarters. After the armistice with Turkey it was intended that he should join the allied commission at Constantinople. However, while on home leave after four and a half years spent abroad, he was approached to join the administration to run Palestine under the new British mandate. Despite a feeling of unworthiness, and still committed to the idea of doing social work, Deedes was persuaded by Herbert Samuel, the first high commissioner, to become chief secretary in the Palestine administration. Samuel later wrote in his memoirs that he had asked for Deedes in April 1920 not only because he was by profession a soldier of great administrative capacity, but because 'there was in him a strong strain of idealism which drew him powerfully to the Holy Land' ('DNB'). However, Deedes undertook to serve for only two years. On arrival in Jerusalem in May 1920 he recruited an energetic staff of young men, Arabs as well as Jews, who established a model of collaboration and enterprise. He was deeply interested in both the Arab desire for freedom from foreign rule and the Jewish claim on Palestine as a national home. 
Deedes believed in personal relations more than political and official relationships: essentially he was driven not by politics, but by his religion. He sought to reconcile Arab and Zionist aspirations, but opposed centralization and ventured into the provinces to see matters for himself. He grew popular and was warmly praised by Jews and Arabs alike. A leading Arab newspaper commented: 'Every element in the country, as far as we can observe, seems to think that he is their friend' ('DNB'). Both communities sensed that his was a distinctive and unusual presence among them and knew how to value it. His mother joined him in Jerusalem, creating a home in which people of different faiths and opinions could meet together and talk. But the situation was increasingly volatile. Deedes struggled to control the May Day riots in Jaffa in 1921, decisively allowing Jews to defend themselves, standing on a lorry, unarmed and virtually alone, and exhorting the crowds around him to disperse. He saved a Jewish settlement at Rehoboth from an assault by a crowd of ten thousand, not by deploying soldiers, but by instructing an aeroplane to dive low over their heads. 
In 1921 Deedes was knighted. Early in 1923 he resigned. Some thought him worn down by administration. In reality he was troubled by the gulf which separated him as chief secretary from humble people: he had no interest in material advantages, and the trappings of office and authority seemed only a hindrance to spiritual life. He had always practised stern self-denial and cultivated the great grace of humility, and he argued that there were plenty of abler men to replace him. He transferred to the Highland light infantry in 1923 and retired with the rank of colonel and honorary rank of brigadier-general. In April 1923 he finally returned to live in England, refusing all official ceremonies, preferring to say his farewells quietly and personally. 
At the age of forty Wyndham Deedes began a new career in social work. He moved into two rooms in University House, Bethnal Green, a poor suburb of London, much inhabited by immigrants. There he became absorbed in social work for several organizations, pursuing the solitary, devout life of a Christian ascetic. He worked assiduously for the National Council of Social Service and chaired its London council. He helped to establish a bookshop where public talks took place. He slept little, rose at 5.30, and dealt with correspondence before breakfast. Usually, he ate only a biscuit for lunch. Much of his income he gave away. He read a great deal, often theology, in the evenings, and also translated Turkish novels into English. 
The world beyond Bethnal Green was not cast aside. Deedes broadcast once a week over the BBC, in Turkish which now seemed a little dated, though it had a rare elegance. He still travelled abroad, to promote Zionism in Europe and the United States. He made himself useful in the new representative bodies of the Church of England. Instinctively he strongly opposed national socialism and visited Germany twice on missions of protest or assistance. Deedes was often a guest of the Weizmanns, who lived in Kensington. He revisited Turkey towards the end of 1939 after a violent earthquake had occurred there. He was a founder of the Turkish Centre in Fitzhardinge Street in London. In 1943 he was instrumental in creating, in Bedford Square, the British Association for the Jewish National Home in Palestine; a year later he was chiefly responsible for acquiring the house in Manchester Square which became Palestine House. (On 30 September 1948 it became the legation of Israel.) 
When war broke out again in September 1939 Deedes chose to serve in the civil defence. He became a conscientious chief air-raid warden for the borough. When bombed out of University House he moved into a neighbouring tenement. In 1941 his work assumed a more explicitly political character when he became Labour member of the London county council for North-East Bethnal Green, remaining such until 1946. He also became a member of the education committee. 
A succession of operations -- three in 1946 alone -- diminished Deedes's physical powers and his stamina. His mother had died in 1940, and Saltwood Castle was sold. He was advised to leave London on health grounds, and in 1950 he returned to Hythe, near the family home of Saltwood, living simply in a single bed-sitting room in a boarding-house, often passing the night deep in meditation and noting his reflections, as he had for years, on little scraps of paper. Visitors were struck by the spiritual side of his nature. Eliahu Elath, the Israeli ambassador, who met him in 1950, noted that 'the strength which was so visibly deserting his body could, in some mysterious way, be transmuting itself into moral and spiritual vitality' (Elath, Bentwich, and May, 82). The creation of the state of Israel proved to be the fulfilment of his hopes, and Deedes reflected that perhaps he had been allowed to live only to see it happen. Sir Wyndham Deedes died on 2 September 1956 in St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32769


Havilland, Sir Geoffrey de (1882-1965), aircraft and aero-engine designer and manufacturer, was born at Magdala House, Terriers Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 27 July 1882, second of three sons of the Revd Charles de Havilland (1854-1920) and his first wife, Alice Jeannette (1854-1911), daughter of Jason Saunders, of Medley Manor, Oxfordshire. His early life was tense and miserable, with an irascible, improvident father and a harassed, tearful mother, who eventually suffered a depressive decline. Originally destined for the church, de Havilland was educated at Nuneaton grammar school, St Edward's School, Oxford, and the Crystal Palace School of Engineering (1900-03). He then served an apprenticeship at Rugby with Willans and Robinson, engine manufacturers. In 1905 he became a draughtsman at 30's'. a week with the Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company in Birmingham, but, disliking the dull work and harsh management, he resigned after a year. He then worked for two years in the design office of an omnibus company in Walthamstow. 
Inspired by the aeronautical flights of Wilbur Wright, de Havilland in 1908 borrowed between $500 and $1000 from his maternal grandfather (an Oxford businessman) and designed his own aeroplane and engine. During 1910 he taught himself to fly in a second prototype. His first employee was Frank Trounson Hearle, who in 1914 married de Havilland's fiery socialist sister, Ione (1885-1953). De Havilland himself married, in 1909, Louise (1881-1949), daughter of Richard Thomas, engineer, of Chepstow; his wife had formerly been companion to his mother and governess to his two sisters. She made the fabric coverings of the first De Havilland aircraft on a hand-turned Singer sewing machine which she continued to use until her death. They had three sons. 
In 1912, flying one of his own machines, de Havilland established a new British altitude record of 10,500 feet. During the following two years he evolved an important range of generic aeroplanes before his appointment in January 1914 as an inspector of aircraft in the aeronautical inspection directorate. He felt miserable and wasted at leaving design work, and in May 1914 became chief designer for the Aircraft Manufacturing Company (Airco) of George Holt Thomas at an annual salary of $600 plus commission on aircraft sold. After the outbreak of war he joined the Royal Flying Corps but continued working at Airco. In the next four years he designed and flew eight military aeroplanes, five types going into war service in large production. He was an original but never outlandish designer who had an unerring instinct about his work. The number of 'DH' aeroplanes built in Britain and the USA amounted to about 30 per cent of the total output of those two allies. 
Following the closure of Airco in 1920, de Havilland raised $20,000 and founded the De Havilland Aircraft Company with a staff of fifty. He was neither chairman nor managing director of his company, begrudging all time lost to technical work and feeling exasperated by financial responsibilities. He preferred instead in the 1920s to devote himself to the possibilities of civil aviation. In 1925 he pioneered the light aeroplane movement with the Moth. This famous model, originally selling at $650, had a simple, practical design and sturdy construction. Over 7000 Moths of different marks were built in Britain in the next seven years, and there were many overseas sales. Thousands of civilians learned to fly in Moths, inaugurating the era of popular civil aviation and winning financial security for De Havillands. The Tiger Moth trainer (first sold in 1931) became the standard Royal Air Force trainer in the Second World War, 8300 being built. 
As a result of design work begun in the 1920s, the De Havilland Aircraft Company manufactured 862 airliners in Britain during the 1930s, of the Dragon, Express, and Dragon Rapide types. All were equipped with De Havilland engines. In 1934 the De Havilland Comet Racer (of which only five were built) won a race from London to Melbourne in under seventy-one hours. During the following year de Havilland pioneered the British manufacture of American controllable pitch propellers, which subsequently were crucial in winning the battle of Britain. 
De Havilland's prime contribution in the Second World War was the Mosquito, perhaps the most versatile warplane ever built, and for most of the war, the fastest aircraft. His company also operated the government's 'shadow' factories of the second aircraft group and the northern propeller division. Group personnel (including shadow factories) rose from 5191 in 1937 to 38,311 in 1944, and aircraft production from 200 in 1937 to 2327 in 1941. Turnover rose from $1.4 million in 1936 to $25 million in 1945. 
After the war De Havillands returned to civil markets with the Dove and Heron types, and built the jet-powered Vampire fighter. Rocket engines followed in 1947 and guided weapons in 1951. The company's engine division had produced the first British jet propulsion engine in 1942, and its Comet airliner, which first flew in 1949, pioneered the civilian jet airliner. Twenty-one Comets were built in Britain up to 1954, when production was suspended after metal fatigue caused two machines to crash with heavy loss of life. De Havilland was distressed by these accidents, and although manufacture of an improved prototype was resumed in 1958, memories of the catastrophe were never erased. 
De Havilland was not involved in design work after 1945, and he retired from active involvement in his company in 1955, thereafter remaining as president. His eldest son, Geoffrey de Havilland, who first flew at the age of eight weeks, was killed while flying an experimental DH fighter near the speed of sound; his youngest son, John (1918-1943), died in an air collision. His wife suffered a nervous breakdown after these deaths and died in 1949. In 1951 de Havilland married Joan Mary (1900-1974), daughter of Edward Philip Frith, chartered accountant, and the divorced wife of Godfrey Mordaunt (died 1951). 
De Havilland was a keen natural historian and photographer, whose attractive personality shines from his memoirs, 'Sky Fever', published in 1961. Imaginative, sensitive, enthusiastic, and tenacious, he was tactful, friendly, and disarming in manner. As the leader of a design team he was deeply admired by his assistants. His modesty and dislike of fuss were such that for two decades he limited his entries in reference books to three or four lines. He was a brave pilot, who won the king's cup air race in 1933 and continued flying until his seventieth year. He was probably unique among the pioneer designers in flying his own creations. He was made OBE in 1918 and CBE in 1934, received the Air Force Cross in 1919, was knighted in 1944, and appointed to the Order of Merit in 1962. He received numerous national and international gold and silver medals and honorary fellowships of learned and engineering societies. De Havilland died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 21 May 1965 at Watford Peace Memorial Hospital, Stanmore, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 32770


Havilland, Geoffrey Raoul de (1910-1946), aviator, was born on 18 February 1910 at Crux Easton, Hampshire, the son of Sir Geoffrey de Havilland (1882-1965) and his wife, Louise (1881-1949), daughter of Richard Thomas, of Chepstow. His father in 1920 founded the De Havilland Aircraft Company Ltd, which became a worldwide enterprise under his technical leadership. 
The eldest of three sons, Geoffrey Raoul was born near to the site of his father's first flying experiments, which attained the success of full controlled flight in the summer of 1910. It was about this time that he experienced his first flight, carried in his mother's arms in a plane piloted by his father. When he and his brothers later went to school -- Geoffrey was educated at Stowe School (1924-7) -- their parents would visit them by Gipsy Moth, landing in a field in the school grounds for a picnic lunch. All three boys grew up with the sound of aeroplane engines a constant presence in their lives. 
In 1928 Geoffrey entered the De Havilland company at Stag Lane, Edgware, as an apprentice. While serving his three years in the engineering departments, he learned to fly at the Royal Air Force Reserve School on Stag Lane aerodrome, and then spent about a year in South Africa, where he gained useful flying experience. After returning to England in 1932 he became a flying instructor at the De Havilland Aeronautical Technical School and later at the London Aeroplane Club, which had by then moved to the company's new aerodrome at Hatfield, Hertfordshire. From the first he had shown exceptional ability as a pilot, and a desire to follow this calling in its most exacting branch led him to turn, at the age of twenty-five, from flying instructor to test pilot on the staff of the parent De Havilland company. 
The first aircraft which de Havilland tested was an economical twin-engined transport called the Dragon, which was being manufactured for world use. Aircraft of this class, including Dragonflies, Dragon Rapides, and four-engined DH 86s, occupied him for a couple of years until the company produced a clean, high-performance twenty-two-passenger monoplane airliner, the Albatross, for Imperial Airways. The later development trials of this were conducted by Geoffrey de Havilland when he became chief test pilot in succession to Robert John Waight, who was killed in a flying accident on 1 October 1937. 
Taking Waight's place was a considerable step for one who had not up to that time flown a wide variety of aircraft. Fifteen months later de Havilland undertook the first flight of a twin-engined metal transport aircraft, the Flamingo, and conducted its whole flight development. For the next seven years he made the first flight, and did the tests, of every De Havilland prototype. They were the years of the war when the De Havilland company entered wholesale the field of military aviation, and the aircraft concerned were high-performance combat machines, the fastest in their categories. Notable among them were the Mosquito twin-engined two-seat multi-purpose aircraft, first flown on 25 November 1940; the Vampire jet fighter with De Havilland Goblin engine, 20 September 1943; and the Hornet long-range twin-propeller fighter, 28 July 1944. He visited Canada in 1942 to test the Canadian-built Mosquito and to demonstrate it in Canada and the United States. In recognition of his services he was appointed OBE in 1945. 
De Havilland was a keen sporting pilot and took part in a great many races and contests. He shone in the low turns of pylon racing and was one of the finest exhibition pilots British aviation has known. His favourite personal racer was a clean little monoplane, the TK 2, designed and built by students of the De Havilland Aeronautical Technical School. With a love of the sport he combined a serious attitude to his work. His upbringing helped him to become a practical and analytical test pilot of the calibre most valuable to the aerodynamicist and the designer. In 1933 de Havilland married Gwendoline Maud Alexander. The marriage was dissolved in 1942 and he married in 1943 Pipette Marion Scott Bruford. There were no children of either marriage. 
Geoffrey de Havilland met his death above the Thames estuary on 27 September 1946, when testing an experimental tailless high-speed jet aircraft, the DH 108, in preparation for an attempt on the world speed record. It is probable that he exceeded this during his last flight. The wreckage of his plane was found the next day, scattered over the mudflats of Egypt Bay, near Sheerness, and his body was discovered at West Beach, Whitstable, over a week later. The precise cause of the crash was never established. Geoffrey's youngest brother, John, had been killed while testing a Mosquito on 23 August 1943, and their father later recalled how he had discussed with both of them the dangers of test flying, but that neither had taken these talks 'very seriously': 'They started a strange habit of refusing to call aeroplanes by their proper name. Geoffrey usually referred to them as 'boilers'. 'If I take a boiler up and it blows up,' he used to say, 'it's just bad luck. But nothing's going to stop me.' (de Havilland, 197)' They were buried in Tewin churchyard, near Hatfield, where their mother was also laid to rest, not long after her eldest son's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 32771


Mare, Walter John de la (1873-1956), poet and writer, was born on 25 April 1873 at 83 Maryon Road, Charlton, near Woolwich, London, the sixth of the seven children of James Edward Delamare (1811-1877), principal of the accountant's bank note office, Bank of England, and his second wife, Lucy Sophia (1838-1920). Her father was Dr Colin Arrott Browning, fiery reformer of conditions on board convict transports and staff surgeon to the naval dockyard, Woolwich. The Delamare forebears were Huguenot silk merchants; the poet restored the French form of their name. The Arrotts and Brownings were Scottish evangelicals with a marked bent for medicine. 
De la Mare (known as Jack and later WJ) was a chorister of St Paul's Cathedral choir school, founded its 'Choristers' Journal', and at nearly seventeen joined the statistics department of the Anglo-American Oil Company. He drudged through eighteen ill-paid years (1890-1908), adding, copying, compiling elaborate sales sheets, detesting the company's ruthlessness under Rockefeller. Staying late after hours, using office waste paper, he experimented with story and verse, struggling for publication, and pursued an isolated self-education. 
On 7 August 1899 de la Mare married (Constance) Elfrida (1862-1943), eldest child of William Alfred Ingpen, clerk to the insolvent debtors' court and clerk of the rules. They had two daughters and two sons; Richard, the elder, became chairman of Faber and Faber and a prolific publisher of his father. De la Mare was passionately paternal. 
In youth de la Mare had dark romantic looks, favoured aesthete fashions of the 1890s, and enjoyed amateur acting. Later he grew stocky, his head impressive for its strong, concentrated cast of feature -- engaging and mobile in talk. His highly individual conversation consisted mostly of questioning -- reflective, humorous, dealing in imaginative ideas rather than personalities, constantly off at a tangent. Though warm and widely sociable, he seemed inwardly essentially private. Besides books (he read omnivorously) he delighted in the English scene (travelling abroad reluctantly and seldom), especially in whatever was minute or odd, romantic or grotesque. Poetry was the ruling passion; this only increased with age. 
His own output was prodigious: de la Mare published over a thousand poems and rhymes. The poems are marked by subtle and memorable rhythms, and often minor in key; many are masterly and haunting. His real career began late, when he was nearing thirty, with 'Songs of Childhood' (1902), published under the pen-name Walter Ramal (discarded only in 1904). Some of these poems aim directly at child readers, others recreate the state of childhood itself -- to him always life's summit -- its pure wonder, intuitions, solitary fantasy, and above all its readiness to see this world as part of another, no less real for being magical and spiritual. Fairy-tale, ballad, incantation, make-believe, and dream provide a symbolism not escapist, but selected for more accurate penetration of this other, elusive, 'Real'. 
De la Mare's first prose book, 'Henry Brocken' (1904), is tentative; the hero, wandering on horseback, encounters random figures from books -- Jane Eyre, Gulliver, the doctor in 'Macbeth'. It is critical appreciation in romance form, not by analysis but through a kind of oblique, original illustration. Allied experiments (in verse) on Shakespearian characters brought the eager championship of Henry Newbolt, who succeeded finally in securing for de la Mare a $200 royal bounty grant (1908) -- enough to risk quitting oil to rely wholly on fiction, poetry, and reviewing (chiefly for the 'Saturday Westminster Gazette' and 'Times Literary Supplement'). A civil-list pension followed in 1915. 
Once free, de la Mare wrote an arresting novel, 'The Return' (1910). The hero, leading a mediocre, suburban life, becomes possessed (almost) by the evil, but much more intelligent, spirit of a long-dead Huguenot suicide. By the time the hero repels him (at the cost of all former security) he has himself changed fundamentally, aware now of a profound, enigmatic spiritual context not guessed at before. De la Mare's sense of death as an opening rather than a shutting door is sharply presented. 
'Now and again over one's mind comes the glamour of a kind of visionary world saturating this', de la Mare wrote to Naomi Royde-Smith (8 August 1911). This was for him life's central experience: all he wrote concerned it. Popular recognition came gradually for an outlook so unusual. He became well known only with the poems of 'The Listeners' (1912) and, for children, 'Peacock Pie' (1913). In these, with 'Motley' (1918), his lyric powers reached a climax. This was in part owing to his passionate friendship with Naomi, begun in 1911, when he started reviewing for the 'Saturday Westminster Gazette', of which she was literary editor. Though they were never physically lovers, for four years, until war supervened and the bubble burst, Naomi was his muse. She was far from ethereal -- ambitious, combative, much more in the swim of literary society than he. Yet he found in her (or invented, as they sometimes agreed he did) a secret self who lit up his. When this ended, workaday friendship survived for a while. Lyrics she inspired -- often obliquely expressed -- attain an ardour of longing and regret. Echoes of that infatuation later sound, at reticent remove, in the passion of the heroine of the novel 'Memoirs of a Midget' (1921), which also explores his fascination with the uncommon angle and the very small. His knee-high midget is as acute as a Jane Austen gentlewoman, but has links with Emily Bronte's stranger universe. 
De la Mare's originality stamped his anthologies, notably 'Come Hither' (1923), framed by one of his most beautiful symbolic stories. The anthology juxtaposes official poetry with Tom O'Bedlam and counting-out rhymes, as if to prove that poetry's essence counts for everything, its categories for little. Other very personal studies, part anthology, part discursive meditation, cover most of his main preoccupations: childhood; dream, imagination, and the unconscious; love; time (this last in verse, the long, conversational 'Winged Chariot'; 1953). His other sustained poem, 'The Traveller' (1946), is a kind of dry-land 'Ancient Mariner': a quest across a huge desert, revealed as the Eye of Earth. The hero, dying, finally stares down into a dark well of truth, the pupil, and 'It seemed to him a presence there gazed back'. Sombre, the end yet suggests that to end in defeat does not ultimately matter, to bless life being the only significant victory. 
During the course of his life de la Mare wrote about a hundred short stories for both children and adults: mysterious, often sinister, nearly always poetic in effect. They can be obscure, built up as they are by fine-spun suggestion and the same embroidered, often archaic expressions he used in poetry, indifferent to modern fashion. Danger, enigma, and transience closely dog their most homely or commonplace settings. The accepted is everywhere disturbed by warnings that this universe exists unsafely to bring news of something far more important. De la Mare seems doubtful whether good or evil is the stronger, and his distrust of answers, and hatred of dogma, forbade him any creed; yet he acknowledged a divine creator, was steeped in the King James 'Bible', and would pray before sleep. He held the fundamental human condition, from earliest childhood on, to be homesickness, exile. 
De la Mare's health was not robust, but he had basic stamina, surviving dangerous illness at least four times, and though ailing in his last years wrote constantly, inventive energy flourishing to the end. He moved house often around the south London suburbs, ending as he began, near the Thames. The main homes were 14 Thornsett Road, Anerley, south-east London (1912-25); when prosperity came, Hill House, Taplow, Buckinghamshire (1925-39); and finally, best loved, the top half of South End House, Montpelier Row, Twickenham, Middlesex (1940-56). Here he entertained multitudes of friends and fellow writers, usually to tea parties. He was awarded the OM (1953) and appointed CH (1948), and received honorary degrees from the universities of St Andrews (1924), Bristol (1929), Cambridge (1935), London (1948), and Oxford (1951). Keble College, Oxford, elected him honorary fellow (1944). 
De la Mare died at home of his second coronary thrombosis (the first was in 1947) on 22 June 1956. His ashes were buried in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 32772


Ramee, Marie Louise de la (1839-1908), novelist, was born on 1 January 1839, at 1 Union Terrace, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the only child of Louis Rame (died 1872?) and his English wife, Susan Sutton (died 1893), who named her Maria Louise. Her father was an enigmatic man, a native Frenchman; his marriage certificate records his occupations as tailor and gentleman, and in addition he is known to have taught French. Maria Louise's education apparently consisted completely of her father's tutoring. As her father's frequent absences grew longer and more mysterious, she romanticized him as a Napoleonic spy, changing her name to Marie de la Ramee to suggest a vague aristocratic background. Louis Rame disappeared but is thought to have died in Paris street fighting in 1872. 
Precocious as a child, de la Ramee began to write, producing 'Idalia' (1867) at the age of sixteen. She published her first story, 'Dashwood's Drag, or, The Derby and What Came of It', in 'Bentley's Miscellany' in 1859 under the auspices of her medical adviser's cousin, William Harrison Ainsworth. Seventeen stories later, her first novel, 'Held in Bondage', appeared in 'Bentley's' in serial form in 1863, entitled 'Granville de Vigne: a Tale of the Day' under the pseudonym Ouida, the childhood mispronunciation of Louise that had become her nickname. The pseudonym came to have a particular force, one that was seized upon by de la Ramee, as she strove throughout her life to distinguish between her private and public identities on its basis. This is made clear in a letter of January 1900 to her European publisher, Baron von Tauchnitz: 'I just see in your catalogue that you append another name to Ouida (Louise de la Ramee.) Please take it out. I have no other name in literature. And it should not be put in inverted commas... Besides, I 'love' Ouida. It is my 'very own', as children say. I don't care for any of the other names I bear. (Jordan, 76)' After Sir Francis Burnand parodied her second novel, 'Strathmore' (1865), in 'Punch', and Lord Strangford attacked it in the 'Pall Mall Gazette', Ouida became an established public figure. Her prolific, imaginative novels were admired for their fast-paced plots and atmospheric settings by such people as Bulwer-Lytton, Whyte Melville, and Sir Richard Burton. Many readers, however, criticized her factual inaccuracies, her redundancies, and her two-dimensional characters, including Byronic-type heroes. Her best-known work, 'Under Two Flags' (1867), bears all of these hallmarks and went on to sell millions of copies in its single-volume 'cheap' format. The plot is certainly melodramatic, relating the adventures of the Hon. Bertie Cecil, a member of the Life Guards forced to fake his death and leave London to protect the honour of his younger brother. He enlists as a 'chasseur d'Afrique' under the name Louis Victor, and his many acts of heroism are detailed at length. Having angered his commanding officer, he is about to be court-martialled when one of the camp followers, who has fallen in love with him, throws herself in front of the firing squad, saving his life, in time for the reprieve that follows as a result of his true identity becoming known. The effects of stirring plots such as these, combined with the popularity of Mudie's circulating library, the public appetite for Ouida's prurient romanticism, and her shocking revelations about upper-class and military life, ensured her success until her zenith in the mid-1870s. 
De la Ramee lived and entertained lavishly at the Langham Hotel, London, on earnings averaging $5000 per year, until the eviction caused by her extravagances. Financial problems forced her to move to Italy with her beloved mother in 1871, living first in an apartment at the Palazzo Vagonville in Florence, then at the Villa Farinola at Scandicci, 3 miles from Florence. Mme Rame died in 1893, to be buried in a pauper's grave at Allior cemetery in Florence, after which de la Ramee lived at the Villa Massonni, at Atna' Alessio near Lucca. 
Probably her arrogance, vanity, idiosyncrasies, dramatic flair, and the other extreme oddities described in her biographies make as interesting reading as any of Ouida's novels. A woman whose slight build, large nose, undistinguished features, inauspicious colouring (brown hair, blue eyes), and diminutive stature detracted from her physical appearance, her vanity nevertheless caused her to order expensive dresses too short in the arms and skirt in an attempt to show off her small wrists and feet. The effort merely resulted in unfashionable and grotesque costumes. Often she would receive her visitors in the costume of the heroine of her latest novel, striking the artificial poses she imagined of her characters. 
Snobbish, intolerant, and rude, de la Ramee became a difficult hostess and a demanding, insulting guest, yet she still attracted enough important people to hold a salon. As Lady Paget remarked of the quality of the guests at one of de la Ramee's parties: '[s]he has an extraordinary talent for forcing people to come' (Jordan, 84). Certain of the unusual merit of her amateurish paintings, she pressed them on unwitting guests or acquaintances including that practised observer of human nature, Henry James. To her first biographer, Elizabeth Lee, James remarked that de la Ramee 'was 'curious', in a common, little way... of a most uppish or dauntless little spirit of arrogance and independence... a little terrible and finally pathetic 'grotesque'' (Lee, 231). However, Lee, the author of 'Italian Hours', also claimed to admire 'her original genuine perception of the beauty, the distinction and quality of Italy' (ibid., 234) demonstrated in such novels as 'Signa' (1875), 'Adriadne' (1877), 'In Maremma' (1881), 'A Village Commune' (1882), and 'The Massarenes' (1897). Most of Ouida's fiction was published in several editions and languages, as well as adapted for plays and operas. 
In 1871 de la Ramee unwittingly initiated her own decline by engaging in a notorious ten-year affair with the marchese della Stuffa. This philandering member of an ancient Florentine family, a gentleman-in-waiting to the king, was also involved with Mrs Janet Ross, a society hostess of Florence, resulting in a series of embarrassing public scenes between de la Ramee and della Stuffa. As revenge for his refusal to marry her, Ouida published a 'roman a clef', 'Friendship' (1878), vowing that every word of it was true. However, the negative public reaction to it diminished her already weak social currency, which was then permanently devalued by a direct snub from the prime minister, Lord Salisbury, in 1887. Her popularity as a novelist waned almost entirely after 1890. 
Late in life, de la Ramee became passionate over various causes such as anti-feminism, the South African War, and animal vivisection. She also proclaimed her increasing disgust with the military, and with technological advances. Throughout her life she constantly avowed disbelief in any religion, writing to Lady Constance Leslie in 1907 that she regarded Christianity as an invention based on oriental myths in order to satisfy basic human needs and hopes, and that she deplored its claim to being the best or only religion. 
From 1904 until her death de la Ramee lived in squalor with many adopted stray dogs in her tenement at Viareggio. Her dedication to these pets was perhaps the best index of her increasing eccentricity, as she indulged them with luxuries while starving herself; the local people called her 'Crazy Lady with the Dogs'. In these years she was humiliated by lawsuits, debts, and the well-meaning attempts of friends and readers to ease her poverty. When sympathizers made a public appeal to the subscribers of the 'Daily Mail' to donate to her relief, de la Ramee issued a furious denial that she suffered any want. Her few remaining friends, including Lady Paget, Alfred Austin, and George Wyndham, persuaded the prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, to offer her a pension. After considerable resistance, especially to the requirement of revealing her age for the purpose, in 1906 Winifred, Lady Howard of Glossop, finally persuaded her to accept the civil-list pension of $150 per year. Never strong, she contracted pneumonia and died of complications on 25 January 1908, unmarried and childless, at via Zanardelli 70, Viareggio, Italy. She was buried in the English cemetery at the Bagni di Lucca. There an anonymous female admirer erected a monument above her grave representing a reclining figure with a dog at her feet. A memorial drinking fountain with trough, designed by Ernest G. Gillick with a medallion portrait, and inscribed by Earl Curzon of Kedleston, was unveiled at Bury St Edmunds on 2 November 1909. 
Ouida's last and incomplete novel, 'Helianthus', appeared posthumously in 1908. Although people read many of her forty-four works of fiction well into the twentieth century, it currently appears that only the essays in 'Critical Studies' (1900) may retain lasting merit. 'Under Two Flags', however, was filmed three times in the early twentieth century, with the 1936 version, starring Ronald Colman and Claudette Colbert, best evoking the spirit of the novel. As Graham Greene put it: 'How Ouida would have loved the abandon of this picture, the thirty-two thousand rounds of ammunition shot off into the Arizona desert, the cast of more than ten thousand, [and] the five thousand pounds which insured the stars against camel bites. (Walker, 1129)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32773


Rue, de la, family (per. c.1820-1923), stationers and printers, came to prominence with Thomas de la Rue (1793-1866), born in La Foret, Guernsey, on 24 March 1793, and apprenticed to the master printer Joseph Antoine Chevalier at St Peter Port in Guernsey in 1803. On finishing his apprenticeship, Thomas took up with Tom Greenslade of Bishop's Nympton in Devon, who was related by marriage to Thomas's future wife, Jane Warren: in 1812 they launched a newspaper, 'Le Publiciste'. After only a few months Thomas walked out on the partnership and, with a determination and audacity that were to characterize his business life, raised funding from John Campion, husband of his sister Rachel, to publish his own rival newspaper, 'Le Miroir Politique'. This was so successful that after only a few months he advertised for an apprentice. Thomas's interest in the quality of printing and in other types of publication, such as editions of the litany and 'Psalms', indicated the future direction of his career. 
On 21 March 1814 de la Rue married Jane Warren (1789-1858) of Bishop's Nympton. Their first child, Warren de la Rue (1815-1889), was born at St Peter Port in January 1815. In that summer de la Rue left the 'Miroir Politique', and after his father's death in November 1816 he and his family left Guernsey. They may have moved first to Barnstaple before settling in London, where Thomas set up business in Finsbury Square manufacturing straw hats, a skill perhaps learned in Guernsey through family connections. His second son, William Frederick ['see below'], was born in London soon after. Millinery still allowed de la Rue to experiment with different printing techniques and dyes for paper bonnets during the 1820s; however, a reference to playing cards in his notebooks for 1828 signalled what was to become a lucrative new line. Two years later he was in business with Samuel Cornish and William Frederick Rock, calling themselves 'Cardmakers, Hot Pressers and Enamellers'. 
The new decade brought mixed fortunes. The first few years were prosperous: in 1831 de la Rue registered an ace of spades at the Stamp Office, Somerset House, as was required for purposes of duty on playing cards; the following year he received royal letters patent for improvements in the colour printing and decoration of playing cards. His specification contained descriptions of two methods of applying colour by surface-printing, one employing typography from raised wooden or metal blocks, the other lithography, printing from stones. In each case separate blocks or stones were used for different colours and Thomas paid particular attention to methods of fitting the design together in perfect register, with no overlap or gap between colours. Not all his innovations were successful: attempts to add character to the expressions on the face cards were unpopular -- instead, Thomas applied creativity to decoration on the back of the cards. In 1835 the business moved to the address that became the seat of its empire, 110 Bunhill Row in the City, with the family living next door at number 108. However, the commercial depression of 1837 caused serious financial difficulties for the firm and the partnership -- now de la Rue, James, and Rudd -- was dissolved. Things were so bad that late in May de la Rue was arrested for debt, and though it was in his creditors' interest to bail him out, they drove a hard bargain to do so, running the business for a while as a trust with de la Rue as a paid employee, and negotiating a low price to buy his patent for the production of white lead. The family pulled together to weather the storm: by 1837 both de la Rue's sons were working in the business, and his wife and eldest daughter also helped out. Warren de la Rue had joined the firm some two years earlier, and was already proving the worth of his scientific interests; indeed, another scientist with whom he had collaborated, Charles Button, lent de la Rue money to help clear his debts. In 1839 both Warren and Charles Button were made partners in the firm, and in the following year Warren married Georgiana Bowles (1819-1918), who travelled with him on business and helped him throughout his career. Typically, Thomas de la Rue bounced back from his problems, celebrating Victoria's coronation in June 1838 by employing 100 staff for six days to gild a special edition of the 'Sun' newspaper. 
For several decades both family and business flourished as established lines and new products were developed with shrewd collaboration and constant experiment, and were rewarded with public recognition. Warren de la Rue combined scientific experiment with business travel, as well as superintending building works and devising an improved boiler for making tea for the workmen. Playing cards became a cornerstone of the business, the more expensive packs distinguished by the work of Owen Jones (1809-1874), who in an association lasting several decades produced over 170 designs for playing cards alone, including a pack for the royal family, as well as for diaries and calendars. The cards and their manufacture earned the praise of Charles Dickens in his 'Household Words' (vol. 6, 1853), and their influence was indirectly acknowledged by the family long after the business had diversified: referring to the number of cards in a pack, William Frederick left $52 in his will to Owen Jones, while Warren's younger son, Thomas Andros de la Rue ['see below'], had the houses of Cadogan Square renumbered so that his would be number 52. 
In an early venture into overseas markets in the early 1840s Thomas de la Rue established his younger brother, Paul, in St Petersburg to oversee the tsar's playing card business, for which De La Rue supplied machinery. Railway tickets and visiting cards were added to the range of printed goods, and the range of social stationery expanded. Such activities followed on from existing business, but as early as 1840 de la Rue took out a printing patent which contained hints of two key areas of future development, in a reference to 'banknotes, post office envelopes or any work requiring great difficulty of invention'. At this date the firm was not yet directly engaged in the security printing of currency or stamps, but among several valuable contacts, Warren was friendly with Edwin Hill, the brother of Rowland Hill who introduced the pre-paid penny postage in 1840. Capitalizing on the market opened up by the increase in post, De La Rue initially moved into the manufacture of envelopes, cut mechanically by a machine invented by Warren de la Rue and Edwin Hill. 
This venture was just one feature of the accolade published in 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal' in July 1846: recounting his experience in 'A day at De La Rue's', the writer found 'an amusing hive of industry; steam-engines, machinery and animated beings, commingling in restless and varied movement' to produce playing cards, mourning stationery and marriage cards, needle-books, and even a portable chessboard. The description shows that inventive production was matched by economies of scale and good management: the firm made and repaired their own machinery, while the productivity of some 300 employees was maximized by such paternalistic measures as replacing beer breaks with a shorter working day and establishing a library and a sickness fund. The article described the firm as the largest of its kind in the world -- journalistic exaggeration, perhaps, but indicative of status which was recognized and enhanced at the Great Exhibition of 1851. 
With the help of good contacts -- Warren had by now been elected to the Royal Society and Owen Jones was superintendent of works for the Great Exhibition -- De La Rue had a prime site and attracted huge crowds to their display, of which the envelope-making machine was the centrepiece. Other items included portable writing-desks, designed by William Frederick, and playing cards with coloured pips to assist those with poor sight; the latter were not a success at the time, though similar devices are now a common feature on paper currency, of which the present-day De La Rue is a major producer. Thomas, Warren, and the firm won medals for their contributions to the exhibition, which were also rewarded by good publicity in the exhibition catalogue, the 'Illustrated London News', and in Henry Selous's painting of Victoria opening the exhibition, which included Thomas and Warren among the onlookers -- indeed, the family bought the painting, later presented to the Victoria and Albert Museum. At the exhibitions in New York and Paris in 1853 and 1855 the firm won further honours and Thomas was made chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. 

William Frederick de la Rue (1825-1870), Thomas's younger son, was born in London on 3 April 1825; he began working for the firm in 1837 and became a traveller in 1840. He was made a partner in 1850 and married Emma Tanner on 20 May of the following year. For some time they lived in the family house next door to the business in Bunhill Row before moving to Harley Street in 1864. Known as Colonel Billy because of his close association with a militia regiment, the 4th Tower Hamlets, William Frederick applied his administrative skills to complement Warren's scientific interests. Over the next twenty years they introduced two important new lines: postage stamps and paper money. In 1853 the firm received a four-year contract from the Inland Revenue to produce adhesive revenue stamps for drafts and receipts. The surface-printing techniques De La Rue used for playing cards enabled them to offer benefits of cost and security over their rivals, Perkins, Bacon & Co., who had hitherto had the Inland Revenue business. In the next few years this advantage was pressed further, helped by a chemist, Hugo Muller, whom Warren had brought to the firm and who worked on perfecting secure printing inks. In 1855 De La Rue produced their first postage stamp, the fourpenny carmine; two years later they received a further contract for the 1's'. and 6died stamps. Another major market opened up in 1854 with the order for stamps for the East India Company, a contract which led to further postal business for the whole of India, including the supply of government stationery. 
A second breakthrough came in 1858 when the crown agents asked De La Rue to produce stamps for the British colonies. Once again, De La Rue's gain was Perkins Bacon's loss: disapproving of their lack of consultation, the new agent general for the crown agents established a good relationship with William Frederick, who was given the courtesy title 'Engraver to the Agents General for the Crown Colonies'. The potential offered by colonial business was boosted further in 1859 when Mauritius placed an order for paper currency, a line of security printing anticipated in the patent of 1840. In 1860 banknotes for Mauritius were printed from copper plates. For the immediate future postage stamps were the greater area of growth for the firm, but these developments were the seeds of greater things to come, for in the twentieth century supplying stamps and banknotes to the British empire was a major part of De La Rue's business. 
During the 1850s Thomas de la Rue continued to work on improvements in paper and printing inks, still maintaining his determination to stay ahead of the field; thus in 1856 and 1857 he took John Dickinson & Co. to court for infringing the patent for the envelope-making machine, and won. In 1858 his wife, Jane, died; some months later he married a young Swedish woman, Alice Marie Andre. Soon afterwards he retired from the firm, having negotiated a generous settlement which included lending money to his sons at high interest. In valuing his own achievement in founding the business above that of his sons in developing it, Thomas created a bitterness that was not resolved; thus his career ended as it had begun, with a successful partnership turning sour. After a few weeks of illness, he died at 84 Westbourne Terrace, London, on 7 June 1866, and was buried at Kensal Green. 
Following Thomas's retirement the firm's business continued to expand at home and abroad. Perhaps through William Frederick's friendship with American cousins, De La Rue in 1862 was given the contract to print postage stamps for the Confederate states. William Frederick and Warren were both active in travelling to solicit new business. They won orders for stamps and railway tickets in Italy, latterly helping the Italians to set up their own printing plant. Two letters from William Frederick at Bunhill Row to Warren in Italy in 1862 are a mix of family concerns -- Emma, William Frederick's wife, was ill -- and business, including a promising new order from the raja of Mysore. Postal contracts continued for India, and were established for Portugal and in South America. At home output and sales of playing cards and railway tickets rose impressively, research continued into improving paper and watermarks, and the stationery business flourished, including the ever popular Improved Indelible Diary and Memorandum, almost a miniature almanac, and calendars and diaries embellished with Owen Jones's exquisite decoration -- also to be found on labels for Whitbread's stout and Huntley and Palmers' biscuits. To accommodate this growth, the firm opened offices in Liverpool and Paris (the effects of the Civil War led to the early closure of a New York office) and expanded their London property. 
On 24 August 1870 William Frederick de la Rue died at 122 Harley Street, London, aged forty-six, from cancer of the liver, leaving a distraught family. Warren, who had retired some months earlier, came back to run the firm with the help of his two sons, Warren William (1847-1921) and Sir Thomas Andros de la Rue, first baronet (1849-1911), both of whom had joined the firm on finishing their education. From the 1870s to the 1890s the firm built on existing foundations, again acquiring new property to meet orders from the crown agents and the Board of Inland Revenue, who in 1879 gave De La Rue the order for the 1died stamp, thus putting the country's entire postage stamp business into their hands. As in the past, production was backed by research, to prove, for example, that the red ink used on the penny stamp was not harmful. The continued growth probably owed much to Warren's presence, for after his retirement in 1880 and death in 1889 the picture changed considerably. 
Warren de la Rue's sons showed strong family loyalty, helping at home when their father was ill, but their contrasting personalities -- William Warren pedantic and humourless and Thomas Andros urbane and extrovert -- were markedly less successful in business than their father and uncle, though Warren William's thoroughness at least protected the firm's interests for a time. Accounts differ on how long Warren William remained active in the firm; it seems likely, however, that his involvement diminished after a riding accident in 1896, if not before, and that Thomas Andros was effectively in control of the business after their father's death. On 1 February 1876 he married Emily Maria Speed (1848-1904), with whom he had three sons; he conducted a glittering social life with a passion for theatre and parties. In 1898 he was made a baronet (in recognition of his work as governor of the Royal Chest Hospital) and he turned the firm into a public company, with most of the shares owned by the family and friends. Having inherited a spectacularly successful business, Thomas Andros proceeded to run it with complacency and short-sightedness, caring less for the welfare of staff and more for profit. His attitude towards major customers suggests some of the first Thomas's stubbornness, but without his drive towards invention and investment to develop new lines and maintain the firm's competitive edge. Thomas Andros alienated two crucial clients: the relationship with the crown agents deteriorated, and the Inland Revenue became concerned about De La Rue's monopoly of stamp production, noting that their prices did not fall to reflect cheaper manufacturing costs. In 1911 the Inland Revenue proposed splitting their contract between De La Rue and Harrisons; there may also have been a request that De La Rue lower their prices: either way, Thomas Andros refused to compromise, and the whole contract went to Harrisons. 
This major loss was the start of a serious decline in the fortunes of the De La Rue firm. Thomas Andros died a few months later, at 52 Cadogan Square, London, on 10 April 1911, leaving the business in the hands of his sons, Evelyn, Ivor, and Stuart. They inherited a diminished empire and their lack of flair and harmony failed to restore it. Though the scarcity of gold during the First World War led to contracts for printing 10's'. and $1 notes, these orders were shared with another firm, Waterlow Brothers and Leighton; Stuart de la Rue entered into a dubious arrangement with a third company, Waterlow & Sons, with mutual promises of financial compensation should either receive future contracts. His two older brothers having joined the army, Stuart was left in charge, recklessly acquiring new and unprofitable businesses. By 1921 De La Rue was approaching bankruptcy: ten years after the loss of the Inland Revenue contract Stuart repeated his father's stubborn short-sightedness and lost the government's postal and stationery business for India because he was not prepared to set up a printing office there. Two years later, in 1923, a court battle with the now combined Waterlow firms culminated in public scandal when it emerged that Thomas Andros had long since had a private agreement with Waterlows to share out remuneration from postal contracts. Unable to restore confidence, his youngest son was now forced to leave, ending the family's control of the firm. 
Under new management, retrenchment was eventually followed by the revival, marked by the establishment of a prestigious annual dinner in 1932, and the negotiation of substantial and lucrative banknote contracts from the minister of finance in China. In 1939, with war again imminent, De La Rue undertook to safeguard this production by building printing works in Shanghai and Rangoon, rediscovering the initiative which had been evident in the 1840s and which would again carry them forwards. By the start of the twenty-first century the firm still bearing the family name De La Rue has become the world's largest commercial security printer, operating internationally to provide currency for over 150 countries, cash-handling systems, and security documents. With this dynamism in developing technology and searching out new business, the modern firm still bears witness to the legacy of its founding father, Thomas, and his sons Warren and William Frederick. 


@@@@@


doc= 32774


Delevingne, Sir Malcolm (1868-1950), civil servant, was born on 11 October 1868 at Oxford Street, London, the second child of Ernest Thomas Shaw Delevingne, wine, spirit, and liquor merchant, and his wife, Hannah Gresswell. His paternal family was of Huguenot descent and his father, though a British subject from birth, was born in Paris. Between 1877 and 1887 he attended the City of London School, where he was school captain (1885-7) and won a scholarship at Trinity College, Oxford, which he entered in October 1887. He gained first-class honours in classical moderations in 1889 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1891. In 1892 he passed the civil service examination for 'first division' clerkships and, after a brief period at the Local Government Board, was transferred to the Home Office. He remained there for the rest of his career. Initially private secretary to the secretary of state, he rose by stages to the position of permanent under-secretary of state in 1922. He retained this rank until his retirement in 1932. 
Although Delevingne was involved in many aspects of the work of the Home Office, he was particularly associated with two questions: occupational health, welfare, and safety and -- especially towards the end of his career -- the control of dangerous drugs. He brought to this work both profound religious faith and a strong social conscience, and soon acquired an encyclopaedic knowledge of factory legislation 'not only on its practical but also on its historical side' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1950). He was the unobtrusive force behind moves to improve employment conditions in the first quarter of the twentieth century. In particular, he was instrumental in bringing about the 'Police, Factories, etc. (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act', 1916, which allowed the home secretary to order the provision of amenities such as seats, canteens, washrooms, drinking water, and first aid without the need for a full-scale revision of the 'Factory Act'. In addition he was influential in reorganizing the work of the factory department and establishing the Home Office Industrial Museum as a permanent exhibition of methods for promoting safety, health, and welfare. He was also much involved with mining regulation and did much of the preliminary work which led to the 'Coal Mines Act' of 1911. 
Delevingne was also active on the international stage. In 1905, 1906, and 1913 he was a British government delegate to the international conferences on labour regulations at Bern. As such he was a party to several important agreements, including for prohibitions on the use of white phosphorus in matches and on night work for women. In 1919, as the British representative on the labour commission of the Versailles peace conference, he was one of the architects of the International Labour Organization, whose original constitution he did much to draft. Subsequently he participated in the international labour conferences at Washington (1919) and Geneva (1923, 1928, and 1929). Even in retirement he remained actively involved in questions of industrial welfare. In 1933 he chaired a Home Office committee on shift work for women and young people. Subsequently he served on the royal commission on safety in coal mines (1936) and chaired the Safety in Mines Research Board (1939-47). He was also, again in 1936, chairman of an inter-departmental committee on the rehabilitation of persons injured by accidents. 
Delevingne's work for international controls on dangerous drugs took him repeatedly to Geneva and even as far afield as Bangkok, mainly as the British delegate at opium conferences. Convinced that the drug trade was 'a great evil which must be fought', 'he never spared himself in the combat' (Martindale, 34). Responsible for co-ordinating and representing the views of all government departments, he rapidly gained a global reputation as an authority on the subject. As such he served as chairman of the supervisory body under the international convention of 1931 for the limitation of the manufacture of dangerous drugs, and was Great Britain's representative on the League of Nations's advisory committee on opium traffic, 1921-34. After his retirement -- indeed, up to the age of seventy-nine -- he continued to represent the United Kingdom at the international opium conferences. In 1932 the privy council nominated him a member of the council of the Pharmaceutical Society. In recognition of his services Delevingne was appointed CB in 1911, KCB (1919), and KCVO (1932). 
Delevingne was imaginative, innovative, 'clever and able' (Martindale, 35), and was imbued with drive, determination, and a 'remorseless quest for precision' (Butler, 157). Senior colleagues also regarded him as courteous, kind, loyal, and even lovable. Yet his methods sometimes attracted criticism. This was partly because he was something of an autocrat who preferred to deal with a matter personally rather than to delegate, and partly because he 'sometimes gave the impression of being too much the bureaucrat who thought that to settle a matter you had only to tie it up in a bundle of regulations, preferably of his own drafting' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1950). He also fought tenaciously and, for the duration of his career, successfully, to prevent the transfer of industrial administration from his beloved Home Office to the 'upstart' Ministry of Labour. This brought, in comparison to other countries, a certain irrationality into labour administration in Britain, which it was one of Bevin's first actions as minister of labour to remedy. 
Delevingne never married. Of his siblings, Walter Norman Delevingne (1870-1937) had a distinguished career in the Indian Civil Service, and his elder brother, Edgar Constant Delevingne ('b'. 1867), spent some forty years as a master at the City of London School. During his working years his chief recreations were travelling and walking -- especially in Norway and Italy. In retirement, until his health deteriorated, he undertook various kinds of social work, especially for Dr Barnardo's Homes. Elected a member of the charity in 1903, he joined its council in 1934. Delevingne died at his home, 20 FitzGeorge Avenue, West Kensington, London, on 30 November 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 32775


Delius, Frederick Theodor Albert (1862-1934), composer, was born on 29 January 1862 at Claremont, Horton Lane, Bradford, Yorkshire, the grandson of Ernst Friedrich Delius (1790-1831) and the fourth of the fourteen children of Julius Delius (1822-1901) and his wife, Elise Pauline Kronig (1838-1929). Both his parents were born in Bielefeld, Germany. His father moved to Bradford to work in the wool trade; he was naturalized in 1850, and married in 1856. Delius's younger sister Clare in her 'Memories' (1935) recalled their father as a disciplinarian, with 'a ledger mind' (Delius, 'Memories', 96) whose 'guiding influence... was fear' (ibid., 22). He was, however, a just man, and not averse to the arts: Joseph Joachim and Alfredo Carlo Piatti made music at the Delius home. Little Fritz (the name with which he was baptized and which he used until he was about forty) played the piano and the violin, improvising with ease. Hearing Chopin's posthumous E minor waltz opened an 'entirely new world' (ibid., 48) for him. 
Delius was a strong, athletic boy who delighted in roaming the Yorkshire moors. He attended the Bradford grammar school (1874-8), then the International College at Isleworth (1878-80). The family took it for granted that he should enter his father's trade. He was sent first as the firm's representative to Stroud in Gloucestershire, where his handsome appearance and charming manners won him friends and business success. For Delius, however, it meant that he could slip up to London for concerts. Next he was sent to Chemnitz, but neglected his duties in favour of trips to Dresden, Leipzig, and Berlin (where he heard Wagner's 'Die Meistersinger'). Then it was Scandinavia, where, as his sister put it, he associated with 'such figures in the textile world as Ibsen and [another Norwegian dramatist] Gunnar Heiberg' (Delius, 63). Ibsen's revolt against the conventions that hinder self-expression, together with the majestic Norwegian mountains, fortified Delius's self-reliance. Next his father tried him in France. Three years passed (1880-83) before Delius senior admitted that his son was a black sheep in the wool trade and set him up as a citrus fruit farmer in Florida (1884). 
The old Spanish plantation called Solana Grove was run down. In a wooden chalet, alone, amid lush vegetation on the banks of the broad St Johns River, Delius dreamed and found himself. He laid musical foundations unexpectedly. One summer night, while he was sitting on his veranda, there came to him the distant sound of the plantation workers singing. He experienced a 'state of illumination'; and the memory haunts some of his greatest works. Christopher Palmer ('Delius: Portrait of a Cosmopolitan', 1976) suggests that Delius's idiom was influenced by the strange untutored harmonies of the black labourers and their longing for the 'promis' land'. Also, by chance Delius met Thomas Ward, a Brooklyn organist convalescing in Jacksonville; Ward taught him for six months, and Delius later claimed that Ward's were the only lessons from which he derived benefit. 
Delius earned his keep by teaching music in Danville, Virginia (1885-6), and briefly in New York, and then, with his father's support, he studied at the Leipzig Conservatory (1886-8), working under Hans Sitt, Carl Reinecke, and Salomon Jadassohn (though according to Patrick Hadley no trace of this formal instruction can be found 'except in certain of his weaker passages'; 'DNB'). 
At Leipzig Delius met Christian Sinding, a fellow student, and Edvard Grieg. A walking tour in Norway (1887), the first of many, confirmed the 'profound, mystical and indelible' (Beecham, 2) influence of that country. Grieg intervened on his behalf with his father, who grudgingly granted Delius a minimal allowance but never came to accept his son's distinction. 
Delius's father's brother Theodor, living in Paris, became his friend, mentor, and benefactor. In 1888 Delius settled near him, and by 1894 he belonged to a circle of artists and writers, among them Paul Gauguin, August Strindberg, and Edvard Munch (described by Lionel Carley in 'Delius: the Paris Years', 1975). He was found to be attractive, warm-hearted, spontaneous, and amorous. He was also industrious. As well as short pieces, he had already composed (1886-7) the 'Florida Suite', privately performed in Leipzig in 1888. His symphonic poem 'Paa Vidderne' was performed in Christiania (Oslo) in 1891, and Gunnar Heiberg commissioned incidental music for his play 'Folkeraadet', a political satire, produced there with some controversy in 1897. Hans Haym in Elberfeld conducted 'Over the Hills and Far Away' in 1897. The operas 'Irmelin' (1890-92, first performed in Oxford, 1953) and 'The Magic Fountain' (1894-5, first performance by the BBC, 1977) were composed; and 'Koanga' was begun in 1896. 
Delius met the artist Helena Sophie Emilie Rosen (1868-1935), known as Jelka, the granddaughter of the composer and pianist Ignaz Moscheles, in 1896. She was no Sunday painter, but worked in her studio up to ten hours a day and exhibited in the Salon des Independants. Later she impressed Beecham by her 'gravity of thought and a quiet intensity of emotion' (Beecham, 79). She and Delius were brought together by their shared passion for Nietzsche. She had been given permission to paint in the romantic garden running down to the River Loing of a house in Grez-sur-Loing, a village 40 miles outside Paris on the edge of Fontainebleau. Delius visited her there, and in 1897 she bought the house. He returned to Florida on business, and she wondered if she had lost him. On his return he simply took up residence at Grez, which became his home until he died. In 1903 Delius and Jelka were married. 
From then on Delius's life, apart from visits to Paris, Germany, Norway, and London, was spent in those calm and idyllic surroundings. There were no children. Marriage did not curtail his affairs with other women: Jelka was often distressed, but remained devoted. Supported by his father, then by his wife, Delius never had need to earn. His uncle's death in 1898 brought him a legacy: he used part to buy Gauguin's painting 'Nevermore' (now in the Courtauld Inst.). The rest allowed him to mount a concert of his music in London on 30 May 1899, conducted by Alfred Hertz. The second half comprised excerpts from 'Koanga'. All the music was new to the country of his birth. Some critics were baffled, but many commented on the innovation, the audacity, and above all the vitality of the music -- estimates which might surprise later generations who came to regard Delius as a languorous sensualist. 
Delius then promoted his music in Germany, where interest was rising. Jelka's German painter friend Ida Gerhardi (her portraits include several of Delius and Jelka) became his fervent ambassador. Haym produced 'Paris' in Elberfeld in 1901, and in 1904 there were first performances there of 'Koanga' (under Fritz Cassirer) and 'Appalachia' (variations on an old plantation song), and the piano concerto, and in Dusseldorf of 'Lebenstanz'. In 'A Village Romeo and Juliet' (1899-1901, first performed in Berlin, 1907) influences of Grieg, Strauss, and Wagner were banished or fully absorbed. Delius found his authentic voice: passionate, regretful, individual, introspective. The tale is of idealistic adolescent love, shadowed by the sinister, seductive Dark Fiddler and ending in an ecstatic double 'Liebestod'. The interlude, 'Walk to the Paradise Garden' (composed later, and popular in concerts), sums up the opera's beauty and pathos. In 'Sea Drift' (1903-4, first performed in Essen, 1906) an adult relives in memory a boy's first anguished experience of bereavement, through the seabird's loss of his mate. Delius described how 'the shape of it was taken out of my hands... as I worked' (Fenby, 36), and was 'bred' from Whitman's poetical and his musical ideas. Of course there are thematic allusions and balances, tonal and rhythmic relationships, but the sensations seem to arise spontaneously from the melting chromaticisms and colours. 
In 1907 Thomas Beecham, then aged twenty-eight, heard 'Appalachia' under Cassirer in London and instantly became a sympathetic advocate. (Delius, still a prodigious walker, exhausted poor Beecham on a Norwegian holiday in 1908.) Granville Bantock, Norman O'Neill, Percy Grainger, and Ernest Newman also admired Delius's music, which began to make headway in England. He briefly became involved in the Musical League, one of his few excursions into musical politics. Bantock conducted the premiere of 'Brigg Fair' at Liverpool in 1908. That year Delius himself conducted 'Appalachia' at Hanley in Staffordshire; he was an infrequent and inept conductor, though he did conduct the premiere of the first 'Dance Rhapsody' at the 1909 Three Choirs festival -- strange context for a composer who in 1912 defiantly declared 'I believe... in no doctrine whatever... in complete annihilation as far as our personal consciousness goes' (Carley, 'Letters', 2.86). 
In the 'Mass of Life' (1904-5) Delius testified to his atheism. With Cassirer's assistance, he selected the words from Nietzsche's prose-poem 'Also sprach Zarathustra' (part of the closing section, 'Mitternachtslied', had been performed at his 1899 London concert). The larger part of the mass was produced in 1908 in Munich, and Beecham conducted the complete work in London in 1909. It is the grandest and most ambitious of Delius's concert works, needing four soloists, a double choir, and a large orchestra. In music that touches extreme poles of physical energy and rapt contemplation, Delius celebrates the human 'Will' and the 'Individual', and the 'Eternal Recurrence of Nature'. If there is a weakness, it is (as in all Delius's output) occasional rhythmic monotony. 
A group of shorter orchestral works -- concert favourites -- shows characteristic features. In 'Brigg Fair' (1907), variations on a Lincolnshire folk-song collected by Grainger, the simple modal melody is supported by sliding and juxtaposed chromatic chords; often in Delius a chord has an instant rather than long-term function. 'In a Summer Garden' (1908, revised 1911) and 'Summer Night on the River' (1911) are refined examples of his orchestral pointillism, and of the way in which he seems to improvise a structure. In fact, the music -- condensed and elliptical -- is made from evolving motifs and groups of chords. Delius generally avoids symmetry and stable tonal centres; he creates a continuous harmonic flow of tension and delayed resolution, mirroring a stream of high emotional experience. In 'On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring' (1912) the spacing and placing of even the diatonic chords, let alone their chromatic alterations, make for a mood almost hypnotic in its poignancy. These exquisite idylls, for all their composer's German descent and French domicile, spell 'England' for most listeners. Their influence is felt in many an evocative piece of comparable length by composers of the English pastoral school, though not all Delius's followers achieve his concentration. 

'Songs of Sunset' (1906-7) carries the sweetness almost to swooning point, apt for Ernest Dowson's world-weary verse. In writing for voices Delius concentrates little on the energy and imagery of words, more on what mood the words evoke. His unaccompanied partsong 'On Craig Ddu' (first performed in 1907) shows this. The choruses of 'Song of the High Hills' (1911-12, first performed in London, 1920) are wordless: human voices paradoxically increase the sense of solitude. To this cooler period belong 'North Country Sketches' (1913-14), consisting of evocations of his still-loved Yorkshire moors, and 'Eventyr' (1917). If not austere, they are certainly bleaker. In 1909-10 Delius composed 'Fennimore and Gerda', his sixth and last opera (first performed in Frankfurt am Main, 1919), to a libretto drawn from Jens Peter Jacobsen's novel 'Niels Lyhne': it deals with the division between romantic dreaming and reality, though Delius oddly gave the opera a happy ending. Awkward in shape and in length, laconic compared with 'A Village Romeo', it has been called a contemporary conversation piece. Delius's operas, often deemed undramatic, respond to sensitive treatment which sustains their atmosphere. 
In 1911 the young Philip Heseltine (Peter Warlock) wrote to Delius, beginning an exchange of letters which, together with his book (1923), give an insight into Delius's views on morality and on his obligations to his gifts. He scorned the bourgeoisie, the common herd, and despised conventional ties which inhibit the artist. He distrusted academic learning which killed instinct, and stressed the value of perseverance, application, and concentration of energy. 
Between 1913 and 1916 Delius composed his 'Requiem', dedicated 'to the memory of all young Artists fallen in the war'. Again he took the text from Nietzsche -- how wryly he must have smiled at using the titles 'mass' and 'requiem'! When Albert Coates produced it in London in 1922 it offended recently bereaved Christians, denying as it does an afterlife and offering instead the pantheistic renewal of Nature. Shorter than the mass and continuous, it is -- until the final ecstatic affirmative return of spring -- Delius's sternest work. Together with the sinister 'Arabesque' (1911, 1915; first performed in Newport, Wales, 1920) to a text by Jacobsen -- 'Knowest thou Pan?' -- the 'Mass' and the 'Requiem' present Delius's 'creed'. 
In 1914 Delius was at the height of his fame. As the Germans advanced, the Deliuses retreated to England, where he was by now much feted. Osbert Sitwell thought he might more easily be taken for a great lawyer than a great composer. Beecham in his biography (1959) wrote of the 'mingled cast of asceticism and shrewdness' (Beecham, 146) that one might find in a cardinal. Eugene Goossens remarked on Delius's querulous and penetrating voice (he was always a polemical conversationalist). Grainger discerned in his speech half-Yorkshire, half-German peculiarities. Delius wrote letters in English, German, French, and Norwegian; but as time passed Jelka took on more of his correspondence. 
Hearing May and Beatrice Harrison play Brahms's double concerto in 1914 prompted Delius, now back in Grez after a visit to Norway, to compose a similar work for them (1915). It was the first of his mature instrumental works in the traditional classical forms that were not quite second nature to him (Deryck Cooke's 1962 articles, reprinted in 'A Delius Companion', 1976, offered analyses based on organic development). As well as chamber music, there are concertos for violin (1916) and cello (1921). In 1920 came a commission from the impresario Basil Dean to compose incidental music for Flecker's oriental drama 'Hassan'. When the lavish production came out in London in 1923 it ran for 281 performances. The serenade became a hit, and the closing chorus, sung as the caravan passes out of sight, is incantatory. 
During 1917 Delius began to show symptoms of the syphilis that he had contracted in 1895; but in 1921 the Deliuses built themselves a chalet in Norway. Despite treatment at sanatoria across Europe, by 1922 he was walking with two sticks; and by 1928 he was paralysed and blind. A young Yorkshireman called Eric Fenby heard of his condition, and that he was trying to dictate to Jelka, as he still wished to compose. For five years Fenby acted as his unpaid amanuensis, variously revising, completing, and composing 'Cynara' (a setting of Ernest Dowson), 'A Late Lark' (a setting of W. E. Henley), 'A Song of Summer', a third violin sonata, the 'Irmelin' prelude, and 'Idyll' (1932; a reworking from the 'verismo' one-act opera 'Margot la rouge', 1901-2; first performed in St Louis, USA, 1983). Their greatest combined achievement, 'Songs of Farewell', settings of Walt Whitman's poems for eight-part chorus and orchestra, was dedicated to Jelka. It was first performed in 1932. By now Delius's self-reliance had hardened into egotism. Racked with pain and frustration, he became an intolerant, tyrannical figure. He loved to taunt and provoke Fenby, a sensitive and devout young man. Despite this, Fenby's devotion to Delius's music, his skill -- telepathy, almost -- and his compassion for the two lonely old people are frankly and movingly described in his 'Delius as I Knew Him' (1936; the 1981 revision details the Delius-Fenby legacy). In 1968 Fenby acted as consultant to Ken Russell's 'disturbingly life-like' (Fenby, 178) BBC television film, 'A Song of Summer', in which Max Adrian played Delius, Christopher Gable Fenby himself. There are no recordings of Delius's voice or person. 
In 1929 Delius was appointed Companion of Honour, and in October that year Beecham mounted a magnificent six-day Delius Festival in London. Delius, in his bath chair, was present, and people who saw with sentimental pity that emaciated immobile figure gained a false impression, for his stoicism, mental acuity, and sardonic wit remained unimpaired. 
Back at Grez the darkness was lightened by visits from Delius's many devoted friends, among them the composer Henry Balfour Gardiner, who had bought the Deliuses' house in 1923, allowing them to live there free (the war reduced their royalties, and Delius's malady brought extra expenses). The wireless and the gramophone now became valuable links to the musical world, though he listened to little music other than his own. In 1933 Elgar, in France to conduct his violin concerto with Menuhin, spent an afternoon at Grez. Delius, who not surprisingly rated 'The Dream of Gerontius' a 'nauseating work' though he admired 'Falstaff', welcomed him warmly, and the two great composers chatted animatedly. 'A poet and a visionary' Elgar called Delius in his account of their meeting (Redwood, 94). 
That summer Fenby, near breakdown, had to leave the Deliuses. 'What he suffered and what she endured' (Fenby, 103), he later recorded. In May 1934 Jelka sent for him to take charge of the household, as she had to be operated on for bowel cancer. Delius began to sink, and Jelka was brought from her hospital bed to sit at his side until he died on 10 June 1934. 
Delius wished to be buried in his garden; failing that, in some country churchyard in the south of England, where people could 'place wild flowers' (Fenby, 227) on his grave -- strange request for an exile and an unbeliever. As Jelka was too ill to travel, he was buried at Grez, then exhumed and reinterred at St Peter's, Limpsfield, Surrey, on 26 May 1935. Jelka died a few days later and was buried beside him. 
At Beecham's suggestion Jelka had set up a trust from royalties which, together with the society founded in 1962, has promoted Delius's work. Beecham edited, propagated, and interpreted Delius's scores with unique understanding; above all, he recorded most of the concert works in performances which had been enthusiastically endorsed by the composer himself. His conducting at the Royal College of Music in 1934 of 'A Village Romeo and Juliet' fully revealed the opera's seductive power. The Bradford Festival of 1962 and the fourth Delius Festival of 1982 encouraged scholarly reassessment of a composer whose professionalism, if highly individual, has tended to be underestimated. Delius's music is not everyday fare, but it enshrines his sense of bliss and aching loss at its passing. 'I have seen the best of the earth and have done everything that is worth doing; I am content' (Fenby, 73). The sentiment is worthy of the man who in his 'Requiem' set the words 'I honour the man who can love life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32776


Deller, Sir Edwin (1883-1936), university administrator, was born at Paignton, Devon, on 16 March 1883, the son of Edwin Deller, carpenter, of Paignton, and his wife, Mary Ann Stone. He was educated at local schools up to the age of fourteen, when he began work as a clerk for an uncle at Paignton. He went to London at the age of about twenty and worked as a clerk in various offices. He was then employed by Kent education committee until 1912, when he became a secretary in the academic department of London University. He was already a member of the university, for he had matriculated in 1908 as an evening student at King's College, graduating LLB in 1911. He obtained the degree of LLD in 1916 with a thesis entitled 'The liberty of the subject', as a student of University College. He also studied at the London School of Economics. In 1914 he married Winifred Lilian (Betty), eldest daughter of Benjamin Willey Betts, embosser and chaser, of Hornsey; they had a son. 
Deller's career on the staff of London University was rapid. In 1921 he became academic registrar and in 1929 he was elected principal of the university in succession to the geologist Sir Franklin Sibly, whose period of office had not been entirely successful. He was a born administrator and a man of great culture and knowledge of the world, while his quickness of intuition made him skilful in handling men and situations. He seldom intervened in debate, but when he did, he would settle a point by a few brief words, wise and tactful, and often touched with a quiet and irresistible humour. He had a quick eye for the heart of any problem, and an equability of temper which was of great value in handling the often heated controversies that confronted him during his term of office. Above all, he was a man of striking personality and charm, whose open-hearted friendliness and quiet wisdom spread a much-needed spirit of goodwill and co-operation in the university, upon which the erection of the central buildings in Bloomsbury set the crown. In the organization of these buildings, the commissioning of an architect (Charles Holden), and the general policy of the development of the site Deller made a great contribution, often working closely with William Beveridge. He was not destined to see the buildings' completion, however. He died in University College Hospital, London, on 30 November 1936 from the effects of an accident which had occurred three days earlier when he was visiting the great tower, then in the course of construction. He was survived by his wife. 
Outside the university, Deller played a great part in founding the British Institute in Paris. In 1926 he visited the United States of America, and on his return wrote an excellent book, 'Universities in the United States' (1927). He was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1932 and was knighted in 1935. Among other distinctions he was elected an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple in 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 32777


Montmorency, James Edward Geoffrey de (1866-1934), jurist, was born at Greenwich on 6 December 1866, the third son of James Lodge de Montmorency, a member of the hospital staff there, and his wife, Susan Kiddel. Educated at Blackheath proprietary school, he was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1886, and graduated BA in 1889 and LLB in 1890; in 1909 he was awarded the Seatonian prize for an English poem on a sacred subject. In 1892 he was called to the bar by the Middle Temple and went into chambers on the Chancery side. He married in 1899 Caroline Maud Saumarez, third daughter of Major-General James de Havilland; they had one son and two daughters. 
Having a strong inclination towards the more academic aspects of the law, at an early stage in his career de Montmorency was inspired with enthusiasm for comparative legal studies by the influence of John Macdonell, Quain professor of comparative law in the University of London. In 1902 he was Quain prizeman in comparative law at University College, London, and in 1911 and 1912 King Edward VII legal research scholar of the Middle Temple. In 1920 he succeeded Macdonell as Quain professor and he held the chair until his retirement in 1932. From 1930 to 1932 he was also dean of the faculty of laws in the University of London. 
De Montmorency's activities covered a wide area and, in addition to those already mentioned, he was for many years literary editor of the 'Contemporary Review'. He acted as assistant secretary of the royal commission on divorce and matrimonial causes from 1910 to 1912, and from 1918 to 1920 as joint secretary and member of the attorney-general's committee of inquiry into breaches of the laws of war. He was a prolific writer, but much of his published work is of a somewhat miscellaneous and transient character. He was one of the principal contributors to the series of monographs published by the Society of Comparative Legislation under the title of 'Great Jurists of the World', and he wrote the section 'Sea-policy and the 'Alabama' claims' in the 'Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy', volume 3 (1923). Selections of the articles which he contributed to 'The Times' and the 'Contemporary Review' were published under the titles of 'The Never-Ending Road' (1916), 'The White Riders' (1918), and 'The Admiral's Chair' (1921). 
De Montmorency met with considerable success as a teacher of the law. He was of a warm-hearted and generous disposition, which endeared him to students, and he was untiring in his efforts to assist them. A keen churchman, he was invaluable as a governor and manager of church schools. He died at his home, 31 Lee Terrace, Blackheath, on 9 March 1934; he was survived by his wife. 
H. C. Gutteridge', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32778


Montmorency, Raymond Harvey de, third Viscount Frankfort de Montmorency (1835-1902), army officer, born at Theydon Bower, Epping, Essex, on 21 September 1835, was the only son of Lodge Raymond, second viscount (1806-1889), and his wife, Georgina Frederica (died 1885), daughter of Peter Fitzgibbon Henchy QC, of Dublin. Educated at Eton College and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he was commissioned as ensign in the 33rd (Duke of Wellington's) regiment on 18 August 1854, promoted lieutenant on 12 January 1855, and served with his regiment during that year in the Crimea. He was in the trenches at the siege of Sevastopol and took part in the storming of the Redan on 8 September. For his gallantry at the assault he was recommended for the Victoria Cross, but he did not receive it. De Montmorency then accompanied his regiment to India. During the mutiny in 1857-8 he commanded a detachment against the mutineers in central India. 
Promoted captain on 29 March 1861, de Montmorency exchanged into the 32nd (Cornwall) regiment, and from 6 December 1861 to 31 December 1864 was aide-de-camp to his uncle by marriage, Major-General Edward Basil Brooke, who commanded the troops in the Windward and Leeward islands. From 4 June 1865 de Montmorency was aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir John Michel, commanding the troops in British North America, and in 1866 took part in the repulse of the Fenians. He married on 25 April 1866, at Montreal, Rachel Mary Lumley Godolphin, eldest daughter of Sir John Michel. They had two sons and three daughters. 
While travelling in Abyssinia in 1867 de Montmorency volunteered under Sir Robert Napier in the campaign against King Theodore. He accompanied the expedition to the gates of Magdala, when all volunteers were recalled. He commanded the frontier force during the 1886-7 Sudan operations, and in 1887, while commanding the troops at Alexandria with the local rank of major-general, he directed the operations of the British field column of the frontier force during the Nile operations. He was mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted major-general on the establishment on 30 November 1889, and succeeded to the peerage on the death of his father on 25 December. 
From 1890 to 1895 Lord Frankfort commanded a district in Bengal, and from 1895 to 1897 the Dublin district; he retired on 21 September 1897. A keen soldier, strict disciplinarian, and master of drill, and a kind and generous man, he died suddenly of apoplexy at his home, 30 Bury Street, St James's, London, on 7 May 1902, and was buried on the 12th in the village churchyard of Dewlish, Dorset. His wife survived him. Their eldest son, Raymond Harvey de Montmorency (1867-1900), captain 21st lancers, won the Victoria Cross in the charge near Omdurman in 1898. He was killed in action in February 1900 at Molteno, Cape Colony, while commanding the corps of scouts he had organized and which bore his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 32779


Morgan, William Frend De (1839-1917), potter and novelist, was born on 16 November 1839 at 69 Gower Street, London, the second child of Augustus De Morgan (1806-1871) and Sophia Frend (1809-1892). His father was the first professor of pure mathematics at University College, London, a man of severe integrity who resigned on two occasions when he believed the college had transgressed its founding principle of religious toleration. His mother was active in the anti-slavery movement, the reform of prisons and workhouses, the founding of Bedford College for Women, and the suffrage movement. The atmosphere of the De Morgan household, at first in Bloomsbury and then in Primrose Hill, was a mixture of intellect, high-mindedness, word play -- the professor of pure mathematics had a terrible weakness for puns -- and mortality, for the family suffered from tuberculosis. William inherited the intellect and the word play in good measure: his simple nature delighted in intellectual and verbal fantasy. But the high-mindedness seems to have passed him by; he greeted life with innocent, quizzical humour. Mercifully, the tuberculosis also passed him by. Though never strong, he outlived his six brothers and sisters, four of whom did not reach the age of forty. 
De Morgan was educated at University College School, London, and at the college itself, and then entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1859, hoping to become a painter. With his great domed forehead (inherited from his father) and his wavering, high-pitched voice which ended every sentence with a drawl, he was a strange and humorous figure among the students. He left the schools in 1862, doubting that he would make a painter. Not much is known of his activities in the 1860s, except that he met William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones, who became perhaps his closest friends, and that, probably encouraged by Morris, he began to design tiles and stained glass. Towards the end of the decade he was working at 40 Fitzroy Square, where he had a kiln in his studio. In 1872 he burnt the roof of the house off, and had to leave. 
De Morgan's father had died in 1871, and 'c'.1872 De Morgan went to live at 8 Great Cheyne Row, Chelsea, with his mother and his youngest sister, 
William built a pottery kiln in the garden of the house in Great Cheyne Row, but it was soon too small, and about 1873 he rented Orange House, almost next door, and started a pottery there. It is on the products of this pottery, which he carried on at various sites for over thirty years, that his reputation mainly rests today. 
De Morgan's work at Orange House was devoted almost exclusively to decorating tiles and different kinds of pots -- dishes, bowls, and vases. At first he bought ready-made tiles and pots to work on, and later the pottery made its own. But De Morgan was always much less interested in the shape and structure of pots than in their glazes, from a scientific as much as an artistic point of view. Some wares were decorated with enamel underglaze colours, others with the sheen of lustre, in emulation of the Renaissance technique which De Morgan was partly responsible for reintroducing in Britain. The pottery was small, and devoted almost entirely to his own designs; he was essentially a painter who had turned to the decorative arts, as did others in the 1870s. In this sense it stood alongside Morris & Co. as one of the first workshops of the arts and crafts movement in Britain. As it happens, both workshops were short of space by the end of the decade, so Morris and De Morgan searched together for new premises. In 1881 Morris moved his works to Merton Abbey in south London; in 1882 De Morgan built his kilns near by. 
The appeal of De Morgan's pottery lies in his glazes, which are richer and softer than those of his contemporaries; in his skill with colour -- his one-time partner Halsey Ricardo wrote of 'the pools of colour into which one can dive and scarce plumb the full depth' (Hamilton, 69); in his happy reinterpretation of Islamic pottery of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries; and in his decorative handling of birds, animals, and fish, some from nature, others from the comic bestiary of his own imagination -- one never knew there could be so many varieties of amiable dragon. Lewis Carroll admired his tiles, and had them installed in Christ Church, Oxford. 
De Morgan appeared before the public as an artist, a decorator of pots and tiles. But the public did not see him at the pottery, absorbed in its technicalities, working at the chemistry of his glazes, overseeing the tense and unpredictable business of firing lustre wares. His friends and associates saw him, rightly, as an inventor and a scientist. And though he had little to do with the pottery industry in Stoke-on-Trent or elsewhere, his workshop was, in a quite untheoretical way, a real combination of art and science. 
On 5 March 1887 De Morgan married Evelyn Pickering (1855-1919) ['see 'Morgan, (Mary) Evelyn De]. Talented, humorous, and forthright, she had established herself as a successful painter despite, it seems, the opposition of her wealthy family. He was forty-eight, she was thirty-two. She painted sumptuous figure subjects with lofty themes in a late Pre-Raphaelite manner -- all that her whimsical husband's pots and tiles were not. But they made an excellent couple. As a small sign of their mutual eccentricity, they were married quietly, went to the railway station, and caught the first train that happened to be available; it took them to the Isle of Wight. On their return they settled into 1 The Vale, King's Road, Chelsea, next door to James McNeill Whistler. It was a childless marriage, but successful; they laughed at each other a lot, and she strengthened his resolve. 
The daily journey to Merton Abbey taxed De Morgan's health, and in 1889 he moved the pottery to purpose-built premises nearer home, off Townmead Road in Fulham. These were financed partly by Evelyn and partly by the architect Halsey Ricardo, with whom he formed a partnership in 1888. The Fulham phase of De Morgan's work lasted longer than any other and saw its crowning achievements, especially in lustre wares of great technical and aesthetic sophistication. But the benefit of the move was partly lost in 1892, when doctors advised that he should spend the winters outside Britain. From 1892 the De Morgans wintered in Florence. It was difficult to run the pottery from a distance and De Morgan's long absences were felt by the staff; in his busy, boffinish way, he had always been its moving spirit. His letters from Florence refer to financial losses. There was a temporary closure in 1903; around 1904 he had to stop designing because of neuritis in his thumb; and the company was finally wound up in 1907, though several of De Morgan's employees continued under their own names. He was in his mid-sixties, and had perhaps reached his natural term for such work. Commentators nod sagely over his lack of business sense, and quote him as saying 'It is not well organised, it is very ill De Morganised in fact!' (Hamilton, 48). But that was self-deprecation. De Morganization had worked well enough for more than thirty years. 
Just as the pottery was closing down, De Morgan became a best-selling novelist. This man in his sixties, who had hardly written anything and not read much, who had been absorbed all his life in the wordless conventions of the decorative arts, was now full of words. In 1901 he had begun to write a story, and then put it by. He was about to throw it away with other papers when Evelyn looked at it and encouraged him to go on. By 1904 there was a manuscript of 500,000 words. It was published in July 1906 as 'Joseph Vance: an Ill-Written Autobiography' and became a best-seller. The inconsequence of the whole affair delighted De Morgan, and he continued to be puzzled by his own success. Sometimes he reflected on how the money he earned as an author might have allowed him to continue as a potter. 

'Joseph Vance' was followed by 'Alice-for-Short' (1907), 'Somehow Good' (1908), 'It can Never Happen Again' (1909), and 'An Affair of Dishonour' (1909), which was set, exceptionally, in the seventeenth century. Then came 'A Likely Story' (1911) and 'Ghost Meets Ghost' (1914). His two last novels, 'The Old Madhouse' (1917) and 'The Old Man's Youth' (1921), were completed by Evelyn and published after his death. All were published in London by Heinemann, and all but one by Henry Holt in New York. The typical De Morgan novel is long, crowded with characters, rambling in construction, and set in mid- or late Victorian London. De Morgan's cockneys, who are often rescued from poverty or the dangers of drink by a benign member of the middle class, are memorable, and he was proud to acknowledge Dickens as his model. Although they appeared around 1910, these novels were a throwback to an earlier style of story-telling. But to see them as neo-Dickensian is to notice their externals and to overlook the gentle, puzzled inwardness with which he reflected on life. He was more open to complexity than Dickens, less indignant at the evils of society. Dotheboys Hall in 'Nicholas Nickleby' was a fierce and successful attack on the 'Yorkshire schools' system. De Morgan's young hero Joseph Vance experienced the violence and stupidity of the English public school system, but he also excused it to those he loved. He behaved 'more puerorum', as De Morgan put it, 'as boys do' (W. De Morgan, 'Joseph Vance', 1906, 145). 
De Morgan left it up to his characters to develop the story, and he read each week's writing over to his wife, thus populating their homes. He found it easier to write in Florence, and their flat in the via Lungo il Mugnone, which had been full of Evelyn's high themes and William's comic frogs and startled deer, became full of Evelyn's high themes and William's cockney scamps. But by 1914 Florence had become melancholy to them through the deaths of friends, and they went back to London for good. In 1910 they had moved from The Vale to 127 Church Street, Chelsea, where they lived for the rest of their lives. De Morgan, now seventy-five, was still writing, though constantly disturbed by fierce anti-German feelings. He was a familiar figure in the streets of Chelsea during the war, carrying the shopping home, taking his evening walk on the Embankment, white-haired, a little bent, but brisk and frank. He died at his home on 15 January 1917 and was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Surrey, five days later. Evelyn died on 2 May 1919 and is buried with him. The draped classical figures of Grief and Joy on their tombstone, which she designed, recall her more than him. 
An image like the wheel of fortune is needed to give shape to William De Morgan's life and reputation. (Evelyn would have given such an image its full solemnity; William, perhaps feeling its power more, would have drawn it as a joke.) It had operated in his own life, taking him up to fame as a potter, down to financial failure, up again to fame as a novelist and down to death. And it went on turning. His friends thought that, because the British like literature more than art, his novels would survive better than his tiles and pots, and there was some interest in the novels between the wars. But gradually they lost their readership and reputation. 'Joseph Vance' was last republished in 1954; since the late 1950s all of De Morgan's novels have been out of print. The pots and tiles started from a position of low esteem: in 1939 an official guide to the tile collections in the Victoria and Albert Museum referred to their 'dank period flavour' (Catleugh, 76-7). But since the mid-twentieth century their reputation has risen with the tide of interest in Victorian decorative art. In 1968 the De Morgan Foundation was set up to preserve the paintings of Evelyn and the pottery of William De Morgan collected by her sister Anna Maria Stirling at Old Battersea House in south London. Today De Morgan's pots and tiles are eagerly studied and collected (examples are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery; the De Morgan Foundation; and the William Morris Gallery, London), while his novels are unregarded. It has been so for about forty years. It almost seems as if the wheel has stopped. 


@@@@@


doc= 32780


Dempsey, Sir Miles Christopher (1896-1969), army officer, was born in New Brighton, Cheshire, on 15 December 1896, son of Arthur Francis Dempsey, a marine insurance broker, and his wife, Margaret Maud De la Fosse. He was educated at Shrewsbury School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned into the Royal Berkshire regiment in 1915. He served with his regiment in France from 1916, when he commanded a company at the age of nineteen, to 1918; he was wounded, mentioned in dispatches, and awarded the MC. He subsequently took part in operations in Iraq (1919-20). Between the wars he served both with his regiment and on the staff, at one time with Archibald Wavell as his divisional commander. At the outbreak of war in 1939, Dempsey was lieutenant-colonel in command of the 1st battalion of his regiment. During the battle for France he took command of 13th infantry brigade, which played a major part in the British counter-attack at Arras in May 1940; as a result of its contribution in a three-day battle in the Ypres and Comines Canal area, the British expeditionary force gained time for its withdrawal to Dunkirk. Dempsey was appointed to the DSO. 
The next action which Dempsey saw was in the Middle East. Having been promoted lieutenant-general, he took command of 13th corps of the Eighth Army after the battle of El Alamein, and helped Sir Bernard Montgomery to plan the invasion of Sicily. His corps landed at Syracuse on 10 July 1943 and took part in the hard battle for Catania. During the descent on Italy itself, on 3 September 1943, his corps was in the spearhead, and Dempsey conducted the winter battles in southern Italy in a masterly fashion. But he did not remain there for long. Montgomery needed him for the coming invasion of western Europe, and in January 1944 he returned home to command the Second Army. His part in the battle for Normandy and the subsequent breakout, closing up to the Rhine, and finally advancing to the Elbe, was a model of how to conduct operations soundly and successfully. He was in many ways the ideal subordinate to Montgomery: never seeking the limelight, nor able (from the nature of Montgomery's directives) to indulge in bold strokes of initiative, he always fully understood what Montgomery's purpose was, and quietly and steadily got on with it. He would spend much of his time visiting his subordinate commanders and their troops, assessing the situation, listening to their problems, and giving instructions clearly and succinctly. He had profound understanding of the soldiers under his command and firm control over operations, so he inspired both subordinates and superior commanders with confidence in his judgement and leadership. Yet he remained relatively unknown to the public. 
Dempsey was very good at understanding a battlefield; a map became a relief map in his hand. His sound, albeit cautious establishment of the initial bridgehead was followed by the application of ever-growing pressure in the Caen sector. His conduct of the battle was governed by the knowledge that the breakout was to be by the Americans in the western flank of the bridgehead; he therefore went on hitting away at the Germans, drawing more and more of their strength against his own army. He was determined to take Caen, since its capture would, as he put it, 'loosen the enemy's hinge and provide us with a firm hinge'. During the subsequent operations in the latter part of July 1944, which led to the American breakout and the subsequent Falaise and Argentan battles which broke the German positions in Normandy, Dempsey was always ready to take advantage of the opportunity to exploit success, but never tried to reinforce stalemate. He would also wholeheartedly accept responsibility for taking critical decisions, without worrying if the efforts of the army were misinterpreted by the press or senior allied commanders. He was quite unperturbed when there were suggestions that operation Goodwood (which was designed to draw more German Panzers away from General Omar Bradley's First Army) had been a failure, and he merely pointed out that such misunderstandings would help with the deception plan. After the breakout in Normandy, Dempsey's army conducted difficult and deliberate winter operations in Belgium (it was during a visit to the front at this time that George VI dubbed him KCB, an appointment which had been gazetted in June 1944), and established itself at the Rhine by March 1945; in the subsequent advance to the Elbe his army was in the forefront, and he himself received the surrender of Hamburg on 3 May 1945. 
When the European war was over Dempsey was appointed commander of the Fourteenth Army for the reoccupation of Singapore and Malaya, in succession to Sir William Slim, whom he also followed as commander-in-chief, allied land forces, south-east Asia, until 1946 when he was promoted to the rank of general. He was appointed KBE in 1945. In 1946-7 he was commander-in-chief Middle East, and he retired in July 1947 at his own request. In 1948 he married Viola Mary Vivien, youngest daughter of Captain Percy O'Reilly, of Colamber, co. Westmeath; they had no children. 
After his retirement Dempsey joined a number of companies: he was a director of H. and G. Simonds, and chairman in 1953-63; he was also chairman of Greene, King & Sons in 1955-67, and deputy chairman of Courage, Barclay, and Simonds in 1961-6. But he derived especial pleasure from chairing the Racecourse Betting Control Board (1947-51). He had always been an excellent horseman, and was very fond of hunting and racing; he bred and raced his own horses, and once commented that his position on the Racecourse Betting Control Board enhanced his enjoyment of racing all the more for knowing that it was also his duty to be there. Nor did he sever his connection with the army: he was colonel commandant of the corps of Royal Military Police in 1947-57, and of the Special Air Service in 1951-60. He was also colonel of his regiment, the Royal Berkshires, in 1946-56, and a deputy lieutenant for Berkshire from 1950. He was commander-in-chief (designate), UK land forces, in 1951-6, and was appointed GBE on his retirement from this post. 
Dempsey, who was nicknamed Bimbo, had many interests: he was a student of military history with a remarkable memory, and he loved music, both playing the piano and singing. At Shrewsbury School he had captained the first eleven, and later at Staff College he had played cricket -- he was left-handed -- with Thomas Troubridge, who was afterwards his naval colleague for the invasion of Sicily. Tall, lean, and tough, a man of considerable charm and modesty, young-looking and always immaculately turned out, he radiated confidence and authority. Dempsey died at his home, Coombe House, Yattendon, near Newbury, Berkshire, on 5 June 1969. 
John Strawson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32781


Denman, Gertrude Mary, Lady Denman (1884-1954), public servant, was born on 7 November 1884 at 4 Durham Villas, London, the second of the four children and only daughter of Weetman Dickinson Pearson (1856-1927), contractor, Liberal MP, and afterwards first Viscount Cowdray, and his wife, Annie Cass (1862-1932), charitable worker and political hostess. Between attending day school in Queen's Gate, London (1894?-1897), and finishing school in Dresden in 1901, she supplemented the educational attentions of governesses by wide reading, especially of books on economics and philosophy in her father's library. Her father's business ventures frequently took her parents abroad, and her somewhat isolated childhood fostered both an independence of mind and a shyness which she nearly always overcame by sheer hard work, enthusiasm, and concentration. Slim and boyish in appearance, Trudie, as she was known, was described as characterful rather than pretty, a broken nose sustained in childhood depriving her of claims to great beauty. 
On 26 November 1903 she married Thomas Denman, third Baron Denman (1874-1954), army officer and Liberal peer. A son and daughter were born in 1905 and 1907, and in 1911 she accompanied her husband to Australia on his appointment as governor-general. The marriage was not a success, and although remaining on friendly terms they lived largely separate lives after their return to England in 1914. 
Born to great wealth, Lady Denman believed that the only justification for such an inheritance was service to the community. A brief period as a member of the executive committee of the Women's Liberal Federation (1908-10) gave her an invaluable introduction to the machinery and business of a large organization, and throughout her life she was involved not only in family concerns -- as a director of the Westminster Press Ltd and the Cowdray Trust, and a board member of S. Pearson & Son Ltd -- but also in numerous philanthropic activities -- as chair of the Smokes for Wounded Soldiers and Sailors Society (1916-17) and the Cowdray Club for Nurses and Professional Women (1937-52), as an executive committee member of the Land Settlement Association (1934-9), and as a trustee of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust (1938-48). An enthusiastic games player, she particularly enjoyed tennis and golf, and was president of the Ladies' Golf Union from 1932 to 1938. 
In October 1916 Lady Denman became chairman of the subcommittee of the Agricultural Organization Society which, on the suggestion of Margaret Rose Watt, had undertaken to found Women's Institutes. On 4 October 1917 the 137 institutes transferred to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries and she became honorary assistant director of the women's branch of the food production department, responsible for the newly created Women's Institute section. She insisted that the institutes must be self-governing and on the formation on 16 October of the National Federation of Women's Institutes she was elected chairman, a post to which she was re-elected annually until she retired in 1946, wishing to make way for someone younger. She saw in the Women's Institute movement a great opportunity for social reform; a means for democratic training in citizenship for countrywomen, for widening their knowledge, and for improving their standards of life. The remarkable achievements of the movement are the fruit of her talent for administration, her foresight, and the principles of good procedure and democracy on which she based its early organization. When she died there were over 8000 institutes with a membership of 450,000. The Women's Institute Residential College, founded in September 1948 at Marcham, near Abingdon, Berkshire, was called Denman College in recognition of her services. 
In 1930 Lady Denman helped to found and became chairman of the National Birth Control (later Family Planning) Association, an office which she held until her death. Having witnessed in Australia the suffering caused to women by too-frequent childbirth, she was convinced they should be given the means to plan their families so as to avoid poverty and ill health. Her unstinting support for this controversial cause needed considerable courage and forthrightness, and she considered it to be the most difficult job she had ever undertaken. 
As head of the women's branch of the Ministry of Agriculture from April 1938 Lady Denman co-ordinated the re-establishment of the Women's Land Army, becoming its honorary director in 1939, and lending her home, Balcombe Place in Sussex, as its administrative headquarters. She brought to the task initiative and good sense, always seeing the work of the land army in relation to the needs of the nation at war, yet she realized that there were many obstacles to be overcome and her powers of leadership were greatly needed to reconcile conflicting demands. She waged constant battles for proper recognition of the land army, and succeeded in securing conditions of employment which were of lasting benefit to agricultural workers as a whole. However, the government ultimately refused to award the land army the grants, gratuities, and benefits which it accorded to women in the civil defence and armed services, and she resigned in protest on 15 February 1945. 
As a chairman Lady Denman excelled, her contemporaries praising her genius for organization and the impartiality, quick understanding, and sense of humour which enabled her to handle with success any meeting, however large or difficult. She could be formidable in opposition -- which she enjoyed -- but was fair and generous to those whose opinions differed from hers. Underlying the administrative drive, the penetrating eye in committee, the often gloriously caustic comment, and the intolerance of dishonesty, pomposity, and pretension, there was deep affection for those whose cause she championed, for succeeding generations of her own family, and for her many friends whom she welcomed to Balcombe Place. 
In 1920 Lady Denman was appointed CBE, in 1933 DBE, and in 1951 GBE. Taken ill with appendicitis while on holiday in France in February 1936, mismanagement of her condition by local doctors nearly cost her her life. In early 1954 a period of ill health was traced to the displacement of an organ, a legacy of 1936, and although she survived the major operation this necessitated, her heart subsequently failed and she died at 20 Devonshire Place, London, on 2 June 1954. A memorial service was held in Balcombe parish church, although as the bishop of Chichester pointed out in his address, she personally eschewed dogma, refusing to call herself a member of the church. Her body was cremated and the ashes scattered at Balcombe Place. 


@@@@@


doc= 32782


Denney, James (1856-1917), United Free Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 5 February 1856 in Paisley, the eldest son of John Denney and his wife, Mary Barr. His parents belonged to the Reformed Presbyterian church (the Cameronians), in which his father, a joiner, was a deacon. When he was four months old his parents moved to Greenock. He attended the Highlanders Academy in the town before studying at the University of Glasgow (1874-9), graduating with a double first in classics and philosophy. Denney then studied theology at the Free Church college in Glasgow, the Reformed Presbyterians having joined with the Free Church of Scotland while he was at university. He graduated in 1883 and then spent three years in the East Hill Street Mission of Free St John's Church, Glasgow. In 1886, at the age of thirty, he was ordained and inducted to the charge of East Free Church in Broughty Ferry. A few months later, on 1 July 1886, he married Mary Carmichael Brown of Glasgow: they had no children and she predeceased him in 1907. During his time as a parish minister he published several books, including 'The Epistles to the Thessalonians' (1892) and 'The Second Epistle to the Corinthians' (1894). 
Denney remained in Broughty Ferry until 1897, when he was appointed to the chair of systematic and pastoral theology at the Free Church college in Glasgow. His theological acumen had by this date already been widely recognized, as evidenced by the invitation to give a series of lectures at the Chicago Theological Seminary in 1894, later published as 'Studies in Theology' (1895). As a teacher Denney was a hard taskmaster, always demanding the very highest quality of work from his students. His manner could be curt and even abrasive, and sometimes, to those who did not know him, he appeared remote, even cold. This, however, was countered by another side to his character, as witnessed by the admiration and loyalty he inspired in successive generations of students, and the warmth and humour he displayed among close friends such as J. P. Struthers, W. R. Thomson, and W. Robertson Nicoll. On the death of A. B. Bruce in 1899, Denney succeeded to the chair of 'New Testament' language, literature, and theology. He held this chair until his untimely death in 1917, also serving as principal of the college from 1915. He was awarded honorary doctorates in divinity by Chicago Theological Seminary, Glasgow University, and Aberdeen University. 
Theologically Denney was, on the whole, conservative. This was apparent in his critique of the prevailing liberal theology of his day: he objected to Harnack's treatment of miracle and the supernatural, and he highlighted the consequences of Ritschl's denial of the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ. However, on some issues, Denney was decidedly on the liberal wing of his church, revealing an original and creative theological mind and anticipating Karl Barth and the neo-orthodox movement. His position on the doctrine of scripture caused considerable anguish among the evangelicals (with whom, on so many theological issues, he was at one). In one of the lectures given in Chicago, revised heavily before publication, he denied verbal inspiration. Denney continued to promote his views on this subject and, indeed, on several occasions, at both presbytery and general assembly, he publicly denied the infallibility of scripture and the doctrine of verbal inerrancy. Liberal tendencies were also noticeable in his desire for the abandonment of credal subscription: he argued for the replacement of subscription to the Westminster confession of faith with the simple formula, 'I believe in God through Jesus Christ, His only Son our Saviour'. 
As a theologian, Denney's great theme was the cross of Christ. He was passionately committed to the doctrine of substitutionary atonement, and increasingly viewed the cross as the heart and centre of all theology. It has been argued that this position, developed much more fully in his later work, was the result of his wife's having introduced him to the sermons of C. H. Spurgeon. Whether or not this is so, it is certainly true that the forgiveness of sins through the atoning death of Christ became for Denney the prevailing theme of all his writing and preaching. His most important writings in this area were 'The Death of Christ' (1902), 'The Atonement and the Modern Mind' (1903), and the posthumously published 'The Christian Doctrine of Reconciliation' (1917). As a scholar he was precise and thorough, with a meticulous eye for detail. He had a sharply critical intellect which, combined with his gift for clear and forthright speech, gave him a great advantage in debate and discussion. Denney also had a wide knowledge of classical and other literature. T. H. Walker quotes him as having said that if Shakespeare's tragedies were lost he could replace them from memory. His critical contributions in print and speech were much appreciated. 
Denney was a prolific writer, producing fourteen books as well as co-writing another. In addition, two volumes of his letters were published posthumously: 'Letters of Principal Denney to W. Robertson Nicoll, 1893-1917' (1920) and 'Letters of Principal Denney to his Family and Friends' (1921). He also wrote many short pieces for dictionaries, journals, and newspapers, notably numerous articles for James Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Bible', including 'Ascension', 'Creed', 'Knowledge', and 'Promise'. His contributions to Hastings's 'Dictionary of the Gospels' included 'Authority of Christ' and 'Regeneration'. His magazine articles were mostly for 'The Expositor', including: 'Caesar and God' (January 1896), 'Adam and Christ in St Paul' (February 1904), and 'A commentary on St Matthew' (March 1915). His newspaper writing was, with very few exceptions, for the 'British Weekly', to which he contributed dozens of articles between 1898 and 1917. Topics included: 'The everlasting gospel' (3 February 1898), 'Faith and science' (11 April 1907), 'Why was Jesus sent to the cross?' (29 December 1910), 'Religions and the true religion' (21 August 1913), 'The Christian community and the war' (13 August 1914), 'The war and the national conscience' (20 August 1914), and 'Prohibition' (15 February 1917). 
Denney, however, was no ivory-tower theologian, but was deeply concerned with the work of the gospel and the advancement of the kingdom of God. His remark that, 'If evangelists were our theologians and theologians our evangelists we should be nearer the ideal' was never more truly witnessed than in his own ministry. He said on a number of occasions that he had no interest in a theology which did not help in the work of evangelization or in a theology which could not be preached. Denney proved himself an active and devoted churchman. In 1900, when the Free Church of Scotland united with the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland to form the United Free Church of Scotland, Denney took part in the talks leading to the union. He was also involved in discussions about a further union with the Church of Scotland, which ultimately took place in 1929, after his death. He also played a role on the administrative side of the church as convener of the central fund, which was concerned with financial matters, in particular the stipend of ministers. He served in this capacity from 1913 to 1917, and just before his death had agreed to continue as convener for another four years. Denney could be a crusader, too: his involvement with the temperance movement led to his virulent attack on the drink trade during the First World War. The last thing he wrote before he died was an article on Robert Burns and the dangers of drink. 
Denney became ill in February 1917 and died on 11 June 1917 in Glasgow. His funeral took place on Friday 15 June. After a private service at his home, 15 Lilybank Gardens, there was a public service in the Free Church college. He was buried in the western necropolis, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 32783


Denniston, Alexander Guthrie (1881-1961), cryptanalyst and intelligence officer, was born on 1 December 1881 at Greenock, the eldest child of James Denniston, a medical practitioner, and his wife, Agnes Guthrie. He was educated at Bowdon College, Cheshire, and at the universities of Bonn and Paris. 
From 1906 to 1909 Denniston taught at Merchiston Castle School. He then went to teach foreign languages at the Royal Naval College at Osborne, Isle of Wight. A considerable athlete, he played hockey for Scotland in the pre-war Olympic games. When war broke out in 1914, he was one of the few men in the service of the Admiralty who were fluent in German, and he played a leading part in the hasty establishment of Room 40 OB. Taking its name from the office in which it operated (Room 40, Old Buildings, Admiralty), this organization intercepted, decrypted, and interpreted on behalf of the naval staff German and other enemy wireless and cable communications. For its wartime exploits -- and most of all, perhaps, for its success in decrypting the notorious Zimmermann telegram -- Room 40 OB subsequently became internationally known. The fame did not extend to Denniston, nor (though he was at the centre of the cryptanalytical process) did he contribute to the publicity on which it rested: he was by nature reticent, and in 1919 he had been selected to lead the country's peacetime cryptanalytical effort as head of the Government Code and Cypher School (GCCS). In 1917 Denniston married Dorothy Mary Gilliat, who worked at the time with him in Room 40 OB. She was the daughter of Arthur Gilliat, a businessman; they had one son and one daughter. Their son, Robin, made his career in publishing and became the academic publisher at Oxford University Press. 
Denniston served as the operational head of GCCS from 1919 to February 1942. He supervised its formation as a small interdepartmental organization of twenty-five people recruited from Room 40 OB and its equivalent section in the War Office, MI1B. It included defectors from Russia, linguists, and talented amateurs of all kinds. Denniston, appointed CBE in 1933, presided over its slow inter-war expansion. In those years it had to cope with the continuously increasing sophistication of cipher security and with a decline in wireless communications, as well as with a shortage of funds. Yet he succeeded in the important task of preserving continuity of expertise and experience, and also presided over GCCS's rapid expansion and transfer to Bletchley Park on the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. 
In 1937 Denniston had begun to recruit a number of dons who were to join GCCS on the outbreak of war. His contacts with academics who had been members of Room 40 OB helped him to choose such men as Alan Turing and Gordon Welchman, who subsequently led the attack on Wehrmacht Enigma. Denniston's foresight, and his wise selection of the new staff, who for the first time included mathematicians, were the basis for many of GCCS's outstanding wartime successes, especially against Enigma. In the first half of 1940 Denniston had the satisfaction of knowing that, reinforced by the wartime staff which he had recruited and with the aid of vital information supplied by Polish cryptanalysts who had solved Wehrmacht Enigma many years earlier, GCCS was beginning to solve the problem which had most stubbornly defied all its efforts. This was the problem posed by Germany's adoption of the Enigma cipher machine in various versions for the secret communications of the armed forces, the railways, the secret service, and other government organizations. 
Yet Denniston knew that GCCS could not hope to tackle the ciphers of the axis powers on its own. From early 1941 onwards he strove to promote full co-operation between GCCS and the United States' army and navy code-breaking units, urging the Americans to attack Japanese traffic, with GCCS concentrating on German and Italian signals. Although some senior figures both inside and outside GCCS were initially very reluctant to share GCCS's Enigma secrets with the Americans, his views were implemented in the Holden agreement of October 1942 on naval ciphers and the BRUSA (Britain-United States of America) agreement of May 1943 on the army, air force, and secret service ciphers of Germany, Italy, and Japan. Both Britain and America benefited immeasurably from the resulting co-operation, which later led to similar far-ranging post-war agreements between the two countries. 
GCCS achieved a substantial mastery of Enigma in the second half of 1941, reading from then until the end of the war many of the ciphers it employed. In the course of doing so, it increased its staff from about 200 in September 1939 to 10,500 (including its out-stations in England) by January 1945. GCCS also encountered new administrative requirements, and to an ever greater extent came to rely for its operation on specialized apparatus and machinery. Although Denniston recognized that these developments called for a major reorganization, he was not himself the man to carry it out: he had always been a reluctant administrator, preferring to concentrate on technical matters. Nor was he forceful enough in pressing GCCS's case for priority in obtaining junior staff and vital code-breaking machinery. In October 1941 four cryptanalysts, including Turing and Welchman, became so frustrated with the resulting delays in breaking Enigma that they appealed for help directly to Winston Churchill, who immediately ordered that they were to 'have all they want on extreme priority' (minute, 22 Oct 1941, TNA: PRO, HW 1/155). A reorganization in February 1942 divided GCCS into a services and a civil, and much smaller, wing, which had only about 250 staff (including its commercial section) by March 1944. As head of the services division Denniston was succeeded by Commander Edward W. Travis; he himself, having been appointed CMG in 1941, remained the head of the civil division, moving to London (to above Madame Riche, 'couturier des dames' in Berkeley Street), where, on seven floors, he and his team dealt with the diplomatic traffic of Germany, Italy, Japan, and many neutral countries -- the commercial section, which had fifty staff in May 1943, worked in the nearby Aldford House. 
The department worked eighteen hours a day, seven days a week, and achieved many successes. Colonel Alfred McCormack, the influential deputy head of the US army's special branch, which supervised signal intelligence in the US war department, was extremely impressed by Berkeley Street during a lengthy visit to GCCS in 1943. He informed the department that it would be 'absolutely astonished' by the 'resources of intelligence... here in Denniston's show, waiting for somebody to tap them' (cable 4952, 2 June 1943, 'Colonel McCormack's trip to London'). Denniston, continuing his policy of co-operating fully with the United States, had 'turned his people over to us [McCormack's team] for questioning and given us a free run of his place' more than anybody else in GCCS ('Conversations with Denniston', 'Colonel McCormack's trip to London', 63). Although Denniston was bitterly disappointed at no longer being sole head of GCCS, he headed the Berkeley Street section most effectively. He retired in 1945 and thereafter taught French and Latin at a Leatherhead preparatory school. 
Throughout his long period of office as operational head of an undivided GCCS, directly responsible to the chief of the secret service, Denniston brought unusual distinction and expertise, as well as devotion, to his work. If he had little liking for questions of administration, he had even less for the ways of bureaucracy and the demands of hierarchy. By his willingness to delegate, his trust in subordinates, his informality, and his charm he set his stamp on the character of the place, particularly in the early war years in Bletchley Park. More than any other man, he helped it to maintain both the creative atmosphere which underlay its great contribution to British intelligence during the Second World War and the complete security which was no less an important precondition of its achievement. 
Alastair Denniston, as he was known, was a small man, with a strong, craggy-featured face -- indeed, colleagues referred to him as 'the little man'. With his athletic figure, he was always very neatly turned out. He died at the Memorial Hospital, Milford-on-Sea, Hampshire, on 1 January 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 32784


Denniston, John Dewar (1887-1949), classical scholar, was born on 4 March 1887, at Bareilly, India, the younger surviving son of James Lawson Denniston, of the Bengal civil service, and his wife, Laura Mary Davies. He attended the Dragon School, Oxford, and was a scholar of Winchester College and of New College, Oxford, where he gained a first class in classical moderations in 1908 and a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1910. He was Craven scholar in 1909 and in 1913 was elected a fellow of Hertford College, where he remained for the rest of his life with the exception of the war years. In 1914 he was commissioned in the King's Own Scottish Borderers, served in France, and was twice wounded. He later transferred to the War Office and was appointed OBE for his services; he returned to the War Office again for the duration of the Second World War. He married on 5 July 1919 Mary Grace, daughter of Joseph John Morgan, solicitor, of London; there were no children. 
Denniston ranked among the most gifted and distinguished classical scholars of his time. His principal publications include 'Greek Literary Criticism' (1924), Cicero's 'Philippics I and II' (1926), 'The Greek Particles' (1934; 2nd rev. edn, 1954; reprinted 1981); and Euripides' 'Electra' (1939), one of the best extant editions of a Greek tragedy. 'Greek Prose Style' appeared posthumously in 1952, and was reprinted in 1997; an Italian version by Enrico Renna, with excellent indexes, came out in 1993. 
The quality of all Denniston's work was very high; but his greatest contribution to knowledge was his monumental book on the Greek particles. This is a work which bears comparison with the achievements of the great scholars of the past. It represents the exercise of an original and penetrating mind in a field of vast extent. The whole of classical Greek literature is explored; the examples (which number over 20,000) depend on Denniston's own reading and judgement, and their complexity is made intelligible by a lucid and accurate intellect, the myriad interpretations each the result of fresh and fine meditation. The style is vigorous, and the ideal humane. Denniston was concerned much less with linguistic schematism than with niceties of meaning: the Greek particles are keys to the undertones of meaning, and Denniston was the first to detect and interpret the undertones in thousands of passages of Greek prose and poetry. The book is indispensable in all fields of Greek literature, and it is difficult to see how it can ever be superseded. 
Denniston was a joint editor of the first edition of the 'Oxford Classical Dictionary' (1949), to which he contributed a masterly survey of Greek metre. His draft of an edition of Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' was completed after his death by Denys Page and appeared in 1957. 
Denniston was among the most successful classical tutors of his time at Oxford, and tutors from other colleges sent their best students to him for final preparation before university scholarships. He required of his pupils keenness and honesty in their work and it then seemed no effort to him to treat them on terms of equality, whatever their intellectual gifts. He came to regard the tutorial hour as a matter of importance, almost of urgency, and could be outspoken in praise or blame, but always strove to impart something of his own love and understanding of the ancient world, and of his high ideals of scholarship. A considerable part of the work which he did with his pupils was published in 'Some Oxford Compositions' (1949) of which he was a joint editor and a principal contributor. He was unsurpassed in the art of rendering English prose into classical Greek. 
From his schooldays Denniston was devoted to music, and enjoyed playing tennis and, later, watching cricket, but his chief delight was in good conversation and in the happy home which was for many years a centre of lively entertainment in Oxford. For him, conversation meant argument on a stated theme. Through smaller talk he would growl absently; then a phrase would attract him, and with much brushing of the coat-lapel and lightening of the eyes he would attack. His mind was singularly clear and quick, his speech candid and forceful, almost violent. No quarter was given, nor yet offence. Ironical but not sarcastic, subtle but not sophistical, he left in the mind of the listener the impression of a powerful intellect controlled by good humour, a warm heart, and a profound inner modesty. He was a lifelong Liberal and an active and proselytizing member of the League of Nations Union. He watched with horror the rise of the dictators and was among the first to offer refuge in his home to exiles from Austria. 
When the regius chair of Greek became vacant on the retirement of Gilbert Murray in 1936, Denniston was passed over in favour of E. R. Dodds. He was elected FBA in 1937 and proceeded DLitt at Oxford in 1949, shortly before his death, at The Beeches, Church Stretton, Shropshire, on 2 May 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 32785


Denny, Sir Archibald, first baronet (1860-1936), shipbuilder and engineer, was born at Dumbarton on 7 February 1860. He was the fourth son of Peter Denny (1821-1895), of Helenslee, Dumbarton, shipbuilder, and his wife, Helen (died 1905), the eldest daughter of James Leslie, of Dumbarton. Educated at Dumbarton Academy until the age of fourteen, he then went to the 'ecole cantonale' at Lausanne, Switzerland, where he spent two years on the study of science, mathematics, and languages. 
Denny began his apprenticeship in the shipbuilding department of the family business of William Denny & Brothers, during which time he qualified for entry to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where for three years he combined the academic study of naval architecture with the practical training of the shipyard. On completion of this training he served for a short time at the Liverpool office of Lloyd's Register of Shipping. In 1883 Denny became a partner in his father's firm. He assumed responsibility for the technical side of the undertaking, filling the gap left on the death of his brother William Denny (1847-1887) ['see under 'Denny, Peter]. He was involved in the development of the ship model experiment tank at the Leven shipyard, which commenced operation in 1883 as the world's first hydromechanics laboratory set up by a commercial shipyard, and remains in operation. 
Denny became best known for the leadership which took the shipyard to a position recognized worldwide as second to none for technical excellence. The yard produced high-quality ships, many of which were destined for the high-speed and cross-channel routes. In 1901 it delivered the pioneer passenger turbine steamer 'King Edward' using its vast experience coupled with the knowledge gained from research and experimentation in the ship model tank. Denny was consulted regularly by government departments and other interests, he played a prominent part in the council of the Institution of Naval Architects, and for many years was chairman of the technical committee of the British Corporation Register of Shipping, the Glasgow-based rival to Lloyd's Register of Shipping. He chaired the British Engineering Standards Institution for nine years, the Board of Trade committee on the subdivision of ships from 1920 to 1924, the 'Titanic' disaster investigation committee (1912-15), and the International Conference on the Safety of Life at Sea. He served on many government and official commissions and committees, either as chairman or as a committee member. 
In 1885 Denny married Margaret, second daughter of John Tulloch, engineer, of Dumbarton, a partner in the engineering department of the firm. They had five sons and one daughter. Denny served for many years in the volunteers, becoming second in command of a battalion of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. He was created a baronet in 1913, and in 1911 and 1927 received the honorary degree of LLD from the universities of Glasgow and of Cambridge respectively. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1894, but recognition by his peers took the form of election as president of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland, for the sessions 1903-5. In 1921 he took up residence in London and for the remaining fifteen years of his life represented the shipyard interests in the City. He died in London on 29 May 1936, and was succeeded as second baronet by his eldest son, Maurice Edward Denny (1886-1955), who also chaired the company board for thirty years. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32786


Denny, Sir Maurice Edward, second baronet (1886-1955), engineer and shipbuilder, was born at Braehead, Dumbarton, on 11 February 1886, the eldest son of Archibald Denny (1860-1936) and Margaret Tulloch. Maurice Denny was the third generation of the family in control of shipbuilding at Dumbarton, but, unlike his father and grandfather, did not go to the local school. He was educated first at Tonbridge School, Kent, and then spent two years in Switzerland and one in Germany at the universities of Lausanne and Heidelberg. He then embarked upon an apprenticeship in the firm, combining it in a sandwich course with four years at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he studied naval architecture under Professor C. H. Peabody, graduating with first-class honours as BSc in 1909. This was followed by a further year in the drawing office of Wm Doxford & Sons Ltd, Sunderland, learning about the new diesel engine. On his return to the Leven shipyard in 1911 he became a partner in the business at the age of twenty-four. In 1916 Denny married Marjorie, daughter of William Royse Lysaght, steelmaker, of Castleford, Chepstow, Monmouthshire; they had two sons and two daughters. 
When the family firm became a limited company in 1918, the two sides of the business, the Leven shipyard of William Denny & Brothers and the marine engineering works of Denny & Co., were united in the single business of Wm Denny & Co.; Maurice Denny was appointed a director. He was elected vice-chairman in 1920, and in 1922 succeeded his uncle, Colonel John M. Denny, as chairman. He was then thirty-six years old and held that office for the next, troubled, thirty years until 1952, when he retired and became president. 
Naval architecture, especially in areas of the design, stability, and propulsion of ships, was the consuming interest of the young and technically expert Denny. He co-operated with Charles Parsons in 1911 to produce Dennys' first set of geared turbines, to engine the destroyers 'Badger' and 'Beaver', the first to be fitted with this type of engine. His experimentation was cut short by the First World War, during which Denny rose to the rank of major in the machine-gun corps in France. However, on account of the pressure on shipbuilding, and his experience, he was recalled to take up the post of deputy director of designs under the controller-general for merchant shipbuilding at the Admiralty, and was appointed CBE in 1918. 
After the war Denny was keen to apply his scientific brain and well-trained mind to the many shipbuilding problems, but there was a deep depression in world trade, and the need for rigid economies had to have priority. But even in these very difficult years he enhanced his company's reputation, particularly in the construction of fast cross-channel ships with turbine propulsion. He also developed a 'vane-wheel' system for powering flat-bottomed riverboats, and produced two types of torsion meters, the Denny-Johnstone and the Denny-Edgecumbe. His company also built the first all-welded ship in Scotland in 1934, the 'Robert the Bruce', which was in addition the first diesel-electric paddler constructed in Britain. Even more significant was his collaboration with William Wallace (1881-1963) of Brown Brothers to produce the Denny-Brown stabilizer. This was first fitted extensively during the Second World War to give greater stability for gunnery. After the war it was widely used in ships all over the world. 
Denny made a lasting contribution to the progress of the industry, particularly in promoting research. He became chairman of the Shipbuilding Conference in 1940, and also served on the advisory committee on merchant shipbuilding, working closely with Sir Henry Lithgow in co-ordinating the shipbuilders' work during the war. In spite of heavy demands on his time he was instrumental in the foundation of the British Shipbuilding Research Association in 1944; and he was a member of its research council and served as chairman of its research board from its inception until his death. It was largely due to his driving force that the 'Lucy Ashton' trials to measure the power and speed of ships were carried out. The modification of this old Clyde paddle-steamer, fitted with four jet engines, permitted full-scale self-propelled experiments, delivering valuable hydrodynamic data. His services in administration during the war earned him the KBE in 1946. 
Among many appointments, Denny was chairman of the technical committee of the British Corporation Register of Shipping and Aircraft, the Glasgow-based registration company, which was eventually amalgamated with Lloyd's Register. He also played a prominent role in the Air Registration Board, being chairman for many years. On Clydeside he was president of the Clyde Shipbuilders' Association, and nationally the president of the Shipbuilding Employers' Federation. He was a valued supporter of many of the professional institutions and notably president in 1935 of the Institute of Marine Engineers, as his father and grandfather had been. He received an honorary LLD from Glasgow in 1949. Denny's business interests also involved him in many directorships, notably of shipping companies, mainly the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company, the India General Navigation and Railway Company, and the British and Burmese Steam Navigation Company. He was also a director of the Union Bank of Scotland, of Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds, and of Lloyds British Testing Company. 
In his approach to his business Denny was driven by a meticulous integrity, which was the outstanding quality of his character. He was a man of wide interests, and a witty and genial personality. He found his recreation in country life -- he was a golfer, a keen gardener, and an ornithologist of wide knowledge with an almost complete egg collection of birds of the British Isles. In ship model-making he was a skilled craftsman and he presented to the Science Museum his handmade model of the 'Cutty Sark', a famous clipper ship completed by Denny Brothers. Following a coronary thrombosis, Denny died at Drymen, Stirlingshire, on 2 February 1955. His eldest son, Alistair Maurice Archibald Denny, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 32787


Dent, Edward Joseph (1876-1957), musicologist, was born at Ribston Hall, Wetherby, Yorkshire, on 16 July 1876, the fourth and youngest son of John Dent, barrister and for many years an MP, and his wife, Mary Hebden, daughter of John Woodall, of Scarborough. A scholar at Eton College and at King's College, Cambridge, Dent gained a third class in part one of the classical tripos in 1898. However, he had studied music, at which he excelled, at Eton under C. H. Lloyd; and at Cambridge, where he was a pupil of Charles Wood and Charles Stanford, he gained the MusB in 1899. From 1902 to 1908 he was a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, and lectured on music history, also teaching harmony, counterpoint, and composition. During this time he became absorbed in research on Alessandro Scarlatti, who was the subject of 'Alessandro Scarlatti' (1905), his first book and perhaps his most notable achievement. This research was based largely on the study of manuscripts, involving travel throughout Italy, and was followed soon afterwards by major articles on Leonardo Leo, eighteenth-century Italian opera in general, and Orazio Vecchi's 'Amfiparnaso'. These publications established Dent as the leading British musicologist of his day, and the first to gain an international reputation. 
Following Charles Wood's death in 1926, Dent was appointed professor of music at Cambridge University, a post which he held until 1941. He was responsible for reorganizing the teaching of music on a broader basis, as the prerogative not only of organists and organ scholars but of those interested in all branches of music. He particularly encouraged performances of early music, especially baroque. His interests focused on Scarlatti; seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Italian opera, on which he published articles in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', the second edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians', and the Riemann Festschrift of 1909; and Mozart. His 'Mozart's Operas' (1913), published at a time when most of Mozart's operas were still almost completely unknown in England, became the standard work in any language on this subject and demonstrated Dent's ability to form keen critical judgements on the basis of close scholarship. Opera meant more to Dent than any other form of music. He made new translations of Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro', 'Don Giovanni', and 'Die Zauberflote', and supervised a celebrated student production of the last of these at Cambridge in 1911. His later translations included several of Verdi's operas, Berlioz's 'Les Troyens', and Beethoven's 'Fidelio'. He also edited many of Purcell's works and produced these at Cambridge, the Old Vic, the Glastonbury festival, and elsewhere; he made a new edition of 'Dido and Aeneas' in 1924. 
From 1919 Dent was the music critic of 'The Athenaeum', remaining after its amalgamation in 1921 into 'The Nation and Athenaeum' (until 1924). He was also active in the formation of the British Music Society. But he remained essentially international in outlook. He was responsible for the fact that the International Festival of Contemporary Chamber Music, held in 1922 at Salzburg, developed into the International Society of Contemporary Music; this body has branches in many countries and gives annual festivals of modern music. He became its first president, a post he held until 1938 and again in 1945-7. In 1927 he became vice-president of the newly formed International Society for Musicology, of which he later became president. He also served on the board of directors of Sadler's Wells Theatre, of which he became a governor. When the Covent Garden Opera Trust was set up in 1946 he became a director and showed a very active interest in presenting opera of all kinds in English. In 1950 he became the first president of the Liszt Society. 
Dent had a strong rebellious streak, and delighted in expressing outrageous opinions about music that he felt had been accepted with unthinking reverence. His chapter on modern English music in Guido Adler's 'Handbuch der Musikgeschichte' (1924; 2nd edn, 1930) caused some controversy, as he devoted considerably more space to the music of Sir Hubert Parry and Sir Charles Stanford than to that of Sir Edward Elgar, writing that 'for English ears Elgar's music is too emotional and not quite free from vulgarity'. In 1931 a protest against Dent's remarks, signed by many well-known musicians and others, was sent to the Press Association, leading to a flood of highly charged correspondence in various papers. For the 1929 edition of the 'Oxford History of Music' Dent wrote a chapter entitled 'Social aspects of music in the middle ages', and he later served on the editorial board of the 'New Oxford History of Music'. He was an honorary doctor of music of Oxford (1932), Harvard (1936), and Cambridge (1947) universities. He was also, in 1953, one of the first two musicians elected a fellow of the British Academy. His other books include 'Foundations of English Opera' (1928) and a masterly biography of Ferruccio Busoni (1933), a composer whom he knew well as a personal friend. His prolific writings included many articles, forewords to books, and programme notes. 
Dent composed a few original works, of which the most important are a set of polyphonic motets. He also made an arrangement of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' and a practical edition of one of the earliest oratorios, the sacred drama 'La rappresentatione di Anima, et di Corpo' of Emilio de' Cavalieri. His scholarship was a living activity; he was always interested in promoting live performances of music which interested him, not merely in writing articles about it in learned journals. He revived a great deal of early music at a time when there was relatively little interest in it, while at the same time being keenly involved in contemporary music. He left his mark on many fields of music, not only in Cambridge, but in the whole international scene. In recognition of his contribution to musicology the Royal Musical Association, of which he was president from 1928 to 1935, instituted the Dent medal, which is awarded annually to recipients selected for outstanding achievement in this field. Dent, who was unmarried, died at his London home, 17 Cromwell Place, on 22 August 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 32788


Dent, Joseph Malaby (1849-1926), publisher, was born at 3 Archer Street, Darlington, on 30 August 1849, the tenth child of George Dent, a house-painter, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Railton. Joseph Dent attended a Wesleyan school until the age of thirteen. He was briefly an apprentice printer, but proved so inept at that trade that he turned to bookbinding. Dent was a product of the autodidact culture that flourished among self-improving Victorian artisans. His own father had taught music and sold musical instruments as a sideline, and Dent himself discovered Walter Scott's novels while still at school; at the age of fifteen he became enamoured of literature when he spoke before a chapel mutual improvement society on Boswell's 'Life of Samuel Johnson'. That book would become the first volume in Dent's great series of cheap classics, 'Everyman's Library'. In August 1867 Dent moved to London, where he worked for a bookbinder in Bucklersbury, out of Cheapside. He married Hannah (1840/41-1887), daughter of George Wiggins, on 1 October 1870: they had four sons and two daughters. After the death of his first wife, he married Alexandra Campbell, daughter of Thomas Burnett Main, on 13 April 1889; they had four daughters and two sons. 
Dent set up his own London shop in Hoxton in 1872, and in 1881 he moved to larger premises at 69 Great Eastern Street, but that plant burnt down on new year's day 1888. The insurance money allowed him to rebuild, and the following autumn J. M. Dent & Co. ventured into publishing. Dent had often been struck by the contrast between his handsome leather bindings and the spindly Victorian type on the pages they enclosed; he now embarked on a crusade to raise standards of book production. He published the 'Temple Library', starting with Charles Lamb's 'Essays of Elia', edited by Augustine Birrell, with etchings by Herbert Railton. This series of limited editions, produced on handmade paper, won both commercial success and the endorsement of the antiquarian bookseller Bernard Quaritch. In 1889 Dent put out an edition of 'The Canterbury Tales' with hand-coloured illustrations; then he turned to uniform editions of the great English novelists. A trip to Florence and Siena in 1890 inspired the 'Mediaeval Towns' series: illustrated books about the historic cities of Europe. There followed in 1893-4 a magnificent edition of Sir Thomas Malory's 'The Birth, Life and Acts of King Arthur', with about 300 illustrations by the nineteen-year-old Aubrey Beardsley. 
Dent recognized an enormous potential demand for cheap classics among self-educated readers. He was secretary of the Shakespeare Society at the Toynbee Hall settlement house, where the members had to cope with a confusing variety of editions, most of them badly edited and without helpful critical apparatus. Between 1894 and 1896 he produced the forty-volume 'Temple Shakespeare', edited by Israel Gollancz, with title-pages by Walter Crane, all for 1's'. a volume; the series was to sell 5 million copies over the next forty years. There followed the 'Temple Dramatists', editions of other Elizabethan and Jacobean playwrights; the 'Temple Biographies'; the 'Temple Greek and Latin Classics'; 'English Men of Science'; a forty-volume translation of Balzac's 'Comedie humaine'; as well as multi-volume 'Temple' editions of Fielding, Scott, Dickens, Hugo, Thackeray, and Hazlitt. There was even a 'Temple Bible' in thirty-one volumes. Dent's list was not, however, limited to the classics. He also published contemporary writing by Maurice Hewlett, H. G. Wells, Henryk Sienkiewicz, Bernhard Berenson, Edward Thomas, John Masefield, Henry James, Padraic Colum, George Santayana, Mary Webb, and the later works of Joseph Conrad and W. H. Hudson, as well as children's books by Kate Greenaway and Edith Nesbit. The 'Temple Primers' series popularized academic subjects for lay readers. 
In 1906 Dent began his greatest project, a 1000-volume uniform edition of world literature, selling for 1's'. a volume. His editor was Ernest Rhys, who proposed the name 'Everyman's Library'. Cheap classic reprints were by no means a new concept -- Rhys himself had earlier edited the 1's'. 'Camelot Classics' for the Newcastle publisher Walter Scott -- but 'Everyman's Library' was unprecedented in its breadth, coherence, and beautiful design. Reginald Knowles designed the bindings, endpapers, and title-pages in the manner of William Morris. A hand-lettered title and a distinctive floral ornament were stamped on the spine in gold. The demand for 'Everyman's Library' was so great that Dent had to build the Temple Press, a vast new production facility at Letchworth Garden City. In 1911 the firm moved to imposing new offices at 10-13 Bedford Street, Covent Garden, London. Having invested so much capital in his Letchworth plant, Dent could be stingy with his workers, authors, and editors. Rhys, for instance, had to work at breakneck speed to prepare new volumes for publication (152 in the first year), and at first earned only 3 guineas per volume. But Dent was a capitalist with an entirely genuine commitment to quality: when one of the first 'Everyman' volumes, Lamb's 'Essays of Elia', fell short of his aesthetic standards, he had the entire print run destroyed. 
Dent has been criticized for his over-reverent, conservative, petit bourgeois tastes in literature. (He always pronounced it 'litterchah', his employee Frank Swinnerton recalled.) Since the early 'Everyman' volumes were reprints of out-of-copyright texts, they inevitably represented the standard canon of Greek, Roman, English, American, and western European classics. By 1956 the firm's editorial director admitted that many of the Victorian war-horses had already become anachronisms. With puritanical fastidiousness, Dent blocked the admission of Tobias Smollett and 'Moll Flanders' to 'Everyman's Library'. Yet in other respects the series was remarkably inclusive, embracing the Russian classics, the great books of India, and an impressive range of female novelists. (Dent himself wrote the introduction to Elizabeth Gaskell's 'Cranford', one of his personal favourites.) A Liberal nonconformist, Dent was inspired by an almost religious mission to bring culture to the masses. As a member of the Toynbee Hall education committee, he organized a Sunday afternoon concert series that ran in Whitechapel for thirty years. From 1902 he served on the council of the British and Foreign School Society, and he was a strong supporter of Margaret McMillan's nursery school movement. 
In 1912 Dent launched 'Everyman', a penny literary weekly. It was a failure, partly as a result of quarrels with the editor, Charles Sarolea. The First World War slowed the publication of new 'Everyman's Library' volumes to a near standstill, and wartime inflation forced the series to raise its prices and economize on ornamentation. Dent was devastated by the loss of two sons, Paxton and Austen, in the war; significantly, the first work of twentieth-century literature published in 'Everyman's Library' was Henri Barbusse's devastating war novel 'Le feu', translated as 'Under Fire'. 
J. M. Dent's sons Hugh and Jack Dent and Jack's son, F. J. Martin Dent, all assumed managerial roles in the family firm. J. M. Dent retired in 1924, and died of heart failure at his home, Cromhamleigh, Harewood Road, south Croydon, on 9 May 1926. He was buried in Sanderstead churchyard, Surrey. 'Everyman's Library' did not reach volume 1000 until 1956, but Dent had lived to see total sales exceed 20 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 32789


D'Erlanger, Sir Gerard John Regis Leo (1906-1962), airline company director and financier, was born at Hall Place, Bexley, Kent, on 1 June 1906. He was the only son and the elder of the two children of Baron Emile Beaumont D'Erlanger (1866-1939), international banker and chairman of Erlangers Ltd, and his wife, (Marie Rose Antoinette) Catherine de Robert d'Aqueria, daughter of the marquis de Rochegude of Bollene in Vaucluse, France. He was educated at Eton College where he acquired the nickname 'Pop' by which he was known to his friends for the rest of his life. As a member of a family which had as many links with France as with England, D'Erlanger completed his education in Paris and then qualified in London as a chartered accountant in 1933. At the same time he took up private flying with enthusiasm and gained a pilot's 'A licence' (Royal Aero Club aviator's certificate no. 9730) at the Airwork Flying School at Heston in Middlesex on 11 March 1931. In company with two wealthy friends, Gordon Selfridge the younger and Whitney Straight, he acquired a taste for continental touring by air and, on a business visit to Argentina in 1932, flew himself around in a single-seat Composer Swift. He started a career in the family tradition when he joined Myers & Co. in 1934 and, in the following year, became a member of the London stock exchange. 
Already D'Erlanger's flying interests had begun to extend beyond the sporting field. In 1934 he joined the board of the privately owned Hillman's Airways. No more incongruous -- or successful -- association could be imagined than that of the tough, self-made businessman, Edward Hillman, and the young, urbane, Etonian accountant. Hillman died in December 1934 just as the company went public, and D'Erlanger took a leading part in bringing his father's banking house to invest in the company. There was already one other financial institution entering the field of air transport -- Whitehall Securities, founded by the first Lord Cowdray, managed by Clive Pearson, and including on its board Harold Balfour MP. In 1935, thanks largely to D'Erlanger and Balfour, Hillman's Airways merged with United Air Lines, owned by Whitehall Securities, and was renamed British Airways in 1936. The result was a powerful independent airline with substantial financial backing which could challenge the state-supported Imperial Airways. 
D'Erlanger became a director of British Airways on its formation and in 1937 he married Gladys Florence, daughter of H. J. Sammut; they had one son and two daughters, one of whom, Mary Caroline (Minnie), was the first wife of Winston Churchill ('b'. 1940). On 1 April 1940, following the report of the committee chaired by Lord Cadman, Imperial Airways and British Airways were merged to form the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), with D'Erlanger on the board of BOAC from its official beginning. 
Before this, when war was clearly imminent, D'Erlanger began negotiations in 1938 with the Air Council member for development and production, Air Marshal Sir Wilfrid Freeman, for an auxiliary force of private pilots, too old or unfit for military service, who might be used to ferry aircraft from manufacturers to squadrons in time of war. At first the Air Ministry was lukewarm but, when war was declared in September 1939, Air Transport Auxiliary rapidly came into being at White Waltham, near Maidenhead, Berkshire, with D'Erlanger as commandant. During the next six years 1215 men and women from fourteen nations ferried some 308,000 aircraft of 147 different types in all weathers and often in the most difficult conditions, with the loss of 173 lives, sixteen of whom were women. A memorial was set up in St Paul's Cathedral with their motto: 'Aetheris avidi' ('Eager for the air'). For this contribution to the war effort D'Erlanger was made a CBE in 1943. 
Before the war ended, D'Erlanger began discussions with Sir Harold Hartley, chairman of the Railway Air Services, about the formation of a new airline for domestic and European services. The result was the formation on 1 August 1946 of British European Airways (BEA), a second nationalized corporation. It took over the former services of the independent airlines, including those of Railway Air Services and BOAC's European routes, under Hartley's chairmanship and with D'Erlanger as managing director. When Hartley became chairman of BOAC in July 1947, D'Erlanger took the chair of BEA but -- following a dispute about the level of subsidy with the minister of civil aviation, Lord Pakenham -- he resigned on 14 March 1949 and returned to the City. He was succeeded as chairman of BEA by Lord Douglas of Kirtleside. D'Erlanger was a member (from 1952) and deputy chairman (from 1954) of the Air Transport Advisory Council, resigning in 1955. 
Early in 1956, after the resignation of Sir Miles Thomas in the wake of the disasters involving the early jet airliner Comet I, D'Erlanger was appointed chairman of BOAC. It was a very difficult time, with BOAC having to use obsolescent equipment in the face of its competitors' more modern aircraft and having to fight the ministry and the Treasury over the shortage of dollars needed to buy American equipment and costs generally, which neither understood. D'Erlanger's tenure was made the more difficult both because he was a part-time, unpaid chairman who operated from his flat in London, and because the government pressed for purchase of the VC-10 and Super VC-10 jet airliners rather than allowing BOAC to buy all Boeing 707s. D'Erlanger signed the contract despite the protests of incoming chairman, Sir Matthew Slattery. 
D'Erlanger was knighted in 1958. He retired from BOAC in 1960 to devote himself to City affairs as chairman of City and International Trust, of the General and Consolidated Investment Trust, and of the Moorgate Investment Company. He was also deputy chairman of the Provident Mutual Life Association, and a director of John Mackintosh & Sons and of Philip Hill Investment Trust, with which Erlangers had merged. He settled down to enjoy a less onerous life at his home at 11 Hyde Park Street in London. Surrounded by a circle of friends, he had wide interests, which included the Royal Yacht Squadron. Two years after his retirement he died suddenly on 15 December 1962, at his home in London. He was survived by his wife. 
Pop D'Erlanger's chief contribution to British aviation was to bring together early commercial airline interests and adequate finance in the years before the war of 1939-45, and to help consolidate their scattered remnants to form BEA under state ownership in 1946. His imaginative formation of the Air Transport Auxiliary in 1939 provided a valuable source of flying experience which might otherwise have remained untapped. This was a contribution to the war effort which, because it fitted no service mould, went largely unrecognized. Always pleasant, often worried, never happy with officialdom, D'Erlanger had an innate reserve which, combined with difficulty in communication, kept him from still greater attainments. In aviation he was a gifted amateur in a tough professional field and a political amateur in a highly politicized industry; in finance he was very much the professional who was often among amateurs. 


@@@@@


doc= 32790


Robeck, Sir John Michael de, baronet (1862-1928), naval officer, was born on 10 June 1862 at Gowran Grange, Naas, co. Kildare, Ireland, the second son of John Henry Edward Fock, fourth Baron de Robeck (1823-1904), and his wife, Zoe Sophia Charlotte (died 1903), the third daughter of William Fitzwilliam Burton of co. Carlow. The family title was Swedish, stemming from John Henry Fock, Baron de Robeck (1755-1817), who was naturalized by act of parliament in 1785 and settled in Ireland. 
De Robeck entered the navy as a cadet on 'Britannia' in 1875, and was promoted to lieutenant in 1885, commander in 1897, and captain in 1902. His early naval career was unremarkable and included service in Chinese, North American, and Mediterranean waters and two tours of duty in 'Britannia'. He appears to have had a flair for training and was considered a natural leader, handsome in appearance, gentlemanly in manner, and noted for his love of sports in all forms. De Robeck was inspecting captain of boys' training establishments from February to December 1911 and after promotion to rear-admiral in December 1911 was appointed admiral of patrols. De Robeck was the first to command (April 1912 to May 1914) this newly created organization that included four patrol flotillas (three of destroyers and one of torpedo-boats) and the majority of submarines. 
De Robeck was on half pay when the war began and was recalled to command the 9th cruiser squadron, a force of elderly cruisers taken up from the reserve and assigned the Cape Finisterre station. In January 1915 he was transferred from this obscure post and made second in command of the eastern Mediterranean squadron with his flag in the battleship 'Vengeance'. The squadron, commanded by Vice-Admiral Sir Sackville Carden, was originally to play the primary role in the Dardanelles campaign, charged with reducing the Turkish forts at the entrance to the Dardanelles and opening the straits to the passage of allied warships. The bombardment of the Turkish defences began in February but Carden's health soon broke down under the strain and he was forced to relinquish his command. Under the rules of seniority, command should now have gone to Rear-Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss, then senior naval officer, Mudros. However, Wemyss declined because he regarded de Robeck as better suited since he had been so closely involved in the planning and execution of the attack. De Robeck, promoted to acting vice-admiral, shifted his flag to the new super-dreadnought 'Queen Elizabeth' and found himself in a position of great responsibility, one of the handful of men who might truly influence the outcome of the war. He inherited Carden's staff, whose chief was Commodore Roger Keyes, a fiery partisan of a properly executed naval offensive. 
The naval bombardments gradually reduced the majority of Turkish fixed defences -- although not the mobile howitzer batteries -- but the major Anglo-French naval attack on 18 March was a failure, largely owing to an undetected line of Turkish mines that sank two British and one French battleships. De Robeck was at first ready to renew the attack, convinced that the Turkish batteries could be dominated after a few hours bombardment thereby permitting the sweepers to clear the mines. Here he was probably acting under the influence of Keyes and others on the staff, notably the Royal Marines war staff officer Captain William W. Godfrey. However, de Robeck reconsidered and on 22 March recommended waiting until the army, then concentrating on the nearby island of Lemnos, landed and seized the commanding heights on the Gallipoli peninsula. The divergence between de Robeck and Keyes on the subject of a renewed naval attack would be lasting. 
The landing at heavy cost on 25 April did not yield the desired results. This raised the question of another naval attack. De Robeck's cable to the Admiralty on the subject was couched in terms a disappointed Keyes regarded as an attempt to shift responsibility on to the Admiralty if they ordered him to attack. De Robeck's task was immensely complicated by the arrival of German submarines at the Dardanelles. The 'Queen Elizabeth' was ordered home and de Robeck shifted to the semi-dreadnought 'Lord Nelson' and then to the converted yacht 'Triad', better suited for shuttling between the nearby islands and the beaches. A new landing in August at Suvla again failed to break through. The autumn brought a fresh crisis when Bulgaria entered the war on the side of Germany, leading within a few weeks to the collapse of Serbia and the imminent opening of direct rail communications between Germany and Constantinople, permitting the unimpeded flow of heavy ammunition to the beleaguered Turks. The belated attempt to save Serbia resulted in the opening of the Macedonian front, an additional responsibility for de Robeck. The onset of autumn storms also added to the difficulty of supplying the army over open beaches. It was clearly the crisis of the campaign. The government wavered. Keyes, with thoroughly reorganized sweeping and offensive forces, including specially bulged ships to minimize mine damage, prepared plans for a new naval attack to save the campaign. De Robeck allowed him to go home in late October to plead his case, emphasizing to the first lord that there was no ill will between them and that he had always encouraged his officers to state their views candidly. It was sporting gestures such as these that made de Robeck so popular in the navy, but he was also careful to counter Keyes with a private letter to the first lord recommending against attack. De Robeck went beyond the argument that the stakes were high enough to risk the loss of a few obsolescent ships if it would lead to capture of the great prize -- Constantinople. The problem in de Robeck's mind was that even if the fleet got through the narrows and anchored off Constantinople it would not necessarily mean that the Turks would surrender. The fleet would then have the problem of being supplied by vulnerable unarmoured ships through the narrows where the Turk would still hold the commanding heights. It was de Robeck who would have the responsibility and he stuck to his guns, praised by some such as Admiral Limpus, admiral-superintendent at Malta, who was thankful he was strong enough to say no. 
The strain of command and responsibility were telling on de Robeck and by autumn he was suffering from chronic insomnia and neuralgia. His health became so bad that he was forced to take a brief leave in England in late November, leaving Wemyss as senior naval officer. Wemyss and Keyes, who had returned to the Aegean, made a desperate effort for a renewed naval attack and to prevent an evacuation. It was futile, the government decided on evacuation. De Robeck returned to the Aegean just after the successful completion of the evacuation of Suvla and Anzac by dawn on 20 December. He credited Wemyss and Keyes with excellent organization, but deplored their campaign in his absence for a renewed attack. However, he had not the heart to send Keyes away but contented himself with a heart to heart talk telling him he must in the future be a chief of staff and not 'leader of the opposition'. Again it was a grand sporting gesture. 
De Robeck returned from England a new man, fit and able to sleep. He had been freed of the dreadful responsibility of a new attack on the straits. De Robeck completed the successful evacuation of the final bridgehead at Cape Helles the night of 8-9 January 1916. His command in the Aegean was now steadily diminished as ships were recalled to home waters. There were still a multitude of complications with the French, Greeks, military authorities, and the threat of German submarines, but for him the remainder of the war was really an anticlimax. He relinquished the Aegean command in June 1916 and returned to England to command the 3rd battle squadron ('Dreadnought' and the pre-dreadnought 'King Edward VII'-class battleships) at the Nore. In November 1916 he took command of the 2nd battle squadron in the Grand Fleet with his flag in 'King George V'. He struggled with the Admiralty over the seemingly inadequate rewards given to his eastern Mediterranean command after the Dardanelles campaign and in 1917 also testified before the Dardanelles Commission. 
De Robeck was created a baronet in 1919, received a grant of $10,000, and was created a GCB and GCMG in the honours awarded after the armistice. In July 1919 he became commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean with his flag in the battleship 'Iron Duke'. He also acted as British high commissioner at Constantinople and was promoted to admiral in March 1920. Once again he had significant responsibilities, diplomatic and political as well as naval, as resurgent Turkish nationalism and resistance to the terms of the original peace treaty created the possibility of further fighting. 
De Robeck left the Mediterranean in May 1922 and in July married Hilda Maud (died 1944), the widow of Colonel Sir Simon Macdonald Lockhart bt, and daughter of Colonel Augustus Henry Moreton-Macdonald of Bembridge, Isle of Wight. They had no children. 
De Robeck's last active service was command of the Atlantic Fleet (August 1922 to August 1924). He was created a GCVO and promoted to admiral of the fleet in November 1925. He died on 20 January 1928 at his home, 2 Southwick Crescent, Hyde Park, London, and the truly impressive and well-attended funeral at Bembridge, Isle of Wight, four days later, and concurrent memorial service at Westminster Abbey were evidence of the wide esteem in which he was held. 
De Robeck will always be remembered as one of the great 'might have beens' of history, forever linked with the Dardanelles campaign. He did not, either by choice or premature death, write his memoirs and so has tended to suffer from the persuasive writing of men such as Churchill and Keyes who believed he had missed a great opportunity by not renewing a naval attack. On the other hand, he might well have avoided a costly failure. This is an argument that can never be answered -- was he a man who squandered a priceless opportunity or a strong man who had the courage to say no? 


@@@@@


doc= 32791


Saulles, George William de (1862-1903), medallist, was born on 4 February 1862 at Villa Street, Aston Manor, Birmingham, and baptized there on 13 April 1863 at St Philip's Church, the son of William Henry de Saulles, glass merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Anne. His grandfather was French, or possibly Swiss, but his father had settled in Birmingham. He began his art training at the Birmingham School of Art under E. R. Taylor and gained several prizes there. He was then apprenticed to John Wilcox, die-sinker, in Birmingham, from whom he gained varied experience, including the execution of dies for large labels for Manchester manufactured goods, which sometimes included figures in their design. He moved to London in 1884, and worked for John H. Pinches, the die-engraver, then in Oxenden Street, Haymarket. In 1888 he returned to Birmingham and worked for Joseph Moore, the medallist. 
During 1892 de Saulles was commissioned to work on new coinage for the Royal Mint, following the death of Leonard Charles Wyon, the chief engraver. In January 1893 he was appointed 'engraver to the mint' ('Annual Report of Deputy Master of the Mint', 1893, 30), and from that time until his death was actively engaged in the production of dies for English and colonial coins and for official medals. He was a highly skilled craftsman who worked with great rapidity, and who designed, modelled, and engraved most of his dies. He was in some degree influenced by the French school of L. O. Roty and J. C. Chaplain, but in his official work there was little scope for innovation or the exercise of imagination. 
De Saulles's medallic work between 1894 and 1903 included large numbers of official and private medals and several plaques, many of which were exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1898. Notable among these were the diamond jubilee medal of Queen Victoria (1897), the coronation medal of Edward VII (1902), and the Stokes jubilee medal with a portrait of Professor Nathaniel Stokes (1899). 
De Saulles's first commission from the mint was to execute the dies for the new issue of coins of Queen Victoria in 1893, designed by Thomas Brock. He designed the Britannia reverse of the English bronze coins of 1895, and the issue of English coins made in 1902 after the accession of Edward VII. His signature on the coins is De S. He also designed and engraved the dies for various colonial coins, such as the British East Africa copper coins (1897), the British Honduras coins (1894), and the British dollar for India (1895). He made the last great seal of Queen Victoria (1899), and many designs for official seals for the colonies. At the time of his death he was preparing the models for the great seals of the United Kingdom and those of Ireland and Scotland, subsequently executed by F. Bowcher. (His work is listed in more detail by Pinches, 312-13; Hocking, 2.301; and Brown, vols. 2-3.) 
De Saulles was regarded as a kind-natured man and was entirely devoted to his profession. He died on 22 July 1903 at his home, 31 Fairfax Road, Bedford Park, Chiswick, and was buried on 25 July in the churchyard of St Nicholas's, Chiswick. He left a widow, Myra Elizabeth. Works and designs on paper by de Saulles are among records of the mint at the Public Record Office, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32792


Soissons, Louis Emmanuel Jean Guy de (1890-1962), architect and town planner, was born in Montreal, Canada, on 31 July 1890, the younger son of Charles de Soissons and his wife, Julie, 'nee' Rozwadowska. When he and his brother and sister were small, the family moved to London. 
De Soissons's early education was at Bewshers and Colet Court, the preparatory school for St Paul's, but he did not continue on to a public school. He knew early that he would be an architect and at the age of sixteen was articled to J. H. Eastwood. From 1906 to 1911 he attended evening classes at the Royal Academy. He became the Royal Institute of British Architects' Tite prizeman (1912) and then their Henry Jarvis student at the British School at Rome (1913). He next went to the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, attending the atelier Duquesne and winning three medals, but returned from Paris when the First World War broke out. Back in Britain, he tried to enlist in a line regiment but short sight precluded this. Instead, he served with the Army Service Corps and later undertook liaison duties with the Italian army. He was mentioned in dispatches, appointed OBE in 1918, was awarded the 'croce di guerra', and was made a 'cavaliere' of the order of the Crown of Italy. He also worked with the War Claims Commission where his fluent French and Italian were useful. 
After the war de Soissons returned briefly to his studies at the Beaux-Arts. There followed a short-lived partnership with Philip Hepworth, followed by a longer-lasting but informal arrangement with George Grey Wornum. In 1919 destiny placed a finger upon de Soissons. Ebenezer Howard, the doyen of the garden-city movement, had in 1919 impetuously decided to start a second town for 40,000-50,000 near Welwyn to take up the torch from his first experiment at Letchworth. The initial sketch-plan came from a Letchworth architect, but the sapient Sir Theodore Chambers, chairman of Welwyn Garden City Ltd, then asked the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) to recommend an architect-planner. In April 1920 de Soissons was appointed to produce a revised plan, with the duty also of company architect. He presented his plan in June. Its subsequent development and implementation revealed a breadth of interests and skills of design and decision-making which proved to be in excellent balance. Besides laying out the whole plan of Welwyn Garden City, de Soissons designed a high proportion of its civic buildings, its early factories, and its housing. On behalf of the company he had the final decision about the work of other architects in the town, which he always exercised with respect for his fellow professionals. When in 1948 Welwyn Garden City was expanded into one of the government's post-war new towns, de Soissons was confirmed as planner and his firm laid out the large extension scheme. 
On 29 April 1922 de Soissons married Elinor Maude Charlotte Penrose-Thackwell, with whom he had three sons. They set up their first home in the embryo new town and he lived in or near it from then on, believing that such a responsibility should not be discharged from a distance. He knew that while a plan could provide a strategy, it was the detail that would touch people's feelings. The results are evident in the pleasure of moving around the town and in the active affection that it generates among its inhabitants. 
What is known of de Soissons's architectural philosophy has to be derived mainly from his work and conversation, for he wrote little. He perceived architectural quality without prejudice about style, but had a personal affection for the Italian Renaissance, the eighteenth-century English and American classical vernacular, especially the buildings of Nantucket, and Regency Brighton, Cheltenham, and Leamington. He was too independent to be greatly influenced by any of this or by Welwyn Garden City's immediate predecessors, Letchworth (which he did not much like) and Hampstead Garden Suburb. Like them, his town was conceived as having a formal civic centre surrounded by informal residential areas. The latter were innovatively planned and invested with exceptional natural charm. Yet it was one of his main contributions to the garden-city movement that despite their relaxed and natural character, his streets and housing are distinctively urban in idiom and are not villages writ large. This was a lesson de Soissons had absorbed from the Liverpool school of architect-planners such as Stanley Adhead and Patrick Abercrombie. He developed their neo-Georgian style with suavity and flexibility, but could design flat-roofed houses when asked to. His industrial buildings at Welwyn Garden City were also notable: he attempted, for instance, to confer architectural quality upon the banal 'sectional factories' hitherto built for leasing on trading estates. 
De Soissons did much other inter-war housing for people of low and middle incomes, in part through the patronage of Sir Theodore Chambers. He was architect to the duchy of Cornwall estate in Kennington, London, and was one of a small group with whom Edward VIII as prince and king discussed housing problems. He served on the Central Housing Advisory Committee and the Burt committee, appointed after 1945 to promote innovation in construction. He was greatly pleased by an invitation just before the war to design barracks for the brigade of guards and after 1945 to rebuild Carlton House Terrace for the Foreign Office -- but sadly both had to be cancelled. He did popular work at Cheltenham. As senior partner in the extended post-war firm of Louis De Soissons, Peacock, Hodges, and Robertson, he participated in rebuilding the bombed centre of Plymouth, as well as further housing in the west country. Among much other work he was responsible for the George VI memorial in Carlton Gardens, the Hobbs memorial gates at the Oval, the restoration of the Nash terraces in Regent's Park, and buildings at Cheltenham College. He was architect to the Imperial War Graves Commission for Greece and Italy, where his firm meticulously designed and planted war cemeteries rivalling the best built after the First World War; one of the largest and most moving is at Cassino. He believed in personal commitment in design and was the final arbiter in the office. He conveyed his ideas with decisive comments and quick sketches, and expected them to be carried out exactly. He was, however, more open-minded about modern work in the office than his personal tastes might suggest. 
In 1923 de Soissons was made a fellow of RIBA and a member of both the Town Planning Institute and the Societe des Architectes Diplomes par le Gouvernement. But he was not an 'institute' man and preferred to put effort into the Architectural Association School (1929-33) where he was a vice-principal of the upper school and a tough, incisive critic. He was also active at the Royal Academy, to which he was elected in 1953 (having become an associate in 1942) and where he served as treasurer from 1959, and at the Royal Fine Arts Commission (1949-61). He was also involved with F. R. Yerbury in founding the Building Centre. He was awarded the RIBA distinction in town planning in 1945 and was made CVO in 1956, the honour that he most greatly valued. 
De Soissons dressed like a Frenchman, sporting a moustache, round glasses, and a beret, frequently with the addition of a bow-tie. He loved good food and wine, sculpture, and paintings (James Woodford and Charles Cundall were among his close friends), but he did not particularly enjoy theatre or music. He read quickly and enjoyed the best current architectural journals, especially French, Italian, and Scandinavian. He was a devotee of whodunits and of the novels of Dickens, Dumas, and Zane Grey. Though averse to publicity, he was gregarious and friendly with anyone who gained his respect, whatever they were and wherever he found them. He made every day an event for those with him at the time, for he had great vitality and a strong sense of fun. Religious or political compatibility was irrelevant. When he walked into a pub he would look quickly around and give a greeting, and he resented any lack of response. Not a sporting man himself, he enjoyed the idea of field sports, and walking holidays gave him pleasure at one stage. He was a member of the Athenaeum and the Arts Club, but not a club devotee. Among his architectural contemporaries he admired Sir Edwin Lutyens, with whom he once worked briefly, Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, H. S. Goodhart-Rendel, Charles James, and Frank Lloyd Wright. His own closest collaborator in his firm was Kenneth Peacock, with whom he designed the war cemeteries. 
De Soissons was first, last, and always a practical architect; and although he wanted the challenge of major set-piece architecture, Welwyn Garden City is likely to be viewed in history as his great achievement, especially its plan and its residential areas. He died at the London Clinic on 23 September 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 32793


Stein, Sir Edward Adolphe Sinauer de (1887-1965), merchant banker, was born at 9 Palace Gate, London, on 16 June 1887, the eldest of three children of Clara Annie (died 1927), daughter of Baron de Stein of Antwerp, and her husband, Sigmund Sinauer (died 1911), merchant, who outside business adopted his wife's surname and was known as Sinauer de Stein. The elder of de Stein's sisters married Herward Ramsbotham, later first Viscount Soulbury, politician and governor-general of Ceylon. The younger sister, like de Stein, never married, and she kept house for him all their adult lives. 
De Stein was educated at Eton College from 1901 where, though small in stature, he distinguished himself at sports. In 1905 he went to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was immensely popular and was noted for his wit and skill as a raconteur. He gained a second-class degree in history in 1910 and then read for the bar; he was called by the Inner Temple in 1912. He served throughout the First World War in the King's Royal Rifle Corps, emerging unscathed with the rank of major. 
De Stein's early business career was influenced by that of his father, who had arrived in London about 1881 as a partner of H. Nathan & Co. and who from 1902 chaired its successor, S. Hoffnung & Co., Australian and American merchants. Sinauer de Stein was also chairman of New Darvel Bay (Borneo) Tobacco Plantations Ltd, and, following his sudden death in Milan in 1911, Edward succeeded him as chairman. He inherited a modest fortune from his father's net estate of $45,000, and in 1927 he received a further sum from his mother's estate of $27,000. 
After the war de Stein worked briefly for Carters, general merchants in the City, where his brother-in-law was a partner, before joining Michael Herbert, quite possibly in the newly formed Constructive Finance and Investment Co., until Herbert's admission as a partner of Morgan Grenfell in 1924. De Stein then formed his own firm, Edward De Stein & Co., in partnership with John Mulholland, son of the second Lord Dunleath and member of an influential Northern Ireland family. In 1936 David Bowes-Lyon, brother of Elizabeth, duchess of York, joined them. De Stein therefore instituted a partnership with considerable prestige and establishment influence; and all three men obtained directorships of major British companies. 
De Stein's firm left no record of its activities, but knowledge of the financial markets and of the financing needs of business facilitated its development in two related directions. One was investment management in return for a regular fee income while the other, in return for windfall profit, was the specialist provision of corporate finance advice to companies intent on expansion by acquisition or through raising additional capital. 
Edward De Stein & Co. was one of several small houses formed at this time to meet an expanding demand for specialist advice, especially from small and medium-sized businesses, an activity avoided by established merchant banks until the 1930s. However, the care with which de Stein developed his business resulted in an undoubted City reputation. His shrewdness and transparent honesty enabled him to pick and choose with exacting care his clients, his associates, his partners, and the directors of the boards he chaired. 
In investment management the list of de Stein's private and institutional clients was doubtless long, but the public manifestation of this work was through his management of investment trusts, not a new but certainly an expanding vehicle of popular investment. By 1930 he had established and managed Anglo Celtic Trust Ltd and British Combined Investors Trust Ltd, and he sat on the boards of others such as Industrial Selection Trust Ltd, Mid European Corporation Ltd, and Romney Trust Ltd, which were domiciled at his City offices. 
De Stein's major financial operations appear to have been comparatively few, and he and his partners sat on the boards of several client companies. He himself was a director of the Columbia Graphophone Company from about 1920 and was involved with its merger in 1931 with the Gramophone Company (popularly known as His Master's Voice) to form Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (later EMI Ltd), on whose board he served until the late 1950s. He was chairman of the important tobacco manufacturers Gallaher Ltd of Belfast, following his organization of a syndicate to acquire the business from its founding family in 1928 and its subsequent offer for sale as a public company; he remained its chairman until the late 1950s. He was also chairman of the finance house Mercantile Credit from the early 1930s to the 1950s, at a time of its expansion into hire purchase; from 1951 he was president of the Finance Houses Association. These companies, and other clients such as Dunlops, were in dynamic sectors of the economy; de Stein appears to have stood clear of mature companies with different financing requirements. 
In 1951 de Stein merged his business with the corporate finance arm of a smaller competitor, Dawnay Day, but in 1960, when he was seventy-three, his own firm merged into, and was effectively swallowed up by, Lazard Brothers, an acknowledgement that the growing complexity of corporate finance transactions had for the time being numbered the days of the smaller houses. De Stein felt distinctly out of place in this new era, ushered in during 1958 and 1959 by the 'aluminium war': he joined a syndicate of City houses to prevent, 'in the national interest', British Aluminium Ltd from falling into unsuitable foreign ownership, but its efforts were humiliatingly crushed by the aggressive take-over practices imported from Wall Street by S. G. Warburg & Co. 
De Stein was a vociferous opponent of nationalization and highlighted in letter columns of the press its critical shortcoming: 'in cases where, under state ownership, there is no competition whatsoever, on what basis are the prices of services and goods to be determined so that... the public may be able to judge whether there has been efficiency and economy in operation? ('The Times', 21 Jan 1948)' Notwithstanding this opposition to a 'controlled' economy, from 1949 to 1954 he was a director of the National Research Development Corporation, though his directorship of the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation was short-lived; this body, sponsored by the Bank of England, was formed in 1945 to provide equity finance for small business, but de Stein resigned in 1946 with a somewhat terse public statement referring to 'pressure of business' ('The Times', 9 Nov 1946, 9). 
De Stein was mercurial and impatient and he distrusted the judgement of theoreticians. His success lay in his ability to size up, mostly intuitively, the prospects of a company or industry and to find the right men to carry through his ideas. But he was bad at figures and here he relied on the help of others. During the Second World War, de Stein was director of finance, raw materials, for the Ministry of Supply (1941-6), for which he was knighted in 1946. From 1949 until 1963 he was chairman of the finance committee of the British Red Cross. His philanthropic work included the support of Toc H and of boys' clubs in London's poorest districts; he established his own club at Shepherd's Bush, where he joined in sports and entertained on the piano. He established the Easton Trust to found hostels for boys from schools for the maladjusted. 
De Stein's wit and quick mind showed themselves in the writing of verse and essays. In 1919 he published a collection of parodies entitled 'Poets in Picardy' and he contributed to 'Punch'. He was an accomplished pianist and in later life he took up watercolour painting, exhibiting at the Royal Society of Painters in Water-Colour. He was a keen sportsman, a fine fisherman, an excellent shot, an amateur landscape gardener, and a discriminating collector of ceramics and pictures; he was also skilled at tapestry work. His London home was filled with things of beauty. In 1944 he presented Lindisfarne Castle on Holy Island, along with its furniture, to the National Trust on the basis of its lease to his younger sister. De Stein died at his country home, Fulling Mills, Easton, Hampshire, on 3 November 1965, and was buried in Easton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 32794


Syllas, Stelios Messinesos de (1917-1964), architect, was born at Northbrook, Holmwood, Surrey, on 24 July 1917, the younger son of Stelios de Syllas, painter, and his wife, Vera Rose Palatiano. His mother came from a very conventional Greek family in Corfu, but had Anglo-Irish connections on her mother's side. Her parents disapproved of de Syllas, who came from a less respectable background, and as a result they eloped first to Munich, before moving to Britain in 1911. De Syllas's father had little success as a painter and turned to making toys. Leo was educated at Haberdashers' Aske's School, Hatcham, and Christ's College, Finchley, and proceeded to the Bartlett school of architecture at University College, London, in 1933. Here he rebelled against the classicism of Professor Albert Richardson by designing a modernist project, which was failed. He transferred in 1936 for his two final years to the Architectural Association, where the implications of modernism were being extended from the formal to their left-wing social, political, and intellectual dimensions by a lively group of students with whom de Syllas was associated as an editor of the magazine 'Focus' (1938-9). Richard Llewelyn-Davies was a close friend and mentor, especially in political matters. In 1939 de Syllas, Anthony Cox (another 'Focus' editor), and nine other recent Architectural Association graduates formed the Architects' Co-operative Partnership with the intention of practising in the new collaborative and research-based manner for which they had campaigned as students. 
Further progress was interrupted almost immediately by the war. De Syllas joined the research and experiments department of the ministry of home security. On 1 August 1942 he married Phoebe Helen (1913-1986), daughter of Ralph Lucas, engineering designer, and sister of the architect Colin Lucas, whose first husband, A. W. Nicol, an original Architects' Co-operative Partnership member, was killed in an accident. He had two stepsons and a son and daughter. In 1943 de Syllas went to the British West Indies as assistant architect to Robert J. Gardner-Medwin in the Colonial Development and Welfare Organisation to work on a programme of buildings for education, housing, and health. In 1946 he was appointed architect and planning officer to the government of Barbados, whose sugar production was valuable for the post-war British economy, and was responsible for the master plan of Bridgetown. De Syllas designed a training college in the grounds of Erdiston House (1947), which incorporated well-lit dormitories and classrooms, shaded with overhanging roofs, in local coral block masonry. On returning to Britain in 1947, de Syllas rejoined the pre-war partnership, which in 1951 was renamed Architects' Co-Partnership (ACP). Work was seldom attributed to individuals, but de Syllas was involved at this time in the design of Leesbrook School, a secondary modern, at Chaddesden in Derbyshire, completed in 1955. 
The opportunities for building in developing countries continued to excite de Syllas, and in 1954 he opened a branch office of ACP in Lagos, Nigeria. Work included the Bristol Hotel, Lagos, completed in 1961, and a large housing development at Akosombo in Ghana to serve the upper Volta River project. He remained most fascinated by the technical and social aspects of architecture, describing himself on one occasion as 'only 99 per cent architect'. None the less, his rooftop extension to Simpson's, Piccadilly, London (1963), contributes by spirited contrast to Joseph Emberton's original building of 1935. In 1962 de Syllas was responsible for the winning ACP competition design for the St Paul's Cathedral choir school in New Change, which followed the materials of Wren's cathedral while breaking its own mass into separate units. Following his death this was built with only minor changes. 
A man of enthusiastic energy, de Syllas pursued his overseas commitments without any diminution of his interest in architectural affairs at home. He was elected to the council of the Architectural Association in 1956 and was next in line for the presidency when he died. He strongly supported the merger, then being proposed, with Imperial College. He was active in the association's pioneering department of tropical studies and was largely responsible for establishing a link between the Architectural Association and the University of Science and Technology at Kumasi, Ghana. In 1963 he was chairman of the Royal Institute of British Architects Commonwealth Architects' Conference. 
De Syllas was tall and striking in appearance. Although initially hampered by his non-English name and background, he came to recognize their exotic value. He was animated and fluent in movement, talking and gesticulating continuously. Warm-hearted and gregarious by nature, he showed a readiness to communicate in several languages uninhibited by an imperfect command of some of them, which was always compensated for by his genuine charm and sincerity. Full of stimulating ideas and with an infectious optimism, he got on notably well with young people, whose outlook he found refreshing. His early vision of modernism was modified by an increasing awareness of architectural context and tradition. He believed in combining practice with teaching and in the early 1950s joined other ACP partners in teaching the third year at the Architectural Association. 
In 1951 de Syllas took his family to live in a Victorian house, St Julian's, near Sevenoaks, which was established as an experiment in communal living. Phoebe de Syllas, whose talents were overshadowed by her husband, was an interior designer and wrote on this subject. Leo de Syllas was killed in a road accident near Le Kef in Tunisia on 30 January 1964, while working on a project for new schools for the Tunisian government. 


@@@@@


doc= 32795


Des Voeux, Sir (George) William (1834-1909), colonial governor, was born on 22 September 1834, the eighth of the nine children of Henry Des Voeux (1786-1857) of Baden-Baden, Germany, a clergyman who spent his time in foreign travel, and his second wife, Fanny Elizabeth, daughter of George Hutton of Carlton, Nottinghamshire. His grandfather was Sir Charles Des Voeux, first baronet (died 1814), who had held office in the government of India. His mother died when he was two years old; his father remarried in 1839 and returned to settle in England, first in London, then at Leamington Spa. William was educated at Charterhouse School (1845-53) and Balliol College, Oxford (from 1854), which he left in his third year without taking a degree, as he could not meet his father's wishes that he take holy orders. 
Des Voeux went to Canada in 1856, originally intending to farm, but instead settled at Toronto. He graduated BA from the university there, and also passed in law. After practising briefly at the Canadian bar, to which he was admitted in 1861, in 1863 he became a stipendiary magistrate and superintendent of rivers and creeks in an upriver district of British Guiana. Having been transferred to a coastal district including extensive sugar estates, which were worked largely by means of Indian and Chinese indentured labourers, Des Voeux, an ardent liberal, formed the opinion that the 'coolies' were grievously oppressed by the planters. He was reluctant, as magistrate, to enforce 'the Draconic laws against the coolie indentured labourers', and rather demonstratively took the part of the labourer against the employer, thereby incurring -- though not to the extent which he imagined -- the hostility of the planters and the distrust of the government. Relations became so strained that he asked for a transfer to another colony, and in 1869 was sent as administrator to St Lucia. From his new post he at once wrote to Lord Granville of what he regarded as the grievances of the indentured labourers in Guiana. He himself afterwards characterized his letter as 'defective', 'written in great haste', and 'without notes to refresh his memory'. 'The Times' described it as 'the severest indictment of public officers since Hastings was impeached'. A royal commission of inquiry was appointed and Des Voeux was recalled to Guiana to prove his case. The commission corrected certain abuses in the labour system, but Des Voeux failed to prove what he later described as an exaggerated view. 
Des Voeux returned to his duties in St Lucia, 'depressed by a sense of personal failure', although the Colonial Office did not condemn him. At St Lucia he reorganized and codified the old French system of law in force there, put right the island finances, and started a central sugar factory. While on sick leave in 1875 he married, on 24 July, Marion Denison, the daughter of the pioneer of submarine telegraphy Sir John Pender. They had two daughters and five sons, three of whom died in infancy. 
During 1877-8 Des Voeux was acting governor of Trinidad, and in 1878 he left St Lucia and acted for about a year as governor of Fiji during the absence on leave of Sir Arthur Gordon (afterwards Lord Stanmore). Des Voeux successfully carried on the task of creating the first British crown colony in the south sea islands. After a visit home, during which he was appointed governor of the Bahamas but did not take up the post, in 1880 he returned to Fiji as actual governor and as high commissioner of the Western Pacific, where he remained until 1885. He was made KCMG in 1883. He was governor of Newfoundland in 1886 and of Hong Kong from 1887 until his final retirement from the service in 1891. He was made GCMG in 1893. 
Thereafter Des Voeux lived quietly in England, chiefly in London. He published his autobiography, 'My Colonial Service', in 1903, a pleasant, gossipy book in two volumes containing much of interest on colonial administration. He died in Brighton on 15 December 1909, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32796


Detmold, (Charles) Maurice (1883-1908), painter and printmaker, was born in Putney, London, on 21 November 1883, the son of Edward Detmold, electrical engineer, and his wife, Mary Agnes Luck. His mother may have died in childbirth as Maurice and his twin brother, 
Maurice Detmold's first attempt at mezzotint was made in 1898 but he only once returned to this technique of printmaking and henceforth experimented mainly with colour printing. In that year the brothers exhibited at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, the English Art Club, and the International Exhibition at Kensington, London. In 1898 they produced a small portfolio, 'Eight Proof Etchings by Maurice and Edward Detmold', this edition selling out almost immediately. In 1899 the brothers learned the use of aquatint, which they applied to their work with some success. Also in 1899 a volume of coloured reproductions of the brothers' drawings, 'Pictures from Birdland', was published by Dent. In 1900 they held an exhibition of drawings and prints in a variety of techniques at the galleries of the Fine Art Society. They continued to work together, painting large watercolours illustrating an edition of Rudyard Kipling's 'Jungle Book' which was published in 1903. In 1904 Maurice exhibited at the Royal Academy, and the brothers contributed a joint etching, 'The Falcon', to the 'Artist Engraver'. On 12 January 1905 the brothers were elected associates of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers. Although they later resigned their membership, they contributed some of their best work to that year's exhibition. During August and September of the same year, the Arts and Crafts Exhibition at Leicester included designs for stained glass by both brothers. These designs added to the increasing evidence in Maurice's work that he in particular wished to escape from the label of 'animal artist' and move into more imaginative fields of art. 
Two plates produced late in 1905 were Maurice Detmold's last etched works. He had produced in total ten etchings and two woodcuts in collaboration with Edward and twenty-five etchings done by himself, though in part from drawings by his brother. Many of the works produced separately by the brothers are almost indistinguishable from each other, but it is the collaboration involved in producing the single-plate etchings that is the most remarkable. 'They seemed as one soul divided between two bodies, inspired by the same ideal, using the same means of expression, possessing the same quickness of eye and deftness of hand' (Dodgson, 'Maurice and Edward Detmold', 373). 
For several years the brothers had resided in West Hampstead but had spent periods at Ditchling in Sussex. On 9 April 1908, prior to one of these visits to Sussex, Maurice Detmold committed suicide -- at his home in Inglewood Road -- by inhaling chloroform. A suicide note found near his side read: 'This is not the end of a life. I have expressed through my physical means all that they are capable of expressing, and I am about to lay them aside' ('Art Journal'). He was unmarried. 
Although Maurice Detmold was generally considered to be the more talented of the pair, both brothers' later works in particular show a remarkable technical ability which a combination of lack of training and experience did not allow to mature and develop. These works are distinguished by their personal interpretations of the subject matter and are heavily influenced by the works of Japanese masters (notably Hiroshige and Hokusai) while adhering to the conventions of art nouveau. Their animal paintings and illustrations show refined naturalistic features, with plumes and feathers subordinated to decorative arrangement, giving the subject an exaggerated and stylized appearance. 
For over a decade after Maurice's death Edward Detmold continued to produce prints and watercolours and was perceived as a notable British printmaker. In the 1930s he retired into virtual obscurity, creating mainly saleable watercolours and prints depicting birds and flowers. Becoming increasingly disillusioned with the world around him, which he referred to as 'this blood-drenched civilisation', he, as did his brother nearly half a century earlier, took his own life, by shooting himself in Montgomery, Wales, in 1957. An exhibition of his work was held at the Keyser Gallery in 1979. Examples of the brothers' work are in the collections of the National Art Library of the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum's department of prints and drawings, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32797


Vere, Aubrey Thomas de (1814-1902), poet, born on the family estate of Curragh Chase, Adare, co. Limerick, on 10 January 1814, was the third son of Aubrey Vere Hunt, later styled Sir Aubrey De Vere, second baronet (1788-1846), and his wife, Mary (died 1856), who was the eldest daughter of Stephen Edward Rice (died 1831) of Mount Trenchard, co. Limerick, and sister of Thomas Spring Rice, first Lord Monteagle (1790-1866). Aubrey's two elder brothers successively inherited the baronetcy. His father supported Catholic emancipation, so that, when the bill granting it was passed, young Aubrey climbed a pillar outside the house and waved a torch in the darkness. He was educated privately and one of his tutors, Edward Johnstone, aroused the boy's interest in Wordsworth, an enthusiasm that lasted for life. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1832 where he studied in a desultory manner, concentrating on metaphysics and theology rather than on the more mundane aspects of a course which seemed to destine him for holy orders in the Church of Ireland, a path in line with his father's wishes for his third son. In 1837 he won a prize for an essay on theology, and the following year he left the college without committing himself to the church. He visited Oxford in 1838 and met John Henry (later Cardinal) Newman, who was a leading Tractarian, arguing for the reform of Anglicanism along traditional lines. De Vere admired Newman's sincerity and holiness, describing him as being like a 'youthful ascetic of the middle ages' (de Vere, 256). In 1839 de Vere visited Cambridge, where he discovered an entirely different intellectual climate in the Apostles club, where everything was openly discussed with complete freedom, and where traditional practices and the idea of authority were relentlessly questioned. His cousin Stephen Spring Rice was a member of this club and in their correspondence de Vere steadily withdraws from the Apostles' view that liberty is the freedom to do and think as one likes to a more orthodox position, conducive to settled concepts of authority and revealed truth. In one of his letters, he writes: 'Religio [means] 'to bind again'... and how can you bind except by Doctrines reduced to their orthodox form and Duties explained, applied, and enforced?' (Ward, 59). Through his cousin's association with the Apostles, de Vere met Richard Monckton Milnes, poet and biographer of Keats, and James Spedding, the great editor of Francis Bacon. Although Tennyson was another Apostle, de Vere did not meet him until 1842. The year before, 1841, he had met Wordsworth, by then poet laureate, while in London attending to the publication of two books of poems by his father: 'Sonnets' and 'Song of Faith'. He was invited to the Lake District, where he fitted easily into Wordsworth's extended household, including Sara Coleridge, daughter of the poet, and Isabella Fenwick. 
In 1842 de Vere published 'The Waldenses and Other Poems', containing lyrics and meditations on religion, which he dedicated to the mathematician and astronomer William Rowan Hamilton, whom he had known at Trinity College, and with whom he had discussed belief and the evidence of nature. In 1843 appeared 'The Search after Proserpine and Other Poems', a copy of which he sent to Walter Savage Landor, whom he had long admired. Landor did not read the book for five years but when he did heaped praise upon it, and hailed de Vere as breathing the 'pure fresh air' of Greece (Taylor, 255). However, when he travelled in the Mediterranean in 1843 he found the Greeks 'a false people... never ashamed of being detected in a lie', as he wrote later in his 'Picturesque Sketches of Greece and Turkey' (1850, 1.11). In 1845 he spent a good deal of time in London, where he met Thomas Carlyle and his wife, Jane Welsh, whom he greatly impressed with his youthful good looks, religious air, and contempt for society wit. His father, Sir Aubrey, was ailing at this time, and went to London for treatment, where he was looked after by his son, who approved of the paintings by Rembrandt and Correggio bought for Curragh Chase. In late autumn and early winter 1845 he went on a walking tour of Scotland; when he reached Edinburgh news began to arrive of the consequences of the failure of the potato crop that year in Ireland, the first onset of what was to become known as the great famine. His father died in July 1846, as the blight began to strike a second time. With his brothers Vere, Stephen, William, and Horace he threw himself into the organization of famine relief schemes, helped in the distribution of the Indian corn (maize) that was sent in to the areas where starvation was rife, tried to work on the consciences of his fellow landlords encouraging them to commit resources to match those allocated from government, and attempted to supervise and regulate the process of emigration. De Vere also set up a scheme whereby women were engaged in a number of industries, and then faced the problem of disposing of manufactured goods for which there was no market. This extensive range of voluntary activities informed his study of Anglo-Irish political economy 'English Misrule and Irish Misdeeds' (1848). He recognized a depth of anti-Irish feeling in England, and called for systematic emigration from a rural society that was uneconomic, as well as the redevelopment of agriculture along efficient lines. His direct experience of the famine in Limerick and in Clare informed his threnody on the disaster 'The Year of Sorrow -- Ireland 1849', which he included in 'Inisfail' (1861), a lyrical chronicle of Ireland, which sees it as an isle of destiny, whose people are fated to suffer affliction so they may accomplish a spiritual mission in the world. De Vere employs different forms and voices, from rhapsodic declamation to terse quatrains, to depict Ireland's varied history and traditions, but the thinking is fatalistic. Of Ireland he says, in the 'Introduction': 'Her Fatalism meant simply a profound sense of Religion' ('Inisfail', xx). 
By 1851 de Vere had taken the step to which he had been tending since meeting Newman in 1838. In 1850 he spent time in the company of Henry Edward (later Cardinal) Manning, and together they studied Aquinas and Dante. Manning left the Anglican church in April 1851; in the autumn he and de Vere set off for Rome, on a pilgrimage, and de Vere was accepted into the Catholic church at Avignon on 15 November, much to the dismay of Carlyle, who warned him against submitting himself to the bondage of traditional orthodoxy. 
In 1854 the Irish Catholic hierarchy, in an attempt to establish a system of higher education for their congregation, appointed Newman to be first rector of the Catholic University of Ireland. Newman made a number of professorial appointments and established de Vere in the chair of political and social science, recognizing his candidate's experience of affairs, and his analysis of administrative and economic difficulties in Ireland. However, de Vere had no students and gave no lectures. He was working on a poetic task Pope Pius IX had suggested during an audience in Rome after his conversion in 1851: that he devote his imaginative energies to poems on the Virgin Mary and the saints of the church. The first instalment of this project appeared in 1857 as 'May Carols, or, Ancilla domini', which celebrate Mary as the mediatrix between the material and spiritual worlds, the means whereby the incarnation took place in human flesh. He sees her animating all beauty, and, in particular, flowing through the annual resurrection of spring. 'Legends of St Patrick' (1872) versified episodes from the saint's life and his conversion of the Irish to Christianity, while 'Legends of the Saxon Saints' (1879) undertook a similar task for St Cuthbert, Caedmon, and others. His approach to Catholic doctrine, and the way in which it might be expressed in poetry, had something in common with that of Gerard Manley Hopkins, the English Jesuit whom Newman brought to teach in the Catholic University. They were in most other respects very different. Mutual friends once arranged for them to meet at Howth, but de Vere was gone when Hopkins arrived. When he learned from his hosts that de Vere had a poor opinion of Dryden, Hopkins thought that he had 'not missed much'. 

'Alexander the Great' (1874) and 'St Thomas of Canterbury' (1876) were two leaden ventures into that sepulchre of imaginative energy: the Victorian verse-drama. Like many Victorians, de Vere saw the early phases of culture as periods in which essential features of a people or a civilization were realized, hence his interest in early heroes and saints, and his desire to reanimate legendary styles of thought and feeling. 'The Foray of Queen Maeve' (1882) was another such attempt at reading the early traces of culture and identity in Ireland; he based it on a manuscript translation of the Irish saga 'Tain Bo Cuailnge' by Brian O'Looney in the Royal Irish Academy. 'Constitutional and Unconstitutional Political Action' (1882), a pamphlet written in reaction to the murder in Phoenix Park of Lord Frederick Cavendish, the newly appointed chief secretary of Ireland, by the Invincibles, a Fenian splinter group, shows his commitment to non-violent reform. 'Essays Literary and Ethical' (1889) mixes literary criticism with meditations on issues such as church property and materialism. His 'Recollections' (1897) recalls a long life, many friendships, and his path towards a fixed set of religious convictions. 
De Vere did not marry, but he seems to have been one of those for whom celibacy poses no difficulty. He died at Curragh Chase on 21 January 1902 and was buried in the churchyard at Askeaton, co. Limerick. 


@@@@@


doc= 32798


Vere, Sir Stephen Edward De, fourth baronet (1812-1904), philanthropist and classical scholar, was the son of Sir Aubrey De Vere, second baronet (1788-1846), and his wife, Mary Rice (died 1856); his younger brother was Aubrey Thomas de Vere. He was born at Curragh Chase, Adare, co. Limerick, on 26 July 1812. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and throughout his life shared the literary tastes of his family. After reading at Lincoln's Inn, he was called to the Irish bar in 1836. His life was dedicated to the service of his fellow countrymen, and he worked hard for the relief of the distress during the Irish famine. He believed emigration to be the only panacea, and encouraged the young men to go out to Canada. Hearing of the terrible sufferings of the emigrants on the voyage, in May 1847 he went himself as a steerage passenger to Canada. The emigrant ships were sailing vessels, and the voyage took six weeks or more. Arriving in Canada he wrote a letter (30 November 1847) describing the appalling conditions aboard ship. His revelations were made public by the Colonial Office and had a powerful impact. De Vere's letter was cited in both houses of parliament in 1848, and his recommendations for new regulations were the basis for amendments to the passenger acts ensuring that proper accommodation was provided for emigrants. 
De Vere's admiration of the Irish Catholic people led him to embrace the Roman Catholic religion, and his reception into that church took place during his visit to Canada in 1848. In 1851 he wrote a pamphlet defending the creation of a Catholic hierarchy in England. 
De Vere was member of parliament for Limerick County (1854-9). He was a Liberal, supporting tenant right and Gladstone's land legislation, but he was opposed to home rule. He succeeded his brother Vere as fourth baronet in 1880. De Vere published 'Translations from Horace' in 1886, together with some original verse. He died unmarried on 10 November 1904 at Foynes, co. Limerick, an island in the River Shannon and was buried there, by the door of the Roman Catholic church, which was built mainly by his exertions. A fountain was erected in the village during his lifetime to commemorate his work in the district. His kindness to his tenants was remarkable; they were permitted to help themselves to wood from the park, and even, it was said, to the deer. The baronetcy became extinct at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 32799


Deverell, Sir Cyril John (1874-1947), army officer, was born in St Peter Port, Guernsey, on 9 November 1874, the son of Lieutenant (later Major) John Baines Seddon Deverell and his wife, Harriet Strappini Roberts. He was educated at Bedford School and in 1895 was gazetted a second lieutenant in the 2nd battalion, the West Yorkshire regiment. In autumn 1895 he accompanied the regiment to west Africa where he took part in the bloodless Asante expedition. Shortly afterwards he transferred to the 1st battalion in India and as a result missed involvement in the South African War of 1899-1902. On 31 March 1902 he married Hilda, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Gerald Grant-Dalton, who was then his commanding officer. In 1906 he was chosen to attend the Staff College at Quetta; afterwards he held a number of staff appointments in India in which he was judged to have performed well. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 Deverell was back in England. He was appointed a brigade major in the 28th division, one of the first of the 'Kitchener's Army' divisions. Deverell proceeded to France with this division early in 1915. He was constitutionally and temperamentally well suited to meeting the challenge of war, and on the western front his career flourished. Tall, broad-shouldered, and therefore physically imposing, he was also decisive and mentally robust. This combination of qualities inspired confidence in those around him and he rose from captain to major-general in two years. During the war as a whole he received three brevets and seven mentions in dispatches. 
After serving as a brigade major throughout the second battle of Ypres in the spring of 1915, Deverell was given command of the 4th battalion of the East Yorkshire regiment with which he served for four months before being given command of the 20th brigade of the 4th division. He commanded this brigade in the early stages of the great Somme offensive of 1916 before being promoted once again -- this time to command the 3rd division, an appointment he held until the armistice. The 3rd division fought under his command in the latter part of the 1916 Somme offensive. It also took part in the battle of Arras (1917), in the third battle of Ypres (1917), and at Cambrai in the following year. In the last year of the war it fought in Picardy and Flanders during the German spring offensives and with General Sir Julian Byng's Third Army in the allied offensives of August to November 1918, which brought the war to an end. The 3rd division was generally regarded as a good division and Deverell as an excellent divisional commander. The 3rd division and Deverell personally particularly distinguished themselves during the final campaign. 
After the armistice Deverell, who was appointed CB in 1918 and KBE in 1926, commanded the Welsh division of the Territorial Army for two years before going to India, where he commanded the United Provinces district for four years. In 1927 he was appointed quartermaster-general in India, and after three years in that post he was appointed chief of the general staff in Delhi. In 1931 he returned to England to take over the western command. Two years later he was promoted general and transferred to the eastern command. Deverell thus had even more experience of senior staff appointments in peacetime than he had of field commands in war. His success in both kinds of employment made it increasingly likely that he would rise to the very top of his profession. His success in commanding one of two opposing corps in large scale manoeuvres held in 1935, winning his victory by a particularly subtle operation, made him the obvious candidate to succeed Sir Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd as chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS). In 1936 he thus rose to the most senior position in the British army and was promoted field marshal. He was appointed KCB in 1929 and GCB in 1935. 
The army in which Deverell now held the top post was in a somewhat dilapidated condition. Both regular and territorial units were desperately short of recruits and much of the equipment was obsolete. The international situation was increasingly threatening and the army of National Socialist Germany was growing fast. A rearmament programme for the regular army (though not for the Territorial Army) had been approved by the cabinet before Deverell took office. This programme had been conceived by the general staff under Montgomery-Massingberd on the basis that the British army was likely to have to fight alongside the French against the Germans, as in 1914-18. But Neville Chamberlain, then chancellor of the exchequer, wished to place the main emphasis on developing British airpower, considering that this might deter war. When Chamberlain became prime minister in May 1937 he appointed a new secretary of state for war, Leslie Hore-Belisha, and Deverell came under pressure to make fundamental changes in military policy. The government decided to give a much lower priority to preparing the British army to fight on the continent, making it almost exclusively a force for home and imperial defence. A large part of the object of this new army policy was to limit expenditure on the army, particularly on tanks. As a good soldier Deverell could not and did not refuse to implement the military policy of his government. But he did not believe that it was realistic to try to check German expansion on the continent without preparing the British army to fight there. Because of Deverell's evident lack of enthusiasm for the new policy, and reluctance to contemplate radical changes in army organization, Hore-Belisha sacked him in December 1937. 
Few would now doubt that Deverell was in the right on the policy issue at stake. Indeed the government tacitly admitted as much when it began actively preparing a field force for the continent a little over a year later. The dismissal, moreover, was handled shabbily. In public Hore-Belisha indicated that he was sacking Deverell because the ageing CIGS had become a drag on the army's rearmament. The secretary of state for war made no public reference to the fundamental difference over strategic policy which, as he admitted in private correspondence with the prime minister, was the real motive for the dismissal. Deverell was furious at the contemptuous tone which Hore-Belisha adopted in the letter dismissing him. In a written reply he indicated that his conscience was clear as to his duty to the army and as to its rearmament, and that he regarded Hore-Belisha's comments on his performance as both unjust and cruel. 
In retirement Deverell lived at Lymington, Hampshire, where he took a prominent part in local affairs, serving on the borough council and chairing the local defence committee during the Second World War. He died at Court Lodge, Lymington, on 12 May 1947. His wife and a son and a daughter survived him. For thirteen years before his death he had been colonel of his old regiment, the West Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32800


Villiers, John Henry de, first Baron de Villiers (1842-1914), judge in South Africa, was of Huguenot descent and was born at Paarl, Cape Colony, on 15 June 1842. He was the second son of Carel Christiaan de Villiers, government land surveyor, of Paarl, and his wife, Dorothea Elizabeth Retief, also of Paarl. Educated at the South African College, Cape Town (1853-61), he went next to Utrecht, intending perhaps to prepare for a clerical career. He read widely in literature, philosophy, and history, and transferred in 1862 to Berlin University. But in June 1863, overcome by vocational doubts, he entered the Inner Temple, London, to train for the bar, qualifying in November 1865. Early in 1866 he began to practise at the Cape bar. In 1871 he married Aletta Johanna (died 1922), daughter of Jan Pieter Jordaan, a wine farmer, of Worcester, Cape Colony. They had two sons and two daughters. From June 1867 he sat as a member of the house of assembly for Worcester, advocating, 'inter alia', the withdrawal of state aid from the churches, and the institution of responsible government in Cape Colony, hoping thereby to thwart eastern Cape separatism. In 1872 he became attorney-general in the ministry of John Charles Molteno, but, at the urgent request of the premier and of William Porter, he resigned in December 1873 to become chief justice. Though now a judge, he never lost touch with legislation and politics. He presided over several key commissions, notably the Cape federal commission (1873), the education commission (1880), and the diamond laws commission (1887) and was 'ex officio' president of the legislative council. 
De Villiers was deeply concerned with, and had a major impact on, wider southern African affairs. He worked for regional federation, trying to arrange this with President J. H. Brand of the Orange Free State in 1871. In 1877 they actually agreed upon a scheme, which would have been submitted to the high commissioner, Sir Bartle Frere, but for Sir Theophilus Shepstone's annexation of Transvaal. In 1881 he was a member of the royal commission which drew up the Pretoria convention. He had already been knighted in 1877, and he was now created KCMG (1882). 
In 1888 and 1895 de Villiers was invited to stand for the Orange Free State presidency and, in 1893, at the instance of Cecil Rhodes, he agreed to take office as prime minister of Cape Colony; but Rhodes suddenly re-formed his cabinet without him. De Villiers offered his services again in 1896 and 1902, but on both occasions the premiership was offered to J. G. Sprigg, who accepted. In 1894 de Villiers went to the Ottawa colonial conference to further Rhodes's schemes of intercolonial preference and communications. Personally he was on good terms with Rhodes, and with the high commissioners Sir Hercules Robinson and Sir Henry Loch, but, like Loch, he feared the use to which Rhodes might put his wide and indefinite powers, and he began to turn against him early in 1894. After the Jameson raid (January 1896), de Villiers successfully urged President Kruger to show mercy to his prisoners; and early in 1897 he unsuccessfully mediated between Kruger and his chief justice, J. G. Kotze, over the power claimed by some of the judges to test the validity of laws by the touchstone of the 'grondwet' (constitution). For some time de Villiers had tried to form a South African court of appeal as a step towards federation, and in 1886 had urged the inclusion of colonial judges in the privy council. He was himself sworn in, as the first colonial judge to take his seat on the judicial committee, in July 1897, though he was unable to attend regularly. 
During 1899, in spite of failing health, de Villiers worked hard for peace. He lay dangerously ill for many weeks in England and on the Riviera in 1901, during the South African War, but he recovered and helped to block the proposed suspension of the Cape constitution in 1902. By 1906 he was again promoting federation, and from 1907 kept in close touch with J. X. Merriman, the Cape premier, and General Smuts. A visit to Canada as representative of the four South African colonies at the Canadian tercentenary now persuaded him that union was better than federation. On his return, he was unanimously elected president of the national convention, and as such he personally conducted the negotiations with the imperial government on the future of the protectorates. In the convention itself he presided over the plenary sessions and most of the committees, thanks to the confidence he inspired, sometimes securing the adoption of motions which, put forward by anyone else, would have been rejected. He also headed the drafting committee which finalized the 'Union of South Africa Bill', prior to its passage through the British parliament. For this he was created baron, with the title de Villiers of Wynberg. He returned home to become first chief justice of the union (1910). In 1912, and again in July 1914, he was acting governor-general. He died quickly, of pneumonia, at Pretoria, on 2 September 1914 and was buried at Woltemade cemetery, Maitland, on 7 September. He was succeeded as second baron by his elder son, Charles Percy ('b'. 1871). 
De Villiers was relatively tall, lean, and active, a man of immense dignity relieved by a kindly spirit and dry humour. He 'had a square face, blunt features, firm jaw, long thin nose, close-shut mouth, deep-sunk eyes, while from his cheeks hung thin Dundreary weepers which later spread under his chin like a white crescent moon' ('DSAB'). He enjoyed hunting and fishing, loved dogs, kept bees, and his enthusiasm for fruit farming embraced viticulture, and citrus and deciduous fruit. His chief claim to fame, however, is as a judge. Other South African judges may have been more learned in the letter of the law, but none understood its spirit so well. It was sometimes said that at times he dispensed 'de Villiers's law' (and some of his judgments were reversed on one or two points after his death), but despite his speed in reaching decisions, his judgments were only questioned by the privy council four times. Over the course of forty-one years he dispensed justice fearlessly, without respect of persons, on a great variety of subjects, notably those which -- like his decisions in 'In re Kok and Balie' (1879) and 'Sigcawu's case' (1895) -- went right to the core of individual liberty. He outshone the Cape, and outlived judges of his own generation. 
De Villiers's desire to see the consolidation of Southern African judiciaries into a single system grew 'pari passu' with the political unification of the subcontinent, drawing the coastal and inland states closer together. Besides the supreme court in Cape Town, there were by 1882 five similar courts in South Africa under four separate legislatures, unchecked by a common court of appeal. Their law and practice were fundamentally the same, but divergences necessarily occurred. These divergences were checked by the fact that the Cape supplied many of the judges to the other courts, and by the growing prestige of de Villiers. Even so the law of the colony was in a state of confusion. The criminal law had become practically English. But the Roman-Dutch civil law was being Anglicized in a haphazard manner, partly owing to the influence of de Villiers himself. He has been criticized for consulting too narrow a range of authorities and applying English precedents sometimes with inconsiderate haste, as in the matter of water rights ('DSAB'). The marriage of English and Roman-Dutch law, however, which had begun to take place from the early years of British rule, was achieved piecemeal in the longer term, and perhaps owes more to de Villiers than to any other single man. It later spread from the borders of the South Africa of 1873 northward to the Zambezi. 


@@@@@


doc= 32801


Devine, George Alexander Cassady (1910-1966), actor and theatre director, was born on 20 November 1910 in Hendon, near London, the only child of Giorgios Devine, bank clerk, of Hendon, and his wife, Ruth Eleanor Cassady. He was educated at Clayesmore School, of which the founder and headmaster was his uncle Alexander Devine, and at Wadham College, Oxford, where he read modern history. One of his tutors was Lord David Cecil. As president of the Oxford University Dramatic Society in his last year, he established a foothold in the professional theatre by inviting John Gielgud to direct the society's 1932 production of 'Romeo and Juliet', in which Devine played Mercutio in company with Peggy Ashcroft's Juliet and Edith Evans's Nurse, and Christopher Hassall's Romeo. 
Devine left Oxford without taking schools to embark on a London acting career. At the same time, he attached himself as business manager to the firm of Motley, the stage design partnership of Elizabeth Montgomery, Margaret Harris, and her sister (Audrey) Sophia Harris (1900-1966), who on 27 October 1939 became Devine's wife, and was the mother of his only child, Harriet. 
It was in the Motley studio that he first met Michel Saint-Denis, director of the Compagnie des Quinze, whom for the rest of his life he acknowledged as his master. With Saint-Denis and others he set up the London Theatre Studio (1936-9) which attempted a revolution in British stage training. After the war (which Devine spent mostly in Burma as a captain in the Royal Artillery, and during which he was twice mentioned in dispatches), he resumed his alliance with Saint-Denis at the Old Vic Centre: a tripartite offshoot of the Old Vic Company, comprising a school (directed by Glen Byam Shaw), the Young Vic touring troupe (directed by Devine), and a never-completed experimental theatre (in the charge of Saint-Denis). From its opening in 1947 the centre produced an astounding crop of young actors, directors, and designers, and when the governors of the Old Vic closed it down in 1952 their action provoked a storm of professional outrage and parliamentary criticism. 
Up to this time Devine had spent most of his working life as a teacher-administrator, but with the break-up of the Vic Centre, he turned to freelance directing: partly of opera at Sadler's Wells and Covent Garden (where he directed the premiere of Sir William Walton's 'Troilus and Cressida', 1954), and partly of the Shakespeare repertory at Stratford upon Avon (collaborating with Gielgud and Isamu Noguchi in the 'Japanese' 'King Lear' in 1955). In 1956 he resumed his reformist mission as artistic director of the newly formed English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre. The company's original policy was to persuade established novelists to write for the stage, a policy abandoned after the production of John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1956) which released a tidal wave of new plays by hitherto unknown young playwrights including John Arden and Arnold Wesker. Until the end of the decade the Court was the spearhead of the so-called 'breakthrough' movement, challenging the reigning conventions of dramatic craftsmanship and reasserting the theatre's role as a platform for radical opinion. 
Throughout this spectacular period Devine remained personally inconspicuous. After the first season he directed very few new plays himself (excepting those by his close friend Samuel Beckett); and when he acted on the Court stage it was usually to save money. His purpose was to create a free space where the best talents could collaborate in pushing the theatre from the periphery to the centre of English cultural life: a purpose partly acknowledged in 1958 when he was appointed CBE 'for services to drama'. 
Devine's 'writers' theatre' was a place where material of a kind formerly restricted to club performances found a public outlet. He was not the originator of this idea, but he was the first English director to make it work. He succeeded through an unshakeable determination, entirely untouched by narrow obsessiveness. In opening his doors to unknown writers and directors he also kept them open to eminent pre-war colleagues such as Ashcroft and Laurence Olivier: and in keeping an open space for the rebel artists under his roof he took great care not to play the rebel with his own management committee. He remained a dedicated teacher, and the creator of an exemplary theatre in which the technician was respected no less than the actor and the writer. His final years were spent with his former London Theatre Studio pupil the designer Jocelyn Herbert (1917-2003), daughter of Sir Alan Herbert. In her company he died in London on 20 January 1966. 
Irving Wardle', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32802


Devlin, Joseph (1871-1934), Irish nationalist and politician, was born at 10 Hamill Street, in the lower Falls area of Belfast, on 13 February 1871. He was the fifth child of Charles Devlin (died 1906), a jarvey (hackney cab owner), and his wife, Eliza King (died 1902), an illiterate who sold groceries from the house; rural migrants and Roman Catholics, they had married in Belfast in 1858. Until he was twelve Devlin attended the nearby Christian Brothers' schools, where the curriculum presented a more 'national' view of Ireland's history and culture than was offered by the diocesan schools or the state system. After a brief period as a clerk, concerning which he later alleged discrimination, he worked in a pub. He showed an early aptitude for public speaking, becoming chairman of a debating society formed in 1886 to commemorate the first nationalist election victory in West Belfast. Between 1891 and 1893 he was a journalist on the 'Irish News' and the 'Freeman's Journal'. He then managed a Belfast pub for the nationalist MP Sam Young, which sustained him until he became a full-time politician in 1902, affording him the flexible working conditions needed to organize the anti-Parnellite Irish National Federation in eastern Ulster. Notwithstanding nationalist reunion in 1900 Devlin's local party remained in bitter conflict until 1905 with the bishop's Catholic Association, which wanted city politics to be based on Catholic rights and episcopal leadership rather than nationalism. In 1901 his aspiration was still to acquire a pub in Glasgow or London as the base for a future political career. His early experiences convinced Devlin that priests and publicans, properly managed, could underpin nationalist organization in a way that class-based or cross-communal appeals could not. 
In 1902 Devlin's career took off: the Irish party sent him to Irish America on the first of many successful fund-raising tours; in February he entered parliament unopposed following a by-election in Kilkenny North; and on his return he accepted a paid position in the nationalist movement (which he once vowed he would never do) as London-based secretary of the United Irish League of Great Britain (UIL), moving in 1905 to Dublin as general secretary. Devlin's special skills lay in the arousal and organization of minority and emigrant nationalists, initially in Belfast and Glasgow. Thus the Ancient Order of Hibernians (AOH) came to interest him. The AOH was a benefit society for Irish American Catholics; it also existed in Ireland and Britain, but was discouraged by the Catholic church because of its paraphernalia of oaths and secrecy, although these practices resembled modern freemasonry more than any traditional secret society. Devlin encountered the order's power in America in 1902-3, and on return set out to claim it for constitutional nationalism. From 1905 until his death he was national president of the AOH 'board of Erin', developing it as a grass-roots movement under his personal control, but in harness with the UIL: it was attractive to nationalists with no interest in land agitation, to small businessmen seeking advantage, and to workers seeking insurance benefits. The AOH continued the O'Connellite link between Catholicism and nationalism, but through an organization under lay control. To the Irish party's opponents, both nationalist and unionist, the order was symptomatic of the party's corruption, jobbery, and Catholic exclusivism. 
After the 1906 general election Devlin sat for West Belfast, which he regained from the Unionists by sixteen votes. He became a distinguished parliamentarian, though his best oratorical performances continued to be on the public platform. He took up labour issues effectively, especially conditions in the linen mills and sweating in the textile trades. He came to parliamentary prominence after 1910, when home rule dominated politics: Winston Churchill thought him 'the one new figure of distinction in the Irish Party' (R. S. Churchill, 'Winston Spencer Churchill', 2, companion, pt 2, 1969, 1035). Conservatives feared that he would oppose compromise on Ulster, but loyalty to the party leadership remained his touchstone. He followed John Redmond in supporting wartime recruiting. After Easter 1916 he procured for the party a self-denying ordinance from nationalist Ulster to assist Lloyd George's abortive home rule negotiations, organizing a convention which endorsed temporary six-county exclusion from home rule by a vote of 475 to 265. Although his reputation never entirely recovered from this episode Devlin easily retained his Belfast seat in 1918, against Eamon de Valera of Sinn Fein, when elsewhere the Irish party was annihilated. Never again did he go out on a political limb: in the Irish convention of 1918 he sided with the bishops in blocking Redmond's compromise with the southern unionists over customs; during the 1919-22 period, reduced to the leadership of six MPs, he avoided any policy involvement, believing that the popular mandate had passed to Sinn Fein. 
Partition left Devlin in depressed personal and political circumstances. He ruled out escape into southern politics; he lost West Belfast through boundary changes in October 1922, when he also failed to become Independent Labour MP for Liverpool Exchange. In 1929 he was returned for Tyrone and Fermanagh, but made little impact. He was elected to the new parliament of Northern Ireland in 1921, and led his small party out of abstention in 1925. In 1928, at the instigation of former pro-treaty Sinn Feiner Cahir Healy, he founded the National League of the North, an attempt to create a united and formally structured nationalist movement in Northern Ireland, drawing in all but the irreconcilable IRA element, but the movement had expired by the time of his death. He won amendments to the 'Northern Ireland Education Act' of 1930 which improved the funding of Catholic schools, but these were years of demoralization for northern Catholics, and his party abstained after 1932. 
Devlin was a small man, known affectionately as Wee Joe by his constituents. Though sneeringly dubbed the 'duodecimo Demosthenes' by T. M. Healy he was a charming and effervescent personality, and widely loved. For twenty-five years his existence was nomadic and, like one in four of his Irish male contemporaries, he never married. He spent much of his leisure time with priests and with families, where he was especially popular with children. He organized seaside 'days of delight' for thousands of Belfast children, and in 1920 opened a holiday hotel in Bangor for mill girls. Though nervous he was a fluent and powerful orator. One contemporary characterized his approach as 'getting there', without too much concern as to the destination (F. Cruise O'Brien in 'The Leader', 19 Feb 1910): the archetypal party secretary, his energies were devoted less to the formulation than to the implementation of policy. Devlin acquired the image of a political 'boss' in some quarters, and critics alleged that he surrounded himself with people less sincere and dedicated than he was. Perhaps because for so much of his career he served a leadership which was superior in both age and social status, and which to some extent patronized him, he tended in turn to surround himself with sycophants rather than with challenging or innovative minds. Arising from his formative experience during the Parnell split, party loyalty became a prime characteristic of his own career, and a quality which he perhaps prized too greatly in others. 
Devlin's main residence was in Belfast with his parents until 1902; then in London and Dublin; then, during the First World War, alongside professionals at 3 College Square North, Belfast; and, after 1926, at Ard-Righ, 362 Antrim Road, Belfast, formerly the home of F. J. Bigger. In later years he was comfortably off, as a director of the Distillers Company and chairman of the 'Irish News'. He died at St John's Nursing Home, Belfast, on 18 January 1934 of a gastric haemorrhage, following several years of failing health. He was buried at Milltown cemetery, Belfast, two days later. His funeral at St Peter's Pro-Cathedral, Belfast, was attended by leading members of both Irish governments. 


@@@@@


doc= 32803


Devons, Ely (1913-1967), statistician and economist, was born in Bangor, north Wales, on 29 July 1913, the second eldest in a family of three boys and three girls of David Isaac Devons, a Jewish minister from Vilna who had arrived in Britain in 1902 on a Russian passport at the age of twenty-one, and his wife, Edith Edelstein, who was from Ireland and ten years younger than her husband. A younger brother, Samuel, was professor of physics at the University of Manchester in the 1950s when Devons held the chair of applied economics. 
Devons attended a number of different schools as his family moved to Stoke-on-Trent, Portsmouth, and then Manchester, ending up at North Manchester Municipal High School before entering the University of Manchester. In the course of a chance encounter in the street he was persuaded by Harold Laski to study economics and graduated in 1934 with first-class honours in the school of economics, politics, and modern history. As Drummond Fraser research fellow he read for the MA degree at Manchester, researching British production statistics and producing his first article, 'Output per head in Great Britain, 1924-33' ('Economic Journal'). He married in 1939 Estelle Wine, a concert pianist from Dublin and a pupil of Solomon. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Devons's career as a statistician began in 1935 with a post under Glyn Hughes as economic assistant to the Joint Committee of Cotton Trades Organizations in Manchester. In March 1940 he joined the Central Economic Information Service -- a small group of economists and statisticians from which developed at the end of the year both the economic section of the war cabinet secretariat and the Central Statistical Office. Devons quickly made his mark as one of a number of Manchester men, including John Jewkes, D. N. Chester, and Harry Campion, who played a major part in the early days of these bodies. His special responsibility was to assemble the secret statistics accumulating in various parts of Whitehall and issue them in a form convenient for the central direction of policy. In this he was extremely successful and the work he initiated in 1940-41 had a revolutionary effect on the presentation of official statistics. Government statistics never afterwards looked so dull, discontinuous, and inaccessible. It was a job which he repeated in the Ministry of Aircraft Production and again for the Organization for European Economic Co-operation in 1950 when he took a hand in the first issue of its statistical bulletins. 
Devons did not steep himself in statistics without considering the lessons they pointed. He had a chance to combine the two when Jewkes, now in charge of aircraft planning, asked him to join him as chief statistician. In the next four years Devons came to exercise an increasingly dominant role in the Ministry of Aircraft Production, taking over from Jewkes as head of planning in 1944. His experience in the planning of aircraft and aircraft components formed the background to much of his later thinking about economic and administrative problems and provided the material for his 'Planning in Practice' (1950), a classic of its kind. 
At the end of the war, after some hesitation, Devons returned to Manchester as reader and later professor of applied economics. He remained there for much of the time as dean of the faculty of economic and social studies, until appointed in 1959 to the chair of commerce at the London School of Economics. Nearly all Devons's published work was composed during his years in Manchester. His 'Introduction to British Economic Statistics' (1956), a critical guide displaying an unrivalled knowledge of official statistics, was followed by 'Essays in Economics' (1961). But his main contribution was the stimulus he provided to his distinguished colleagues. The staff seminar which he conducted with Arthur Lewis has been described by Professor Harry Johnson as 'the most devastatingly critical forum in the country into which a careless economist could blunder'. 
The move to London was not altogether a success since international trade was not Devons's normal field of interest. But as convener of the economics department he was an initiator of structural change, able to think and plan in terms of the institution as a whole. He was largely responsible for the new MSc degrees in economics and econometrics and helped to raise money for graduate fellowships in support of them. In 1965 the title of his chair was changed from commerce to economics. While at the LSE he served from 1959 to 1965 as a member of the Local Government Commission for England and acted as consultant to the British and foreign governments. 
A victim of insomnia, Devons was an omnivorous reader and had a particular appetite for government publications, especially minutes of evidence. He declared his leisure activities to be fell-walking, tree-felling, and disputing ('WWW'). He loved debating and was given to paradox and skittishness. This put off many people who failed to notice how right even his more extravagant forecasts proved to be. He was always in command of the relevant facts, never bowed without question to received opinion, and was possessed of an acute and firm judgement rooted in common sense. He hated arrogance, dogmatism, and -- most of all -- humbug. He had an eye for the weakness of an argument and for the workable solution to a problem. To a rare combination of administrative skill and intellectual power was added an impressive firmness of character which made him incorruptible even in small matters. 
Devons's published work seems slight and his career disappointing in relation to his intellectual gifts. This partly reflects his disenchantment with technical economic analysis, partly his preference for administrative tasks, but perhaps most of all a detachment which sprang from lack of ambition. He was not a natural writer or man of action. But he had a capacity for leadership which in the post-war years never found full expression. 
Devons had to contend throughout the last twelve years of his life with repeated bouts of illness in the middle of arduous administrative duties. He died, survived by his wife, in St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, on 28 December 1967 after two years of almost continuous ill health. 
Alec Cairncross', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32804


Dewar, Sir James (1842-1923), chemist and physicist, was born at Kincardine-on-Forth, Scotland, on 20 September 1842, the youngest son of Thomas Dewar, vintner, and his wife, Ann Eadie, daughter of a shipowner. At the age of ten his schooling was interrupted by an attack of rheumatic fever, and during the period of incapacity that followed he occupied himself in making fiddles -- an exercise to which he was wont to attribute his manipulative skill. On recovering he was sent to Dollar Academy, and thence, about 1858, to Edinburgh University. There he worked successively under James David Forbes, the professor of natural philosophy, Lyon Playfair, the professor of chemistry, whose demonstrator he was, and, on Playfair's resignation in 1869, under his successor Alexander Crum Brown. In 1869 he was appointed lecturer on chemistry in the Royal (Dick) Veterinary College, where he later became professor. From 1873 he was also assistant chemist to the Highland and Agricultural Society, with the duty of delivering what he called 'peripatetic lectures'. In 1875 he left Edinburgh for Cambridge, having been elected to the Jacksonian chair of natural experimental philosophy. Two years later he was elected Fullerian professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, London. Both these chairs he held until his death. While at Edinburgh he married in 1871 Helen Rose, daughter of William Banks, of that city. They had no children. 
During his time at Edinburgh Dewar worked on both organic and inorganic chemistry. His first published paper, presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1867, described a 'simple mechanical arrangement' for illustrating the structure of the non-saturated hydrocarbons, and showed how it could be used to represent seven different formulae for benzene, including the well-known Dewar formula. The device was sent by Playfair to the German chemist F. A. Kekule, who conceived the widely recognized ring formula for benzene. Kekule then invited Dewar to spend the summer of 1867 in his laboratory at Ghent. Dewar went on to do work on chlorosulphuric acid, the oxidation products of picoline, the thermal equivalents of the oxides of chlorine, and the temperature of the sun and of the electric spark. Of some interest is his work on the specific heat of Graham's hydrogenium, thought of as a volatile metal associated with hydrogen. During this investigation, in order to prevent the influx of heat into his calorimeter, he employed, in 1872, the vacuum jacket which later proved indispensable for the liquefaction of gases, and became, though not in his hands, the silver coated 'Thermos' flask. Similarly, the use of coconut charcoal for absorbing gases, which also played a most important part in his later work, was mentioned in a paper he published with P. G. Tait in 1874, entitled 'On a new method of obtaining very perfect vacua' ('Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 8, 1875, 348-9). During this period Dewar's complementary interest in biological subjects, which repeatedly appeared in his subsequent researches, was shown by his investigation with Dr Arthur Gamgee in 1871 of the constitution and physiological relations of cystine, and by elaborate studies conducted from 1873 onwards with John Gray M'Kendrick, professor of physiology in Glasgow University from 1876 to 1906, on the physiological action of light on the eye. 
Soon after moving south, in 1875, Dewar joined George Downing Liveing, then the professor of chemistry at Cambridge, in a series of spectroscopic investigations the results of which were published at intervals over a quarter of a century. Much of this research was designed to controvert Norman Lockyer's speculations on the dissociation of elements at very high temperatures. Some of the work was done at Cambridge, but the Royal Institution, where he had better laboratory facilities, became the chief centre of Dewar's experimental activities, and, indeed, of his whole life. 
At the Royal Institution, Dewar implemented the extensive research programme into cryogenics for which he is best known. In 1878, at a Friday evening lecture, he showed in operation the apparatus by which L. P. Cailletet had effected the partial liquefaction of oxygen; at another lecture, in 1884, he exhibited the gas in the form of a true liquid by the aid of a modification of the apparatus of Z. F. Wroblewski and K. S. Olszewski. In 1891, using essentially improved methods, he discovered that both liquid oxygen and liquid ozone are attracted by the magnet. Hydrogen, the only one of Faraday's 'permanent' gases which had not been liquefied, was for the first time collected by Dewar as a liquid in an open vessel in 1898, and in the following year he obtained it as a transparent ice. This brought him into a dispute over priority with William Hampson, consultant to Brin's Oxygen Company (later British Oxygen Company). For his work on hydrogen Dewar built a large machine, weighing a couple of tons, in which he made use of the Joule-Thomson effect by continuously expanding the highly compressed gas through a fine orifice on a cascade principle. His success was largely due to the inclusion of two novel features -- the vacuum jacket as a means of heat insulation, and a device consisting of a coiled tube which gave sufficient elasticity to enable the liquid gas to be drawn off without fracture of the glass by the intense cold. He also attempted the liquefaction of helium, the only known gas not reduced to the liquid state, but had not succeeded when, in 1908, H. Kamerlingh Onnes, working in his cryogenic laboratory at Leiden, obtained the liquid. 
Dewar's research facilities were greatly improved in 1896 when Ludwig Mond generously gave $100,000 to found and equip the Davy-Faraday Laboratory next door to the Royal Institution. He became its first director. In 1902, the year in which he was president at Belfast of the British Association, Dewar again turned his attention to charcoal, studying the conditions under which it must be prepared in order to develop the greatest activity, and finding that its power of absorbing gases is enormously increased by cold. He used it for the liquefaction of gases, the analysis of gaseous mixtures without liquefaction, and, above all, for the production of very high vacua; this last application probably contributed more than any other single agency to the advances made by atomic physics in immediately succeeding years. Charcoal also enabled him to make vacuum storage vessels of metal larger and stronger than was possible with glass, for he found that a portion of charcoal placed in the vacuous space absorbed occluded gas escaping from the metal and thus maintained the vacuum. 
In producing liquid gases Dewar always had in view their utilization in opening up new fields to research. Thus as soon as he obtained them in sufficient quantity, as well as devising methods for their thermometry and making determinations of their physical constants, he applied them to a wide range of pioneer explorations of the properties of matter at very low temperatures -- chemical and photographic action, phosphorescence, the cohesion and strength of materials, and, with Professor John Ambrose Fleming, of University College, London, electric and magnetic effects such as conduction, thermoelectricity, dielectric constants, and magnetic permeability. With Henri Moissan, Dewar liquefied fluorine in 1897 and in 1903 solidified it. Between 1903 and 1908 he made several researches on radium, investigating with Sir William Crookes the effect of extreme cold on its emanations, examining with Pierre Curie the gases occluded or given off by it, and determining the rate at which it evolves helium. A notable piece of research, which he published in 1913, showed that the mean atomic specific heats of the elements between the boiling-points of liquid nitrogen and hydrogen, when plotted in terms of their atomic weights, exhibit a definite periodic variation instead of being approximately uniform as they are at ordinary temperatures. Similar observations, published posthumously, of the molecular specific heats of many series or homologous groups of inorganic and organic compounds revealed some striking relations. 
During the First World War, in the restricted time left for research after meeting the demands of government departments, Dewar paid attention to the chemistry of the soap bubble, which in 1878-9 had been the subject of the first of the nine courses of Christmas lectures for young people which he delivered at the Royal Institution. He elucidated the conditions necessary for the production of long-lived bubbles and flat films, and studied the interference colours displayed when a jet of air was made to play upon their surface. At this period also he made from the roof of the institution a series of observations of sky radiation with a delicate charcoal thermoscope. 
The papers recording the spectroscopic researches which Dewar made with Liveing were published in collected form in 1915, and the rest of his papers in 1927. In addition to the research recorded in his journal papers, he also engaged in a number of other scientific projects. These included, for example, the experiments resulting in the invention of cordite which he and Sir Frederick Augustus Abel carried out as members of the government committee on explosives (1888-91), one of the special chemical and other researches entailed by his large practice as an expert witness. The work on cordite involved him and Abel in prolonged litigation with Alfred Nobel, who believed that their patent for cordite infringed his own for ballistite. The case eventually went to the House of Lords, where Nobel finally lost. It cost him $28,000 and left him permanently embittered. Dewar was also an authority on sewage disposal and water supply, and a member of the Balfour commission on London water supply (1893-4); for many years he and Crookes made daily chemical and bacteriological analyses of the water distributed to the metropolis. He was elected FRS in 1877, knighted in 1904, and received many honours from scientific societies in Europe and America. 
Well read in English literature, especially poetry, Dewar was devoted to music; a little violin playing, with his wife as accompanist, often ended the day's work in the small hours of the morning. His rooms at the Royal Institution and his house at Cambridge were filled with 'objets d'art' of all kinds, and he was a fine judge of wine and tobacco. To many contemporaries, Dewar was seen as quarrelsome, litigious, and impatient, with few close friends in the scientific community. To others, while sometimes choleric and prone to vigour of expression, he was seen as a kindly and generous man. His contributions to science lay rather in the discovery of new facts than in the elaboration of theory; he published no theoretical papers. As an experimenter he was unsurpassed, as daring and imaginative in conception as he was brilliant and sure in execution. Dewar died at his home in the Royal Institution, 21 Albemarle Street, on 27 March 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 32805


Wet, Christiaan Rudolph de (1854-1922), army officer and politician in the Orange Free State, born at Leeuwkop, Smithfield district, in the Orange Free State, on 7 October 1854, was the sixth son of Jacobus Ignatius de Wet, of Dewetsdorp, and Aletta Susanna Margaretha Strijdom; he belonged to the sixth generation of the family settled in the Cape. He was privately educated and in 1865, aged eleven, accompanied his father to the frontier during the Basuto War. In 1873 he married Cornelia Margaretha (1856-1936), daughter of Isaak Johannes Christian Kruger, of Bloemfontein; they had five sons and one daughter. 
Strongly opposed to British annexation of the Transvaal republic (1877), de Wet served with the republican forces in the various engagements during the Anglo-Transvaal War (1880-81) which culminated in the British disaster on Majuba Hill (27 February 1881). After retrocession of the Transvaal, de Wet farmed there for some years, and in 1885 was elected to represent Lydenburg in the republican Volksraad. Ill-suited to routine, however, he soon resigned, ultimately returning to the Free State. 
In 1889 de Wet rode with an armed force to Bloemfontein to protest against the building of a railway line from the coast. His vigorous political methods were noted and approved, and he became a member of the Free State Volksraad until 1898. 
In the South African War, in October 1899, de Wet was conscripted as an ordinary burgher and sent to the Natal frontier. He gained military distinction, when, as an acting commander with 300 men, he attacked a 1000-strong British force which had left Ladysmith and halted at Nicholson's Nek on 30 October. De Wet captured the whole force, scoring the first important success of the campaign. On 7 December he was promoted to the rank of field general on the western borders of the Free State, where British troops were massing for the relief of Kimberley. There General Piet Cronje was supreme commander, but, despite de Wet's efforts to guide and later to rescue him, Cronje made tactical errors which led to his capture by Lord Roberts and surrender at Paardeberg on 27 February 1900. Meanwhile de Wet had further distinguished himself by capturing Roberts's convoy at Waterval on 13 February and was appointed commander-in-chief of the Free State forces. The republican cause and the morale of the commandos had been undermined by surrender and desertion but de Wet, supported by Martinus Steyn, president of the Orange Free State, and by General De la Rey, rallied and reassembled his forces. On 31 March he ambushed Colonel R. G. Broadwood's mounted brigade at Sanna's Post, outside Bloemfontein, and on 4 April defeated a British detachment at Reddersburg. 
As the war moved to the Transvaal, de Wet remained behind British lines and re-established the fighting spirit of his men. He and the Boer Transvaal leaders chose guerrilla tactics, of which de Wet became a skilled exponent. With a few thousand followers he kept the field for the next two years against tremendous odds, to the despair and admiration of his opponents. He was still undefeated, his reputation worldwide, when, as acting president of the Orange Free State for one day, he signed the treaty of Vereeniging in 1902, ending the war. 
After the war de Wet visited Europe with his fellow Boer generals and peace negotiators, and, responsible government granted to South Africa in 1907, he was elected a member of the first parliament of the Orange River Colony and appointed minister of agriculture. He was a delegate to the Union Convention of 1908-9 and a member of the union defence council under General Louis Botha. He left politics after union in 1910. 
In 1911 Botha and General J. B. M. Hertzog disagreed on South Africa's relations with the British empire. De Wet supported Hertzog and the movement towards secession and re-establishment of the republics of the Orange Free State and Transvaal. He resigned from the defence council in 1913. After the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 Botha announced his intention of invading German South-West African territory with South African troops in alliance with the British. Already hostile to the expedition, de Wet was influenced by his mistaken belief that Botha's government had ordered the death of his fellow wartime commander and friend General De la Rey, shot by accident on 15 September. De Wet and General C. F. Beyers, the leader of the Transvaal rebels, planned armed revolt. On 24 October Beyers raised the standard in the north, and two days later de Wet followed suit in the Free State. Thousands responded. Botha, however, summoned his supporters, took the field in person, and swiftly defeated Beyers (27 October). He then turned upon de Wet, who was in hiding at Mushroom Valley in the central Free State, and dispersed de Wet's forces (12 November). De Wet resorted to his old guerrilla tactics but in the era of the motor vehicle Botha was able to harry and hustle the mounted commandos, giving them and their horses no rest. Within ten days de Wet was fleeing westward, with only a handful of men, to the Kalahari Desert and German territory. However, on 2 December Botha captured de Wet on the farm Waterberg in the Kuruman district. Beyers had died the previous week while trying to cross the Vaal River, and with both its leaders accounted for the uprising was soon stamped out. 
Found guilty of high treason at Bloemfontein on 15 June 1915, de Wet was sentenced to six years' imprisonment and fined $2000. After public protest, Botha released him on parole and he was allowed to return to his farm in the Free State. He lived quietly, dying on the farm Klipfontein, Dewetsdorp, on 3 February 1922. He was buried at the Vrouemonument ('women's monument') at Bloemfontein beside his old leader President Steyn. He published an account of his campaigns of 1899-1902; an English edition, entitled 'Three Years' War', appeared in 1902. 


@@@@@


doc= 32806


Winton, Sir Francis Walter de (1835-1901), army officer and courtier, was born at Pittsford, Northamptonshire, on 21 June 1835. De Winton's grandfather, Walter Wilkins (1741-1828), gained a fortune in India under the East India Company, returned in 1772, and purchased the Maesllwch estate in Radnorshire; he was MP for Radnorshire from 1796 to 1828 -- an independent who favoured some liberal causes. His son, also Walter Wilkins (1809-1840), enjoyed a 'princely income' ('GM', 2nd ser., 14, 1840, 434) and was 'reform' MP for Radnorshire in 1835-40. Claiming descent from Robert de Wintonia (who went into Glamorgan with Robert Fitz Haimon in the eleventh century) he, together with his brothers and cousins, by royal licence dated 6 July 1839, assumed instead of Wilkins the name de Winton, which they claimed was their 'original surname' (ibid., 2nd ser., 12, 1839, 194). Walter Wilkins married in 1831 Julia Cecilia, second daughter of Richard John Collinson, rector of Gateshead: Francis Walter was their second son. 
Educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, de Winton entered the Royal Artillery as second-lieutenant on 11 April 1854. He served in the Crimean War, at the siege and fall of Sevastopol, and received the Legion d'honneur, fifth class. Captain in 1861, he acted as aide-de-camp to Sir William Fenwick Williams, commanding the forces in British North America, and was again on his staff when he was lieutenant-governor of Nova Scotia (1864-7) and governor of Gibraltar (1870-75). De Winton married in 1864 Evelyn, daughter of Christopher Rawson of Lennoxville, Canada, and had two sons (one died in 1892) and two daughters; his wife survived him. 
From 1877 to 1878 de Winton was military attache at Constantinople, and from 1878 to 1883 he was secretary to the marquess of Lorne (afterwards ninth duke of Argyll) when governor-general of Canada. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1880, he became brevet colonel in 1884, and was made CMG in 1882 and KCMG in February 1884. 
De Winton was an associate of William Mackinnon, the shipowner, and one of what H. M. Stanley called 'the Mackinnon Clan' which tried to create a British economic presence in the Congo. In 1885 he was appointed administrator-general of the Congo under the rapacious Leopold II's International Association enterprise, just before it became the Congo Free State. He held this office only until 1886, when he was created a commander of the order of Leopold. In 1887 he acted as secretary of the Emin Pasha relief committee, and assisted Stanley in his preparations for the relief expedition. 
De Winton, who became a substantive colonel in 1887, commanded the small punitive expedition (largely 1st West India regiment, with a small naval contingent) against the rebellious Yoni in the hinterland of Sierra Leone. Robari, the Yoni stronghold, was shelled, set on fire by rockets, and quickly captured on 21 November 1887; other towns were burned and the rebellion suppressed: no British were killed. De Winton was made a CB in March 1888, and on his return home he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general at headquarters. The end of 1889, however, found him once more in Africa. Repeated requests had been made by the king of Swaziland that his country be taken under British protection to save it from the Boers, but the government had declined to intervene. The Boers gained virtual possession of the pastoral resources of Swaziland. In 1889 de Winton was sent as a commissioner to Swaziland to hold an inquiry in conjunction with a commissioner of the Transvaal republic. He reached Pretoria in November 1889, and after several interviews with President Kruger left for Swaziland, accompanied by generals Joubert and Smit. The joint commissioners held a meeting of the Swazi chiefs and headmen, and, among other things, promised them that the independence of the Swazi should be maintained by both governments; but, according to the report which de Winton subsequently made, the Swazi had already parted not only with all their actual territory but with rights which should only belong to the government of a country to adventurers whose sole object was to make money by them. He therefore considered a British protectorate inadvisable and impracticable. Not until the close of the South African War was the Swazi position improved. 
In May 1890 de Winton, who retired from the army on 21 June of that year with the honorary rank of major-general, was appointed governor of the Imperial British East Africa Company's possessions; but he resigned in June 1891. In January 1892 he was appointed controller and treasurer of the household of the duke of Clarence, after whose opportune death in January 1892 he continued to act in the same capacity in the household of the duke of York, later George V. He was promoted GCMG in 1893. He was honorary secretary of the Royal Geographical Society in 1888-9. He was made honorary LLD of Cambridge in 1892, and was also an honorary LLD of Durham. De Winton died at Llansteffan, Llys-wen, Brecknockshire, on 16 December 1901, and was buried at Glasbury, Brecknockshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 32807


Worms, Henry De, first Baron Pirbright (1840-1903), politician, was born on 20 October 1840, the youngest child of Baron Solomon Benedict De Worms (1801-1882) and his wife, Henrietta, eldest daughter of Samuel Moses Samuel. Solomon De Worms was descended from a wealthy Frankfurt Jewish family, which had settled in London in the early nineteenth century; Solomon's mother was a sister of Nathan Meyer Rothschild, the first of the Rothschild family to settle in England. Solomon and his brothers were the owners of extensive tea plantations in Ceylon; in 1871 Solomon was made a baron of the Austrian empire, and in 1874 Queen Victoria gave him and his descendants permission to use the title in England, in recognition of his work in Ceylon. 
De Worms was educated at King's College, London, of which he became a fellow in 1873, and at the Inner Temple; he was called to the bar in 1863, practising at the Kent sessions. Subsequently, however, he gave up the law to assist in the management of his father's business, which he did until its dissolution in 1879. His interests had already turned in a political direction. Through his friendship with the Austrian ambassador in London, Count von Beust, he had in 1867 obtained an introduction to Benjamin Disraeli; the following year he stood as Conservative candidate at Sandwich, thus becoming the first professing Jew to stand for election to parliament in the Conservative interest -- a feat which earned him a great deal of Jewish communal disapprobation at the time, since the Conservatives had earlier opposed the abolition of Jewish disabilities. Ironically, however, the Sandwich election was marked by some blatantly antisemitic propaganda emanating from the Liberal side; in the event De Worms was unsuccessful, and did not stand at the general election of 1874 which brought Disraeli to power -- and which saw the return of the obscure Nottingham coal owner, Saul Isaac, as the first professing Jewish Conservative MP. In 1880, however, De Worms was returned for Greenwich, and from 1885 to his elevation to the peerage a decade later he sat for the East Toxteth division of Liverpool. 
De Worms's knowledge of the international commodity market was prodigious, and earned him a place in Lord Salisbury's first administration (1885-6) as parliamentary secretary to the Board of Trade. In the second Salisbury government (1886-92) he held office first at the Board of Trade and then, from 1888, as under-secretary of state for the colonies. In 1887 he had been elected president of the international conference on sugar bounties, and the following year toured a number of European capitals urging the abolition of the bounty system; to his great regret the British parliament refused to ratify the convention in which the conference had resulted. 
De Worms was a man of many talents -- a fine speaker, an accomplished pugilist -- but also had a reputation as a bore ('Baron de Bookworms'). A fellow of the Royal Society, he was the author of a treatise on 'The Earth and its Magnetism' (1862) as well as of studies of 'The Austro-Hungarian Empire' (1870) and 'England's Policy in the East' (1877). From an early age he had been brought up to expect to take an active part in Jewish communal affairs. He held the posts of treasurer (1872) and vice-president (1880-82) of the United Synagogue in London, and from 1872 to 1886 served as president of the Anglo-Jewish Association, which practically conducted the foreign policy of Anglo-Jewry at this period. In 1886, however, his daughter, Alice, married out of the faith; worse still, he saw fit to attend her church wedding. This led to his being forced to resign the presidency of the Anglo-Jewish Association, and seems to have planted the seeds of a gradual estrangement from his fellow Jews and from their faith. De Worms, though not a strictly observant Jew, had identified himself very closely with the Jewish world. In parliament he had taken up the causes of the oppressed Jewries of Romania and Russia. Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler's wife, Henrietta, was his second cousin, both his own wives were Jewish, and it is clear that he had originally intended for himself a Jewish burial. However, he grew increasingly bitter at his exclusion from the inner circle of the Anglo-Jewish gentry, and his failure to be included (1901) in the list of those Jewish leaders who were deputed to congratulate Edward VII on his accession to the throne may have been the final straw. When he died, in 1903, he left instructions that he was to be buried in a Christian cemetery. 
On 5 May 1864 De Worms married Fanny, eldest daughter of Baron von Todesco, of Vienna, with whom he had three daughters and from whom he obtained a divorce in 1886; on 25 January 1887 he married Sarah Barnett (died 1914), the only daughter of Sir Benjamin Samuel Phillips, and his wife, Rachel. De Worms died at 42 Grosvenor Place, London, on 9 January 1903, and was buried in the churchyard of Wyke St Mark, near Guildford, Surrey; as he left no male heir, his title became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 32808


Dewrance, Sir John (1858-1937), mechanical engineer, was born at Peckham, London, on 13 March 1858, the only son of John Dewrance (died 1861), railway pioneer, of Greenhills, Tilford, Surrey, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Curtis, of Tilford. He was educated at Charterhouse School and King's College, London, where he paid special attention to chemistry, and was a pupil of his stepfather, Colonel John Davis. On coming of age he took control of the engineering business of Dewrance & Co., which had been left him by his father. This business was founded in London in 1835 by Joseph Woods, with the elder Dewrance as a partner. When Woods died in 1842 it became Dewrance & Co., manufacturing engine and boiler accessories. In 1882 Dewrance married Isabella Ann (died 1922), second daughter of Francis Trevithick, of Penzance, and granddaughter of Richard Trevithick, the 'father of the locomotive'; they had a son and a daughter. 
Dewrance had a great affection for scientific research, which he said was implanted in him by the electrometallurgist George Gore, and in 1880 he started a research laboratory, taking over Professor Frederick Barff's assistants and apparatus and working up his process for protecting iron from rust by treatment with superheated steam. In this laboratory he produced, in 1882, an ingot of aluminium by electrolysis, at a time when that metal was too expensive for general use, and he carried out extensive investigations, notably on lubrication and the corrosion of marine boilers, for which the Institution of Civil Engineers awarded him a Telford premium in 1896, and a Watt gold medal and a Telford premium in 1900. Some years before the First World War he gave up this laboratory, which by then had developed into a 2 acre factory with a pier on the Thames, and with it what he called individualistic research. His interest in research, however, continued, and hoping by team work to accomplish more for the benefit of industry than could be done by working alone, he became a member of many research committees, particularly those of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers on alloys and cutting tools, of both of which he was chairman. He encouraged co-ordinated research work, the standardization of engineering measurements, and mass production, believing this would best ensure the future prosperity of British industry. 
Dewrance was a prolific inventor who took out more than a hundred patents, mainly relating to steam fittings and boiler mountings. He was also an able administrator and man of business. From 1899 until a few months before his death he was chairman of Babcock and Wilcox Ltd, and from 1914 of Kent Coal Concessions Ltd, and allied companies; aspersions cast by a shareholder on his conduct of these coal companies led him to take legal action, and in 1924 the offender was convicted of defamatory libel. In 1923 he was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and from 1926 to 1928 of the Institute of Metals. He was also president of the Engineering and Allied Employers' National Federation (1920-26), master of the Armourers' and Brasiers' Company (1923), high sheriff of Kent in 1925, and a fellow of King's College, London (1929). He was appointed KBE in 1920 and GBE in 1928. His recreations were riding, shooting, and deerstalking. He died at his home, Wretham Hall, Wayland, Thetford, Norfolk, on 7 October 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 32809


Dibbs, Sir George Richard (1834-1904), politician in Australia, born at Flagstaff Hill, Upper Fort Street, Sydney, on 12 October 1834, was the youngest of the three sons of John Dibbs ('b'. 1790), master mariner, and his wife, Sophia Elizabeth Allwright (1809-1891). He was educated in Sydney at St Philip's Church of England School and at J. D. Lang's Australian College. On 18 March 1857 he married Annie Maria Robey (1835-1909), and joined his father-in-law, Ralph Mayer Robey (1809-1864), in a sugar refinery which was bought by the Colonial Sugar Co. two years later. He worked with his brother, John Campbell Dibbs (1830-1899), in a shipping agency, managing in turn the Newcastle and the Sydney offices, and in 1865 started a successful branch at Valparaiso, after running a blockade to enter the city. In 1866 the firm became bankrupt on the failure of the Agra Bank; but by 1875 the creditors had been paid in full, and Dibbs & Co. became one of the foremost firms in Sydney. 
At forty years of age Dibbs began his political career with his election as one of the members for West Sydney in the legislative assembly of New South Wales. He was returned as a supporter of local business and as one of the leading members of the Public Schools League, which championed free compulsory and secular education in state primary schools. In 1877 he was defeated, because of working-class opposition to government-assisted immigration, which he supported. In 1880 he won public favour by his coolness in submitting to a year in debtors' prison instead of paying damages in a slander suit. In 1882 he was returned for St Leonards in northern Sydney and in January 1883 became colonial treasurer in the ministry of Sir Alexander Stuart. The government stopped the sale of crown lands on which the colonial revenue had hitherto depended. On 7 October 1885 Dibbs succeeded Stuart as premier. In the elections of October 1885 he lost his seat at St Leonards to Sir Henry Parkes, but was immediately returned by the Murrumbidgee, a country seat he held until 1894. His ministry was defeated on 21 December 1885, owing to a deficit caused by the stoppage of land sales. 
From 26 February 1886 to 19 January 1887 Dibbs was colonial secretary in the Jennings ministry, which struggled to restore the revenues through new forms of taxation. In July 1887 Dibbs declared his conversion from free trade to protection, speaking of his road to Damascus. From 17 January to 6 March 1889 he was again premier and colonial secretary in a minority government. In March 1891 he was appointed a delegate to the federation convention held in Sydney, in spite of Parkes's objection on the ground of his ostensible republican sympathies: he preferred unification to federation. On 23 October 1891, on the defeat of Parkes's ministry, Dibbs became, for a third time, premier and colonial secretary in a Protectionist ministry with Labor support. His government introduced a modest protective tariff, electoral reform (one man, one vote), and a labour bureau to assist the unemployed. In June 1892 he visited England on a special mission to reassure London capitalists of the financial stability not only of New South Wales but of Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. He was largely successful and was created KCMG on 24 July 1892. In 1893 there was a financial crisis: many banks closed their doors, and the panic was stopped only by the prompt action of Dibbs's government in guaranteeing savings bank deposits, making banknotes legal tender, and providing treasury advances. This made him popular for a time. 
In March 1893 Dibbs himself had become bankrupt and resigned his seat, while retaining the premiership. He was at once re-elected. At the elections in July 1894 Protectionist numbers were severely reduced, and Dibbs subsequently resigned office. In further elections a year later he lost his seat and retired from politics in September 1895, but he was managing trustee of the Savings Bank of New South Wales until his death. 
Dibbs was very tall and robust physically and temperamentally. In early life he had followed his mother's move from Presbyterianism to the Church of England. He died of heart disease at his home, Passy, Hunter's Hill, Sydney, on 5 August 1904 and was buried on the 6th in St Thomas's Church of England cemetery in North Sydney. His wife, two sons, and nine daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32810


Dibdin, Sir Lewis Tonna (1852-1938), ecclesiastical lawyer and administrator, was born in Bloomsbury, London, on 19 July 1852, the third son of the Revd Robert William Dibdin and his wife, Caroline, only child of William Thompson, barrister, of the Temple. He was grandson of Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin of Sadler's Wells Theatre, and great-grandson of Charles Dibdin, the dramatist and songwriter. His uncles included the musician Henry Edward Dibdin and Lewis Hippolytus Joseph Tonna, author of ultra-protestant religious works. Dibdin's father enjoyed considerable popularity for many years as a preacher at West Street Chapel, Seven Dials, which, as La Tremblade, had been one of the earliest Huguenot churches in London and was later a regular preaching place of John Wesley. 
Dibdin was educated at home before going in 1869 to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated as a senior optime in the mathematical tripos of 1874 and was awarded an MA in 1878. He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1876. In 1881 he married Marianne Aubrey (died 1927), eldest daughter of Humphrey Senhouse Pinder, rector of Bratton Fleming, Devon; they had five sons and two daughters. 
From 1895 to 1901 Dibdin was official counsel to the attorney-general in charity matters. His main interest, however, had from an early date been ecclesiastical law and history, and he was appointed chancellor of the dioceses of Rochester (1886), Exeter (1888), and Durham (1891). In 1899 he was engaged in the Lambeth hearings on the use of incense and the reservation of the sacrament. He took silk in 1901. Next year he appeared for the crown in the proceedings arising out of the appointment of Charles Gore to the see of Worcester; his services had been sought by all four other parties. From 1903 to 1934 he was dean of the arches, master of the faculties, and official principal of the chancery court of York, and from 1925 to 1934 he was vicar-general of the province of Canterbury. 
In 1907 the 'Deceased Wife's Sister's Marriage Act' was passed; next year Dibdin had to decide its effect in the memorable litigation known as the 'deceased wife's sister' case, which, in its various phases, lasted from 1908 to 1912. His judgment was upheld in the divisional court, the Court of Appeal, and the House of Lords, and the principle was settled that the 'Deceased Wife's Sister's Marriage Act' of 1907 validates for all purposes a marriage between a man and his deceased wife's sister, wherever and whenever contracted. In view of his evangelical upbringing, several of his decisions in the court of arches came as a welcome surprise to the Anglo-Catholic party and strengthened its position. 
Dibdin's main occupation, however, from his appointment as first church estates commissioner in 1905 until his resignation in 1930 was the direction of the business of the ecclesiastical commission. During that time he bore the chief responsibility for its policy and, with Lord Phillimore, for initiating the many schemes for the benefit of the clergy which eventually took statutory shape in the clergy and episcopal pension measures of 1926. To him, too, are largely attributable the numerous measures relating to the Ecclesiastical Commission and to patronage and episcopal endowments. He combined his office of commissioner with that of an active governor and chairman of committees of Queen Anne's Bounty, thus eliminating much of the overlapping of functions and the competition which had formerly existed. 
Dibdin had taken a prominent part in the deliberations of the house of laymen of the convocation of Canterbury almost from the formation of the house in 1886 and he was for a time its vice-chairman. Immediately on the establishment of the church assembly in 1920 he took a very active share in its work, both in his personal capacity and as the spokesman of the ecclesiastical commissioners, and he was largely responsible for a great many of its measures. There is probably no one to whom the assembly was more heavily indebted for its procedure and for the spirit in which its business was conducted. 
Dibdin served on many royal and other commissions and committees on church affairs. The report of the royal commission on ecclesiastical discipline (1904-6) was mainly his work. As a signatory of the minority report of the royal commission on divorce (1909-12) he, together with the archbishop of York (Cosmo Lang) and Sir William Anson, recommended no alteration in the existing law other than equality of treatment for the sexes. In 1914 he presided over the archbishops' ancient monuments (churches) committee, which led to the formation of the diocesan advisory committees. The historical section of the report of the archbishops' committee on church and state was prepared by Dibdin and A. L. Smith, master of Balliol College, Oxford, and published in 1916; on this report were based the constitution of the church assembly and the proposals which received statutory form in the 'Church of England (Assembly) Powers Act', commonly called the 'Enabling Act', of 1919. Between 1923 and 1926 he served on the ecclesiastical courts commission. In 1934 illness compelled his resignation from the commission on the relations between church and state, appointed in 1930 after the rejection by the House of Commons of the 1928 prayer book. At the same time he resigned all his offices, legal and administrative. 
Dibdin was knighted in 1903; in 1891 he received the honorary degree of DCL from Durham University; he was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1908 and an honorary fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, in 1923. Other honours were offered him and were refused. He died at his home, Nobles, Dormansland, Surrey, on 12 June 1938. His eldest son, Lewis George Dibdin, became secretary of the church assembly in 1939. 
Dibdin combined in a rare degree the qualities of lawyer, judge, and administrator, and this, together with his great experience, gave him a unique position for a layman in church affairs. Archbishop Benson relied greatly upon him and Dibdin advised Archbishop Davidson almost daily on many topics. He wrote or edited a number of legal and other works including 'The Livery Companies of London' (1886), 'Monasticism in England' (1890), and 'The Ecclesiastical Commission' (1919). His 'Establishment in England' (1932), a collection of essays written over a period of fifty years, emphasizes his strong support of the established church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32811


Dicey, Albert Venn (1835-1922), jurist, was the third son of Thomas Edward Dicey ('b'. 1789), proprietor of the 'Northampton Mercury', and his wife, Anne Mary, younger daughter of James Stephen, master in chancery, and was born at the family home, Claybrook Hall, near Lutterworth, Leicestershire, on 4 February 1835. The name Venn was given to him in honour of the leader of the Clapham sect John Venn, whose daughter Jane had married Anne Dicey's brother, Sir James Stephen. Obstetrical error at birth caused a muscular weakness that plagued Dicey throughout life. His handwriting was notoriously difficult to decipher and many of his adult letters were written by an amanuensis. His early education came at home and Dicey recalled in later life his happy memories of lessons taught by his mother. Dicey entered King's College School in London in 1852 and then matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1854. He obtained a first class in classical moderations in 1856 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1858. At Oxford he helped found the Old Mortality society that in a brief existence included a number of individuals who afterwards attained distinction. Among them were Thomas Hill Green, Edward Caird, Algernon Charles Swinburne, James Bryce, and Thomas Erskine Holland. To his Oxford years Dicey owed many of the friendships that he treasured later in life, especially that with Bryce. 
In 1860 Dicey was successful in an examination for a fellowship at Trinity College, Oxford, and in the same year he won the Arnold prize for an essay on the privy council, which was published in the same year. Dicey attributed his lifelong interest in constitutional law and history to this work. He moved to London in 1861 and studied for the bar at the Inner Temple, to which he was called in 1863. He enjoyed moderate success at the bar and eventually became queen's counsel in 1890. In 1872 he forfeited his fellowship when he married Elinor Mary Bonham-Carter (died 1923), youngest daughter of John Bonham-Carter (MP for Portsmouth from 1830 to 1841). The marriage, which lasted for fifty years, produced no children; it was a long, happy companionship, marred only by frequent bouts of illness, to which Elinor Dicey was subject. 
During his residence in London from 1861 to 1882 Dicey practised at the bar and pursued journalistic and scholarly projects. He contributed to the 'Northampton Mercury' (of which he occasionally acted as temporary editor), the 'Spectator', and the New York 'Nation'. The articles in the 'Nation' provide an excellent record of his political and intellectual maturation. During this period Dicey published 'A Treatise on the Rules for the Selection of the Parties to an Action' (1870) and 'The Law of Domicil, as a Branch of the Law of England, Stated in the Form of Rules' (1879). Neither book earned an extensive readership but, by virtue of the scholarly reputation of each, Dicey was elected in 1882 to the Vinerian professorship of English law at Oxford. He held this chair, to which a fellowship at All Souls College was attached, for twenty-seven years; he revived its importance after a long period of absentee occupants since the resignation of Sir William Blackstone in 1766. 
During his long professorship, Dicey published the three books that gave him a significant place in common-law jurisprudence. His 'Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution' (1885), updated by a lengthy introduction to the eighth edition (1915), established his reputation as a major commentator on the British constitution. Focus on three fundamental principles, parliamentary sovereignty, the rule of law, and constitutional conventions, enabled Dicey to provide for the general public an understanding of constitutional law. The clarity of his prose made the work accessible to a wide spectrum of educated opinion, and his ability to reduce the complex topic to three concepts caused him to refer to himself as a prophet of the obvious. His facility for analysis made the work a classic of exposition and ensured its place as a primary influence on the discussion of constitutional law from its first appearance. 

'Law of the Constitution' owed the popularity of its reception as well to polemic features which belied its expository and limited explicit intentions; notably it was a broadly whiggish account of England's history which was implicitly celebratory of English national identity. The centrality of the common law to English history, Dicey held, had produced a tradition of liberty that reached full flower in the individualism so important to Victorian ideas of self. This legacy separated England from the 'droit administratif' institutions in France, where freedom depended upon government licence. His statement of the superiority of England's political heritage placed Dicey squarely in the Burkean tradition and marked out 'Law of the Constitution' as a work of political theory, not simply legal analysis. Even the book's modest self-representation as simply a piece of legal analysis had implicit polemical force. Academic legal science was a recently established discipline, the credibility of which was an issue which preoccupied Dicey. A work which so successfully imported England's common law into its population's sense of its heritage and identity, and one which did so not in the language of abstract theory but by the detailed examination of the law, did a great deal to secure the reputation of the discipline. And just as Dicey championed the science of law he championed also the lawyers: in his legalistic overhaul of the whig account, it was judges and not statesmen who emerged as the upholders of liberty. 
In 1896 Dicey published 'A Digest of the Law of England with Reference to the Conflict of Laws', his greatest treatise with respect to a mastery of an intricate branch of the law. His ability to consolidate the complex, copious case-law in this area into a limited number of rules exerted a strong influence on the law's development, according to his successor in the Vinerian chair, William Martin Geldart. Successive editions, edited by J. H. C. Morris after Dicey's death, retained the book's place in legal scholarship. 
The third book Dicey completed as Vinerian professor was 'Lectures on the Relation between Law and Public Opinion in England during the Nineteenth Century' (1905). This work was based on lectures Dicey delivered in 1898 at the Harvard law school. Dicey had visited the United States previously, in 1870, when he befriended such notable Americans as E. L. Godkin, Charles William Eliot, and Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes. In 'Law and Opinion' Dicey divided public opinion into the following categories: old toryism (1800-30), Benthamism or individualism (1825-70), and collectivism (1865-1900). As a map of the interaction between law and public opinion Dicey's effort lost the confidence of later historians, and his artificial classifications appeared to sacrifice analysis to symmetry of expression. Of Dicey's three great works, 'Law and Opinion' suffered the greatest loss of influence in the twentieth century. 
Dicey also possessed a keen interest in contemporary politics, and until the 1880s he embraced orthodox Liberalism with an emphasis on the benefits of free trade. The conversion of William Gladstone to home rule for Ireland turned Dicey into a leading polemicist on Liberal Unionism. Preservation of the union with Ireland became the core of his political creed, and in this cause he published 'England's Case Against Home Rule' (1886), 'Letters on Unionist Delusions' (1887), 'A Leap in the Dark' (1893), and 'A Fool's Paradise' (1913). Fears for the Irish union caused him to work tirelessly, by publication and private letter, in opposition to any scheme that would modify Ireland's constitutional status. In part because of his own enunciation of parliamentary sovereignty as a fundamental principle of the constitution, and in part from his reading of federalism in the United States, Dicey rejected federalism in any guise as a solution to the revision of Ireland's constitutional status. Dicey opposed a federal settlement because he believed that it produced an inherently weak form of government that repudiated centuries of historical development. Towards the end of his life his hopes were dashed by the events in Ireland from 1918 to 1921. 
Dicey was a gifted conversationalist who sometimes fell prey to the habit of explaining at length any topic with which he was acquainted. Tall and thin, with a splendid white beard in later life, Dicey was for decades a familiar figure in the Oxford University community. Personal generosity of spirit did not extend to politics, where proponents of views contrary to his own drew fierce criticism. He was eighty-five when he published his last book, 'Thoughts on the Union between England and Scotland' (1920), with Robert Sangster Rait. Dicey died peacefully of respiratory complications on 7 April 1922, at his home, The Orchard, 80 Banbury Road, Oxford, after a life full of academic distinction and honours. He was buried at St Sepulchre's cemetery, Oxford. His wife, Elinor, died the following year. Dicey was remembered as an individual who sought the national good above all else, and his work continued to influence discussions of constitutional law. His ability to present the complexities of constitutional law to the public has endured since his death, and it will likely remain his greatest achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 32812


Dicey, Edward James Stephen (1832-1911), author and journalist, born on 15 May 1832 at Claybrook Hall, Claybrook, near Lutterworth, Leicestershire, was the second son of Thomas Edward Dicey ('b'. 1789), of an old Leicestershire family, who was senior wrangler at Cambridge in 1811, was a pioneer of the Midland Railway, and owned the 'Northampton Mercury'. Dicey's mother, Anne Mary, sister of Sir James Stephen, was aunt of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen and Sir Leslie Stephen. His younger brother was Albert Venn Dicey. 
Educated at home and, for about two years, at King's College, London, Dicey went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1850, was president of the Cambridge Union in 1853, and graduated BA in 1854 with a third class in the classical tripos and as a senior optime in mathematics. After leaving Cambridge he went for a short time into business without success, and then took to writing, following in the tradition of many of his relatives. From 1860 he was a regular contributor to 'The Spectator'. He travelled abroad and interested himself in foreign politics. In 1861 he published 'Rome in 1860' and 'Cavour: a Memoir', thereby establishing his reputation as a political commentator. The following year Dicey visited America and wrote in 'Macmillan's Magazine' and 'The Spectator' on the American Civil War, in which he supported the Union. There followed in 1863 'Six Months in the Federal States'. 
In 1861 Dicey became connected with the 'Daily Telegraph' -- then a strongly Liberal paper -- and his style and knowledge of foreign questions led to his being made a permanent member of the staff in 1862. Among his colleagues were Sir Edwin Arnold (an old schoolfriend), F. C. Lawley, and G. A. Sala. He was a leader writer for the paper, and also acted as special correspondent in the Prussian-Danish War of 1864 and the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. He embodied these experiences in the volumes 'The Schleswig-Holstein War' (1864) and 'The Battle-Fields of 1866' (1866). He afterwards described other foreign excursions in 'A Month in Russia during the Marriage of the Czarevitch' (1867) and in 'The Morning Land, being Sketches of Turkey, the Holy Land, and Egypt' (1870), the result of a three-month tour in the Near East. 
While in the Near East in 1869 Dicey accepted an offer of the editorship of the 'Daily News', and held this post for three months in 1870. On leaving it he at once became editor of 'The Observer', and filled that office for nineteen years (1870-89), continuing to write for the paper for some time after he ceased to edit it. Under his editorship the paper's tone was scholarly, albeit with a small circulation. Subsequently he was a constant contributor to the 'Nineteenth Century', the 'Empire Review', and other periodicals. His interest in foreign politics remained keen, especially in the affairs of eastern Europe. He was a frequent visitor to Egypt, and formed at first hand well-defined views of England's position there, at one time advocating the annexation of the country by Great Britain. He recorded his views in 'England and Egypt' (1881; collected articles), 'The Story of the Khedivate' (1902), and 'The Egypt of the Future' (1907). He also published 'Victor Emmanuel' (1882) and an account of Bulgaria (1894). Dicey, like his better-known brother, was one of those Liberal intellectuals who made their way into Unionism. He strongly attacked Gladstone's Irish and Egyptian policies in the early 1880s and he was an ardent opponent of home rule; but he remained a free-trader. He was a strong supporter of friendly relations between Britain and Germany, and closely studied South African matters in later years. 
On 14 August 1867 Dicey married Anne Greene Chapman (died 1878) of Weymouth, Massachusetts, daughter of Henry Grafton Chapman; they had one son, who predeceased his father. During his later life Dicey made his home in chambers in Gray's Inn (he had been called to the bar in 1875, though he never practised). He became a bencher there in 1896 and treasurer in 1903-4. He frequented the Athenaeum and Garrick clubs. C. P. Lucas wrote of him: 'Dicey was by nature a singularly good observer; he had a great store of knowledge, much dry humour, a cool judgment, and a sound and vivid style. Though in a sense reserved and indifferent to outward appearances, he associated easily and genially with men around him, especially with foreigners, while he possessed a rare capacity for easy and clear description of scenes and events which were passing before his eyes. Being neither didactic nor controversial, nor in the ordinary sense professional, he exercised by his writings alike in books and newspapers considerable influence on public opinion. ('DNB')' Dicey died of cirrhosis of the liver at his chambers, 2 Gray's Inn Square, London, on 7 July 1911 and, after a funeral service in the Inn's chapel, was buried in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32813


Dick, Sir William Reid (1879-1961), sculptor, was born on 13 January 1879 in Glasgow, the son of Francis Dick, a journeyman engine fitter, and his wife, Elizabeth Reid (died 'c'.1940). Little is known about the family, but there were at least two other children, Annie and Cathie. Reid Dick was ambitious to sculpt, and at the age of twelve was apprenticed to Scott and Rae, stonemasons, in Glasgow. For five years he learned to carve stone, including granite, and attended drawing and modelling classes at night school. In 1899, as a carver with a firm of stone decorators, he registered at the Glasgow School of Art, studying at night until he received his diploma in 1907. He accepted a post as art master at Bell's Hill Academy in Glasgow (1907-8), but, when first exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1908 his address was 6 Clifton Hill Studios, St John's Wood, London. 
When new to the city, Reid Dick worked as studio assistant to E. Whitney Smith and attended evening classes at the Kennington School of Art. His first noted commission was a portrait of Harry Lauder (marble, exh. RA, 1911). His reputation grew rapidly, and in 1914 he married Catherine Emma, daughter of William John Treadwell of Northampton. They moved to 1 St John's Wood Studios, Queen's Terrace, where they lived until 1924. They had three children, John, Ann, and Mary, at least one of whom was born at their next home, 31 Grove End Road, St John's Wood. In 1938 Reid Dick bought the house and vast studio at 16 Maida Vale (once occupied by the sculptor Alfred Gilbert), where he and his wife lived until his death in 1961. 
In September 1914 Reid Dick joined the ranks of the Territorial Army, going on to serve with the Royal Engineers in France and Palestine from 1915 to 1919. While abroad he amused himself carving small figures in trench chalk, some of which were shown and sold at 'several London Galleries' (Reid Dick Archive). He received early recognition for his work, becoming an associate of the Royal Society of British Sculptors in April 1915; he was elected a fellow in August 1923, won the society's silver medal in 1928, and was its president from 1933 to 1938. Following the armistice in 1918, his bronze mask 'Androdus' was bought for the Chantrey collection (exh. RA, 1919; Tate collection). In 1921 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, and a member in 1928. 
Reid Dick's reputation for monumental sculpture was established after the First World War. Memorials at Bushey and Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire (1921), were followed by a major commission, the Kitchener memorial chapel (1922-5) in St Paul's Cathedral, London, the formal clarity of which became his hallmark. The 'Pieta' in the chapel is one of his finest achievements (sketch model exh. RA, 1922, model 1923, unfinished 1924, marble 1925, original sketch model 1942, study 1953, study 1962). For the architect Sir Reginald Blomfield he made an eagle for the Royal Air Force memorial, Westminster, and the lion for the Menin Gate at Ypres, Belgium (1927). Among his individual memorials are those to David Livingstone at Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe (model exh. RA, 1934), George V in Westminster Abbey (models exh. RA, 1939 and 1941), President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in Grosvenor Square, London (1948; study exh. RA, 1949), and 'Lady Godiva' in Coventry (model exh. RA, 1950). 
Reid Dick's architectural works include bas-reliefs for Selfridges, Oxford Street, London (1928), where he later supervised elaborate temporary decorations celebrating the coronation of George VI in 1937; 'Controlled Energy', two colossal stone groups for Unilever House, Blackfriars, London (1932); figures for St Andrew's House, Edinburgh (1939); and the bronze 'Herald' for the Reuters Building, Fleet Street, London (model exh. RA, 1939). As a portraitist his reputation blossomed after his marble mask of Lady Diana Duff Cooper was shown at the Royal Academy in 1922. A bust of George V (1933) was the first of fourteen royal portraits exhibited at the academy. Other notable sitters included Winston Churchill (bronze, exh. RA, 1943). 
Reid Dick was created KCVO in 1935 and subsequently attended many private and public royal gatherings. In 1938 George VI appointed him sculptor-in-ordinary for Scotland (appointment continued 1952-61). He became an honorary Royal Scottish Academician in 1939. He made numerous memorials to George V, Queen Mary, and George VI at the royal residences at Windsor, Balmoral, and Sandringham. 
According to 'The Times' obituary, Reid Dick was stocky and robust in appearance, with quiet manners and a very soft voice. Alfred Munnings recalled him as 'a simple-minded, short, thick-set raw young Scot' (Munnings, 200). A witty conversationalist at ease in any company, he was liked and admired by his colleagues, and his wide circle of friends included many architects and artists. Straightforward, dynamic, and convivial, he combined a punishing workload with a social life which ranged from grand dinners and parties to the relaxed surroundings of the Chelsea Arts Club. During a bombing raid in 1944 the confident and unflappable Reid Dick, 'a strong tumbler of whisky in his hand, and several inside his body, defied the enemy, scorning to take cover as he leaned against the fireplace in the hall' (ibid., 188). 
Reid Dick served on many committees, including the Royal Mint advisory committee (1934-5), the council of the British School at Rome (1930s), and the council of the Royal Academy (1930s). He was also a trustee of the Tate Gallery (1934-41), a royal fine arts commissioner (appointed 1938), and a chairman of the sculpture committee for the London Olympic games in 1948. In 1933 he was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, receiving the society's Albert medal in 1948 for 'National Memorials in Living Stone'. 
Reid Dick was a major figure in academic sculpture, a consummate craftsman who combined respect for the past with a passionate search for new conventions. His firm belief that sculpture was at its best when related to architecture informed his entire career. Long dismissed as merely a reactionary monument maker devoid of creativity, critical reassessment by Benedict Read in 1986 revealed his true artistic importance. It lay, ironically, in the innovative stylization of form and material simplicity of his smaller pieces such as 'Madonna' (marble, exh. RA, 1922). This vital dash of modernity injected into the traditions of the academy was followed by further figurative experiment by artists such as Charles Sargeant Jagger, Charles Wheeler, and William Macmillan. 
William Reid Dick died at his home, 16 Maida Vale, London, on 1 October 1961 and was cremated on 4 October after a memorial service at Golders Green crematorium; his wife survived him. On 17 October 1963 a memorial tablet was unveiled in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral during a service attended by many artists and architects. The president of the Royal Academy, Sir Charles Wheeler, gave the oration. 


@@@@@


doc= 32814


Read, Grantly Dick- (1890-1959), obstetrician and promoter of natural childbirth, was born at Beccles, Suffolk, on 26 January 1890, the son of Robert John Read (1851-1920), a flour miller of Norwich, and his wife, Frances (Fanny) Maria Sayer (1855-1942), of the White House, Thurlton, Norfolk, which had been in the family since 1704. Dick-Read (the hyphen was assumed in 1958) was the sixth of seven children and the second of three brothers. An unexceptional student but a good athlete, Read went from Bishop's Stortford College to St John's College, Cambridge. After obtaining a third class in part one of the natural sciences tripos in 1911 he became a clinical medical student at the London Hospital, where he came under the influence of Eardley Holland, one of the outstanding obstetricians and gynaecologists of his day. He also worked under the neurologist Sir Henry Head, whose research into pain influenced Read. 
Less than a year after Read's arrival at the London Hospital he began treating the sick in some of the poorest areas of London. On one such visit he entered a small, damp, and poorly lit room in Whitechapel and delivered a woman of her first child. He recounted this event in his unpublished autobiography: 'As the baby's head made its appearance at the outlet of the birth canal and the dilatation of the passage was at a stage where I felt there should be discomfort and pain, I tried to persuade my patient to let me put the mask over her face so that she could inhale some chloroform. But the girl refused the mask, saying that she had no need of this help.' Later, as he was preparing to leave, he asked the woman why she refused assistance and she responded: 'It didn't hurt. It wasn't meant to, was it Doctor?' (Dick-Read, 2.20-21). This became his favourite story. It was also a turning point in his medical career, and although he came to influence women around the world he remained on the fringe of the medical profession. 
Read qualified in 1914 and immediately joined the Royal Army Medical Corps. While serving in Gallipoli he was badly injured and after recuperation served out the war in France. At the end of the First World War he returned to Cambridge University to assume a research post, and for a brief time he was demonstrator in pathology. He received his MD from Cambridge in 1920 and then spent a short time in private practice in Eastbourne before moving his practice to Woking with consulting-rooms in Harley Street, London. In 1921 he married Dorothea (Thea) Cannon (1899-1978), daughter of Neville Cannon, flour miller, of Bexley, Kent; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Read's first book, 'Natural Childbirth', was published in 1933. But his most famous and popular book was 'Revelation of Childbirth' published in 1942. It was published in the United States as 'Childbirth without Fear' in 1944. He wrote at least eight books and more than forty articles in support of the fear-tension-pain theory, and his books were translated into Dutch, Danish, German, Swedish, Italian, French, Afrikaans, Norwegian, Portuguese, and Spanish. As a result, from 1933 until his death in 1959 he received an avalanche of correspondence from women in Britain and the United States, as well as from the European countries, South America, and South Africa, suggesting that his ideas had worldwide influence on how women were having babies. In these works Read introduced the concept that relaxation at the onset of labour was the most effective means of experiencing a conscious, joyful, childbirth in 95-7 per cent of cases. He wrote that informing and educating women on what was happening to their bodies during pregnancy and labour would enable them to relax. Relaxation, he contended, would eliminate the fear and the tension brought on by lack of knowledge. As a result, if a woman felt pain it would not be significant enough to require drugs. 
Read wanted to become a member of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists but refused to sit for the required examination. However, the college offered him an opportunity to open a clinic in London in which he could put his natural childbirth theories into practice. He was offered a building suitable for delivering pregnant women and for teaching his methods of natural childbirth. Dissatisfied with the condition of the premises and their location in an area away from the major London hospitals, he turned down the offer and accused the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of professional jealousy. Read had an obstinate professional attitude, which contributed to his being an outcast among his peers. This led him to popularize his childbirth theories by appealing directly to the public and further alienating himself from the medical establishment. His former teacher and mentor, Sir Eardley Holland, brought this to his attention in a letter in 1949: 'I would urge you, though, with respect, to take more thought to win the sympathies of the Profession as distinct from the Public, and give more time and take more trouble in doing so.... you seem to have alienated the sympathies of the... Gynaecological world. Have you even considered that you yourself may be to some extent to blame for that -- sad state of affairs? You have sometimes tried even me very severely! (E. Holland to G. D. Read, 8 Jan 1949, Wellcome L., PP/GDR/D.150)' There is no indication that Read took this advice. In fact, his longed-for recognition in his own country and public honours from his peers and colleagues continued to elude him. 
In 1948 Read moved his practice to South Africa. After a lengthy legal battle with the government over his licence to practise medicine he attached himself to a hospital on the outskirts of Johannesburg, the Marymount Maternity Hospital, run by Dominican nuns. Four years after arriving in South Africa he obtained a divorce from his first wife, and married in 1952 Jessica Beatrice Bennett, daughter of Leigh Cosart Winters, a businessman; he adopted her two sons. 
In 1954 Read concluded that his work in South Africa had been completed, and, with his family, set out on a safari. His aim was to observe non-Westernized African women giving birth in their natural environment. At the end of this journey, which covered 6000 miles, he was totally satisfied that what he had said all along was true: Western civilization was responsible for the destruction of normal, natural childbirth. 
On returning to England in 1954 Read was no longer in practice but maintained a high public profile through his worldwide lectures. He considered one of the greatest moments of his later life to be in 1956, when the pope granted him an audience and presented him with the silver papal medal for his work on natural childbirth. Also in 1956 his long-playing record of a woman experiencing natural childbirth was released and the film he made of four women giving birth naturally before he left South Africa was shown on BBC television in 1957. In 1957 and 1958 he engaged in a strenuous and lengthy lecture tour in the United States. Dick-Read died after a short illness at his home, Heronby, Beech Road, Wroxham, Norfolk, on 11 June 1959, and was buried at Eaton cemetery, Norwich, following a funeral service at St Andrew's Church, Eaton. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 8 July 1959. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32815


Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes (1862-1932), scholar and advocate of a league of nations, was born on 6 August 1862 at Langham Chambers, near Oxford Circus, London, the third of the five children of Lowes Cato Dickinson (1819-1908) and his wife, Margaret Ellen (died 1882), daughter of William Smith Williams. The accountant Sir Arthur Lowes Dickinson (1859-1935) was his elder brother. His father, the portrait painter, was a Christian socialist who taught at the Working Men's College; his mother was related to the inventor Sir Goldsworthy Gurney, after whom her son was named, though in his circle it was always shortened to Goldie. Dickinson's career was in keeping with these intellectual and high-minded associations, especially from 1881 when, after several unhappy years at a preparatory school and Charterhouse School, he entered King's College, Cambridge, as an exhibitioner. At Cambridge he was elected to the Society of Apostles and fell under the influence of Oscar Browning (he later wrote on him for the 'Dictionary of National Biography'). He also became devoted to Shelley's poetry, the route by which he first approached politics. The visit to Cambridge of Henry George led him to read 'Progress and Poverty', and imbued by these ideas he spent the summer of 1885 working on a co-operative farm in Surrey. He had graduated in 1884 with first-class honours in classics, but returned to Cambridge in order, from idealistic motives, to study medicine -- an idea he gave up after a dissertation on Plotinus, on which he had been working at the same time, had secured for him a fellowship at King's College in 1887. He also lectured, from 1896 to 1920, at the London School of Economics, offering the same courses on political science that he taught at Cambridge. 
Among Dickinson's early books were 'Revolution and Reaction in Modern France' (1892) and 'The Development of Parliament during the Nineteenth Century' (1895), but he also wrote 'The Greek View of Life' (1896) as well as some works of imagination. His 'Letters from John Chinaman' (1901), which was widely noticed, might be included among the latter; purporting to be from a Chinese official (though Dickinson denied any attempt at deception), the letters were a means of criticizing Western society. Another form he used to explore ideas was the imaginary dialogue, most notably 'A Modern Symposium' (1905) in which thirteen men discussed from different standpoints the ideas of the time. He also wrote for the progressive journals of the period, including the 'Independent Review' which he had helped to set up in 1903. His academic standing led to two lecture tours in the United States, in 1901 and 1909. An Albert Kahn travelling fellowship enabled him to visit India (he was accompanied on this part of the journey by E. M. Forster), China, and Japan in 1912. With like-minded companions, he spent various holidays in several European countries. 
The advent of war affected Dickinson's outlook and activities profoundly. Before 1914 his espousal of progressive causes had not drawn him far into the public sphere, for which he had little liking. Thereafter most of his writings were intended to influence opinion and, although not by nature a political activist, he began to work against what he regarded as the international anarchy that had led to war. In the first weeks of the war he called for the establishment of a league of nations (a term he is believed to have coined). He was prominent in the Bryce Group, known as such from the involvement of Lord Bryce, although his friend Forster considered it would more justly have been called the Lowes Dickinson Group. His involvement in the Union of Democratic Control, a body more critical of the government, brought some obloquy, although not to the extent experienced by his friend Bertrand Russell. When Russell was stripped of his lectureship at Trinity College, Cambridge, Dickinson wrote in his defence. He also travelled to The Hague in 1915 and the United States in 1916 to promote his proposals. Inevitably, he was dissatisfied with the terms of the peace and in common with other critics of the war with whom he had been associated (such as J. A. Hobson, Arthur Ponsonby, and E. D. Morel) he moved towards the Labour Party; for a time he was a member of the party's advisory committee on international affairs. The war also resulted in his most substantial book, on which he worked for several years, 'The International Anarchy, 1904-1914' (1926). 
Dickinson retired from lecturing in 1920, but retained his fellowship of King's College and continued to live in rooms there. Until the end of his life he wrote prolifically, especially on Goethe and Plato, both the subjects of several radio broadcasts in 1930-31. In 1931 he published a memoir of an old friend, the philosopher J. M. E. McTaggart. In the same year 'Edward Carpenter as a friend' appeared, an essay that throws some light on his own socialism in the 1880s. 
Like his mentor Oscar Browning, Dickinson believed that fellows of colleges should encourage close friendships with undergraduates, and many were drawn by his charm and humour. Those who knew him well noticed a melancholy side to his outlook, in part a consequence of disappointed hopes for a higher diplomacy but also the result of personal circumstances. He candidly discussed the latter in some recollections, drawn on by E. M. Forster, his biographer, but not published until 1973. It was his intention in these, he noted, 'to tell what is usually not told', though he did so 'with the feeling that those who read, if they are what is called normal men, will not understand, and if they are homosexual, likely enough will find it absurd' ('Autobiography', 43, 89). Not only was Dickinson drawn to young heterosexual men, but his friendships were also coloured by a boot fetish. It was a side of his nature he expressed in verse form: '
We're alone, 

I and the youth I dream of as my own. 

He sits and at his feet I take my place, 

He plants them firmly on my neck and face, 

Both pleasing me and pleased himself at heart, 

Because he loves the domineering part. 

I snuff the scent of leather at my nose 

And squirm and wriggle as the pressure grows, 

While he, more masterful the more I gulp, 

Cries 'Quiet! or I'll tread you into pulp!' 
(ibid., 273)' Roger Fry was the first of five young men to whom Dickinson was particularly drawn. The last was Dennis Proctor, the editor of his recollections and the author of the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article on Dickinson, who wrote that each of the five 'did his best in his own way to assuage his physical desires' (ibid., 7). 
Most who knew Dickinson admired his passionate desire for the improvement of mankind and the sense of service that impelled him into the public sphere. Friends of all ages found him lovable, for the unhappiness brought by personal and political disappointments did not sour his gaiety and compassion. Even his foibles, such as his complaints that he always felt cold and what Kingsley Martin called 'the spite of 'so-called inanimate objects' which pestered him from the moment in the morning when he could not find his collar stud until the final discomfort of undressing at night' (Martin, 121), endeared him to others. Occasionally he exasperated, as when Virginia Woolf recalled Dickinson as 'Always alone on a mountain top asking himself how to live, theorising about life; never living... always Shelley and Goethe, and then he loses his hot water bottle'. In quoting these remarks, Leonard Woolf suggested Dickinson's 'thin vapour of gentle high-mindedness sometimes irritated her' (L. Woolf, 'Beginning Again: an Autobiography of the Years 1911-1918', 1964, 190-91). However, such strictures were untypical of his associates who saw in his thinking a wish to deal fairly with all points of view. This approach characterized too his religious beliefs: he was neither a Christian nor an atheist, but has been compared to a pilgrim who passed through phases of mysticism and religion. His short book 'The Magic Flute: a Fantasia' (1920) explored in allegorical form an idea that always attracted him, how to combine reason and faith. 
When in 1956 Forster gave a radio talk on Dickinson he suggested he was no longer much read or talked about even in King's College. This he regretted, 'not for his sake but because he has so much to offer' -- challenges and correctives that were still relevant (Forster, 212). Though gradually his reputation as a scholar lessened, a few of his books remained in print, including 'The Greek View of Life', issued as a 'University Paperback' in 1962, and 'A Modern Symposium'. His ability to gain the friendship of the young meant he was remembered for many years after his death. Those who were drawn to his personality acknowledged that his appearance was unprepossessing -- bald, thin-featured, and rather shabby, as Roger Fry showed him in a portrait of 1925. His lasting importance perhaps lies in his position as a member of the liberal-socialist intelligentsia of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, not least for his response to, and desire to learn from, the First World War. Dickinson died in Guy's Hospital, London, on 3 August 1932, following a prostate operation, and was cremated at Golders Green on 8 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 32816


Dickinson, Henry Winram (1870-1952), historian of engineering and technology, was born at Ulverston, Lancashire, on 28 August 1870, the eldest son of John Dickinson, general manager and secretary of the North Lonsdale Iron and Steel Company Ltd, and his wife, Margaret Anne, 'nee' Winram. From Victoria Grammar School at Ulverston he went to Manchester grammar school with a foundation scholarship. After a two-year engineering course at the University of Manchester, and four years' apprenticeship (1888-92) at the Parkhead steel works of William Beardmore & Co. Ltd, Glasgow, he became a draughtsman at the Glasgow Iron and Steel Company's Wishaw works and then assistant engineer at the Frodingham Iron and Steel Company. 
Dickinson's career was settled when he was twenty-five: in 1895 he was appointed by open competition junior assistant in the science department, South Kensington Museum, London, which became the Science Museum in 1909. On 15 June 1897 he married Edith (died 1937), youngest daughter of Richard Emerson, schoolmaster, of Low Dunsforth, Yorkshire. Their only son, Henry Douglas Dickinson (1899-1969), was later professor of economics at Bristol, 1951-64. Promoted assistant keeper in the machinery division in 1900, Dickinson was, in addition, made secretary to the advisory council in 1914. From 1915 to 1918 he was secretary of the munitions inventions panel at the Ministry of Munitions. On his return to the Science Museum he was promoted in 1924 keeper of mechanical engineering, taking charge of numerous industrial collections, including motive power. He supervised the erection of the original Newcomen type and Watt beam engines and many other historical exhibits in the museum's new eastern block, opened by George V in 1928, and was responsible for the transfer from Handsworth and the arrangement as a museum exhibit of the contents of James Watt's garret workshop. 
Dickinson represented the Board of Education in 1919 on the memorial committee to commemorate at Birmingham the centenary of the death of Watt. Resulting from this, Dickinson and other engineers founded in 1920 the Newcomen Society for the Study of the History of Engineering and Technology, named after Thomas Newcomen (died 1729) of Dartmouth, maker of the first successful steam engine using a piston in a cylinder. Dickinson was honorary secretary until 1951, except for two years (1932-4) when he was president. As sole editor of the 'Transactions' until 1950, he set a very high standard and the first twenty-five volumes are a lasting memorial of his devoted work. He was made secretary emeritus in 1951 for his very distinguished services in guiding the society for over thirty years, including the critical war period. After he retired from the Science Museum in 1930, his main interest was the Newcomen Society. During his career he presented twenty-three papers to it, and two to the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, of which he was a member for over fifty years. 
Dickinson was the British government's representative at the opening of the Deutsches Museum, Munich, in 1925; he served as president of the Croydon and Purley natural history and scientific societies, besides being a vice-president of the Cornish Engines Preservation Society. He made two lecture tours in the United States, in 1923 and 1938, and received the honorary degree of EngD from Lehigh University, Pennsylvania. On 31 May 1939 he married his second wife, Elsa Lees, eldest daughter of Frank Walker Burgan, railway traffic agent, of Saltburn by Sea, Yorkshire. He died at his home, 20 St James Road, Purley, Surrey, on 21 February 1952, survived by his wife. 
Dickinson was the author of definitive books on his favourite subjects: the biographies 'Robert Fulton' (1913), 'John Wilkinson' (1914), 'James Watt' (1936), and 'Matthew Boulton' (1937); the two memorial volumes 'James Watt and the Steam Engine' (with Rhys Jenkins, 1927) and 'Richard Trevithick' (with Arthur Titley, 1934); also 'A Short History of the Steam Engine' (1939). His series of articles in 'The Engineer' during 1948 was republished after his death as a memorial volume entitled 'Water Supply of Greater London' (1954). 
By his industrious researches and enthusiasm, tempered with sound judgement, Dickinson made a valuable contribution to establishing the history of technology on a firm basis and was one of the leading authorities on the evolution and application of steam power in the industrial revolution. He inspired others by his example and advice to undertake similar research. He lived modestly and was a lucid author and speaker, his knowledge being based on observation, systematic reading, travel, and the material in the Science Museum, for which he wrote several official catalogues. To perpetuate his memory, the Newcomen Society founded in 1954 the Dickinson biennial memorial lecture; the series was inaugurated by Charles Singer, who received the first Dickinson memorial medal. In 1956 the Newcomen Society in North America, inspired by Dr Charles Penrose, senior vice-president, erected a memorial tablet to Dickinson at the Thomas Newcomen Library, West Chester, Pennsylvania. 
Arthur Stowers', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32817


Dickinson, Hercules Henry (1827-1905), Church of Ireland clergyman, was the youngest son of Charles Dickinson (1792-1842), afterwards bishop of Meath, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Abraham Russell, of Limerick. He was born at Dublin on 14 September 1827. Two brothers, Charles and John Abraham, were in holy orders, and the eldest of his four sisters, Elizabeth, married John West, afterwards dean of St Patrick's Cathedral. Dickinson was educated at Dr Flynn's school, Harcourt Street, Dublin, and, from October 1845, at Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained a classical scholarship in 1848, graduated BA in 1850, and proceeded MA in 1856. He was ordained deacon by Archbishop Richard Whately, who was an old friend of his father's, became BD in 1852, and proceeded DD in 1866. In 1852 he became curate of St Ann's, Dublin, considered an important parish, and was appointed vicar there in 1855. He continued to minister St Ann's for forty-seven years. On 2 October 1867 he married Mary Mabel, the daughter of Dr Evory Kennedy of Belgard, co. Dublin. They had nine children. 
In 1868 Dickinson was appointed dean of the Chapel Royal, Dublin, in 1869 treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral, and in 1876 precentor. In 1894 the Irish bishops elected him to the chair of pastoral theology at Dublin University. For many years Dickinson was a prominent figure in Dublin clerical life: he was examining chaplain to successive archbishops, an active supporter of the Association for Promoting Christian Knowledge, chairman of the Dublin Clerical Association, a member of the Representative Church Body, and a frequent speaker at the annual meetings of the general synod, where his humour enlivened debates. He was an ardent advocate of temperance, and he served on the royal commission for licensing reform from 1896 to 1899. He was also an advocate of the higher education of women, and he helped Archbishop Richard Trench in the foundation in 1866 of Alexandra College, Dublin, of which he was warden for thirty-six years. 
Like his ecclesiastical patron, Dickinson was opposed to Tractarianism and was a strong supporter of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel at a time when it was not popular in Ireland. He was the author of 'Lectures on the Book of Common Prayer' (1859) and 'Scripture and Science' (1879), as well as occasional sermons and papers. He resigned his offices because of poor health in 1902, and died at his home, Baldonnel, Clondalkin, co. Dublin, on 17 May 1905. He was buried in Mount Jerome cemetery. Three decorated panels to his memory were placed in the chancel of St Ann's Church, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 32818


Dickinson, Lowes Cato (1819-1908), portrait painter, was born on 27 November 1819 at Kilburn, London, one of seven sons and four daughters of Joseph Dickinson, stationer and lithograph publisher, and his wife, Anne Carter of Topsham, Devon. He was educated at Topsham School and Dr Lord's school, Tooting, Surrey, and began earning a living working for his father's Bond Street business from the age of sixteen. In later correspondence Dickinson alludes to 'circumstances' that 'prevented [him] from following the bent of [his] inclination in early life' (letter to John Thompson, 10 March 1851, Dickinson, 62). One such circumstance may have been the administration of a drawing academy Dickinson had established with his brother Robert, which was attended by Ford Madox Brown in 1848. 
With the help of Captain (later General) Robert Michael Laffan, Dickinson travelled to Italy where he lived from November 1850 to June 1853. His desire to be a practising artist was often quelled by a 'morning's reflection... that I have begun to paint too late in life' (Dickinson, 40). However, Dickinson remained optimistic, filling his correspondence with vivid descriptions of Rome and Genoa, anecdotes of the more interesting people he encountered, and reflections on Italian culture. The more rigorous practice of Catholicism in Rome led him to 'quite respect, esteem and honor' Roman Catholicism in England as the 'essence of purity and good sense' (ibid.). 
On returning to London in 1853 Dickinson took a studio in Langham Chambers. According to Dante Gabriel Rossetti, his rooms were more handsome than those later acquired by John Everett Millais. When not working in his studio, Dickinson visited at Weybridge, Surrey, the early Christian socialist Archibald Campbell, whom he had met and befriended in Italy. In 1851 Campbell acquainted Dickinson with F. D. Maurice's plans to establish a college for working men. The Christian socialist ideals espoused by Maurice changed Dickinson's 'ideal of life': 'the life of pleasure was not a noble, and might be a very useless one' (Davies, 26). He joined the lawyer Tom Hughes, the writer Charles Kingsley, Maurice, and others as founding members of the London Working Men's College. Together with Ruskin, Dickinson conducted the first art classes, which met on Thursday evenings, from seven to nine o'clock. These classes were subdivided into three sections shortly after Rossetti began teaching at the college in 1855; Dickinson and Ruskin taught elementary and landscape classes, while Rossetti taught figure and colour drawing. Dickinson was characterized by J. P. Emslie as 'an influence for good in the midst of a somewhat disturbed atmosphere' (ibid., 46). He 'never indulged in the profuse praise of which his two colleagues were so liberal, but would point out to a student the very spot in his drawing which was weak, and then show him how to amend it' (ibid., 47). 
On 15 October 1857 Dickinson married Margaret Ellen (died 1882), daughter of William Smith Williams, literary adviser to the publisher George Smith, at All Souls Church, St Marylebone, London, and enjoyed a happy and active family life. In 1864 they took a cottage at Hanwell, Essex, where they lived until 1879. Dickinson continued teaching for some eleven or twelve years after Ruskin retired, during which time Madox Brown, Stacy Marks, Cave Thomas, Edward Burne-Jones, V. Prinsep, and Arthur Hughes also came to teach. 
Despite his experience as a teacher, Dickinson often doubted his competence, and struggled with his own limitations as a painter which he felt imposed limits on his teaching. Emslie noted, however, that while in the classroom 'in a couple of hours he would have painted a picture some eighteen inches square... a picture full of colour, light and texture' (ibid., 47-8). He also possessed a 'gift for posthumous portraiture in crayons' (Dickinson, vi). He painted many portraits of writers including George Eliot (1872; NPG), the politician Richard Cobden (NPG), lawyers, divines, and men of letters and science. He is perhaps best-known for his portraits of Maurice (1862; London Working Men's College), Charles Kingsley (1862; NPG), and Tom Hughes (1862; London Working Men's College), painted for the college. His first portraits of these close friends and colleagues were completed in 1858 at the request of the publisher Alexander Macmillan, who also sat to Dickinson for a portrait in crayons. His portrait of General Gordon at Khartoum hung in the Gordon Boys' Home, Worthing; that of George Peabody, merchant and founder of the Peabody Institute, is now in the Peabody Institute, Schapiro House, Johns Hopkins University, Maryland. Dickinson regularly exhibited portraits at the Royal Academy from 1848 to 1891. Through his friend Augustus Vansittart he established a connection with Cambridge, where many of his portraits hung in college halls. 
In 1860 Dickinson took an active part in the formation of the Artists' volunteer rifle corps, of which he was treasurer. In 1879 he built a house, 1 All Souls Place, off Portland Place, St Marylebone, London, where he lived until his death there on 15 December 1908. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His children and colleagues remembered the 'tender expression of his eyes and tones of his gentle voice', his 'beautiful face, white hair and beard' (Dickinson, vi). C. P. Lucas wrote that 'If ever a man had and kept to the end, the heart of a little child, it was Mr. Lowes Dickinson... He saw beauty and goodness in everything' (Lucas, 27-8). In 1909 his two sons and five daughters founded the Lowes Dickinson memorial studentship at the London Working Men's College for the study of art abroad. His portrait of his son Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson (1862-1932), scholar, is in the National Portrait Gallery. His other son was the accountant Sir Arthur Lowes Dickinson (1859-1935). 


@@@@@


doc= 32819


Dicksee, Sir Francis Bernard (1853-1928), historical genre and portrait painter, was born in London on 27 November 1853. He was the elder son of the painter and illustrator Thomas Francis Dicksee (1819-1895) and his wife, Eliza, the daughter of John Bernard, of Church Place, Piccadilly, London; his uncle John Robert Dicksee (1817-1905) was also a painter. Dicksee was educated at the Revd George Henslow's school, Bloomsbury. He studied art with his father and from 1870 to 1875, at the Royal Academy Schools where he showed early promise, winning gold and silver medals. While still a student, Dicksee exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists in Suffolk Street in 1872; he began to exhibit regularly at the Royal Academy from 1876, when he showed 'Elijah confronting Ahab and Jezebel in Naboth's Vineyard', for which he had been awarded the Royal Academy's gold medal the previous year. 
Dicksee's art was firmly rooted in Pre-Raphaelite concepts. Along with the illustrator and designer Walter Crane, the painter and designer Henry Holiday, and the painter J. W. Waterhouse, he was influenced by Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris. The romantic, dreamlike visions that they espoused are epitomized by Dicksee's best-known work, 'La Belle Dame sans Merci' (Bristol Art Gallery). Dicksee worked for some time under Holiday, who is perhaps best-known for his stained glass designs. He learned much from Holiday's interpretation of Pre-Raphaelitism and incorporated into his allegorical painting 'Harmony' (exh. RA, 1877; Tate collection) a stained-glass window that could have been designed by Holiday. Equally, the organ case, seen on the left of the painting, might have been designed by William Morris's firm -- as Graham Reynolds points out, the scene is more akin to a St John's Wood studio than a medieval home. Dicksee was only twenty-four when this painting, which depicts a young woman in medieval costume playing an organ while a young man listens in rapt attention, met with great success at the Royal Academy exhibition. It was hailed as 'picture of the year' and was purchased by the Chantrey trustees for 350 guineas. 'The House Builders' (1880; priv. coll.), a large painting showing Sir William and Lady Welby-Gregory examining the plans and model of Denton Manor (dem.) built for them by A. W. Blomfield between 1879 and 1884, has itself been interpreted as a model of Victorian architectural patronage (see Physick and Derby, 152). 
Early in his career Dicksee also illustrated books and magazines. The best-known of these are probably those for Longfellow's 'Evangeline' (1882) and for Cassell's 'royal' editions of Shakespeare: 'Romeo and Juliet' (1884) and 'Othello' (1889). Several of his woodcut illustrations for the 'Cornhill Magazine' are in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
In 1881 Dicksee was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, and in 1891 he became a full academician. His diploma work, 'Startled', was deposited in 1892. It depicts two nude girls -- one a child, the other an adolescent -- rushing from their bathing place, covered only by loosely held diaphanous robes, as a boat approaches. Dicksee had found a profitable niche, and continued to paint similarly titillating and ephemeral subjects for many years to come. He was not an innovative artist and frequently borrowed compositions from artists he knew and admired. Thus in a portrait of Lady Inverclyde of 1910 (Glasgow Museum and Art Gallery) he utilized a pose (albeit in reverse) derived from D. G. Rossetti's painting of Jane Morris, 'Mariana' (Aberdeen Art Gallery), of forty years earlier. The exotically sensual women depicted in 'The Magic Crystal' (1894; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight) and 'Passion' (or 'Leila') owe much to the powerful, almost masculine women who populate the paintings of Frederic Leighton. The ghostly figure in 'A Reverie' (1895; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool) was clearly inspired by Millais's earlier 'Speak Speak' (1895; Tate collection). 
Dicksee did not restrict himself to an imagined past but repeated his favoured composition, the interaction of two romantically paired figures, in modern moralizing scenes, such as 'The Crisis' (1891; Melbourne Art Gallery) and 'The Confession', in which a young woman dressed in white is seen awaiting the reaction of her husband to whom she has confessed. Occasionally, however, he moved away from this format to paint large, intricate compositions, such as the dramatic 'Funeral of a Viking' (1893; Manchester City Galleries). 
Dicksee was a strident opponent of modern art. His retrogressive stance, however, did not adversely affect his popularity. In his own lifetime his paintings achieved high prices at auction -- the record for his work being set by 'Too Late' (1883), bought for $997 10's'. at the A. Shuttleworth sale at Christies on 3 May 1890. In 1900 he won a gold medal at the Universal Exhibition, and the same year his painting entitled 'The Two Crowns' (Tate collection) was purchased by the Chantrey trustees for $2000. Even into the 1920s he continued to exhibit and sell sentimental, melodramatic paintings that had not changed significantly from his much earlier work, such as 'The End of the Quest' (1921; Leighton House, London) and 'This for Remembrance' (1924; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool). Dicksee's romantic scenes found favour with his female audience and for a time he was also a fashionable portrait painter, especially for women, though towards the end of the century his melancholy style was eclipsed by John Singer Sargent's 'swagger' school of portrait painting. 
In 1924 Dicksee was elected president of the Royal Academy. He was knighted in 1925 and in the following year was nominated by the newly elected chancellor of Oxford University, Viscount Cave, for the honorary degree of DCL. He was created KCVO in 1927. He was a trustee of the British Museum and the National Portrait Gallery and president of the Artists' General Benevolent Association. He died, unmarried, on 17 October 1928, at the Cambridge Nursing Home, 4 Dorset Square, London. A retrospective selection of his works was included in the Royal Academy winter exhibition of 1933. 


@@@@@


doc= 32820


Dickson, Sir Collingwood (1817-1904), army officer, born at Valenciennes, France, on 20 November 1817, was the third son of Major-General Sir Alexander Dickson (1777-1840) and Eulalia (died 1830), daughter of Don Stefano Briones of Minorca. Educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery on 18 December 1835, and promoted first lieutenant on 29 November 1837. In February 1837 he went to Spain with the artillery detachment of the British Legion under Sir George De Lacy Evans. He served with the legion and the Christinist army until after the defeat of the Carlists near Berga in 1840, and was made a knight of Charles III, of San Fernando (first class), and of Isabella the Catholic. 
In March 1841 Dickson went to Constantinople to instruct the Turkish artillery, and remained there until June 1845, employed under the British Foreign Office. He was promoted second captain on 1 April 1846, and brevet major on 22 May. He married on 14 January 1847 Harriet, daughter of Thomas Burnaby, vicar of Blakesley, Northamptonshire. They had three sons, two of whom predeceased him. He became first captain on 2 September 1851, and was inspector of gunpowder at Waltham Abbey from 1 July 1852 to 14 February 1854. 
Dickson served in the Crimea from June 1854 to July 1855. At the battle of the Alma he was on Lord Raglan's staff; when Raglan rode forward to a knoll on the Russian flank and asked for guns there, Dickson brought up two 9-pounders and helped to serve them. Their fire forced the Russian batteries guarding the post-road to retire. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel from that date, 20 June 1854. He commanded the siege-train of the right attack during the siege of Sevastopol up to 21 July 1855. In the first bombardment on 17 October 1854 the siege batteries ran short of powder, and Dickson directed several field-battery wagons to be brought up under a heavy fire and helped unload them; for this action he received the Victoria Cross on 23 June 1855. 
At the battle of Inkerman, Dickson, after Colonel Gambier was wounded, brought up the two 18-pounders which dominated the Russian guns. He chose the site for them, and maintained them there, though he was urged by French officers to withdraw. When the Russians retreated, Lord Raglan said to him: 'You have covered yourself with glory' (Kinglake, 5.439). He was wounded on 4 February, but took part in the bombardments of 9 April and 17 June and in the expedition to Kerch. He was mentioned in dispatches, made aide-de-camp to the queen on 29 June 1855, and received the CB, the Legion d'honneur, and the Mejidiye (second class). 
From September 1855 until the end of the war Dickson was employed with the Turkish contingent, first as brigadier-general and latterly with the temporary rank of major-general (15 February 1856). After the war he was assistant adjutant-general for artillery in Ireland for six years from 4 November 1856, and was then at Leith Fort for five years in command of the Royal Artillery. He was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel on 23 February 1856, and regimental colonel on 5 April 1866. Four months later he became major-general. In 1868-9 he served on the fortifications committee, which investigated the work carried out under the Palmerston loan for defences, and enlivened its proceedings by his anecdotes and humour. 
From April 1870 to 1875 Dickson was inspector-general of artillery. The adoption of rifled guns had caused great changes in artillery, and he therefore went through courses at Woolwich arsenal and at Shoeburyness. His inspections were thorough, but everyone felt the charm of his personality. He was made KCB on 20 May 1871, and he became colonel-commandant on 17 November 1875, lieutenant-general on 8 June 1876, and general on 1 October 1877. In May 1877 he went as military attache to Constantinople, where his old friend Sir Austen Henry Layard was ambassador. Collingwood remained in Turkey throughout the Russo-Turkish War, until 9 September 1879. He was president of the ordnance committee (1881-5), though he was retired on 20 November 1884. On 24 May 1884 he received the GCB. He was master gunner from 1891 until his death. 
Collingwood's wife died in February 1894, and thereafter he lived a retired life at 79 Claverton Street, London. He died there on 28 November 1904 and was buried at Kensal Green. He was a good linguist, fluent in French, Spanish, and Turkish, and a man of 'downright commonsense'. He closely and affectionately studied the traditions of his regiment. 


@@@@@


doc= 32821


Dickson, Sir James Robert (1832-1901), politician in Australia, was born at Plymouth, England, on 30 November 1832, the only son of James Dickson and his wife, Mary Maria, 'nee' Palmer. He was educated at the Glasgow high school, then worked as a clerk in the City of Glasgow Bank. In 1854 he emigrated to Victoria, entering the Bank of Australasia, and on 8 November 1855 he married Annie Ely (1838-1880); his second wife was Mary MacKinlay (1841-1900), whom he married on 5 January 1882. About 1859 he joined his merchant cousin's firm, Rae Dickson & Co. In 1862 he moved to Queensland, working with an estate agent; in the early 1870s Dickson opened his own firm which actively participated in the subdivision and building boom that characterized the development of Brisbane, especially in the early 1880s. As a leading auctioneer he held executive positions in four financial and property institutions. 
Dickson was elected to the legislative assembly in 1873, winning the seat of Enoggera. He was appointed secretary for public works and mines in 1876, then treasurer, until 1879. After a trip to England, on 31 December 1883 he was chosen (for his commercial experience and as a friend) as colonial treasurer in the Griffith ministry. Here he was involved in obtaining large overseas loans, especially for railways and immigration. He resigned in 1887 in protest against Griffith's proposed land tax, which, since it was to be levied on freehold only, Dickson considered to be a 'class tax with a vengeance'. Standing for re-election he won handsomely, but at the general elections of 1888 he was defeated for the seat of Toombul. 
After a stay in Europe between 1889 and 1891, Dickson returned to political life in Queensland. Aligned with the ministerialist cause, he promoted the issue of resuming the importation of Melanesian indentured labourers to work the sugar fields. In a by-election in 1892 he won the seat of Bulimba. He resumed ministerial rank in 1897 as secretary for railways; later postmaster-general was added. In 1898 he was appointed home secretary. When premier Byrnes died suddenly, Dickson, as a stopgap measure, was chosen as premier, chief secretary, and home secretary on 1 October 1898. He held these posts until 1 December 1899. 
In 1899 Dickson played a most influential role in bringing Queensland into the federation of the Australian colonies. Although he had been a Queensland representative at meetings of the federal council of Australasia in 1886, 1888, and 1897, from the mid-1890s there had been a general waning of interest in federation on the part of Queenslanders. While attending the premiers' conference on federation held at Melbourne in January 1899, Dickson secured two amendments in Queensland's favour. At the elections held in 1899 his manifesto proclaimed that federation should be accepted by the people on the 'broad basis of national will'. Through strenuous electioneering and political promises he helped considerably to obtain a 'yes' vote at the referendum held in September. He was chosen in 1900 as Queensland's representative among the Australian delegates attending the London meeting where the final details of the new commonwealth were worked out. Here Dickson stood apart from senior Australian colleagues in his desire to retain some form of appeal to the privy council. 
Although generally a staunch supporter of Griffith's liberal approach, much of Dickson's political thinking was governed by considerations of expediency. He was also a keen advocate of the imperial cause; accordingly, in 1899 he readily committed Queensland troops to the South African War. Described as 'rather sententious in manner', as 'stiff and punctilious', and a 'tedious and monotonous' speaker with a 'complaining or querulous' tone, Dickson was also noted as being capable and courteous, and wisely attentive to the press. He enjoyed a full life, residing most of his time in Toorak House, 16 Anne Street, Hamilton, Brisbane; and he was a very staunch high-church Anglican. He was appointed CMG in 1897 and KCMG in 1901, and he was chosen to be the first minister of defence in Barton's new federal administration. He travelled to Sydney for the inauguration celebrations, became ill, and died on 10 January 1901 at the Australian Club, Sydney, after attending the first cabinet meeting. He was buried in the Nundah cemetery, Brisbane, and was survived by six sons and seven daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 32822


Dickson, William Purdie (1823-1901), theologian and translator, was the third son of George Dickson, Church of Scotland minister of Pettinain, and afterwards of Kilrenny, Fife, and his first wife, Mary Lockhart; he was born at Pettinain manse, Lanarkshire, on 22 October 1823. After attending Pettinain parish school and the grammar school at Lanark, he studied at St Andrews (1837-44) for the ministry of the Church of Scotland. A high prizeman in Greek, at the Divinity Hall he gained in 1843 the Gray prize for an English essay. On 5 May 1845 he was licensed as a preacher by St Andrews presbytery, and he retained his first charge at Grangemouth, Stirlingshire, from 1846 to 1851. On 9 September 1851 Dickson was ordained minister of Cameron parish, St Andrews, where he remained until 1863. During this time Dickson lectured at the university, helped to reorganize the library, and was examiner for classics in 1861-2. He was a lifelong friend of the principal John Tulloch. On 7 December 1853 Dickson married Tassie Wardlaw, daughter of John Small, the Edinburgh University librarian; they had two daughters and a son. 
From 1863 to 1873 Dickson held the new chair of biblical criticism in Glasgow University, and from 1873 until his retirement in 1895 he was professor of divinity, having succeeded John Caird. His theology was unoriginal and he was critical of the new 'higher criticism' influencing biblical scholarship. From 1866 to his death he was curator of Glasgow University Library, the post having been created for him; in this capacity he was responsible for the printing of a new catalogue, the rearrangement of the library according to subject, and the introduction of an alphabetic catalogue. He was president of the Library Association in 1888. From 1875 to 1888 he was the convener of the education committee of the Church of Scotland, but he twice declined nomination as moderator of the general assembly. He was made DD by both St Andrews (in 1864) and Glasgow University (in 1896) and honorary LLD by Edinburgh (in 1885). He was Church of Scotland Baird lecturer in 1883. While minister of Cameron, Dickson began the translation of Mommsen's 'History of Rome' (1862-6), with the author's permission. Mommsen reviewed the translation and added comments which are not in his original work. A second and revised edition appeared in 1895. Dickson's translation of Mommsen's 'Provinces of the Roman Empire' followed in 1887. He also edited the translation of Meyer's 'Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament' (10 vols., 1873-80). In 1889 he published a pamphlet arguing against the proposals for universal free education, and he wrote other articles on the subjects of education and theology. 
Dickson died at 16 Victoria Crescent, Glasgow, on 9 March 1901, and was buried in the Glasgow necropolis. 


@@@@@


doc= 32823


Digby, William (1849-1904), journalist and social campaigner, the third son of William Digby and his wife, Ann Drake, was born on 1 May 1849 at Walsoken, Wisbech, Cambridgeshire. Mostly self-taught, Digby became an apprentice in the office of the 'Isle of Ely and Wisbech Advertiser' at the age of fifteen in 1864. He subsequently became chief reporter of the 'Sussex Advertiser', before leaving England in 1871 for Colombo to take up the post of sub-editor of the 'Ceylon Observer'. There he advocated temperance and successfully campaigned for the abolition of revenue farming. Digby also advocated free trade, publishing 'The Food Taxes of Ceylon' (1875), and was made an honorary member of the Cobden Club in 1878. As official shorthand writer for the legislative council, he prepared six volumes of the Ceylon 'Hansard' (1871-6). He also published 'Forty Years of Official and Unofficial Life in a Crown Colony' (2 vols., 1879), a biography of Sir Richard F. Morgan, acting chief justice in Ceylon. In 1874 Digby married Ellen Amelia, only daughter of Captain Little of Wisbech; she died in June 1878. The couple had one son, William Pollard, who became an electrical engineer. 
In 1877 Digby moved to India and assumed the editorship of the 'Madras Times'. He used his influence to call for the alleviation of the great famine in south India. Largely owing to his representations a relief fund was opened at the Mansion House in London, and $820,000 was subscribed. Digby was active as honorary secretary in India of the executive committee, which distributed relief through 120 local committees. He was made CIE on 1 January 1878. His 'Famine Campaign in Southern India' (2 vols., 1878) is a graphic portrayal of the hunger and distress suffered by the local population. On returning to England in 1879, Digby married, in December, Sarah Maria (died 1899), eldest daughter of William Hutchinson, a former mayor of Wisbech. He edited the 'Liverpool and Southport Daily News' for a few months in 1880 before becoming, until 1882, editor of the 'Western Daily Mercury' at Plymouth. From November 1882 until 1887 he was secretary of the newly founded National Liberal Club in London. He stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for North Paddington in 1885 and South Islington in 1892. 
In 1887 Digby became senior partner of William Hutchinson & Co., East India agents and merchants, a firm he established in conjunction with his wife's family. Meanwhile he pursued in the press and on the platform the campaign for extending self-government to Indians. In 1885 he published 'India for the Indians -- and for England', setting out his ideas chiefly on Indian reform. In 1888 he founded, and until 1892 also directed, an Indian political agency in London, which distributed information on behalf of Indian interest groups in Britain. Digby also became, in 1889, secretary to the newly constituted British committee of the Indian National Congress, and edited the committee's journal, 'India' (1890-92). In 'Prosperous British India' (1901) he attacked the economic consequences of the empire, claiming to prove a steady growth of poverty among the majority of Indians under British rule. Digby died from nervous exhaustion at 50 Weymouth Street, London, on 24 September 1904, and was buried at Bromley Hill cemetery by the side of his second wife; they had a daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom, Everard, became editor of the 'Indian Daily News' in Calcutta. 


@@@@@


doc= 32824


Dilke, Sir Charles Wentworth, second baronet (1843-1911), writer and politician, was born in London on 4 September 1843 at 76 Sloane Street, on the edge of Belgravia and Chelsea, which house he was to inherit from his father, (Charles) Wentworth Dilke, first baronet (1810-1869), in 1869, and in which he was to live until his own death forty-two years later. He also inherited enough property, much of it in the form of two literary publications, 'The Athenaeum' and 'Notes and Queries', as well as more specialized publications, including the 'Gardeners' Chronicle' and the 'Agricultural Gazette', to bring him an income of $6000-8000 of mid-Victorian money. The first baronet (created 1862) was one of the commissioners for the Great Exhibition of 1851, and was subsequently regarded, in an age of exhibitions, as an exhibition expert. He was in St Petersburg as British commissioner for a horticultural exhibition when he died. He was also briefly MP for Wallingford. But despite these attributes he was not greatly esteemed by his elder son (who subsequently wrote of him: 'brain-power wasted and heart misunderstood'), and as a result exercised comparatively little influence upon him. Nor did the second baronet's mother have much obvious formative effect. She was Mary, daughter of William Chatfield, a captain in the Madras cavalry. She entered a decline when her second son, Ashton Wentworth Dilke (the explorer), was born, and died when her elder son was ten. 
The family figure who was most influential in the upbringing of the second baronet was his grandfather, yet another Charles Wentworth Dilke (1789-1864), a prominent literary figure; together, for instance, they visited every English cathedral, as well as a great number of other English and French sights. The boy's health (although it was perfectly good from the age of eighteen onwards) was judged too delicate for him to go normally to school; he was taught mainly at home by a variety of tutors and relatives. 
To compensate for any deficiencies Dilke was open to a wide range of cosmopolitan culture and fashion. He heard and saw all the great mid-century actors and singers, both in London and in Paris. At the age of eleven and in the first flush of display of the Second Empire he was taken to Paris for four months, and managed to observe everything from the great balls to military tattoos and gala performances at the Opera and the Theatre Francais. He became strongly Francophone and francophile, and in subsequent summers in Normandy mingled with the fringes of the imperial family. In England he was also exposed to a remarkable range of acquaintanceship for a boy, but here it was more to men of solid achievement -- literary, scientific, or commercial -- than to the beau monde. Thackeray, Browning, Joseph Paxton, Robert Stephenson the engineer, Joseph Martin the painter, and John Forster the historian, all made an imprint upon him. When he said near the end of his life: 'I have known everyone worth knowing from 1850 until my death', he was not being modest, which was not in his nature, but nor was he exaggerating foolishly. When he arrived at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, his first and only educational institution, in the autumn of 1862, he had absorbed only a patchy academic instruction but a remarkable knowledge of the world. 
At Cambridge, Dilke devoted himself with almost excessive dedication to three interests: the tripos, the river, and the union (debating society), and achieved considerable success in all three. In Trinity Hall the dominant influence was Leslie Stephen, and Dilke attuned easily to his anti-emotional, muscular, competitive approach to work and games. Switching from mathematics to law after his first year, Dilke became senior legalist, the highest distinction in the university open to a law student. At rowing, which he had never done before, he stroked the Trinity Hall boat and saw it go head of the river; he recorded that he was offered a place in the university boat, but was made by his doctor to decline because of the long course on the London tideway. In the union he was not only president for two terms (his re-election was unusual) but left a more permanent mark by being mainly responsible for building the gabled Gothic premises which have since been its home. 
Dilke remained at Cambridge until the spring of 1866, when he was twenty-two, and then paused only to be called to the bar as a member of the Middle Temple (though he never practised) before leaving in June for a North American tour which extended itself into a year-long excursion around the world, taking in New Zealand, Australia, India, and Egypt. One result of this tour was by far the most successful of the eight books which he wrote in the course of his life. 'Greater Britain' was published in the early autumn of 1868, quickly ran through four editions, and remained in print and widely read for nearly half a century. Its title was chosen to encapsulate not only his itinerary but a large part of his political philosophy. He had 'followed England round the world', and the conclusions he drew from his journey were at once radical and racialist. He was for what he regarded as British energy and superiority, but against such archaic British institutions as the monarchy and an oligarchic parliament. The United States, although he maintained a sharp edge of criticism during his four months there, greatly excited him. 'America offers the English race the moral directorship of the globe', he wrote, 'by ruling mankind through Saxon institutions and the English tongue. Through America, England is speaking to the world.' He carried his views to the logical conclusion that Canada should sever the London connection. 
Yet (in relation to the American Indians) he could express with pride the brutally harsh view that 'the Anglo-Saxon is the only extirpating race on earth'; he believed in 'the defeat of the cheaper by the dearer peoples', and he constructed an elaborate theory that the banana was the most dangerous crop -- you could live on it, raw or fried, but do nothing constructive with it. Thus it offered the fatal prospect of a soft life in a soft climate. Despite such occasional excursions into fantasy his picture of America in the immediate lee of the civil war was a brilliant and memorable one, whether he was writing about Washington, with the unfinished dome of the Capitol rising above the swamp town along the Potomac, or of mammon-ridden New York, whose drawing rooms were already the most exclusive (but not the most distinguished) in the world, or of Boston (much superior), where Emerson, Longfellow, and Agassiz held sway, or of Cincinnati, where the cholera was killing 200 a day, or of the great hardships and dangers of a transcontinental journey three years before the railway link was completed. It was much the best part of the book. 

'Greater Britain' brought Dilke much attention. Gladstone read and carefully annotated his copy (though referring to it in his diary as Dilke's 'Greater World'). J. S. Mill, hitherto a stranger, was captivated by it, and for the remaining four years of his life was Dilke's principal mentor. Within a few weeks of publication Dilke was elected to parliament as a radical Liberal at the top of the poll for the two-member constituency of Chelsea. He was part of a Liberal majority of 112 which made Gladstone prime minister for the first time. He was only just twenty-five and his prospects seemed dazzling. 
A future of climbing smoothly and gradually up the ladder of conventional political success did not, however, fit in with Dilke's predilections, which were at once generous and arrogant. He took one small step up the ladder when, in February 1870, he was chosen by Gladstone to second the address, but for the most part he preferred to criticize the government for being too cautious, to work with a semi-detached group of more or less rebellious radicals, and to promote his own pet (and worthy) measures of reform. Thus in 1869 he played a leading part both in restoring to women ratepayers the right to vote in municipal elections, which they had lost in 1835, and in securing the abolition of hanging, drawing, and quartering in New Zealand. In 1870 he was one of the sharpest critics of W. E. Forster's 'Elementary Education Bill'. On this he came into conflict not only with the high-Anglican approach of the prime minister but also with the nonconformist simple ''Bible'-teaching' approach of his normal provincial radical allies. He was more a secularist than he was a protestant, and he was the only Liberal member to vote against the Cowper-Temple compromise. Dilke was much more in the radical mainstream when he moved a crucial amendment providing that the new school boards should be directly elected rather than committees of the existing boards of guardians. The beginning of his close partnership and friendship with Joseph Chamberlain sprang out of his work on this bill and Chamberlain's first political foray as the animator of the National Education League. 
In the autumn of 1871 Dilke's good fortune for almost the first, but by no means the last, time in his life deserted him. He had long been a theoretical republican, although not a very actively proselytizing one. In that year, however, provoked by the continued invisibility of the queen ten years into her widowhood, the lack of respect commanded by the prince of Wales, and the frequent applications to parliament for allowances or dowries for royal children, he decided to use a series of constitutional addresses in provincial cities for the deployment of a somewhat tentative republican case. He began at Newcastle in early November, and made enough impact to provoke a heavily rebuking 'Times' leader. Much more damaging to him than this, however, was the dramatic recovery of the prince of Wales from typhoid. The prince accomplished more for the popularity of the monarchy in 1871 than during the whole of his previous thirty years of life. 
Meanwhile Dilke had to continue with his speaking programme, from Bristol to Leeds to Bolton and Birmingham, in an increasingly hostile climate. He also felt that he could not abandon the issue without repeating in the House of Commons what he had said outside. It took him some months to get a day, then on 19 March 1872 he went down to defeat by 276 votes to 2, and abandoned the subject with relief. It cost him a year or two of semi-ostracism in parliament and society, and the hostility of the queen for the remaining thirty years of her reign. 
In the early 1870s there were two other disparate ingredients in his life which showed that Dilke was not exactly as other men were. During the Franco-Prussian War he demonstrated the cosmopolitan adventurer side of his character. In late July and August 1870 he travelled with the Prussian army and was present on most of the battlefields of their victorious campaign. Then he switched sides, or at least location, and was in Paris on 4 September for the fall of the empire and the proclamation of the republic. During the subsequent nine months of siege and commune he was in and out of Paris and the trajectories of the shells of different nations and ideologies. 
Then, between January 1872 and September 1874, there was the brief interlude of Dilke's first marriage. His wife was Katherine Mary Eliza Sheil, the daughter of a long-dead Captain Arthur Gore Sheil of the 89th foot; from her mother, also dead, a member of an old Devon family, the Wises, she had acquired property and connection in Devon. She possessed, according to Dilke, an unusual combination of attributes: extreme attractiveness of appearance, vivacity, intimidating violence of temper, and debilitating ill health. She sang and she played croquet to professional standards. They were married suddenly and semi-secretly on 30 January 1872. In December 1873 the Dilkes went to Monte Carlo, with Kate recovering from the death of a stillborn son; there Dilke wrote 'The Fall of Prince Florestan' (1874), a picaresque novel. At the time of the marriage there was little suggestion that they were seriously in love with each other; yet when Kate died in childbirth on 20 September 1874 Dilke became deranged -- 'When I was mad', he later wrote of the period. 
Dilke fled to Paris, shaved off his beard, and lived in secret isolation for six weeks, until he was recognized in the street by Leon Gambetta. Gambetta was a genuine friend who brought him back to sanity. But it was typical of Dilke that, even in such a condition of disarray, it should be the most famous Frenchman of the day who found him. He spent most of December and January in north Africa, became a teetotaller (which he remained for eleven years) and a vegetarian, and returned to London, though remaining in an enfeebled condition until Easter, for the beginning of the parliamentary session in 1875. During his four and a half months' absence he had left everything in London, including the naming and baptism of his new-born son, to be settled by his grandmother. At least the name caused her little problem: he became the fourth Charles Wentworth Dilke, but added no lustre to the name before his early death in 1918. 
Dilke himself had a successful summer in the House of Commons, initiating four debates, each of which paved the way for future reforms. He also renewed an interrupted friendship with the notable historian of French art who, ten years later, was to become his second wife ['see 'Dilke, Emilia Francis (1840-1904)]. She had been born Emilia Francis Strong, the daughter of Major Henry Strong of the Indian army, was three years older than Dilke, and was currently unhappily married to Mark Pattison, rector of Lincoln College, Oxford. Having thus re-established both his parliamentary and his emotional bearings, Dilke left for a second world trip, taking in America, Japan, China, and Singapore between August 1875 and January 1876. 
During the four years that intervened between his return and the Liberal victory in the spring of 1880, Dilke's most important activity was the forging of an alliance between himself and Joseph Chamberlain. Chamberlain, after his not altogether successful foray with the National Education League, had been a brilliantly constructive mayor of Birmingham in 1873-6. Then, with his fortieth birthday approaching, he decided that, if he was to make a comparable impact on the national scene, he must quickly enter parliament. One of the three members for Birmingham had hinted that he might retire. Thereupon he was ejected from the seat with all the certainty and expedition with which the mechanism works in a modern fighter aircraft. It was a tribute to the effectiveness of the Birmingham machine that Chamberlain had built up, and to the ruthlessness with which he was prepared to use it. In 1877 he also used this Birmingham caucus as the nucleus around which he built the National Liberal Federation, which brought together most of the radically inclined constituency organizations in the other big towns. 
Chamberlain was thus a most valuable ally for Dilke, who as a metropolitan parliamentarian, most of whose outside contacts were across the channel and even the oceans, lacked lines of communication with provincial radicalism. Chamberlain was a much better speaker than Dilke, and in the last resort a more formidable, if not more attractive, personality. But he lacked Dilke's parliamentary experience, his knowledge of the fashionable world, and his foreign affairs expertise. They therefore each had balancing advantages to bring to the partnership, and Dilke deliberately set about exploiting his by acting as Chamberlain's sponsor in metropolitan life, putting him up at 76 Sloane Street and giving frequent dinner parties to introduce him to a wider world. They were very useful to each other, and there was probably also a genuine degree of emotional attachment, although stronger on Dilke's side than on Chamberlain's. 
These four years saw Gladstone's re-entry into political leadership after his brief retirement. It began with his pamphlet 'The Bulgarian Atrocities' (1876) and it ended with the Midlothian campaign (1879-80). Neither Chamberlain nor Dilke was dazzled by Gladstone, who was too moralizing for their taste. Chamberlain, however, tried to make use of him for the launch of the National Liberal Federation and as a counterweight to Hartington. Dilke found his sentimental generalities offensive to the 'realpolitik' based on detailed knowledge which was always his own approach to foreign policy, and mostly preferred the cool whiggery of Hartington. This was not because he agreed with Hartington's domestic conservatism, but because he thought it would have to be compensated for within the Liberal Party by giving great positions, even the Foreign Office and the exchequer, to himself and Chamberlain. Such a triumvirate, leading after an interval to the emergence of one or the other radical as leader of a Lib-Lab party, dedicated to social reform and unfrightened by collectivism, became the strategic aim of Dilke (and less clearly of Chamberlain) from the late 1870s onwards. The significance of Dilke's fall in 1885-6 was that, by allowing Chamberlain to block the early achievement of home rule (which an unweakened Dilke might well have prevented him from doing), it kept Gladstone in politics for nearly another decade, drove the Liberal Party along the worthy but sterile axis of an Irish-dominated policy, and opened the way for the emergence of an Independent Labour Party, which eventually ended the Liberal governing tradition. 
Before these developments there were the five years of Gladstone's second government and of Dilke's only experience of office, as opposed to previous promise and subsequent contemplation of what might have been. After the 1880 election but before the formation of the government, Chamberlain proposed to Dilke, who was thought of as the better placed of the two, that neither should accept office unless they were both in the cabinet. Dilke thought this might be over-bidding on Chamberlain's part, which was ironical as the eventual outcome was that Dilke, the first to be approached, by holding out for one cabinet post between them, forced Chamberlain into the presidency of the Board of Trade over his head, and had himself to settle for under-secretary at the Foreign Office, though with the advantage that his chief, Granville, was in the Lords. He began his official duties on 27 April 1880. 
Dilke then had to wait nearly three years for promotion, in spite of his being a notably effective minister, especially in the complex matter of the renegotiation of the trade treaty with France. Delay in promotion was partly due to a combination of the queen's determination not to have him in any office 'close to the sovereign' and of his own taste for high-stake play. The latter attribute showed itself in May 1882, when the assassination of Lord Frederick Cavendish dramatically created a vacancy in the office of chief secretary for Ireland. Dilke was offered it, without membership of the cabinet. A lesser man would have felt it necessary to accept to avoid a charge of cowardice. Dilke coolly held out. He would not accept responsibility without power. Eventually, in December 1882, he entered the cabinet as president of the Local Government Board. It was perhaps the least glamorous of all departments, and one which certainly met the queen's demand that he should not be close to her person. But it was also one suited to Dilke's talents, and which he made more constructively central to the government than were the great traditional departments. He set up, and himself presided over, a royal commission on the housing of the working classes in 1884, which had perhaps the most remarkable membership of any royal commission ever assembled. There sat under him the trio of the prince of Wales, Cardinal Manning, and Lord Salisbury. Octavia Hill was vetoed (as a woman) by a combination of Harcourt and Hartington, but he none the less secured three other former or future cabinet ministers among the dozen members. He was also a member of the quintet of ministers which fatefully took all the decisions in relation to the dispatch of General Gordon to evacuate the Sudan. 
Dilke's best work was, however, done on the 'Redistribution of Seats Bill' in 1885, which was of repercussive as well as inherent importance because it unblocked the passage into law of the 'Franchise Bill' of 1884, which extended household suffrage from the towns to the counties, and was the most important reform carried through by that somewhat sterile government of 1880-85. The Lords would not pass it without a redistribution bill. Chamberlain responded with a violent denunciation of the peers, Dilke by being (with Gladstone) the key figure in negotiating with Salisbury in November 1885 a settlement that seemed acceptable from a Liberal point of view, and piloting the resultant bill through the House of Commons with skill and authority. In both the negotiations and the parliamentary process he had the decisive (and for him typical) advantage of knowing twice as much about the subject as anyone else. 
It was not therefore fanciful by the spring of 1885 to see Dilke, perhaps after a Hartington interlude, as Gladstone's most likely successor. His radical credentials were secure, but he was also a man who could work the system and get things done. The government was admittedly on the brink of disintegration. Nearly half its members, including Dilke and Chamberlain, had submitted their resignations. Nevertheless few doubted there would be a bright medium-term Liberal future, underpinned by the extension of the franchise, and that Dilke would have a major part in it. He was also about to be married again, having announced his engagement to the recently widowed Mrs Pattison in the autumn of 1884. 
In June 1885 the government -- further weakened by a row about a central board for Ireland promoted by Chamberlain and Dilke -- was defeated on the 'Finance Bill' and resigned. This was a blow which, with his prospects as they appeared to be, Dilke was easily able to survive. In the following month there fell a very different sort of blow and one that was wholly fatal to his career in high politics. Virginia Crawford, the 22-year-old wife of Donald Crawford, a dour Scottish Liberal lawyer, and also the sister of Mrs Ashton Dilke, his brother's wife, made first a confession to her husband and then a public accusation that Dilke had seduced her in 1882 (the first year of her marriage) and had then conducted an intermittent affair with her for two and a half years. Dilke resolutely denied the charges, although his position was complicated from the beginning by the fact that he had, both before and after his first marriage, been the lover of her mother, Ellen, Mrs Eustace Smith. The case followed a tortuous legal course, during which period Dilke was excluded from any effective political action, despite its being the most seismic year in late nineteenth-century politics. He did manage to get narrowly returned for a new and smaller Chelsea constituency in November 1885 (although he lost it in a second general election eight months later). This apart, everything went from bad to worse for him, each act of the tragedy plumbing new depths. 
The Crawford divorce action was heard and decided in one day on 12 February 1886. Donald Crawford took the court through the details of the confession and one or two vaguely corroborating servants were called. Mrs Crawford was not in court. Dilke's lawyers, aided by the lay advice of Chamberlain, took the view that he should not give evidence. No evidence had been adduced against him ('I cannot see any case whatsoever against Sir Charles Dilke', the judge was later to say), and they feared his being cross-examined about the whole of his past life. The result was that Crawford got his divorce but that Dilke was dismissed from the suit as having no case to answer. It might have been satisfactory for a private individual, but not for a public figure. The verdict appeared to be the perverse one that Mrs Crawford had committed adultery with Dilke, but that he had not done so with her. 
A public campaign, greatly fostered by the early investigative journalist W. T. Stead, was then mounted against Dilke's failure to go into the witness box. By April this had persuaded him that he should seek to reopen the case by getting the queen's proctor to intervene. He did so under a grave misapprehension. He falsely assumed that his counsel would be able to submit Mrs Crawford to a devastating cross-examination. But he had been dismissed from the case and his counsel had no 'locus'. Furthermore the queen's proctor had to try to prove a negative, that Dilke had not committed adultery, before Mrs Crawford was exposed in the witness box. It was he and not she who was subjected to a most stringent and damaging cross-examination. The result was a disaster. He proved a very bad witness, she a very good one. The summing up by the president of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division was highly unfavourable to Dilke. The verdict of the jury -- in form that the divorce should stand, in fact that Mrs Crawford was a witness of the truth and that Dilke was not -- was reached quickly and unanimously. 
Dilke's career and reputation were shattered. Indeed the question for a time was whether he was to be subject to a criminal prosecution for perjury, carrying the risk of a long sentence of penal servitude and the sequestration of his property. When this threat was removed he and his wife (they had been married on 3 October 1885, after the scandal had broken) devoted themselves to his case for several years, with the help of a few devoted 'believers' and the expenditure of a good deal of money on enquiry agents. Much helpful evidence was accumulated, certainly enough to prove the central thesis that, contrary to the view of the court, Mrs Crawford lied in the witness box, and that her activities which she described as having taken place with Dilke were either figments of her imagination or, more probably, had taken place with others. 
Elements of highly charged mystery remained. Dilke, although almost certainly not guilty as charged, obviously had things to hide in his life. But what prompted Mrs Crawford's false story? Cardinal Manning, who instructed her for her reception into the Roman Catholic church in 1889 and was amiably disposed towards Dilke, was said to know the whole truth, but never revealed it. There were conspiracy theories, some involving figures as eminent as Rosebery (no evidence worth speaking of) and Chamberlain (some considerable circumstantial evidence but an absence of convincing motive), and others involving several ladies who had grievances against Dilke. These enigmas have remained unresolved for over a hundred years, and are unlikely now ever to be fully explained. 
Dilke re-entered the House of Commons, and sat for the Forest of Dean, still as an advanced radical, from 1892 until his death nineteen years later. He achieved great local popularity, particularly with the miners of what was then a detached but significant small coalfield. He vigorously pursued their interests and those of labour generally, as well as being an independent parliamentary expert on military, colonial, and foreign questions, and was an important link with Labour members and trade unionists. He was a vital influence in the founding of the committee of imperial defence in 1904, a subject he had discussed in works such as 'Problems of Greater Britain' (2 vols., 1890) and 'Imperial Defence' (1892, written with Spenser Wilkinson). His reputation abroad held up rather better than at home, though in the Commons he became a respected independent back-bencher. But he never again came near to political office. The last third of his life was a sad anticlimax. He spent part of it preparing his large collection of manuscript papers for posterity by mutilating them with a pair of scissors. The death in 1904 of his second wife (whose memoir he wrote as a preface to 'The Book of the Spiritual Life', 1905) and the mental illness and subsequent incarceration of his son and heir greatly disturbed him. Dilke died of heart failure at his house, 76 Sloane Street, London, on 26 January 1911, and was cremated at Golders Green on 30 January after a funeral service at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Square, London. During his son's illness, Dilke altered his will, largely in favour of May Tennant and Gertrude Tuckwell, his second wife's niece and, with Stephen Gwynn, his biographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 32825


Dilke, Emilia Francis, Lady Dilke (1840-1904), art historian and trade unionist, was born on 2 September 1840 in Ilfracombe, Devon, the fourth of the six children of Henry Strong (1794-1876) and his wife, Emily Weedon (died 1879?). Little is known of her mother, who was from Oxford, but her paternal family, of which she wrote proudly in 'Samuel Strong and the Georgian loyalists' (1899), were American colonists, and her father was a retired Indian army officer and amateur artist, who became manager of the London and County Bank in Oxford in 1841. The young Francis Strong (who preferred to go by her second, masculine name) was educated at home in Iffley by Miss Bowdich, who gave her an excellent grounding in languages, including French, German, Latin, and Greek. She grew up in a household in which cultural pursuits were highly valued, and her father was active in local art circles at a time when Oxford was an important centre of intellectual and artistic life. In her youth, through her family's friendship with Henry and Sarah Acland and Thomas and Martha Combe, she came into contact with leading figures in the Victorian art world, such as John Ruskin, John Everett Millais, and William Holman Hunt (who proposed to her in 1859, but was rejected). 
It was Ruskin who, having seen some of her drawings, encouraged Francis Strong to go to London in 1858 and study at the Government School of Design in South Kensington, where she became a regular attendant in March 1859 and was a student for two years. As a public institution which offered training in art, design, and industrial application to an inclusive body of students, and raised consciousness about the relations between art, government, political and economic institutions, and the public sphere, the South Kensington school had a formative influence on her later scholarship as an art historian. She was a good student, with a special interest in anatomical drawing. As a woman, she was denied access to formal life-drawing classes at South Kensington, but in 1859, defying convention, she took private tuition from William Mulready in drawing from the nude. Like a number of other female artists of the day, she protested against the exclusion of women from what was considered to be the most prestigious area of art education. She later withdrew an offer to found a scholarship for female art students at the Royal Academy Schools when the authorities refused to concede to her condition that the women's education include drawing from the nude. 
After completing her art education, Strong returned to Oxford, where she became engaged to the 48-year-old scholar Mark Pattison (1813-1884), rector of Lincoln College, in June 1861, and married him at Iffley church on 10 September 1861. Despite her intellectual marginalization as a woman in Oxford, Francis Pattison entered upon a life of serious scholarship, focusing upon the study of French cultural history and art. At the same time she cut a striking figure socially, developing an artistic and intellectual circle more in keeping with the salons of seventeenth-century France -- upon which she was establishing herself as an authority -- than with the stuffy masculine culture of Oxford college life. According to contemporary accounts, and on the evidence of the early portrait of Mrs Pattison painted by her friend Pauline, Lady Trevelyan, in 1864, her dress and general demeanour were particularly stylish and picturesque. The Pattisons' marriage was famously unhappy, allegedly the model for the 'mesalliances' of Dorothea Brooke and Edward Casaubon in George Eliot's 'Middlemarch' (1871-2) and of Belinda and Professor Forth in Rhoda Broughton's 'Belinda' (1883), and a possible source for Robert Browning's poem 'Bad Dreams' in 'Asolando' (1889). Its miseries, and her own ill health, led Pattison to spend increasing periods of time in France, where she was able to pursue her research interests with greater resources and more independence. 
Pattison began writing reviews, articles, and notes on art for the periodical press from the mid-1860s, and became the salaried art editor of 'The Academy' from 1873 to 1883. It was in this context that she began to carve out her own scholarly and critical principles, differentiating her approach to art equally from the moral aesthetic of her former mentor, Ruskin, and the ahistorical impressionism of Walter Pater. She offered a critique of the former in her article 'Art and morality' ('Westminster Review', 35, January 1869) and in her signed review of his 'Lectures on Art' and 'Catalogue of Examples' ('The Academy', 1870), and reviewed the latter's 'Studies in the History of the Renaissance' in the 'Westminster Review' in April 1873. Throughout her marriage to Mark Pattison, when not following the widespread convention of journalistic anonymity, she published under the signature E. F. S. Pattison. Her second husband attributed her insertion of the initial 'S.', standing for her family name Strong, to 'her wish for some recognition of the independent existence of the woman, and in some resistance to the old English doctrine of complete merger in the husband' (Dilke, 19). 
It was under this name that Pattison published her first book, 'The Renaissance of Art in France' (1879), in which the hallmarks of her scholarship are already evident: her meticulous archival research into primary and unpublished sources; her interest in the institutional organization of the arts, and in the political, economic, and social conditions under which they were produced; and her deep conviction of the profound connectedness of the works of decoration, furniture, painting, engraving, sculpture, and architecture of a period. This was followed in 1882 by a short biography of Sir Frederic Leighton, in the Dumas series 'Illustrated Biographies of Modern Artists', and in 1884 by another major study, 'Claude Lorrain: sa vie et ses oeuvres', published in French. 
At the same time as she was building a formidable reputation as a historian and critic of art, Pattison was active in a quite different field. Her commitment to social reform, and in particular to improving the working conditions of women, led to her involvement, from its inception, in the Women's Trade Union League, founded as the Women's Protective and Provident League by Emma Smith Paterson in 1874. In 1886, on Paterson's death, she herself became president until her death, when she was mourned in the league's journal as 'one... fitted, as few human beings... to fill the post of leader in a crusade against the tyranny of social tradition and the callousness of social indifference' ('Women's Trade Union Review', Jan 1905, 1). In 1878 she was elected to membership of the Radical Club, one of only five women; there she presented a paper entitled 'The conditions which should determine the wages of female labour' (Dilke, 54). The management and expansion of women's trade unions, and in particular her championing of the cause of unskilled workers in dangerous trades, became lifelong concerns. 
In the 1870s Francis Pattison renewed her friendship with the liberal politician and periodical proprietor Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, second baronet (1843-1911), whom she had first met in 1858 as a fellow student at South Kensington. They shared interests in radical politics and in France and its art, and from mid-1875 they were in close correspondence. Their marriage, which took place in Chelsea on 3 October 1885, a year after Mark Pattison's death, although initially shadowed by the scandal surrounding the naming of Charles Dilke as co-respondent in a divorce case, appears to have been happy. Thenceforward she was known by and published under the name Emilia Dilke. Portraits of her from this period -- as Francis Strong Pattison in 1882 by Charles Camino, and as Emilia Dilke in 1887 by Hubert von Herkomer -- depict a poised and elegant woman with a forthright gaze. At the same time she extended her activities for the women's trade union movement, speaking at public meetings across the country, regularly attending and addressing the annual Trades Union Congress as part of her promotion of male-female working-class co-operation, and writing for the league's papers and the general press. She also published a further series of important studies of French art. In 'Art in the Modern State' (1888), on seventeenth-century French art, and in her encyclopaedic four-volume study of eighteenth-century French art (1899-1902) she sought 'to trace the action of those social laws under the pressure of which the arts take shape' ('French Engravers and Draughtsmen of the Eighteenth Century' 1902, v), drawing attention to the political determinants of art and the economics of production and of the modern art market. In these volumes she is concerned with the role of women in the arts as both producers and subjects, drawing parallels between the social and institutional constraints upon earlier and contemporary female artists. She also published two volumes of allegorical stories, 'The Shrine of Death and Other Stories' (1886) and 'The Shrine of Love and Other Stories' (1891), and a collection entitled 'The Book of the Spiritual Life' was published posthumously in 1905. 
Dilke died following a brief illness on 24 October 1904 at her Surrey house, Pyrford Rough near Woking. Her remains were cremated at Golders Green after a funeral service at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Square, London. She had no children. Despite recurring ill health, she had been a woman of prodigious energy which she had directed into a number of channels in the belief that 'Ordinary life widens the horizon for men. Women are walled in behind social conventions. If they climb over, they lose more than they gain. It is therefore necessary to accept the situation as nature and society have made it, and to try to create for one's self a position from which on peut dominer ce qu'on ne peut pas franchir. (Dilke, 55)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32826


Dill, Sir John Greer (1881-1944), army officer, was born on 25 December 1881 at Lurgan, co. Armagh, the second child of John Dill (died 1894), bank manager, and his wife, Jane Greer (died 1894), daughter of a prominent Lurgan JP. The perfect English gentleman was, like so many successful soldiers, an Ulsterman. 'In my youth', he recalled half a century later for the Pennsylvania Scotch-Irish Society, 'I have seen Orangemen on side-cars driving down what they called Papish streets spoiling for a fight, and getting it' (Danchev, 'The early years', 28). Dill's was a lonely youth, uncomfortably foreshadowing later developments. He came from a long line of Dill worthies -- scholars and ministers all -- an oppressive inheritance. He did not make friends easily. Having been orphaned at twelve, he and his elder sister Nina (who also died prematurely, in 1921) were taken on by an aunt and uncle, Joseph Grundy Burton, a well-known campaigner against home rule, a teller of tales, and a diligent parish priest. Dr Burton and his nephew were never close, and in 1895 Dill was swiftly dispatched across the water to Cheltenham College. One Ulster friendship alone survived, transplanted to America from the dismal afternoons spent playing in Belfast's botanical gardens: that with his cousin Foster Kennedy, the future neurologist, who emigrated to New York a few years before Dill found his way to Washington, to whom he would ultimately entrust his life. 
At Cheltenham he rose laboriously from the bottom form to upper fifth military more by the effluxion of time in each form than by any sign of intellectual distinction. His science teacher followed his subsequent career with all the more interest because he found young Dill one of the slowest pupils he ever taught in the military class, no mean feat. In 1900 he passed into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, 154th out of 210, greatly relieved to have so much to spare. At Sandhurst his conduct was exemplary, his marks uniformly mediocre. Worthiness outbid distinction. 
In 1901 Dill was commissioned into the 1st battalion (100th foot), the Prince of Wales's Leinster regiment -- a Southern Irish regiment, there being no other vacancies at the time of the South African War. 'It was a serious thing for a Black Northerner like me to be thrown among a lot of gossoons [boys] from Kings County, but we mixed, we got to love each other' (Danchev, 'The early years', 28). He read Dickens and Thackeray and was periodically concerned to acquire what he euphemistically called 'curios', or more straightforwardly 'loot', but was disappointed to find nothing better than a bed, a jug, a basin, and some other items of furniture, which served to alleviate the hardships of the campaign. 
South African War service was followed by his only period of regimental duty, as assistant adjutant and then adjutant of the 1st Leinsters, 1902-9. It was during this period (in 1907) that he married Ada Maud, daughter of Colonel William Albert le Mottee (late of 18th foot), in Fermoy, co. Cork, the bride's home town. The marriage was precipitate and unsuitable. Though an accomplished tennis player and rider, Maud was a woman of nervous disposition, painfully shy, given to headaches, depression, and excessive self-medication. She died in 1940, after a long series of paralytic strokes, while Dill was chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS). As to how deeply he was affected by all this, testimony is conflicting. Foster Kennedy 'never knew how close they were', but thought 'not very'. Their son, John (1916-71), who lived very much in his father's shadow, wrote ambiguously that Dill's family life 'was not always as happy as it could have been'. Brooke, his protege, ally, and successor, left a harrowing vignette of Maud's paralysis: 'Every visit home to his wife in Windsor was a desperate ordeal; she could not make herself understood, he kept guessing at what she could mean, usually unsuccessfully, and finally with a disappointed look in her eyes she used to throw her head back on the pillow. (Danchev, 'The early years', 33)' Yet Dill's immediate reaction to her death betrays a certain stoicism, even relief, and he seems quickly to have recovered his equilibrium. A year later, moreover, on 8 October 1941, he married a much younger woman: Nancy Isabelle Cecil Furlong ('nee' Charrington), daughter of a brewery magnate, and widow of a former member of Dill's staff. This time he made a very happy marriage, in more than one sense. 'I don't think Nancy dislikes Washington and Washington certainly likes her', he wrote with feeling in 1942. 'She makes a great difference to my life and keeps me young' (ibid., 34). 
Meanwhile another sea change had taken place. In 1913 Dill became a student at the Staff College, Camberley, under Sir William Robertson, who told the intake that they were all very lucky as they had a definite war to train for. This was the determining experience of Dill's life. It was the impress and ambience of the Staff College, coupled with the immediate praxis of the First World War, that really launched his career. A captain in 1914, by the end of the war he was a temporary brigadier, Haig's brigadier-general, general staff operations, and on the evidence of the official historian 'the real operations brain in GHQ' (Danchev, 'The early years', 35). Staff work was meat and drink to him. At the same time he began truly to master his profession. Between the wars he regularly attracted the epithet 'intellectual' -- an equivocal judgement -- and a pattern of postings to give it currency. He preached what he practised. He was senior instructor at the Staff College (1919-22), army instructor at the Imperial Defence College (IDC) (1926-8), and commandant of the Staff College (1931-4). These postings tended to confirm his inspiration or his insipidity, according to taste. For some there could be no argument. Colonels Auchinleck and Brooke were among the students on the inaugural course at the tri-service IDC in 1927. For Auchinleck, 'perhaps the most valuable and best remembered gain was the association with and the friendship of Sir John Dill, whose character, modesty and power of imparting knowledge left a lasting impression on me and, I think, on many others'. For Brooke, 'Dill's genius shone throughout the course; with no precedent to work from he built up studies of all the important factors, and carried everyone with him owing to his unbounded enthusiasm and immense capacity for work' (ibid., 35-6). 
All accounts agree on Dill's vigour and 'drive' before the early 1930s. In the previous decade he was said to have been bitten by a mad soldier, so energetically did he work. Thereafter, however, any assessment of his achievement is bedevilled by questions about his health. He died of aplastic anaemia, the onset of which is usually insidious, the prognosis grim. The conventional wisdom tends to be retrospective: later knowledge of his anaemia is used to underpin an analysis of a decline in vigour dating from 1931-2, coincident with the assumption of increasingly onerous responsibilities: director of military operations and intelligence (1934-6), general officer commanding Palestine and Trans-Jordan (1936-7), and general officer commanding-in-chief home command (1937-9). On this analysis he had already 'gone off', as Liddell Hart put it, by the time he was first considered for the position of CIGS in 1937. When he was eventually appointed, in April 1940, he was in no condition to do what was both necessary and desirable; that is, stand up to Churchill at home and Hitler abroad. He is held to have been an ineffective CIGS because he allowed himself to be worn down, if not worn out, by the prime minister, who called him 'Dilly-Dally' and framed the charge for posterity. 'I do not think that we are having the help from General Dill which we hoped for at the time of his appointment', complained the prime minister, eight short weeks later. 'He strikes me as being very tired, disheartened, and over-impressed with the might of Germany' (Danchev, 'Dilly-Dally', 25). Spent, Dill was expelled from the inner sanctum in 1941, at the very moment when the USA entered the war. He rose again, phoenix-like, as head of the British joint staff mission in Washington (1942-4), but he was never a well man. His death in harness at the age of sixty-two was remarkable only for being so long postponed. An extraordinary public outpouring of grief in Washington found no echo in London. The equestrian statue subsequently erected in Arlington national cemetery (a unique tribute to a foreigner) has no counterpart in his own country. On a Churchillian reading Dill's American apotheosis was uncovenanted, expedient, and fundamentally mysterious. 
In this fable of failure -- Dilly-Dally in decline -- the root cause is held to be congenital defects of character and personality, encapsulated in Lord Moran's feline observation that he lacked 'the he-man stuff' (Danchev, 'Strange case', 353) and exposed in working with Winston; personal misfortune incarnate in his invalid wife; and above all deterioration in his own health consequent on the early onset of the anaemia, exacerbated by a series of riding accidents, in 1931, 1939, and 1943. But the fable is just that. None of it will withstand close scrutiny. In his last years Dill had his own Moran, Foster Kennedy, who monitored the field marshal with cousinly thoroughness. Kennedy's evidence is unimpeachable. The anaemia did not take hold until 1944; it was detected almost immediately. The first break in his health was occasioned by the riding accident of 1943. The picture of life with Maud as a marriage of maladies has been grossly exaggerated. If Dill appeared weak or lethargic as CIGS, or even before, the explanation must be sought elsewhere -- often in the eye of the beholder. In Washington he was not seriously impaired until mid-1944. For Dill, D-day had a more sinister connotation. After that he never really recovered. But he did return to work, and worked on until he died, literally bone-weary. 
As for Dilly-Dally, he did stand up to Churchill -- on strategic priorities, on particular operations, on the competence of individual commanders -- but not on the prime minister's terms. What he failed to do was adapt to Churchill's parliamentary manners. 'The prime minister lost his temper with me. I could see the blood come up in his great neck and his eyes began to flash. He said: 'What you need out there [the Middle East] is a court martial and a firing squad'. I should have said, whom do you want to shoot exactly; but I did not think it till afterwards. (Danchev, 'Dilly-Dally', 21)' Dill was by no means inarticulate, as Wavell could be impenetrably inarticulate. Rather, it was a matter of temperament. He refused to pander. Instead he addressed to the prime minister a stream of closely argued minutes and explanatory notes. These efforts left Churchill unmoved and Dill unrequited. They were poorly calculated to achieve their purpose, not only because Churchill so rarely found a written case convincing, but also because Dill's style entirely left out of account the necessity to enthrall. As Wavell said, 'Winston is always expecting rabbits to come out of empty hats' (Danchev, 'Dilly-Dally', 27). It was not for want of comprehension on Dill's part; he understood the requirements well enough. 'Finest hours' were beyond the army's means in 1940-41; and Dill was not the man for conjuring tricks. It was his misfortune to join the chiefs of staff at a time when acquiescent colleagues, scarce resources, and impetuous ministers combined to make the cautionary advice of the CIGS at once vital and unpalatable. Caution was anathema to Churchill. In cabinet, he called Dill 'the dead hand of inanition' (ibid., 25). Dill did not answer back. Waltzing with Winston was not his style. He could advise others, but in more than one sense he could not help himself. 
Dill's achievement as CIGS from May 1940 to December 1941 was fundamental nevertheless. It was he, above all, who responded to the imperative of the moment and established the wearying but constructive adversarial relationship between Churchill and the chiefs of staff on which Brooke built so successfully for the duration of the war. In 1940 no one knew, and many doubted, whether such a relationship could be made to work. The need and pain of definition are often forgotten. Yet the essential forerunner of the matchless combination of Churchill and Brooke was the ill-matched combination of Churchill and Dill. The prerequisite for Brooke's acceptability was Dill's purgatory. Dill accustomed Churchill to the trammelling of professional advice. 'I live a very hectic life', he wrote. 'Most of it is spent trying to prevent stupid things being done rather than in doing clever things! However, that is rather the normal life of a Chief of Staff' (Danchev, 'Dilly-Dally', 28-9). 
Dill's 'retirement' was announced for 25 December 1941, his sixtieth birthday. Churchill intended that he become governor of Bombay, 'a position of great honour, followed by a bodyguard with lances' (Danchev, 'Dill', 52). But excommunication in Bombay was not to be Dill's fate. When the prime minister embarked post-haste for Washington to confer with the president after Pearl Harbor he felt compelled to take Dill with him. When the British contingent returned home Dill stayed on, in an unprecedented if indeterminate position of enormous influence at the epicentre of allied decision-making. He became not only head of the joint staff mission and senior British member of the combined chiefs of staff, but also, ironically, personal representative of the minister of defence, an office claimed by Winston Churchill himself. So began his life's greatest work. Dill's very presence in Washington became crucial to the operation and consolidation of an extra-special relationship. His highest service to the alliance was to contain its tremendous fissile potential. Dill is perhaps best seen as an amateur ambassador, complementing and in some measure supplanting Lord Halifax. His unarguable success in this role is the more striking for the absence of what has always been considered essential for a British ambassador in Washington -- the confidence of the prime minister. So far from enjoying that confidence, Dill was retired as CIGS precisely because he had forfeited it. The change wrought by his removal to the USA was that the tension became creative. To official America, to one American in particular, Dill quickly came to be seen as a guarantor: a guarantor of the British, against their notorious and incorrigible duplicities; a guarantor of Brooke, against his overbearing advocacy; a guarantor of Churchill himself, against the fatal lullaby of his imperial pretensions and eccentric strategies. 
With General George C. Marshall, the US army chief of staff and organizer of victory, Dill discovered an empathy unparalleled in Anglo-American military relations. To this American he was 'sans peur et sans reproche'. When his statue was unveiled in 1950 it was Marshall's simple eloquence which set the tone of the occasion: 'Here before us in Arlington, among our hallowed dead, lies a great hero, Field Marshal Sir John Dill. He was my friend, I am proud to say, and he was my intimate associate through most of the war years.... I have never known a man whose high character showed so clearly in the honest directness of his every action. He was an inspiration to all of us. (Danchev, 'Very Special Relationship', 1)' Such a man was an ideal guarantor and mediator, fixer and broker, in the Anglo-American market place. Dill could be trusted: trusted to deliver. He was efficacious -- for Brooke and Marshall, uniquely efficacious -- and ambidextrous. He was able to comprehend both sides. In effect he interpreted each to the other. Hence his exhortations to mutual frankness: to reveal as much as possible of 'how minds are working', as he was fond of saying, in order to allay suspicion and promote understanding. 'Without him', ran the War Office epitaph, 'Britain could not have understood America so thoroughly and quickly, nor America Britain'. It was Dill, in tandem with Marshall, who made the combined chiefs of staff work, in Henry Stimson's words, 'not as a mere collecting point for individual rivalries between services and nations, but as an executive committee for the prosecution of global war' (Danchev, 'Very Special Relationship', 133). 
Dill, who had been made KCB in 1937 and GCB in 1942, died in the Walter Reed Hospital, Washington, DC, on 4 November 1944. Four days later a memorial service was held at Washington Cathedral. Afterwards a motorized cortege proceeded along a route lined by thousands of troops to Arlington national cemetery. The coffin, folded in a union jack, with an unsheathed sword and a field marshal's cocked hat on top, was transferred to a gun carriage drawn by six grey horses. The US joint chiefs of staff acted as honorary pall bearers. A simple service was held at the graveside. Salutes were fired, the last post and reveille sounded. 'I have never seen so many men so visibly shaken by sadness', wrote Foster Kennedy afterwards. 'It was a remarkable and noble affair.' The joint chiefs sent as a message of condolence to their British counterparts an extraordinary tribute: '[We] feel [we] share equally with you the loss to our combined war effort from the death of Field Marshal Sir John Dill.... We have looked to him with complete confidence as a leader in our combined deliberations. He has been a personal friend of all of us.... We mourn with you the passing of a great and wise soldier, and a great gentleman. His task in this war has been well done. (ibid., 1 and 3)' 



@@@@@


doc= 32827


Dill, Sir Samuel (1844-1924), classical scholar and educationist, was born on 26 March 1844 at Hillsborough, co. Down, the eldest son of the Revd Samuel Marcus Dill (died 1870), DD, Presbyterian minister of Hillsborough, later professor of systematic theology and first president of Magee College, Londonderry, and his wife, Anna Harrison, daughter of James Cowan Moreland, of Hillsborough. The family of which he came was founded by a soldier of Dutch descent in William III's army, and gave noted ministers, writers, and controversialists to Irish Presbyterianism. One of his brothers became headmaster of Foyle College, Londonderry. 
Dill was educated in Belfast at the Royal Academical Institution and the Queen's College, where he took his degree in arts in 1864. He then went, as a scholar, to Lincoln College, Oxford, and obtained first classes in classical moderations (1867) and in 'literae humaniores' (1869). In 1869 he was elected fellow and tutor of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Later he became librarian and dean of the college, and was made an honorary fellow in 1903. In 1877 Dill was appointed high master of Manchester grammar school -- this being the last appointment to that post made by a president of Corpus. During his headmastership the school was reorganized; new buildings were erected and school societies developed. Dill was equally effective as administrator and teacher. His liberal conception of education is illustrated by his development of the teaching of modern subjects, and by the connection that he established between the school and working boys' clubs. He attached particular importance to developing the corporate life of the school outside the classroom. A former pupil, Gordon Hewart, described him as 'one of the very few men who appear to the boy to be heroes, and throughout life never lose that character' ('The Times', 27 May 1924). In 1884 Dill married Fanny Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Cadwallader Morgan of Shrewsbury. They had three daughters. 
Dill resigned his headmastership in 1888 and devoted himself to the preparation of his first book. In 1890 he returned to the Queen's College as professor of Greek. As a member of the Belfast University Commission, he took a large share in transforming the college into a university in 1909. He was chairman of the viceregal committee of inquiry into primary education (1913-14), whose unanimous report he drafted. A supporter of the claims of teachers for decent salaries and security of tenure, he influenced Irish education by his work as a member, and later as chairman, of the intermediate Board of Education. He was a man of strong religious feeling. A Presbyterian by birth, in his later years he became more identified with the Church of Ireland. His views were unionist, but he took no part in politics, being on friendly terms with H. H. Asquith and receiving a knighthood from the Liberal government in 1909 for his services to education. 
Dill was best known as a writer. His literary power and productiveness gave him a high rank among the ancient historians of his day and country. In 1898 he published 'Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire', which was followed in 1904 by 'Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius'. Then at the age of sixty he turned to a wide and ill-mapped field. His 'Roman Society in Gaul in the Merovingian Age', edited and published posthumously in 1926 by his son-in-law, the Revd C. B. Armstrong, showed much of his old gift but also the lack of his finishing touch. Although not research in the technical sense, Dill's works were founded on a thorough study both of the primary and secondary sources. Less histories of a period than studies of the life of societies in dissolution or in spiritual crisis or decay, they reveal his moral and religious sympathies. Their interest, combined with the lucidity and charm of their style, attracted the general reader as well as the scholar. 
Dill received the honorary degrees of LittD from the University of Dublin, and of LLD from Edinburgh and St Andrews. He resigned his professorship in 1924, and died at Montpelier, Malone Road, Belfast, on 26 May of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 32828


Dillon, Emile Joseph (1854-1933), journalist and philologist, was born in Dublin on 21 March 1854, the second son of Michael Dillon, a foundry and hardware merchant, and his wife, Mary Byrne. In accord with his father's wishes, Dillon studied for the priesthood in the Carmelite school and Holy Cross College in Dublin; he spent a further three years in St David's Monastery, Pentasaph, Wales, at the Grande Chartreuse, at the seminary of St Sulpice in Paris, and at the college of the Paulist Fathers in New York. At the age of twenty-one, he effectively abandoned theology to pursue his interest in oriental languages and returned to Paris; he worked briefly as assistant librarian in the Bibliotheque Nationale and began his philological studies under Ernest Renan at the College de France. Encouraged by Renan, Dillon completed his study of Sanskrit, Arabic, and Hebrew at the University of Innsbruck. In 1875 he finally left the priesthood and moved to the University of Leipzig (where he was awarded a doctorate of philosophy). 
During the late 1870s Dillon travelled in Europe and studied briefly at the universities of Tubingen, Louvain, St Petersburg, and Kharkov. He first visited Russia in 1877, when he was temporarily employed in Kiev as tutor in German to the sons of a Russian nobleman. From Kiev, he went to the University of St Petersburg to continue his studies of oriental languages and to obtain a teaching position, but he was denied a post because of his criticism of influential faculty members. He left for the University of Louvain, where he achieved a doctorate in oriental languages and literature and helped to found the literary review, 'Le Museon'. Returning to St Petersburg in 1880, Dillon was briefly employed by a Russian newspaper; in 1881 he married a widow, Yelena Maksimovna Bogachova, who bore him four sons during the 1880s. By the early part of this decade Dillon possessed an excellent command of Latin, Greek, French, German, and Russian, and had mastered, among other languages, Sanskrit and Armenian; he claimed to speak twenty-six languages, and to be completely fluent in ten. With these qualifications he was appointed professor of comparative philology, Sanskrit, and ancient Armenian, at the University of Kharkov in 1884. He had already achieved renown for his translations of ancient Armenian manuscripts into Russian (which merited his election to the Armenian Academy in Venice) and studies on ancient Bactrian and Iranian languages, and the university awarded him a doctorate in comparative philology in 1884. But his promising academic career ended abruptly when he resigned in protest against the bureaucratic administration of the university. 
In 1886 Dillon migrated to Odessa, where he became foreign editor of the liberal 'Odessky Vestnik', and later editor of the 'Odesskiye Novosti'. After a year of conflicts with the censor, he moved to St Petersburg, where he began to contribute articles on Russia to the London press, and by the late 1880s had become well established as a journalist. During 1887 he was recruited by the proprietor of the 'Daily Telegraph', Harry Lawson (later Lord Burnham), as the paper's correspondent in Russia, and in this capacity, and later as roving foreign correspondent, served the 'Telegraph' for almost three decades (until 1914). Soon after this arrangement was established, Dillon began to contribute monthly articles on Russia and foreign affairs to the 'Contemporary Review', 'Fortnightly Review', 'National Review', 'Review of Reviews', and some American periodicals. His 'Russian Characteristics' series in the 'Fortnightly Review' and the 'National Review' (1889-92), under the pseudonym E. B. Lanin, firmly established him as an authority on Russian affairs; his keen reporting and his subsequent exploits as a special correspondent inspired journalists such as W. T. Stead to acclaim him as Britain's premier foreign correspondent. 
Dillon's most spectacular coup was his first-hand reporting for the 'Daily Telegraph' of the Turkish massacres of Armenians during 1894-5. Barred from Armenia by the Turkish authorities, he slipped into the beleaguered region in various disguises and rendered harrowing descriptions of Turkish genocide, which aroused British public opinion and provided Gladstone with the evidence to indict the Turks for the Armenian 'horrors'. Dillon's success in Armenia and his development of close contacts with statesmen and diplomats greatly enhanced his reputation as an innovative foreign correspondent, and persuaded the 'Telegraph' to permit him to undertake, on his own initiative, missions in Europe and Asia. Thus, in 1897, disguised as an Orthodox priest living with Cretan insurgents, Dillon reported the revolt in Crete against Turkish rule and, abetted by his close friend, the Greek patriot Eleutherios Venizelos, he served as an intermediary between the insurgents and the allied fleet coercing the Turks. During the following year Dillon reported the Spanish-American War from Madrid, and a year later (1899) was in France covering the second court martial of Captain Alfred Dreyfus. From France he went to the Netherlands, where he reported the first Hague peace conference in 1899, and during 1900 was in China describing the Western powers' suppression of the Boxer uprising in Peking (Beijing). 
Returning to his home in St Petersburg, Dillon became a firm friend and ardent advocate of the Russian finance minister and later (1905-6) chief minister, Sergey Witte. In August 1905 Dillon accompanied Witte as publicity adviser to the Portsmouth peace conference, which ended the Russo-Japanese War, and contributed to influencing American public opinion on behalf of Russia. During the Russian Revolution of 1905, Dillon sedulously reported what was occurring, and warned that, without such a progressive leader as Witte, Russia would be consumed by a bloody peasant upheaval; he subsequently bitterly assailed Tsar Nicholas II for dismissing Witte in 1906. Henceforth, Dillon was pessimistic about orderly reform in Russia and became increasingly concerned with the deteriorating international situation. In the Bosnian crisis of 1908-9, his defence of his friend, the Austro-Hungarian foreign minister, Count Alois L. von Aehrenthal, against the charges of the Russian foreign minister, Aleksandr Izvolsky, caused considerable embarrassment to the British Foreign Office. From 1909 to 1913 Dillon, accompanied by a bevy of pretty female secretaries, traversed the European capitals and covered the Balkan wars of 1912-13. In 1913 he terminated his residence in Russia and divorced his wife, and in the following year married his long-time companion and secretary, Kathleen Mary Ireland of Belfast. 
By this time Dillon had become overly opinionated and discursive and had outlived his value for the 'Daily Telegraph', which gradually ceased publishing his dispatches. Now the ageing 'greyish little man with a stubby beard and soft voice' could no longer indulge his 'cloak and dagger' complex and pose as a 'mystery man' (Burnham, 44, 47). Even so, many journalists and diplomats still respected his skill in getting everywhere and learning everything, his intimacy with prominent statesmen, his multi-lingual facility, and his realism. During 1915 he predicted the imminent collapse of Russia, and throughout the war and the ensuing peace conference (which he attended) was very pessimistic about Europe's prospects. Despairing of the future of Europe, he left for Mexico after the conference, hoping that the Mexican Revolution might provide some 'helpful hints and fruitful parallels' for post-war Europe. On a brief visit to the United States and Mexico in 1920-21, he found in President Alvaro Obregon another Witte; his view of the Mexican situation was set out in 'Mexico on the Verge' (1921). Returning to Mexico in 1922, Dillon became a confidant of Obregon and served him as a contact with foreign oil corporations. 
Plagued by ill health, Dillon returned to Europe in 1924 and settled at Barcelona. In 1928 he visited the Soviet Union and, although he admired some Bolshevik achievements, left lamenting that the old Russia he had known was now only a vague memory. By the time of his death on 9 June 1933, at 49 Calle Salud, Barcelona, Dillon had completed the book 'Count Leo Tolstoy: a New Portrait' (1934), a lively account of his experiences and difficulties with Tolstoy, whose works he helped to translate and popularize in Britain. On his death, Dillon was remembered in Fleet Street as 'a man of mystery... whose business in life it was to know and understand foreign affairs in a way peculiar to himself' (Bentley, 318). 


@@@@@


doc= 32829


Dillon, Francis (1823-1909), landscape painter, was born in London on 24 February 1823, the younger son of John Dillon (died 1868), of Morrison, Dillon & Co., a successful firm of silk mercers, of Fore Street, London, and the owner of a fine collection of watercolour drawings, including several by J. M. W. Turner; only the forename of his mother, Mary (died 1856), is known. Following Mary's death, John Dillon remarried and with his second wife had three more children. Francis was educated at Bruce Castle School, Tottenham. In 1846 he joined the Royal Academy Schools, and subsequently became a pupil of James Holland. On 27 March 1847 he married Emma Josephine Case (1822-1860), and in the following year he took her and their daughter to Madeira for several months, also visiting Lisbon. This trip, the first of many, resulted in Dillon's first exhibits in oil, 'On the Tagus, Lisbon' (ex P. Polak, 1966) at the Royal Academy, and 'Ribeiro Brava, Madeira' at the British Institution, both in 1850, and also in the publication of 'Sketches in the Island of Madeira' (1850), a volume of thirteen lithographs. 
Dillon continued to exhibit frequently at the Royal Academy until 1903 and at the British Institution until its close in 1867. He was a founder member of the Dudley Gallery in 1865, and exhibited there until, in 1882, it was assimilated into the Institute of Painters in Water Colours, of which he then became a member, exhibiting there until 1908. He exhibited elsewhere in London, including the Society of British Artists, the Grosvenor Gallery, and the New Gallery, and also in Manchester and Paris. Much of the subject matter for his paintings was drawn from the scenery and buildings he encountered during his extensive travels abroad. He visited several parts of Europe, including France, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, and Norway, and, in 1881-2, he travelled to Portugal, Spain, and Morocco; but two countries further afield, Egypt and Japan, made the greatest impact on his career. 
Dillon visited Egypt on at least four occasions. In 1854-5 he ascended the Nile as far as Aswan, making many fine watercolour sketches (examples ex Christies, 9 June 1970, 9 November 1971). He returned in 1861-2 when he shared a studio in Cairo with George Price Boyce and the Swedish artist Egron Lundgren. They lived in an oriental manner and were befriended by Iskender Bey, son of Suleyman Pasha, formerly a French officer. Several drawings from this trip were published in the 'Illustrated London News' (April 1862). Subsequent visits were in 1869-70, 1873-4, and possibly later in the 1870s. Several of Dillon's exhibited paintings reflect his interest in the antiquities of Egypt, including 'The Colossal Pair, Thebes' (exh. British Institution, 1857; ex Christies, 30 November 1984) and 'The Pyramids from the Island of Roda' (exh. Royal Academy, 1863; ex Maas Gallery, 1983-4). These were highly acclaimed at the time, the 'Art Journal' judging 'The Colossal Pair' 'among the most admirable of modern works' (1857, 69), but, while the best deserve recognition for their atmospheric treatment of orientalist subjects, others that have survived are variable in quality. 
In the 1870s Dillon became concerned for the Islamic monuments of Cairo, especially its domestic houses, which were then suffering wholesale destruction from the modernization of the city; he joined others, such as J. D. Crace, R. P. Spiers, and Stanley Lane-Poole, in efforts to study and preserve this heritage. The watercolour and gouache sketches that he made in Cairo, particularly those that depict specific and identified domestic interiors -- to which few other European artists had access -- are his most individual and distinctive works. They are now considered his most significant contribution to the British orientalist tradition; examples are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Several of these interiors were later worked up for exhibition and were well received by the critics: such, for example, were 'The Harem of a Wealthy Arab, Cairo' (exh. Dudley Gallery, 1875) and 'Hareem of Sheikh Sadat' (exh. Dudley Gallery, 1876; probably related to 'Ka'ah in the Harem of Sheykh Sadat', Searight collection, V&A). Seven were reproduced in G. Ebers's 'Egypt: Descriptive, Historical and Picturesque' (1878-9). Dillon brought several Islamic artefacts back to London, and created an Arab studio in his house in Upper Phillimore Gardens. 
Dillon was one of the first Western artists to visit Japan, travelling there in 1875 via North America. He spent a year based in Osaka with his son, but also sketched the scenery in other parts of the country. On his return he exhibited Japanese subjects, such as 'The Stray Shuttlecock' (V&A), at the Royal Academy and the Dudley Gallery. He brought home several Japanese curios and his appreciation of the arts of Japan enabled him to write an introduction to the catalogue for an exhibition of Japanese and Chinese art works held at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1878; two years later he published 'Sketches by Japanese Artists'. He also became a member of the council of the Japan Society. 
Dillon's interest in conservation was not confined to Egypt: in 1880 he joined an international committee to assist the progress of the restoration of St Mark's Basilica in Venice, and six years later he participated in the controversy over the effects of light and environmental conditions on watercolours. In the 1890s he opposed the construction of the Nile dam at Aswan which would result in the submergence of the temples at Philae. 
As a young man Dillon was sympathetic to the ideas behind the revolutions of 1848. He knew Giuseppe Mazzini during his exile in England -- almost certainly as a result of his connections with the Ashurst family, notable for their liberal tendencies -- and also assisted some of the leaders of the Hungarian revolution. His marriage produced two daughters, Georgina and Mary, and a son, Edward, but his wife died in 1860 -- which possibly contributed to his frequent travelling -- and his elder daughter also predeceased him. He died at 13 Upper Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, on 2 May 1909. 


@@@@@


doc= 32830


Dillon, Harold Arthur Lee-, seventeenth Viscount Dillon (1844-1932), antiquary, born on 24 January 1844 at 1 Albert Street, Victoria Square, London, was the elder son of Arthur Edmund Dillon-Lee or Lee-Dillon, sixteenth Viscount Dillon (1812-1892), and his wife, Ellen (1809-1896), daughter of James Adderley of King's county, Leinster. The eleventh viscount had married, in 1744, the heiress of the Lees of Ditchley, Oxfordshire, collateral heirs of Sir Henry Lee, champion to Elizabeth I: through them Dillon was descended from Charles II and Barbara Villiers. He was educated at a private school at Eltham, Kent (1855-60), and at Bonn University. He passed out fourth in the army examination of 1862, was gazetted ensign in the rifle brigade on 8 November of that year, and promoted lieutenant in 1866. He saw service in India and Canada, and, on leaving the regular army in 1874, was promoted captain in the Oxfordshire light infantry (militia battalion), retiring with the rank of major in 1891. 
After leaving the rifle brigade Lee-Dillon developed the antiquarian interests which eventually led to his becoming one of Britain's leading authorities on the history of arms and armour, medieval costume, and kindred subjects. His first major publication was a new and completely revised edition in 1885 of 'Costume in England', by F. W. Fairholt. This was followed by over fifty others, mostly articles in learned journals, notably 'Archaeologia', the 'Archaeological Journal', and the 'Journal of the Society of Army Historical Research', a few under his pen-name Armadillo. The majority are on some aspect of the history of arms and armour, but others include an important study of Calais and the Pale ('Archaeologia', 53, 1893), and a catalogue of the paintings, and accounts of various historical manuscripts, at Ditchley. 
In 1888 Lee-Dillon had published a seminal paper on the sections of the great 1547 inventory of Henry VIII's possessions covering arms and armour at Westminster, the Tower of London, and Greenwich ('Archaeologia', 51, 1888), and in 1892, the year in which he succeeded his father as Viscount Dillon, he was appointed as the first curator of the Tower of London armouries, where the residue of these collections had ended up. At this date the armouries still included arms for current use and were administered by the War Office. Their historic contents were under the charge of army storekeepers, who mistreated them and whose lack of historical knowledge led to the eventual nullification of attempts to arrange and label them correctly by, successively, S. R. Meyrick, J. Hewitt, and J. R. Planche. This scandalous state of affairs led to the creation of the official, but semi-honorary, post of curator of the armouries, with responsibility for the study and care of the historic pieces. Dillon was not only the first curator, but he was also the first person to be involved with the armouries to have made a serious study of arms and armour 'in the metal' and not only from early documents and illustrations. He carried out a complete reorganization of the collection, during which he made a detailed examination of all the major pieces, identifying for the first time a number of those with important historical associations and correcting many inaccurate attributions. In 1910 he published an 'Illustrated Guide to the Armouries', which was, in fact, a summary catalogue of pieces exhibited. He retired from the armouries in 1913, having laid the foundation for their eventual conversion into a modern museum. 
Dillon was assisted in identifying the original owners of some of the Tower armours by the reappearance of a folio album of captioned designs of armours produced in the English Royal Almain Armoury at Greenwich for Marian and Elizabethan courtiers. The album had resurfaced in the catalogue of the collection of Frederic Spitzer in 1892; the South Kensington (now Victoria and Albert) Museum failed to purchase it at the Spitzer sale in 1893, but, thanks to Dillon's intervention and support, managed to acquire it privately in 1894. In 1895 Dillon published an article on it ('Archaeological Journal', 52, 1895) followed in 1905 by a volume of facsimile reproductions of a selection of the plates under the title 'An Almain Armourer's Album'. Both, although now out of date, were milestones in the study of English armour. 
Dillon was chairman of the trustees of the National Portrait Gallery (1894-1928), to which he presented and bequeathed various portraits from Ditchley, among them likenesses of Elizabeth I, Archbishop William Wareham, Sir Philip Sidney, and Sir Henry Lee (by Antonio Moro). He was also president of the Royal Archaeological Institute (1892-8) and of the Society of Antiquaries (1897-1904), a trustee of the British Museum (1905-12) and of the Wallace Collection (1918-31), and antiquary to the Royal Academy. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy on its foundation in 1902, appointed CH in 1921, and was also an honorary freeman of the Armourers' and Brasiers' Company of London. 
Dillon married twice: first, on 3 November 1870, in Ottawa, Julia (died 1925), eldest daughter of Isaac Brock Stanton of Ottawa and his wife, Maria, daughter of James Wilson of Scarr, co. Wexford, with whom he had one son who predeceased him; second, on 15 June 1926, Margaret Louisa Everard (died 1954), daughter of the Revd Henry Edward Browne ffolkes, and widow of the Revd John Erasmus Philipps. 
A true aristocrat, with a fine head and figure, Lord Dillon was equally at home in a royal palace and in the third-class carriage of the Great Western Railway, by which for many years he travelled from Charlbury to London and back several times a week. He had two maxims, one that 'Duty is doing more than you are paid for', and the other, in connection with enquiries relating to his expertise, 'Never say you do not know, but find out and then reply'. He died at Ditchley on 18 December 1932, and was buried in Enstone church, Oxfordshire. He was succeeded as eighteenth viscount by his nephew Arthur Henry (1875-1934), who sold Ditchley in 1933, when nearly all the remaining pictures in the collection were dispersed. 


@@@@@


doc= 32831


Dillon, John (1851-1927), Irish nationalist, was born into the Catholic bourgeoisie in Blackrock, co. Dublin, on 4 September 1851, second son among eight children of the Young Irelander John Blake Dillon (1814-1866) and Adelaide (1828-1872), daughter of William Hart, a Dublin solicitor. 
John Dillon was educated privately (one of his tutors was the Fenian James Stephens) and at the age of thirteen was sent to Dr Quinn's school in Harcourt Street. From 1865 to 1870 he studied in the arts faculty of the Catholic University, where he won several prizes and was auditor of the Literary and Historical Society. A voracious reader, he devoured works on literature, history, philosophy, medicine, and science, among many topics. In 1870 Dillon briefly was apprenticed to a Manchester cotton broker but he returned to Dublin and began studies at the Catholic University medical school, before becoming a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1875. Dillon then was a demonstrator in anatomy at the Cecilia Street medical school, but ceased active involvement in medicine when he entered political life. Family financial means enabled him to devote his energies exclusively to politics. A romantic revolutionary aura hung over this tall (6 feet 2 inches), thin man, who was plagued by chronic bouts of illness, including dyspepsia (a condition that affected him in every political crisis), varicose veins, a degree of heart trouble, and eye problems -- although he was also prone to hypochondria. 
Dillon's liberal, independent Irish Catholic notion of an inclusive political nation based on civic rights was in consonance with his father's vision. He articulated radical-Liberal opinions: C. P. Scott observed, 'on social subjects and in foreign politics he is a keen and active Liberal' ('Political Diaries of C. P. Scott', 202), though in later years he was essentially conservative on labour questions and women's suffrage. Dillon -- solitary, aloof, fastidious, and lacking in bonhomie -- was respected in Ireland and by the House of Commons. At the height of the land war, when he was locked in political combat with the government, the Irish chief secretary's adopted daughter none the less recorded, 'there is always something impressive in Mr Dillon's tragical face and manner, and belief in his undoubted honesty and political unselfishness never fail to get him a respectful hearing from the House' ('Florence Arnold-Forster's Irish Journal', 494). Yet he also had a vindictive streak that manifested itself later in his attitude to Sir Horace Plunkett, Sir Antony MacDonnell, James Larkin, and James Connolly. Possibly he had more of a Catholic concept of the 'nation' than he would have wished to acknowledge; Dillon was unwilling to accommodate the Irish landlord class. His public career falls into three phases: radical and agrarian up to 1891; party and parliamentary leader from 1891 to 1914; and an increasingly critical though constitutional opponent of Britain and its Irish policy from 1914 to 1918. 
Dillon joined the Home Rule League when it was founded in November 1873. He surfaced in the parliamentary by-election campaign of John Mitchel, his father's old associate, for Tipperary in 1875, when he first met William O'Brien, for many years his closest colleague and later an unrelenting critic. Dillon became ill in 1876 and remained largely outside the political arena until the next year, when he was elected to the council of the Home Rule League and began working with Charles Stewart Parnell. He also joined the council of the Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language and later the Gaelic League, though he never succeeded in learning Irish himself. A political rather than a cultural nationalist, he was a foremost opponent of making Irish a compulsory subject in the new National University in February 1909. From the time he entered politics until the early 1890s he was seen as a radical with an affinity for Fenianism, though he never joined the movement. By attacking the supposedly anaemic parliamentary approach of Isaac Butt in January 1878 Dillon won public notice; on 4 February 1879 he famously condemned the ailing Butt on the leader's last appearance at the Home Rule League council in Dublin. 
In 1879 Dillon made his first speech on the land question and on 5 October he advocated what would become known as 'boycotting'. When the Irish National Land League was formed in October 1879, he was a member of the original committee and accompanied Parnell on a mission to North America to raise funds for the new body; he remained there until July. In April 1880 he joined the executive of the league. Though Dillon admired Parnell, the two were never intimate colleagues. In his absence Dillon was returned to the House of Commons for Tipperary at the general election in April. But his principal forum was Land League meetings; on 5 November he was among those unsuccessfully prosecuted for conspiracy to prevent the payment of rent. Dillon was a close ally and friend of Michael Davitt, the spearhead of the land agitation. In January he was elected to the committee of the party and, after Davitt's imprisonment, he was appointed Land League head of organization on 13 February. A stern critic of Gladstone's 'Land Bill' introduced in April 1881, which he believed would do nothing for small farmers, Dillon stole a march on Parnell by calling for its rejection (12 April). No other member of the Irish party ever took the initiative away from Parnell in that period. Dillon was detained under the 'Protection of Person and Property Act' (1881) on 2 May (ultimately he was imprisoned six times) but his health quickly deteriorated and he was released on 6 August. At that time he declined to be associated with Parnell's newly launched newspaper, 'United Ireland'. On 15 October he was incarcerated again, with Parnell and others, in Kilmainham prison. Although opposed to the 'No rent manifesto' issued on 18 October, as a gesture of solidarity Dillon signed it. Shortly after his release from prison on 2 May he (and Parnell) received the freedom of Dublin (16 August). As part of the 'Kilmainham treaty', Parnell sought to end the land war; unhappy with this change of direction, on 25 September Dillon announced his withdrawal from politics 'for the next few years' (Moody, 539); he left Ireland in November and in the summer of 1883 departed for Colorado, where his elder brother, William, lived. There he avoided politics and did not mix with Irish-Americans. 
In the summer of 1885 Dillon re-emerged tentatively in politics, after returning home to find the political climate altered. Though he had differed from Parnell over cessation of the land war, he now believed that the Irish leader's strategy on home rule had borne fruit. Persuaded to contest the Ulster seat of North Tyrone, where he was narrowly defeated in the autumn general election, Dillon also was selected to fight the safe constituency of East Mayo, which he held until 1918. When Parnell, at the risk of undermining party unity, insisted on the selection of Captain William O'Shea for the parliamentary vacancy at Galway borough in February 1886, Dillon remained neutral. Gladstone's adoption of home rule in 1886 confirmed Dillon's acceptance of Parnell's strategy and convinced him of the utility of the Liberal alliance. But the Conservatives' return to office in July 1886 heralded renewal of the land agitation and the following years were dominated by the second phase of the land struggle, the Plan of Campaign, which Dillon authored with O'Brien and T. C. Harrington; it was published on 23 October in 'United Ireland'. He and O'Brien were the most visible leaders of the agitation. During 1887 he first met his future wife, Elizabeth Mathew ['see 'Dillon, Elizabeth (1865-1907)], daughter of Sir James Mathew, at her parents' home in London, where he became a frequent guest. In the most notorious incident of the struggle on 9 September 1887 at Mitchelstown, Cork, where Dillon was speaking, the constabulary opened fire, killing three and wounding two. Although an earnest Catholic, Dillon always opposed clerical interference in secular politics; following the papal rescript condemning the Plan of Campaign, Dillon on 4 May 1888 retorted, 'that document is not binding on the conscience of any Irishman at all' (C. C. O'Brien, 221). From this period he faced a stream of criticism from some ecclesiastics, and notably engaged in a long-running dispute with the bishop of Limerick. Confined to Dundalk prison on 20 June, Dillon was released on 15 September because of weakening health. The Plan of Campaign was chronically bereft of funds and Parnell was not prepared to lend more than token aid. On 6 March 1889 Dillon sailed for Australia to solicit contributions; he also toured New Zealand, and returned to Ireland via the United States in late April 1890. His mission raised about $33,000, but the financial woes of the plan persisted and the movement was nearly bankrupt by mid-1890. Dillon was arrested again on 18 September 1890, but received bail, and he and O'Brien disappeared on 9 October and travelled to America. He was thus abroad and unable to re-enter the United Kingdom during the crucial stages of the Parnell divorce crisis. After initial hesitation he declared against Parnell's continued leadership. He reached France on 18 January 1891 to join O'Brien in the 'Boulogne negotiations' with Parnell over the leadership of the party. When these broke down, Dillon and O'Brien travelled on 12 February to Folkestone, where they were immediately arrested. They were detained in Galway gaol until 30 July, in what proved to be his final spell in prison. While interned, Dillon and O'Brien became increasingly disgusted with the tenor of Irish politics, especially by T. M. Healy's venomous attacks on Parnell. On their release they sided with the anti-Parnellites. 
Parnell's death marked the emergence of the second phase of Dillon's career. Although he never lost sight of the land question, especially the fate of evicted tenants, he increasingly focused on the management of the anti-Parnellites and the home rule question, though his active participation was limited by illness during later 1891 and early 1892. On his recovery he took the lead in resisting Healy's influence. As deputy to the aged Justin McCarthy, Dillon was effectively the anti-Parnellite chairman, and consolidated his pre-eminence by 1894. He worked to reconstruct Parnell's authority, with its emphases on united control, strong leadership, vigorous discipline, the reassertion of the party in the national movement, and on placing the constituencies in a subordinate position to the parliamentarians. When the Liberals reclaimed office in August 1892 Dillon was one of the Irish leaders routinely consulted about policy. He urged John Morley, the chief secretary, to treat the case of the evicted tenants and was party to the negotiations over the 'Government of Ireland Bill' in 1893. Gladstone's retirement created a political vacuum in the Liberal alliance, presenting problems for Dillon's direction of the national agenda. Following the general election of 1895 the Conservatives returned to office, which limited nationalist influence, but the outcome of the election also provided Dillon with the ammunition to expel Healy from positions of influence in the movement. His personal circumstances changed when he married Elizabeth Mathew on 21 November at the Brompton Oratory. They had six children, five sons (born in 1896, 1898, 1900, 1902, and 1905) and a daughter (born in 1897). Their fourth son was James Mathew Dillon (1902-1986). 
On McCarthy's resignation, Dillon was elected chairman of the anti-Parnellites by thirty-eight votes to twenty-one on 18 February 1896. He immediately abolished the troublesome party committee but never enjoyed uncontested allegiance; the Healy faction and the 'Irish Catholic' constantly snapped at his heels. At this point there were in reality three Irish national parties, though Dillon led much the largest. Dillon announced at the Irish Race Convention in September that he was ready to stand aside if this would abet reunion. However, he was less accommodating towards Sir Horace Plunkett's attempts to bring Unionists and nationalists together. Although he attended the All-Ireland Committee conference in 1896, Dillon never shed mistrust of dialogue with Irish Unionists, and displayed an animus against Plunkett, the co-operative movement, and Unionist reformism generally. Similarly, though he supported the 'Irish Local Government Bill' (1898) sponsored by the tory government, he was uneasy about plums proffered from that quarter. In 1898 O'Brien initiated the United Irish League on an agrarian platform. Dillon was ambivalent about this new association, believing that it could lead to confrontation with the government and endanger the alliance with the Liberals. This time marked the first significant strains in the O'Brien-Dillon relationship. In February 1899 Dillon resigned the party chairmanship in order to facilitate party reunion. 
Freed from the constraints of leadership, Dillon felt able to take a more forthright political stance. He was a key critic of the South African War. Although faithfully supporting John Redmond after his selection for the chairmanship of the unified Irish party in February 1900, Dillon during late 1901 and early 1902 made a series of speeches on the land question. He went on a fund-raising tour of America in 1902 but became ill and was sidelined from politics from October until April 1903. During the interlude the land conference in December 1902 agreed a formula for tenant land purchase which became the backbone of the 'Wyndham Act' (1903), the single largest measure of its type. Whereas O'Brien was a keen promoter of the accord and thereafter became the chief nationalist proponent of 'conference plus business', as the way to unite all classes and creeds for Ireland, Dillon's instinctive dislike of negotiations with landlords soon surfaced. While some of his objections to the act were well founded, at Swinford on 23 August he attacked the legislation and also the 'doctrine of conciliation' (Bew, 'Conflict and Conciliation', 102-3), believing that the right approach was to put unrelenting pressure on the landlords and government. An ensuing breach with O'Brien was never healed; O'Brien's later published accounts severely tarnished Dillon's reputation. Dillon successfully urged Redmond to resist the conference approach to deal with the vexed question of universities in Ireland. Similarly, the devolution proposals promoted by the under-secretary, MacDonnell, were seen by Dillon as insidious. For much of 1904 he was once more afflicted by illness, and only resumed regular attendance in the House of Commons the next year. 
When the Liberals returned to office in January 1906 Dillon again was regularly consulted. In 1906 he laboured assiduously to defend Catholic interests in the abortive 'Education Bill' (for England and Wales) and was deeply involved in negotiations over the local government proposal of the chief secretary, James Bryce, which, however, he always disliked. A much modified scheme incorporating Dillon's major objections was proposed by Bryce's successor, Augustine Birrell, the next year. The nationalist response was uncertain; a national conference was called; this rejected the measure and it was withdrawn by the government. Dillon's part in the conference was curtailed abruptly when his wife died on 14 May; effectively he was inactive for some months afterwards. Subsequently, he spent most of his time in Dublin and raised a young family. The passage of the 'Evicted Tenants Act' (1907), the 'Irish University Act' (1908), and the 'Irish Land Act' (1909) were more satisfying outcomes for Dillon. During the budget crisis of 1909 he spoke frequently in Ireland, incurring unpopularity for his stance on a measure which would increase the Irish tax burden. 
Between 1910 and 1914 the home rule question re-emerged. Dillon twice suffered debilitating injuries during this period. From 4 June until October 1911 he was incapacitated and then in October 1912 he was thrown from a pony trap, which caused him to be inactive. During 1913 he was mostly in Ireland, casting an unsympathetic eye on the 'malignant enemy', James Larkin, during the Dublin 'lock-out' (Carroll, 208). Dillon was at the hub of negotiations over home rule in 1914, and was present at the abortive Buckingham Palace conference (21-24 June). Opposed to 'partition', he was prepared to support local autonomy for northern protestant areas so long as the formal unity of the country was not compromised. During 1914 Dillon was frustrated by the government's handling of the 'Curragh mutiny' (20-25 March) and the fatal consequences of the use of troops at Bachelors Walk on 26 July. 
With the opening of the First World War, Dillon entered a final phase of his public career. At the outbreak of war in August 1914, Dillon accepted Redmond's support of the British decision to enter the conflict, though he never shared his leader's enthusiasm and he abstained from the military recruiting campaign. Between the Easter rising, April 1916, and the general election of 1918 Dillon's political statesmanship was severely tested. When the rebellion broke out he was in Dublin and able to estimate its effect. On 11 May he made an impassioned speech in the House of Commons against further executions. Thereafter Dillon, a natural pessimist, was plunged into constant gloom about the situation. He was immersed in David Lloyd George's abortive attempt to resolve the home rule question (May-July 1916) and offered important criticisms of the government's actions in Ireland during the autumn. His reservations about the war accelerated, and he was 'deeply concerned... from the point of view especially of the protection of the smaller nationalities, and now of Rumania' ('Political Diaries of C. P. Scott', 239). In 1917 he declined nomination to the Irish Convention. On 12 March 1918 Dillon was elected party chairman in succession to the recently deceased Redmond. He joined forces with Sinn Fein and the Catholic bishops in resisting the government's plan to introduce conscription to Ireland which, in the event, was never imposed. He made a further vain effort to persuade the government to introduce Irish self-government, introducing a motion for self-determination on 29 July 1918. After the failure to reach an electoral pact with Sinn Fein, the Irish party was overwhelmed by it in the December general election; Dillon himself was defeated in East Mayo by Eamon de Valera by 8975 votes to 4514. 
Afterwards Dillon played little active part in Irish affairs, though he corresponded with old colleagues about public events. Between 1919 and 1922 he came to a rapprochement with his old antagonist Plunkett. Had Dillon left politics in 1882 or 1892, he would have been remembered as one of the foremost figures of the land struggle. As it is, his reputation was scarred by the long years of parliamentary manoeuvres after Parnell's fall and the failure to achieve home rule. Furthermore, his Young Ireland brand of nationalism seemed outmoded in the years after 1916, while his conservative views on labour and women did not endear him to a rising generation. His standing was also harmed in unflattering memoirs by several old colleagues. Following surgery, he died in a nursing home at Portland Place, London, on 4 August 1927, and was buried four days later in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 32832


Dimbleby, Richard Frederick (1913-1965), radio and television broadcaster, was born on 25 May 1913 at Richmond, Surrey, the elder child and only son of Frederick Jabez George Dimbleby (1876-1943), journalist and local newspaper proprietor, and Gwendoline Bolwell ('b'. 1886), daughter of a Bath surveyor. The families of both parents were low-church, committed to temperance, and supporters of the Liberal Party. Dimbleby's mother -- as a girl she had wanted to go on the stage -- was a pillar of the Richmond Operatic and Dramatic societies. His father combined a succession of jobs in Fleet Street with editorial control of the family newspaper, the 'Richmond and Twickenham Times'; during the First World War he worked in Whitehall as a government public relations officer. Dimbleby went to a preparatory school near Battle in Sussex and in 1927 to Mill Hill School, then on the northern outskirts of London. He was an amiable, idle boy; broad and heavy even in his teens, he disliked organized games and was happiest when messing about in boats. He excelled only at music; having passed matriculation at the third attempt he left school at eighteen and started work on the family paper. 
After brief spells as a reporter in Hampshire and on the staff of the 'Advertiser's Weekly', Dimbleby was taken on by the BBC. In 1936 Britain's 'national instrument of broadcasting' relied for its news reports on the agencies. Dimbleby had suggested to the BBC's chief news editor that there were ways in which the 'News' might be enlivened without robbing it of authority and boldly proposed recruiting to the staff a number of reporters or correspondents. This revolutionary idea was not immediately adopted, but Dimbleby soon attracted attention by his enthusiasm for eyewitness reports and authentic sound effects; when covering the story of a record-breaking new train, he spent much of the journey recording the sound of the wheels by dangling a microphone down a lavatory pan. 
Dimbleby reported the royal tour of Canada in the spring of 1939 -- the first to include a BBC correspondent -- and on the day war was declared he put on uniform as the BBC's first war correspondent (although he had been briefly in Spain as an 'observer' earlier in the year). He experienced the frustrations of the phoney war in France (and of explaining his expense claims to BBC administrators -- after recording a Christmas programme in a casualty clearing station, he thought it fitting that the corporation should foot the bill for the turkey and plum pudding). Before disaster overtook the British expeditionary force he was sent to the Middle East, and over the next two years he witnessed the campaigns in Libya and Eritrea, saw fighting in Albania and Greece, and was ambushed by guerrillas in Iran. 
In 1942 Dimbleby was recalled to London, a victim of the internecine warfare that was being waged between the war cabinet in Whitehall and Middle East command, and between a romantic and stubborn prime minister at home and his cool-headed but equally obdurate commander in the field. 'I found', General Wavell noted drily, 'that Winston's tactical ideas had to some extent crystallised at the South African war' (Dimbleby, 106). Dimbleby, carefully briefed by Wavell's general headquarters, had been sending back dispatches which did nothing to ease the strained relations between the BBC and Whitehall. When he left Cairo, he was feted by ministers, ambassadors, and army commanders. Godfrey Talbot, the BBC colleague sent out to replace him, said: 'I was a journalist succeeding a personality' (Dimbleby, 159). 
Early in 1943 Dimbleby became the BBC's air correspondent; his first mission took him on a raid on Berlin in a Lancaster bomber. Shortly after D-day in 1944 he was appointed director of the war reporting unit. He himself reported the crossing of the Rhine. He was the first correspondent to enter Belsen, and he broadcast from there what his son Jonathan later described as 'an unforgettable, definitive statement about human atrocity' (Dimbleby, 190). Shortly afterwards, he was in Berlin. 'As a clean, solid, efficient city, it has ceased to exist', he reported. He broadcast one of his dispatches from the filth and rubble that had been Hitler's study in the chancellery, sitting in the Fuhrer's chair. 
When Dimbleby returned from Germany in the summer of 1945, his BBC salary was $1000. When the BBC refused to raise it by $100, he decided to resign and take his chance as a freelance. On 26 June 1937 he had married Dilys Violet Constance Thomas ('b'. 1913), who had been his father's personal assistant on the family paper. They already had two sons (both David and Jonathan were to follow their father into broadcasting), and they would later have a third son and a daughter. 
Work came slowly, and Dimbleby was grateful when his uncle, none too willingly, offered him the editorship-in-chief of the family papers. (His father had died three years previously.) From television, which had been under wraps during the war, he earned less than $150 in his first two years as a freelance, but his versatility and professionalism soon attracted the attention of radio producers. He joined the new panel game 'Twenty Questions' (the idea was imported from American radio). He also travelled the length and breadth of the country to interview people for 'Down your Way', a programme devised to get round the stringent restrictions imposed on the broadcasting of recorded music by the industrial muscle of the Musicians' Union. 
By the early 1950s Dimbleby was in demand as a commentator for outside broadcasts. He described the lying-in-state of George VI, and at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth in 1953 it was Dimbleby's happy choice of words which added colour to the black and white images on the small screen. Dimbleby was also influential in the shaping of current affairs broadcasting -- what he described as 'the big and vital field of topical but non-immediate news' (Dimbleby, 267). By the time the 'Panorama' programme was launched in 1955 he was seen as the only possible presenter, and he remained as its anchorman for the rest of his life. Leonard Miall, who worked closely with him in those years, wrote that he 'almost acted as a national Ombudsman' (Miall, 'Inside the BBC' 58). His bulk and his unflappability were hugely reassuring. During a programme on the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, a viewer telephoned to say she would send her children to school only if Richard Dimbleby said it was safe to do so. 
Dimbleby's mastery of television techniques and the meticulous attention he paid to his 'homework' made him a natural choice for presenting the exhausting marathons screened at general election time. He also continued into the 1960s as the voice of the BBC on state and other important occasions -- the first televised opening of parliament, Princess Margaret's wedding, the funeral of President Kennedy. To critics who complained that his tone was reverential, he would point out that a commentator at a solemn occasion who did not lower his voice to a hushed whisper might quickly be hustled off the premises. 
The politics of broadcasting being what they are, Dimbleby had to contend with more than one attempt to dislodge him. As he moved into his fifties, however, he knew he was being stalked by an enemy more formidable than any of the BBC's young turks. By the time he delivered his moving commentary on the pageantry of Churchill's funeral in January 1965 Dimbleby had already been suffering from cancer for five years. 
When he went into hospital and the nature of his illness was made known, he received 7000 letters. A woman travelled from the country to London with a basket of eggs; the queen sent six bottles of champagne to his bedside. He died on 22 December 1965, and his passing was marked by a memorial service in Westminster Abbey -- the place he had sometimes called his 'workshop'. A quarter of a century later, a memorial plaque, sculpted by his third son, Nicholas, was unveiled in Poets' Corner, an honour never previously accorded to a broadcaster. 
Dimbleby's family life was richly contented. It had been his ambition as a young man to escape from suburbia into the English countryside, a dream he realized in 1952 with the purchase of a farm with 25 acres of grassland in Sussex. In his later years he was the proud owner of a succession of Rolls-Royces; the honorary doctorate of laws conferred on him by the University of Sheffield was also a source of great pride. He was an enthusiastic pianist favouring, according to his son Jonathan, 'loud ringing chords and long ralentandos' (Dimbleby, 294). He was never happier than when on the water; when he covered the coronation in 1953, he operated from his Dutch sailing barge, 'Vabel', which he brought round from Chichester and moored in the Thames. 
Dimbleby's broadcasting career spanned almost thirty years. In the last ten years of his life he was widely regarded as 'the voice of the BBC'. His personal and professional qualities were well summed up in Westminster Abbey by his old friend and colleague Wynford Vaughan-Thomas: 'We knew him as a simple man, a good man, and in the end a very brave man. Richard brought a sense of permanence to our impermanent profession' (Miall, 61). 


@@@@@


doc= 32833


Dimock, Nathaniel (1825-1909), liturgical scholar and theologian, was born on 8 July 1825 at Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, son of John Dimock of Bridge-end, Stonehouse, and his wife, Emma Rook, daughter of Dr James Parkinson of Hoxton. He was educated at two private schools before matriculating at Oxford in 1843. He graduated BA from St John's College in 1847, proceeding MA in 1850. He was ordained deacon by Dr Edward Stanley, the bishop of Norwich, on behalf of the archbishop of Canterbury in 1848, and ordained priest by Archbishop Sumner in 1850. He married on 31 March 1853 Georgiana, daughter of John Alfred Wigan of Clare House, Kent, and sister of Sir Frederick Wigan, bt. She died three months after the marriage on 14 July 1853. Dimock was curate of East Malling, Kent, from 1848 to 1872. He was then vicar of Womenswold, Kent, from 1872 to 1876, and vicar of St Paul's, Maidstone, from 1876 to 1887. Owing to ill health he went abroad and became English chaplain at Sanremo from 1887 to 1888. 
Dimock was a fine liturgical scholar. He approached questions from an evangelical standpoint, responding creatively and with great learning to the ferment of new thinking on sacramental questions occasioned by the Oxford Movement, in particular in its second, ritualistic phase. Evangelicals like Dimock argued against the ritualist teaching on the priestly office, on the real presence of the body and blood of Christ, and on the sacrifice of the mass. Dimock also sought to prove that this teaching was without warrant from most of the church fathers or from Anglican divines, including those of the Jacobean and Caroline period, whom high-church clerics particularly esteemed. In 'The Christian Doctrine of Sacerdotium' (1897) Dimock maintained that there was a true priesthood within the Church of England, but that it was located not within its ministers but entirely in Christ and in his finished work. In his books 'On Eucharistic Worship in the English Church' (1876) and 'Papers on the Doctrine of the English Church Concerning the Eucharistic Presence' (2 vols., mem. edn 1911) he argued that the 'real presence' was not local but spiritual, like the presence of the Lord in baptism. He maintained that Christ was present in the worthy recipient of communion only, and claimed an Anglican pedigree for this reformed, rather than Lutheran, view in Lancelot Andrewes, Jeremy Taylor, William Wake, and Daniel Waterland. Dimock followed on from William Goode, a mid-nineteenth-century evangelical theologian, and ultimately from Cranmer, developing the objection that the dogma of the real presence has deleterious consequences on the doctrine of the incarnation, denying the full humanity of Christ through the presence of a non-natural body on many altars following the ascension. Other important books by Dimock include 'The Doctrine of the Death of Christ' (1890), 'Missarum sacrificia' (1890), 'Dangerous Deceits' (1895), 'Vox liturgiae Anglicanae' (1897), and 'Light from History on Christian Ritual' (1900). Dimock's greatest weakness was stylistic: his prose can be turgid, but his argument is clear and his sources exhaustively cited. 
Dimock retired in 1888 and lived at Eastbourne. He passed a quiet life, uninvolved in public debate and controversy, until in 1900 he was invited to take part in Bishop Mandell Creighton's Fulham round-table conference on the holy communion and ritual. Dimock substantially influenced many of the conference's conclusions. From 1896 he lived at Redhill, and died there on 3 March 1909 at his home, Hemstede, Station Road. He was buried at Reigate cemetery on 8 March. 
Dimock was recognized for his liturgical scholarship by those of other churchmanships, such as the high-church bishop of Edinburgh, John Dowden, who respected his work on the eucharist. From his own evangelical party Bishop Handley Moule of Durham acknowledged Dimock's standing, stating that 'in him the grace of God combined in perfect harmony a noble force and range of mental power, an unshaken fidelity to conscience and Revelation, and a spirit beautiful with humility, peace and love' (N. Dimock, 'On Eucharistic Worship in the English Church', mem. edn 1911, x). 


@@@@@


doc= 32834


Dines, William Henry (1855-1927), meteorologist, was born on 5 August 1855 at 74 Charlwood Street, Pimlico, London, the only surviving son (two daughters also reached adulthood) of George Dines (1812-1887), builder and meteorologist, and his wife, Louisa Sara Coke of Norfolk. George Dines's father, Charles, gamekeeper to the Whitbread family, had been murdered by a poacher and the Whitbreads retained an interest in the welfare of the Dines family. George Dines was apprenticed to the building firm of Thomas Cubitt, rising to become foreman of works at Osborne. His meteorological interests probably arose out of his building work, and may have encouraged similar interest in his son. 
Dines was educated at Woodcote House School, Windlesham, Surrey, then articled as an engineering pupil at the Nine Elms Works of the London and South Western Railway. After completing his articles in 1877 he went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he passed the mathematical tripos in 1881 as twentieth wrangler. He remained in residence as a mathematical coach for a year after graduation, but his retiring nature and spare constitution did not fit him for a teaching career, though he continued to offer mathematical tuition by correspondence. He married, on 3 January 1882, Catharine Emma ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of Frederick Tugwell, a clergyman. Two of their sons later became notable meteorologists. As he had private means Dines was able to devote himself to the study of dynamical and physical meteorology. He became the leading exponent of experimental meteorology in England at the turn of the century, and his work in anemometry, the upper air, solar and terrestrial radiation, and the structure of the atmosphere was particularly notable. 
The collapse of the Tay Bridge in 1879 led engineers and builders to raise questions about the maximum wind pressure tolerance of structures, and meteorologists to face the problem of how to relate wind velocity and force to the corresponding pressures. The Royal Meteorological Society commissioned a wind force committee in June 1885 to examine the matter. Dines was one of the most active members, his colleagues being William Marcet, the society's president, the instrument makers William Ford Stanley and R. W. Munro, and, from the Meteorological Office, R. H. Scott, secretary, and Captain Toynbee, superintendent. 
Dines used his engineering skills to devise an anemometer that would be independent of friction, and to compare alongside each other various types of anemometer. On this latter task he collaborated with G. M. Whipple, superintendent of Kew observatory. Having failed to persuade any railway company to allow instruments to be fixed to a speeding locomotive, they set up their experiments on a steam powered whirligig in the Dines's family garden. Their results were jointly published in the 'Proceedings' and in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society in 1888. After several years of development with Munro's instrument engineering firm, Dines produced the pressure tube anemometer. This robust instrument achieved widespread and international popularity, the type having more than eighty years of active life after its original conception. 
Although of independent means Dines was far from isolated. Interest in his work was sustained through his reports to the annual meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, his membership of meteorological committees, and his circle of friends from university days. For a study of the effect of exposure on the readings of wind pressure recorders Dines collaborated with Captain D. Wilson-Barker, who took the observations over a two-year period on HMS 'Worcester' for their 1899 paper. Six years later he devised a micro-barograph in association with William Napier Shaw. Another longtime friend was Lewis Fry Richardson, the father of analytical forecasting. 
Elected president of the Royal Meteorological Society for 1901 and 1902, Dines encouraged the society and the British Association for the Advancement of Science to support upper air investigations. He himself began to develop lightweight instruments that could be suspended from large box kites. These required a considerable expanse of open countryside for safe operation, as they were attached to steel wire that could be several miles long. Firstly at Pyrton Hill, then from Benson Observatory in Oxfordshire, he took copious measurements of the upper air and coupled them with the results from balloon experiments to investigate the newly discovered stratosphere. His ideas formed the basis for theories concerning variations in atmospheric pressure on account of processes in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. The effects of this linkage are known to this day as the Dines compensation. 
Dines applied the same mix of experimental skill and theoretical grasp to the problem of the heat balance of the earth and the atmosphere. During the early years of the First World War he had attempted to establish a balance sheet for solar radiation; the outcome was the development of an instrument for measuring night-time radiation. 
His home at Benson became one of five weather stations to submit daily weather reports to the Meteorological Office in London. It also remained a focus for family life, one of his two meteorologist sons being married there in 1915, and one of his grandchildren in 1937. In his later years he succumbed to Parkinson's disease, leaving the running of the observatory to his son Lewen. He died at Benson on 24 December 1927. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32835


Dix, George Eglinton Alston (1901-1952), Benedictine monk and liturgical scholar, was born at Woolwich on 4 October 1901, the elder son of George Henry Dix (1872-1932), a schoolmaster of partly French descent who afterwards took orders and became the first principal of the College of St Mark and St John, Chelsea, and his wife, Mary Jane Walker (1872/3-1939). Little information survives about his early years, apart from his education at Temple Grove, Eastbourne (1908-15) and Westminster School (1915-20), where he was a king's scholar and discovered a marked talent for acting (a significant element in his developed personality). After proceeding as an exhibitioner to Merton College, Oxford, in 1920, he took a lively part in the activities of the turbulent post-war undergraduate generation. His second-class honours in the school of modern history in 1923 reflected this, though they did less than justice to the proficiency in medieval studies that he acquired under the tuition of Arthur Johnson of All Souls. This was evidently recognized in his immediate appointment as lecturer in church history at Keble College. In his first year in this post he attended Wells Theological College, and was ordained deacon to the title of his college in 1924 and priest in 1925. 
In 1926 he left Keble, and joined the small Anglican Benedictine community which was shortly to move from Pershore to Nashdom Abbey, Burnham, in Buckinghamshire. Though the timing for this was unexpectedly abrupt, the project had been forming in his mind for some while, and in time it was to give him the identity and stability he needed. His progress towards this goal, however, was far from smooth. Having been sent as a novice to the abbey's house in the Gold Coast Colony, he had to be invalided home in 1929; and his health played a part in his decision not to be professed in the following year, but to assume instead the status of an 'intern oblate'. In the seven years for which this continued he laid the foundations of his patristic and liturgical scholarship. In 1936 he re-entered the novitiate and in 1940 he was solemnly professed. 
From this time onwards Dix's activity was increasingly in the public arena. He shared the papalist stance with which his monastery was associated; but he also saw it as his vocation to reclaim for the church of his baptism -- as a whole -- a Catholic character which Rome could recognize as such, and to prevent it from travelling down paths which would preclude this. Among the latter, in his eyes, were current proposals for church union in south India (and the possibility of their being used as a model for England). He masterminded a public campaign against these, with repeated lobbying of Archbishop William Temple (who remained nevertheless a revered friend); in the time of Temple's successor the resistance was conducted from the lower house of convocation after his election in 1945. There he skilfully exploited the inferior clergy's traditional suspicion of the motives of their bishops, and won a substantial measure of confidence. But the bitterness of the campaign soured the spirits of lesser men, and the time and energy that Dix devoted to ecclesiastical politics was ultimately to the detriment of his writing, and probably also his health. A by-product of the campaign, and one that well illustrates both the strengths and the weaknesses of his scholarship, was his essay on the ministry in the early church in the collection 'The Apostolic Ministry' (1946), which he persuaded his close friend and ally K. E. Kirk, bishop of Oxford, to edit. 
Dix's attraction to liturgical studies had begun long before this time, though the course it took did not remain unaffected. His first major publication in this field was his critical text (1937) of the 'Apostolic Tradition' of Hippolytus of Rome, which had come to light through the researches of Dom R. H. Connolly some twenty years earlier. Dix was a pioneer in his emphasis (some would now say overemphasis) on the importance of this document for the early history of the liturgy, and his edition was a milestone towards a definitive reconstruction, though the final result is likely to look rather different. His text was to have been followed by a commentary, but that was shelved in favour of the more ambitious project for which he is most widely known, 'The Shape of the Liturgy' (1945). Written with verve, imagination, and often mischievous humour, and in places with real eloquence, this is an outstanding piece of 'haute vulgarisation', liturgy made accessible to the general reader. Yet it could only have been produced by a master of his subject. Its breadth of insight decisively altered the scope and the course of liturgical reform both within and beyond the Church of England. And despite the haste of its composition under wartime conditions, and the proportion of bold solutions to individual questions which have not stood the test of time, it is still unreplaced as a unified vision of what Christian liturgy is really about. 
Dix is remembered as a wit and lover of paradox, as a superb (and irrepressible) raconteur, and as a deliverer of devastating put-downs to tendentious scholarship or episcopal self-importance. Beneath the surface there was genuine spiritual conviction and a rare capacity for friendship. Little of substance came from his pen after 1946. Besides his convocation work he was increasingly concerned with the affairs of his abbey (of which he became prior in 1948), particularly the demands of its daughter foundation in the United States, to which he paid two extended visits. On the second of these, after he had committed himself to raising funds for a new chapel by an extensive programme of lecturing, and with building already in progress, an intestinal cancer was diagnosed. Seeing no other alternative to bankruptcy for the daughter house, he postponed surgery for eight months while the money was raised. The treatment was initially successful, but secondaries developed before his convalescence was complete, and he died at Grovefield House, Burnham, on 12 May 1952. He was buried on 16 May in the cemetery of Nashdom Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 32836


Dixie, Lady Florence Caroline (1855-1905), author and traveller, was born in Kinmount, Cummertrees, Dumfriesshire, on 24 May 1855, one of a pair of twins, the youngest of the six children of Archibald William Douglas, eighth marquess of Queensberry (1818-1858), and his wife, Caroline Margaret (died 1904), younger daughter of General Sir William Robert Clayton, bt. 
The Douglases were an ancient Scottish family, vigorous and combative, and in Florence's generation they were haunted by disaster, dissension, and scandal: in 1858 Florence's father died from an accidental shot while cleaning a gun; her brother Francis was killed in 1865 on the first ascent of the Matterhorn; James, Florence's twin, was to commit suicide in middle age in 1891; and their eldest brother, the ninth marquess of Queensberry (John Sholto Douglas), provoked the notorious Oscar Wilde case. Dissension affected the twins when they were seven years old and their mother alarmed their guardians by becoming a Roman Catholic and converting the children; she was threatened with the loss of her children, a real danger in an age which allowed a woman no rights over her own progeny, and an injustice against which Florence was to campaign in later life and which was the subject of her autobiographical 'The Story of Ijain' (1903). 
Their mother took the children abroad for two years and on their return Florence was sent to a convent school where she hated the repressive regime and the dogmatism of the religious teaching. She found relief in poetry, writing 'Songs of a Child' under the pseudonym Darling -- verses which were not, however, published until 1902. Early in life she developed a passion for sport and travel. She was a first rate horsewoman and a keen hunter of big game, one of the first women to take up this activity. She learned to swim and was a rapid walker. On 3 April 1875 she married Sir Alexander Beaumont Churchill Dixie, eleventh baronet (1851-1924), a strikingly handsome man, nicknamed Beau. They shared a taste for adventure and outdoor life, and the one flaw in an otherwise equal partnership seems to have been Beau's love of gambling, which was to prove a constant threat to the family property at Bosworth Park in Leicestershire, eventually sold to pay his debts. They had two sons, George Douglas (1876-1948) and Albert Edward Wolston (1878-1940), godson of the prince of Wales. 
Neither domestic nor social life appealed to Lady Dixie, and, having accomplished the duty of motherhood, she determined to escape 'the monotony of society's so-called pleasures' (Dixie, 2). In December 1878 she set off for South America where 'scenes of infinite beauty and grandeur' might be lying hidden in the solitude of the mountains which bound the barren plains of the Pampas, into whose mysterious recesses no one had yet ventured. 'And I was to be the first to behold them: an egotistical pleasure, it is true; but the idea had a great charm for me' (Dixie, 3). She was accompanied by her husband, her eldest and her twin brothers, and a friend, Julius Beerbohm, a naturalist with some knowledge of the country. Although she was the only woman in the party she took the lead throughout their six months abroad, not only in the pursuit of the big game with which they stocked their larder but also in coping with emergencies varying from the entertainment of unexpected visitors to the devastating shock of an earthquake. 
The publication of 'Across Patagonia' (1880) established Lady Dixie's reputation as a bold and resourceful traveller with a pen as ready as her gun. It was also partly the reason for her appointment as the 'Morning Post''s war correspondent in South Africa where the Anglo-Zulu War was raging; she was the first woman to be officially appointed by a British newspaper to cover a war. Her husband accompanied her and, although on arriving in Cape Town in March 1881 they found to her chagrin that hostilities were over, they spent the next six months in southern Africa. They toured the country, visiting the battlefields and learning something of the causes and the course of the late conflict, while Lady Dixie contributed articles to the 'Morning Post' in which she championed the cause of Cetewayo and his Zulu people. These provided material for 'A Defence of Zululand and its King' (1882). The same views were expressed in her account of the South African adventure, 'In the Land of Misfortune' (1882), a more serious work than 'Across Patagonia' though it has its lighter moments. In some of these Beau is made to cut a less than heroic figure, as when he sleeps through the invasion of their tent by errant mules which his wife is left to drive out -- or so she alleges ('In the Land of Misfortune', 372). 
On her return to England, home politics engaged Lady Dixie's attention, particularly those affecting Ireland which she saw as another 'land of misfortune' in need of her support. She was strongly in favour of home rule (as also for Scotland) but opposed measures advocated by the Land League during the agitations of 1880-83, thereby incurring the enmity of the extremist Fenians. On 17 March 1883, when Fenian outrages were exciting London, she announced that, while she was walking by the Thames near Windsor, two men disguised as women, whom she inferred to be Fenian emissaries, vainly attempted her assassination. Her statement attracted worldwide attention, but Sir William Harcourt, the home secretary, declared in the House of Commons that the story was unconfirmed, and nothing further followed. 
Lady Dixie's political interests were thenceforth concentrated on the advocacy of complete sex equality. Her aims ranged from the reform of female attire to that of the royal succession law, which, she held, should prescribe the accession of the eldest child, of whichever sex, to the throne. She desired the emendation of the marriage service and of the divorce laws so as to place man and woman on the same level. She formulated such views in 'Gloriana, or, The Revolution of 1900' (1890); her stories for children, 'The Young Castaways, or, The Child Hunters of Patagonia' (1890) and 'Aniwee, or, The Warrior Queen' (1890) had a like purpose. Latterly, financial difficulties caused her and her husband to give up their home in Leicestershire and to settle on her family's Kinmount estate. In later life she became convinced of the cruelty of blood sports, which she denounced in 'Horrors of Sport' (1891) and the 'Mercilessness of Sport' (1901). She also supported secularism, contributing to the 'Agnostic Journal'. Lady Dixie died at Glen Stuart, Annan, Dumfriesshire, on 7 November 1905, and was buried in the family grave at Kinmount. 


@@@@@


doc= 32837


Dixon, Sir Arthur Lewis (1881-1969), civil servant, was born in Swindon on 30 January 1881, the only son of Seth Dixon, a Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Caroline Lewis. He was educated at Kingswood School, Bath, of which for many years he was later a governor, and entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he became ninth wrangler (1902). In 1903 he passed fourth in the open competitive examination for class 1 clerkships in the home civil service and joined the Home Office. In 1909 Dixon married Marie (1863/4-1949), daughter of Alfred Talbot Price, architect; she was seventeen years older than he and there were no children. 
It was Dixon's achievement at the Home Office to refashion two great public institutions -- the police and fire services -- from disparate elements which had scarcely changed since Victorian times. In both he helped to enlarge the powers and responsibilities of the Home Office, imposing his own strong ideals on later development. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he was put in charge of a 'war measures' division. From there he could assess the handicaps suffered by police forces and fire brigades alike, given the absence of any effective system for co-ordination and control. Following Zeppelin raids he drew up a successful mutual assistance scheme between fire brigades, an experience valuable in preparing for the war of 1939-45. 
At the end of the First World War the troubles of the police, which had led them to strike, demanded attention. In 1919 the government set up a review committee under Lord Desborough, and Dixon became its secretary. The subsequent reports (1919 and 1920) marked a watershed between old and new police services: as Dixon himself put it later, the changes proposed by Desborough offered 'what amounted to a new conception of the police as a service, an integrated system, rather than a collection of separate forces each concerned with its merely local requirements and personnel' (Critchley, 190). 
The 'new conception' had to be worked out in practical terms and Dixon was consequently placed in charge of a newly formed police division in the Home Office. From there he rapidly gained the confidence, and frequently the affection, of those concerned with police administration: chief constables, members of police authorities, and the new Police Federation. By temperament a brilliant planner and organizer rather than an administrator, Dixon maintained his unique authority, virtually unchallenged, for more than twenty years. His reward came with the realization, when war broke out in 1939, that 183 separate police forces, under his guidance, were already acknowledging not only a local loyalty but also a loyalty to the idea of a single police service dedicated to promoting the wider national interest. Meanwhile, his fertile and ingenious mind always fascinated by scientific discovery, Dixon also cast about for ways of harnessing science to detective work. The development of early radio links within forces, the systematic training of detectives, and the establishment of forensic science laboratories stemmed largely from his enthusiasm and drive. 
Dixon was promoted to assistant under-secretary of state in 1932, and four years later he took over the fire brigades division of the Home Office. Convinced that in a future war the real menace would be incendiary rather than high-explosive bombs, he set about developing and equipping the fire brigades with the same drive with which he had modernized the police. Hence he made sure that, on the outbreak of war, ample firefighting equipment was available. However, it soon became clear that the service's fragmented organization was dangerous, and when the first heavy air raids came in 1940-41 the government decided on an immediate and radical restructuring of the whole service. The task of creating the National Fire Service during wartime fell naturally to Dixon. The basic plan -- the unification of all firefighting arrangements, with standard conditions of service -- was characteristically drawn up within weeks. It was, said the home secretary, Herbert Morrison, 'one of the quickest administrative revolutions that ever took place' -- and it was brilliantly successful. In thus modernizing both the fire service and the police, Dixon made a large personal contribution towards ensuring the stability of the home front during the war. Recognition came with a knighthood in 1941 and promotion to a special rank of principal assistant under-secretary of state in the same year. 
Dixon was shy, and to many colleagues seemed aloof and gluttonous for work. He had little social life: he lived, recluse-like, in a succession of private hotels. He inherited from his father abstemious attitudes: he did not smoke, and was a strict teetotaller. He was an active Christian, and gave great help to the British and Foreign Bible Society, of which he was vice-president. He was also a generous benefactor of the Methodist church, of his old school, and of the Police College. While reserved, however, Dixon was not cold; those who penetrated the reserve were devoted to him. Listening to music, walking, and keeping abreast of scientific discoveries were Dixon's chief delights, but his interests were wide-ranging, encompassing geology, for example, as well as palaeontology, astronomy, and nuclear fission -- about which he published a book, 'Atomic Energy for the Layman' (1950). He was welcomed in many of the observatories and atomic stations of Europe and America, and was a visiting lecturer at Berkeley, California. 
Dixon retired from the Home Office on 30 January 1946, but he continued to keep in touch with the two services which he had refashioned. From official papers he compiled three (unpublished) administrative histories which record his work. He died at the Bourne Hall Hotel, Bournemouth, on 14 September 1969. 
T. A. Critchley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32838


Dixon, Henry Horatio (1869-1953), botanist, was born in Dublin on 19 May 1869, the son of George Dixon (died 1871), the owner of a soap works who had scientific interests, and his wife, Rebecca, daughter of George Yeates of Dublin, whose family were scientific instrument makers. Following his father's death, Henry, his six brothers, and two sisters were raised by his mother. He was educated at Rathmines School and entered Trinity College in 1887 with an exhibition. He obtained a classical scholarship in 1890 but changed to natural science, in which he obtained a senior moderatorship in 1891. After working in Bonn under Eduard Strasburger he returned in 1894 to Trinity College as assistant to E. P. Wright, whom he succeeded in the university chair of botany in 1904. In 1906 he became director of the botanic garden; in 1910 keeper of the herbarium; and in 1922 professor of plant biology in Trinity College. In 1907 Dixon married Dorothea Mary, daughter of Sir John Franks, secretary of the Irish land commission. They had three sons, all of whom maintained the tradition of academic distinction, one as a neurologist, and two as biochemists and fellows of King's College, Cambridge. 
Two of the major fields of work at Bonn were the studies of nuclear division and of transpiration and ascent of sap. The significance of reduction division (meiosis) was just being recognized in the Strasburger school where a great part of the cytological studies was based on hand sections. In a paper to the Royal Irish Academy in 1895 Dixon expressed the view that bivalents owed their appearance to the joining of chromosomes rather than the splitting of some structure. In the school of botany he maintained his interests in cytology and kept a collection of his sections of endosperm made in Bonn until 1926. From these sections he had developed the idea of a mitotic hormone, as the sections appeared to show waves of nuclear division. They showed a zone of prophases, followed by zones of metaphases, anaphases, and telophases. This must have been one of the first demonstrations of synchronous cell divisions. Photographs of the sections, made about 1892, were published by the Royal Dublin Society in 1946. 
Dixon's most important work was on transpiration and water relations of plants. This also stemmed from his association with Strasburger who in 1890-93 published work on channels of transport of sap. Dixon's observations of Strasburger's experiments demonstrating that the ascent of sap killed sections of trees posed the problem of possible physical mechanisms. Dixon, together with his great friend John Joly (1857-1933), provided the solution in their classic paper published by the Royal Society of London in 1895, in which they established the role of cohesion of water as an essential factor in plant water relations. Dixon followed this paper with many studies on tensile strength of water and of sap containing gases in solution. Then followed a series of studies with W. R. G. Atkins on osmotic pressures in plant cells. Further studies concerned the resistance to flow of sap presented by the channels of transport and its relation to the detailed structure of wood. 
In his presidential address to the botany section of the British Association (1922) Dixon put forward the view that rates of transport of sugar were such that the channel of transport could not possibly be the phloem but must be the xylem. (Later Dixon's former student T. G. Mason, working on the subject of transport of sugar in yams and later in cotton, showed that the phloem was responsible for the transport and that what Dixon regarded as an impossibly fast rate of movement did occur. The mechanism remained to be elucidated.) 
Dixon was full of ideas, some of them with terrifying consequences, as when he measured hydrostatic pressures in leaf cells by compressing leafy shoots in glass containers which occasionally blew up. He grew seedlings in sterile culture in 1892, some thirty years before this became a fashionable research procedure. In 1902 he published the compensated manometric technique for study of respiration and photosynthesis in plants, which was subsequently much extended by others. In the very different field of taxonomy, he developed keys for the recognition of timbers, especially mahogany, and worked on the experimental taxonomy of some of the saxifrages of co. Kerry. His publications included 'Transpiration and the Ascent of Sap in Plants' (1914) and 'Practical Plant Biology' (1922). 
The school of botany in Trinity College, Dublin, was Dixon's creation. The building and laboratory, opened in 1907, were Dixon's design and the school and the activities within it were an expression of his orderly and very active nature. His critical and at the same time cordial personality pervaded it. Visitors travelled there from all over the world. 
Dixon, who retired from his chair in 1949, served in many public capacities. He was a commissioner of Irish Lights, a trustee of the National Library of Ireland, and a member of the council of the International Institute of Agriculture. He was elected FRS in 1908 and was Croonian lecturer in 1937; he was awarded the Boyle medal (1916) of the Royal Dublin Society, over which he later presided, and was an honorary fellow of Trinity College. He was an honorary life member of the American Society of Plant Physiologists. He died at his home, Somerset House, Temple Road, Dublin, on 20 December 1953; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32839


Dixon, Sir Pierson John (1904-1965), diplomatist, was born on 13 November 1904 at Englefield Green, Surrey, the elder son and eldest of the four children of Pierson John Dixon (1868-1934), estate agent, and his wife, Helen Barbara (Nellie), daughter of James Ownby Beales, a royal caterer. His forenames reflected a long-standing family tradition, and he was in practice always known as Bob. His childhood was not particularly happy -- his father had persistent financial difficulties, was often absent from home, and had an increasingly strained marriage. The children were badly off and undernourished. Dixon's intellectual ability became his escape from these unhappy circumstances. He was educated at Bedford School and there began consistently to win academic prizes. This run of success culminated in 1922 when he won two scholarships allowing him to go up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in the following year to read classics. Further prizes, notably the prestigious Craven scholarship (1926), enabled him to live a reasonably comfortable and active life as a student. In 1927 he followed his double first-class degree by being awarded a junior research fellowship at Pembroke. A life as a classical scholar appeared to beckon. He had moreover fallen passionately in love not only with Greece, where he had travelled in 1927, but also with (Alexandra) Ismene Melas, an Englishwoman who had been brought up largely in Greece. She was the widow of Michael Melas and daughter of Shirley Clifford Atchley, first secretary at the British embassy in Athens. They married on 4 July 1928 and had two daughters, Jennifer ('b'. 1930) and Ann ('b'. 1941), and a son, Piers ('b'. 1928), who was Conservative MP for Truro from 1970 to 1974. 
In 1929 Dixon's career switched from academia to diplomacy. He passed the Foreign Office examination comfortably, emerging second out of a distinguished intake which included Harold Caccia, later permanent secretary of the Foreign Office, and was appointed a third secretary in October 1929. Postings in Spain (1932-6), Turkey (1936-8), and Italy (1938-40) followed in close succession, providing Dixon with a solid grounding in the workings of the diplomatic corps. His spell in the Italian capital also allowed him to observe at first hand British efforts to appease Mussolini. He was, meanwhile, promoted second secretary in October 1934 and first secretary in December 1939. It was not until the outbreak of the Second World War, however, that his career really took off. 
Dixon's wartime years were mainly spent in close proximity to Anthony Eden. In 1941 he accompanied the foreign secretary on a lengthy mission to the Middle East and the Balkans, and two years later, in November 1943, he was appointed Eden's principal private secretary, with the rank of counsellor. In this capacity he was present at many of the crucial allied encounters in the course of which both the shape of wartime strategy and the post-war settlement were determined. At the Yalta summit in February 1945 he was responsible for co-ordinating the work of the British delegation and was deeply involved in the frantic attempts to draft a satisfactory communique before Roosevelt's earlier than expected departure. 
Midway through the Potsdam conference the general election result in 1945 prompted a change in the British government. Labour's victory, however, had no professional impact on Dixon, since he was immediately appointed principal private secretary to Ernest Bevin, Eden's successor. His position at the heart of British foreign policy making thus remained secure. Indeed in many ways the spell as Bevin's right-hand man must rank as the most impressive of Dixon's career. The foreign secretary's schedule was arduous, dominated by the increasingly fraught conferences of foreign ministers at which the wartime allies struggled to contain their growing mistrust of each other and to reconcile their highly divergent priorities for the post-war world. Against this gloomy backdrop Dixon had not merely to act as companion, counsellor, speech-writer, and administrator for Bevin, but also to join the foreign secretary in the late-night singsongs which marked the end of at least some of the foreign ministers' meetings. He was appointed CMG in 1945 and CB in 1948. 
In January 1948 Dixon received his first ambassadorial posting, to Prague. According to Bevin's biographer this was the direct result of Dixon's relationship with the foreign secretary, since Bevin had identified Czechoslovakia as a likely flashpoint of East-West tension and wanted a British representative there upon whom he could rely. This proved all too prescient. Within a month of his arrival, Dixon could only watch powerlessly as the non-Communist ministers resigned 'en masse' from the Czech government, and Klement Gottwald and the Czech communists used the opportunity to declare a state of emergency and seize total power. Few British diplomats could have had a clearer illustration both of how tense East-West relations had become and of Britain's incapacity to exercise a decisive influence over the downward spiral of events in central and eastern Europe. Dixon was appointed KCMG in January 1950, and in June of that year returned to London as deputy under-secretary of state, with responsibility first for political and then for economic affairs. He also served as UK representative on the Brussels Treaty Permanent Commission, with the personal rank of ambassador, until November 1952. 
Dixon's next foreign posting gave him an even more graphic demonstration of the slippage of Britain's power: he was posted to New York as Britain's permanent representative to the United Nations in March 1954. Within two years of arrival he was swept up by the growing crisis caused by Nasser's nationalization of the Suez Canal. As a result it fell to him to justify the heavily criticized build-up of British military power in the region, to exercise for the first time ever the British veto in the Security Council in an effort to prevent a resolution being passed which would require members to refrain from the use of force, and to represent Britain at the emotional general assembly debate of 1-2 November at which the British, French, and Israeli military action was condemned by sixty-four votes to five. The emotional strain of defending a policy about which he had serious personal misgivings was considerable; looking back on the episode he later wrote: 'It really was an extraordinary situation in which we were quite incompetent to influence the course of events. Flanked by our faithful Australians and New Zealanders, we wandered about the UN halls like lost spirits. Our best friends averted their gaze or burst into tears as we passed. (Dixon, 277)' Despite the harm done to Britain's international standing, Dixon's own reputation was only enhanced by the Suez episode. Thus he was promoted GCMG in 1957 and rewarded with the highly sought-after Paris embassy as his next posting, in October 1960, in succession to Sir Gladwyn Jebb. In 1961 this already demanding role was made still more important when he was asked also to act as leader at official level of the British delegation seeking to negotiate entry into the EEC. After his stints at the shoulders of Eden and Bevin, he was now to act as principal lieutenant to Edward Heath, lord privy seal and the minister responsible for the Brussels negotiations. 
Dixon's diplomatic swansong revealed both his strengths and his limitations. As ambassador in Paris he did succeed in establishing a reasonable, if necessarily distant, rapport with General de Gaulle. This allowed him to forewarn Whitehall that the French president harboured strong misgivings about the enlargement of the EEC. In October 1962 he sent a dispatch to the prime minister predicting that de Gaulle would veto Britain's entry. Macmillan is said to have read the report and scribbled in the margin 'interesting but not convincing' (Beloff, 155). But the negotiations in Brussels also highlighted the discomfort felt by a generalist such as Dixon in dealing with the highly technical and economic nature of the multilateral negotiations between Britain and the six EEC member states. On most of the substantive issues which dominated the Brussels agenda, his grasp was much less sure than that of his deputy, Eric Roll (formerly an official in the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food). Moreover Dixon never seemed entirely at home in the Brussels of the early EEC. Obliged to move constantly between Paris and the Belgian capital, not to mention trips back to London for consultations, he never built up the network of contacts and the feel for Community matters which would have greatly facilitated his task. He could thus do little to bridge the significant gap in attitude and understanding which developed between those members of the British team who were posted in Brussels for the duration of the talks and those more senior figures who flew in on the eve of each major meeting. How costly this inexperience in Community affairs proved is hard to determine; it is nevertheless significant that Britain's later, successful, negotiations to enter the EEC in 1970-72 were masterminded by Sir Con O'Neill, a man who was as much a Brussels 'insider' as Dixon had been an inexperienced 'outsider'. 
Paris, where Dixon remained until February 1965, proved his final posting. Having experienced a couple of years of poor Anglo-French relations in the aftermath of de Gaulle's veto, he then left the diplomatic service. His plan was to return in his retirement to the classical studies which he had left nearly forty years earlier. (He had, meanwhile, published a study of 'The Iberians of Spain and their Relations with the Aegean World', 1939, as well as two works of fiction set in antiquity, 'Farewell, Catullus', 1953, and 'The Glittering Horn', 1958, and a biography, 'Pauline: Napoleon's Favourite Sister', 1964.) Such plans were cut short by his death from a heart attack in Egham, Surrey, on 22 April 1965. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 
Dixon's career was at one and the same time exceptionally distinguished and highly emblematic of a generation of British diplomats. He was catapulted by the Second World War into a position of remarkable influence and was privileged to be present when many of the crucial decisions about both wartime strategy and the post-war world were made. But the years which followed, although not without professional satisfaction, underlined how changed were the circumstances of the country which he represented. His experiences in New York and Brussels in particular could only emphasize how dramatically Britain's influence had dwindled since its wartime position as one of the 'big three'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32840


Dixon, Sir Robert Bland (1867-1939), engineer and naval officer, was born on 30 March 1867 at Darlington, the elder son of Robert Bland Dixon, architect and surveyor, and his wife, Mary Ann Whitecomb ('nee' Parr). He was the elder brother of Walter Ernest Dixon, a pharmacologist. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Darlington, and at the Royal Naval Engineering College at Keyham, then recently established, and was in fact the first student of the college to reach the head of his profession. In 1888 he passed for further training to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, with the rank of assistant engineer (the equivalent of sub-lieutenant). His first year's progress qualified him for an additional two years' study and for specialization in machinery design and the more scientific side of his profession, with only sea service required to qualify him for successive steps of promotion. 
On leaving Greenwich in 1891 Dixon joined the 'Hecla', one of the earliest repair ships, in the Mediterranean. A special feature of her equipment was the carriage of a flotilla of 'second-class torpedo boats' which were hoisted out and exercised together, and provided the initial experience in the evolution of destroyers and destroyer tactics. On promotion to engineer in 1892 he was sent to the battleship 'Trafalgar', and in 1893 to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, as instructor in applied mechanics to assist J. H. Cotterill. Dixon married in 1896 Hettie Alice (died 1936), daughter of Dr Frank Sextus Tuck, of Aylesford, Kent. There were no children. 
After two years' service on the China station in the 'Centurion' (1896-8) Dixon went home and was posted successively to Chatham Dockyard as assistant to the chief engineer (1899), to the Admiralty, to Portsmouth as first assistant to the engineer manager (1902), and, in 1904, soon after his promotion to chief engineer, he joined the staff of the director of dockyards. 
In that same year, owing to the change in naval titles then introduced, Dixon became engineer commander, and as such he spent his last spell of sea service in the battleship 'Dominion' during 1907 and 1908. By then he was recognized by both his seniors and juniors as an exceptionally capable and popular officer, and after three years at Haulbowline yard as chief engineer he was appointed engineer manager of Portsmouth yard in 1912. 
Dixon held this post until 1917, having been promoted engineer captain in 1915, a period which gave his powers of organization and technical judgement a full test on account of the great increase in both men and machinery demanded by first the threat and second the outbreak of war. He left Portsmouth in order to become assistant director of dockyards, and he remained at Whitehall until his retirement in 1928, being successively assistant engineer (1919), deputy engineer (1920), and, in succession to Sir George Goodwin, engineer-in-chief of the fleet in 1922, receiving then the usual promotion from engineer rear-admiral (1919) to engineer vice-admiral on appointment. 
On retirement in 1928, Dixon became chairman and director of several engineering firms, notably of Messrs Babcock and Wilcox. He was an active member of several technical societies and was president in 1926 of the Junior Institute of Engineers, and in 1929 of the Institute of Marine Engineers. He served on the privy council committee of scientific and industrial research. He took a keen and continuous interest in engineering education, and served on the committee on the training of naval cadets under the chairmanship of Sir Reginald Custance in 1912, and on the education committee of the Mechanical Engineers. 
Although no spectacular advance marked Dixon's tenure of high office comparable with the introduction of the water tube boiler and the steam turbine, the British lead in Admiralty engineering was fully maintained. In the 'Kent' class, designed to embody the experience of the First World War and to meet the growing menace from the air, the 'unit' system, whereby each propeller can have, as required, its own independent supply of steam, with high pressures and temperatures, was, after long opposition, introduced in the 'Nelson' and the 'Rodney' and later became almost universal in all important vessels. The cure of 'condenseritis' was achieved after prolonged tests by the use of cupro-nickel tubes, while the introduction of corrugated steam-pipes to provide for expansion successfully met a difficulty in spite of opposition from competent opinion. Another development was the use of electric drive at cruising speeds for auxiliary machinery, but of steam drive with independence of the vulnerable 'ringmain' when in action. 
At a time when the German navy had adopted the diesel engine -- notably in the 'Deutschland' and 'Graf von Spee' -- and the United States had done the same in the 'Maryland' and others, it was largely owing to the representations of Dixon that despite persistent and repeated pressure the Royal Navy retained its faith in the steam turbine, a faith fully justified, since both countries reverted to British practice. Further, during Dixon's term of office there largely disappeared the lack of understanding and contact between seagoing engineer officers and the higher engineer officers at the Admiralty of which the former had long been conscious. 
Dixon was a man of quiet and retiring disposition, with great tenacity of character. He rarely thrust his views forward, but was always ready, when called upon, with a well weighed and considered opinion. He was appointed CB on leaving Portsmouth in 1918 and KCB in 1924. The University of Sheffield conferred upon him the honorary degree of DEng in 1926. He died at St Luke's Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, while on a business visit for Messrs Babcock and Wilcox, on 28 July 1939. 
W. S. Hill', rev. ' 


