@@@@@


doc= 32841


Dixon, Walter Ernest (1870-1931), pharmacologist, was born at Fern Bank, Darlington, on 2 June 1870, the younger son of Robert Bland Dixon, architect and surveyor, and his wife, Mary Ann Whitecomb ('nee' Parr). He was the younger brother of Sir Robert Bland Dixon. Dixon was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Darlington, and entered St Thomas's Hospital in 1890, graduating BSc in 1891 and MD (London) in 1898. In 1899 he was appointed assistant to the Downing professor of medicine at Cambridge. On 25 September 1907 he married Hope ('b'. 1874/5), only daughter of Francis Glen Allan, banker, of Dulwich; they had no children. In 1909 Dixon was made lecturer and in 1919 first reader in pharmacology at Cambridge, a post he held until his death. He also held concurrently, until 1919, the chair of materia medica at King's College, London. For his services in the intelligence department of the Royal Navy during the First World War he was appointed OBE in 1919. 
When Dixon began to devote himself to pharmacology in 1899, there was no university chair in this subject in England, and the science received little attention from the point of view of teaching or research. By the time of Dixon's death, chairs of pharmacology had been established in many English universities and the subject was achieving something like the recognition it deserved. Dixon played a dominant part in fostering this development. He taught pharmacology as an experimental science and as the scientific basis of therapeutics. As a writer, teacher, lecturer, and investigator, he became one of the foremost pharmacologists in the world. H. H. Dale said that, under Dixon, pharmacology became 'a lively adventure in experimental science, offered with an inimitable racy humour' ('BMJ'). Dixon was author of 'A Manual of Pharmacology' (1905; 7th edn, 1929) and 'Practical Pharmacology' (1920). 
Dixon's original researches, of which only a few can be mentioned, covered a wide field. With the help of various collaborators he investigated the physiology and pharmacology of the bronchial muscles, the pulmonary circulation, and the cerebro-spinal fluid. He was greatly interested in the subjects of addiction and tolerance to drugs and in various papers dealt with the pharmacology of hallucinogens and the physiology of addiction. His work on Indian hemp in the 1890s concluded that it was a 'useful and refreshing stimulant and food accessory' ('The pharmacology of cannabis indica', 'BMJ', 11 Nov 1899, 1357). In other papers he dealt with tobacco, morphine, alcohol, cocaine, and heroin. Dixon was a member of the departmental committee on morphine and heroin addiction (1924-6), chaired by Sir Humphry Rolleston, the report of which confirmed a medical basis for drug control in Great Britain. Dixon's public pronouncements strongly favoured this policy and opposed attempts to bring Britain into line with the prohibitionist drug control policy of the United States. He was subsequently a member of the League of Nations expert committee on drug addiction. 
In 1907 Dixon suggested that when a nerve is excited the resultant effect may be due to the liberation of some chemical substance. The subsequent corroboration of this hypothesis revolutionized concepts of the nature of transmission of nerve impulses, and constituted one of the most far-reaching advances in physiology of the twentieth century. Dixon's suggestion was, however, based on somewhat slender experimental data, and gained little credence at the time. 
Dixon's impact on his generation rested not only on his own contributions to science: he also took a wide and participating interest in medical affairs. His witty and persuasive lectures and dogmatic writing had a potent influence in moulding medical thought within and beyond his own university. His buoyant and resolute spirit was a stimulus and example to his fellows. He was 'the leader, life, and soul of the party. His wit was sprightly and never cruel' ('The Lancet'). 
Dixon was elected FRS in 1911 and FRCP in 1930. The University of Manitoba conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD in 1930. He died suddenly at his home, The Grove, at Whittlesford, near Cambridge, on 16 August 1931. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32842


Dobbs, Sir Henry Robert Conway (1871-1934), administrator in India, was born in London on 26 August 1871, the second son of Robert Conway Dobbs (1842-1915) of Camphire House, Cappoquin, co. Waterford, Ireland, and his wife, Edith Juliana, 'nee' Broadwood (died 1932). He was a scholar of Winchester College and of Brasenose College, Oxford, although he left Oxford after two years without taking a degree. He entered the Indian Civil Service in 1892, and was transferred to the political department in 1899. His first 'political' post was in the state of Mysore, but it was not long before he found his way to the north-west frontier, an area with which much of his later career was to be associated. On 4 March 1907 he married Esme Agnes, eldest daughter of George Wilmot Rivaz of Canterbury, formerly of the Indian Civil Service; they had two sons and two daughters. 
Dobbs carried out some adventurous journeys in his earlier years in the political department. In 1902-3 he travelled across Persia from Baghdad to Sistan; in 1904 he explored the then little-known tract of Hazarajat between Herat and Kabul. In 1904-5 he was attached as secretary to Sir Louis Dane's mission to Kabul, whose outcome was the treaty with Britain by which the Amir Habibullah renewed the engagements entered into by his father, Amir 'Abd al-Rahman, in 1880. Since it stipulated that the amir should hold 'relations with no foreign power except the British government', the treaty aroused some criticism at the time. However, it stood the test of the First World War, during which Habibullah remained neutral. 
Between 1907 and 1914 Dobbs served in Baluchistan under Sir Arthur McMahon, and was particularly influenced by the 'Sandeman system', a method of administration devised for tribal areas by Sir Robert Sandeman, governor of Kaharistan in the latter part of the nineteenth century. This gave official governmental recognition to tribal chiefs and tribal law, and set up the chiefs, under the overlordship of the raj, to police their own districts. As revenue commissioner in the civil administration formed in the wake of Indian expeditionary force D's invasion of Mesopotamia, where he served between January 1915 and October 1916, Dobbs translated these principles into the tribal criminal and civil disputes regulation (February 1916), and collected information on revenue and land tenure that was to form the basis of the taxation system of the future state of Iraq. 
Dobbs returned to India at the end of 1916 and served successively as revenue and judicial commissioner (April 1917) and chief commissioner (December 1917) in Baluchistan, and subsequently (1919) as foreign secretary to the government of India. In 1920-21 Dobbs headed a mission to Kabul where -- in very difficult circumstances -- he negotiated a revision of the treaty of 1905 with Amir Habibullah's successor, Amir Amanullah. At this stage the Soviet government was eagerly courting the Afghans, largely in order to consolidate and expand its influence in central Asia. Eventually Amanullah signed treaties with both the Soviet Union and Britain in 1921. The Anglo-Afghan treaty marked something of a rapprochement with Britain, setting up full diplomatic relations between the two states. In his report on his mission to Kabul, Dobbs's description of his difficulties with Amanullah and of the latter's highly mercurial character shows its author's talent for shrewd judgement and nuanced observation. 
In February 1923 Dobbs succeeded Sir Percy Cox as high commissioner for Iraq. It was not an easy post to fill; at the time of Dobbs's arrival no agreement had been reached at Lausanne on the frontier between Iraq and Turkey, and calls were still being made in the British press for Britain to evacuate Iraq. Eventually negotiations for the Anglo-Iraqi treaty were completed in 1924, although Dobbs had gambled heavily by deporting a number of anti-treaty Shi'i religious leaders to Persia in 1923, and had also crossed swords with King Faisal I. After 1924, and particularly after the settlement of the Mosul boundary question in Iraq's favour, Dobbs encouraged the Colonial Office in London not to 'make it appear to the Iraqi public that H. B. M.'s Government is desirous of binding them hand and foot', on the grounds that Britain would ultimately find it easier and cheaper to administer the mandate for Iraq if it did not make excessive and unpopular demands, a policy which was eventually adopted. 
During the six years Dobbs was high commissioner the political horizon was seldom clear for many weeks in succession. The election of the constituent assembly, and subsequently of the Iraqi parliament; the ratification of the Anglo-Iraqi treaty in 1924; the control of the Kurdish districts, and the difficulty of persuading the Kurdish tribal leaders to accept the political framework of the Iraqi state; the Mosul frontier question; the financial viability of the new state; these and other issues demanded constant attention. By the end of Dobbs's time in Iraq it was clear that Britain's goal of maintaining strong indirect control over the country had been achieved enough to make Iraq's entry to the League of Nations only a matter of time. As a diplomat and administrator Dobbs played a crucial role in securing this objective. 
Dobbs was appointed CIE in 1905, CSI in 1916, KCIE and KCSI in 1921, KCMG in 1925, and GBE on his retirement from Iraq in 1929. The last years of his life were spent at his family home at Cappoquin, where he died after a long illness on 30 May 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 32843


Dobell, Bertram (1842-1914), bookseller and literary scholar, was born on 9 January 1842 at Battle, Sussex, the eldest son of Edward Dobell, a journeyman tailor, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Eldridge (died 1899). The family moved to London, where Edward Dobell was stricken with paralysis. In the Dobell MSS Bertram Dobell has recorded that life was in consequence 'very hard' and that he himself was compelled 'to work at the most laborious and uncongenial tasks'. Apart from that comment he was quite secretive about his early years. Nothing is known of his education. His first job was as a grocer's errand boy and he went on to serve as an assistant in the grocer's shop. He showed an early interest in old books, buying from the penny boxes on bookstalls. 
When Dobell was nearly thirty he used his scanty savings to open a shop at 62 Queen's Crescent, Haverstock Hill, selling newspapers and stationery as well as books. He was aided by an advance of $10 from a loan society, which was used to buy stock, $3 being spent on books. From these humble beginnings, aided by a love of literature and a flair for recognizing a rare book when he saw one, and by dint of much hard work, he rose to become the proprietor of two bookshops in Charing Cross Road, held in high esteem by the leading bibliophiles of his day. 
The diaries that Dobell kept meticulously throughout his bookselling years show that until a month before his death he attended auction sales assiduously, not infrequently taking in three or even four sales in a week. Dobell was, in modern terms, a workaholic, and family relationships may have suffered in consequence. Even when business was good money seemed always to be in short supply, and this may have led him to excessive restraint where personal expenditure was concerned. As an exception to this rule he regularly indulged his taste for opera. By 1901 he had accumulated stocks and shares worth $2000. On 24 July 1869 Dobell married Eleanor Wymer (died 1910), daughter of Henry Wymer, a timber merchant. They had five children, three boys and two girls, but in a letter (now in the Bodleian Library) to the New Zealand poet Dora Wilcox he confessed that there was 'little sympathy' between himself and his wife, and that they 'did not live happily together, though [they] managed to endure the matrimonial yoke to the end'. 
As a bookseller Dobell published some 250 catalogues of books and manuscripts, his footnotes giving the catalogues their special flavour. His various catalogues devoted to books printed for private circulation remain useful bibliographical tools because of his annotations. Dobell was the author of 'Sidelights on Charles Lamb' (1903), 'The Laureate of Pessimism: a Sketch of the Life of James Thomson' (1910), and various books of verse, notably 'Rosemary and Pansies' (1901), and 'A Century of Sonnets' (1910). Other collections of his verse were published posthumously. He contributed articles on various literary topics to such periodicals as 'The Athenaeum', 'Notes and Queries', and the 'Quarterly Review'. 
As an editor Dobell was responsible for editions of James Thomson, Shelley, Goldsmith, Strode, and others, but he is chiefly remembered for correctly identifying Thomas Traherne as the author of 'Poetical Works' and 'Centuries of Meditation' when their anonymous manuscripts were wrongly attributed to Henry Vaughan. A number of these edited works appeared over Dobell's own imprint. Closest to Dobell's heart were the works of Thomson, who, writing under the pseudonym B. V., first came to his notice in the columns of the 'National Reformer' in 1868. Six years later, when that journal began serialization of 'The City of Dreadful Night', Dobell wrote to Thomson, urging him to have his poems published in book form, and later offered to bring out such an edition himself. When a business setback prevented him from doing so, he was able to persuade Reeves and Turner to take up the project. Dobell's first letter began a friendship that lasted until Thomson's death. Family legend has it that on occasion Thomson slept on the floor of Dobell's shop. 
At seventy-two, although complaining of failing powers, Dobell was regularly going to Charing Cross Road and putting in a few hours' work each day until very shortly before his death. He eschewed the spectacles that had been prescribed for him and likewise found that he managed better without his dentures than with them. At his death from liver cancer at his home, 21 Queen's Crescent, Haverstock Hill, London, on 14 December 1914, his business passed to his sons Percy and Arthur. 


@@@@@


doc= 32844


Dobson, Frank Owen (1886-1963), sculptor, was born at Queen Charlotte's Hospital, Marylebone Road, London, on 18 November 1886, the son of Frank Dobson (1857-1900), artist, and his wife, Alice Mary Owen. His parents lived at 7 Acton Street, Clerkenwell, London. His father specialized in bird and flower studies, most of which were sold as greetings cards. He attended school first in Forest Gate and then in Harrow Green. At the age of eleven he won an art scholarship to Leyton Technical School, which he attended part-time. His father died when he was fourteen and he went to live with an aunt in Hastings, Sussex, and attended evening classes at Hastings School of Art. After a few months he left to take up a position with the sculptor William Reynolds-Stephens as a studio assistant, and stayed for a year and a half. He then travelled to Devon and afterwards to Cornwall, where he shared a studio with Cedric L. Morris and managed to make a living by selling his paintings. In 1906 he was granted a scholarship to the Hospitalfield Art Institute in Arbroath, Scotland. 
In 1910 Dobson moved to London, where he attended the City and Guilds Art School, Kennington. He then returned to Cornwall, settled in Newlyn, and made the acquaintance of Augustus John through whom he was offered a one-man exhibition of paintings and drawings at the Chenil Galleries in London in 1914. Early in 1915 he enlisted in the Artists' Rifles and in October 1916 was posted to France, where he was a lieutenant in the 5th Border regiment. In January 1917 he was diagnosed as suffering from a duodenal ulcer and sent back to England. On 27 April 1918, while at a military convalescent centre in London, he married, at Christ Church, Marylebone, Cordelia Clara Tregurtha ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of Thomas Tregurtha, a fitter, whom he had met in Newlyn before the war. He was invalided out of the army in November 1918. In August of that year he was commissioned by the Ministry of Information to paint the balloon apron at Canvey Island, Essex (Imperial War Museum, London), for which purpose he took a studio in Trafalgar Studios, Manresa Road, Chelsea, London, where he lived until 1939. 
In March 1920, at the invitation of Wyndham Lewis, Dobson took part in the Group X exhibition at Ambrose Heal's Mansard Gallery, London. He showed 'Pigeon Boy' (Portland stone, 1920, Courtauld Inst.), 'Concertina Man' (Portland stone, 1920), and two studies of the artist Ben Nicholson -- a plaster cast (now lost) and a drawing (priv. coll.). In November 1921 he exhibited sculpture and drawings at the Leicester Galleries, London, including 'The Man Child' (Portland stone, 1921, Tate collection), 'Two Heads' (Red Mansfield sandstone, 1921, Courtauld Inst.), and 'The Rt. Hon H. H. Asquith, M.P.' (bronze, 1921, Tate collection). 
In 1922 Dobson spent three months working on a portrait of the writer Osbert Sitwell (polished bronze, 1922, Tate collection). Sitwell invited him to design the curtain for 'Facade', a theatrical entertainment written by his sister, the poet Edith Sitwell, with music by William Walton, which had its first performance in his house in Carlyle Square, Chelsea. During the 1920s Dobson made portraits of the ballerina Lydia Lopokova (bronze, 1924, University of Hull Art Gallery), the American actress Tallulah Bankhead (bronze, 1924-5), the composer and conductor Eugene Goossens (bronze, 1924 or 1925), the American writer Robert Menzies McAlmon (bronze, 1923, priv. coll.), and Sidney Bernstein, founder of the Granada group (bronze, 1929, priv. coll.). 
In 1923 Dobson first exhibited 'Seated Torso' (Ham Hill stone, 1923, Aberdeen Art Gallery) and 'Robert McAlmon' with the avant-garde London Group, of which he was president from 1924 to 1927. He exhibited at the 14th Venice Biennale in 1924, showing 'Concertina Man' and 'Male Head', and again in 1926 at the 15th Biennale, when he showed 'Susanna' (bronze, 1922-4, Tate collection). In 1925 he showed in the Tri-National Exhibition in Paris, London, and New York, and in 1926 he was included in the European artists' exhibition that toured Canada and the United States. During the winter of 1925 he travelled with the writer Leo H. Myers to Ceylon. On returning to England he started one of his most important works, a large stone carving of a wading female figure, 'Cornucopia' (Ham Hill stone, 1925-7, University of Hull Art Gallery). In 1925 the Contemporary Art Society purchased his 'Head of a Girl (Study for 'Cornucopia I')' (bronze, 1925) and presented it to the Tate Gallery. 
Dobson's view of sculpture as essentially a composition of abstract forms led to his creating simplified, harmonious figures and groups which excluded extraneous detail and narrative content and respected the intrinsic qualities of the materials of which they were made. Roger Fry and Clive Bell, the leading critics of the day, welcomed the appearance of a British sculptor whose work they considered exemplified their fundamental artistic philosophy. Fry wrote that: 'Perhaps Mr. Dobson did not know at the start what he was in for when he set out as a sculptor, and a sculptor who would confine himself to sculptural plasticity. Whether he knew it or not, his having pulled through to some kind of recognition is one of the happiest omens for English art of today. For whether we like his work or not, we must admit that it is true sculpture and pure sculpture, and that this is almost the first time that such a thing has even been attempted in England. (Fry, 172)' By 1926 Dobson had separated from his wife and embarked on a new relationship with (Caroline) Mary Bussell (1904-1989), daughter of the art dealer William Charles Bussell. On 29 March 1928 their daughter was born, and on 6 August 1931, following his divorce, Dobson married Mary in Chelsea, London. 
In March 1927 Dobson's first major exhibition in London opened at the Leicester Galleries. He showed twenty-three sculptures, including 'Cornucopia', 'Susanna', and 'Marble Woman' (also known as 'Reclining Nude'; white marble, 1924-5, Courtauld Inst.), together with portraits of Lydia Lopokova, Tallulah Bankhead, Eugene Goossens, and Leo Myers (bronze, 1927, priv. coll.). He also showed with the London Artists' Association (of which he was a founder member) in November of that year. In 1930 he designed a series of gilded faience panels, 'The Chain of Commerce', for the Hay's Wharf Company's new headquarters on the Thames at London Bridge. In the same year his larger-than-life bronze figure 'Truth' was purchased by public subscription and erected outside the Tate Gallery. During the 1930s he continued to receive commissions for portraits; two of the most notable are the bronze busts of the actress Margaret Rawlings (Lady Barlow) (1936, versions in Manchester City Galleries, Leeds City Art Gallery, and the Tate collection) and the patron and collector Sir Edward Marsh (1938, Museum and Art Gallery, Doncaster). He also produced designs for textiles (Victoria and Albert Museum, London). In 1937 he was commissioned to design a silver-gilt cup, 'Calix majestatis' (Royal Collection), in honour of the coronation of George VI and Queen Elizabeth. 
Dobson fractured his left arm in 1933, an injury which severely restricted his ability to carve. His last large stone carving was 'Pax' (1934, priv. coll.) which was shown in the London Group exhibition in April and May 1935, in 'Two hundred years of British art', at The Hague in 1936, and at the New York World Fair in 1939. At the outbreak of the Second World War, Dobson and his family moved to Bristol and in March 1940 the Bristol Art Gallery held the largest retrospective exhibition accorded to him in his lifetime. Following a series of air raids the Dobsons moved to Kingsley in Hampshire. During the war he received official commissions for drawings and for two portrait busts, 'Admiral Sir William Milbourne James KCB' (bronze, 1941, NMM) and 'Chief Petty Officer Harris John Whitehorne DSM' (also bronze, 1941, IWM). 
Having first shown work in the Royal Academy's annual summer exhibition in 1933, Dobson was elected an associate in 1942 and Royal Academician in 1951. At the suggestion of Henry Moore he was appointed head of sculpture at the Royal College of Art, London, in 1946, and remained until his retirement in 1953. He was appointed CBE in 1947. During the 1951 Festival of Britain, Dobson's 'London Pride' was displayed on the south bank of the Thames. Originally shown in plaster, it was cast posthumously in bronze and placed in front of the Royal National Theatre in 1987. 
Among Dobson's last commissions were a portrait of Sir Thomas Lipton (bronze, 1954), an engraved glass goblet entitled 'The Wave' (1954, Steuben glass collection, Corning, New York), the statuette for the 'Evening Standard' drama awards (1955), and a zodiac clock (1959) for the facade of Sir Albert Richardson's Bracken House in Cannon Street, London. His declining health led to his being admitted to the Princess Beatrice Hospital in Kensington, London, where he died on 22 July 1963. His wife and daughter survived him. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered in the River Thames. 
Dobson's early experiments with angular forms influenced by cubism soon gave way to a softer, more sensual style. His subject was the female body, and his treatment of it was undoubtedly influenced by his admiration for the French sculptor Aristide Maillol. At their best his figures have a monumental dignity and repose. Although during the 1920s he was seen as one of the adventurous spirits of the British modern movement, his reputation began to be eclipsed during the 1930s and 1940s by the emerging talents of Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth. He is seen as a transitional figure in the development of British sculpture, linking the previous school of traditional academic or Romantic sculptors with the generation which followed him. While he may be said to share his position as a pioneer with two other sculptors, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska and Jacob Epstein, Dobson was the only one of these three to have been born in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 32845


Dobson, (Henry) Austin (1840-1921), poet and author, born at Plymouth, Devon, on 18 January 1840, was the eldest son of George Clarisse Dobson, civil engineer, and his wife, Augusta Harris. He was educated at Beaumaris grammar school and at a private school in Coventry before being sent to the 'gymnase' at Strasbourg, then a city belonging to France. At the age of sixteen he came home and entered the Board of Trade, in which he served from 1856 to 1901. His service was chiefly in the marine department, of which he was a principal clerk from 1884 until his retirement. William Cosmo Monkhouse and Samuel Waddington were in the same branch with him, and Edmund Gosse was attached to the commercial department as translator, so that the Board of Trade of those days was lyrically described by an American observer as 'a nest of singing birds'. Lord Farrer, one of the official heads, propounded an alternative view when he wrote of 'certain civil servants who would have been excellent administrators if they had not been indifferent poets'. 
Dobson's first publication, the poem 'A City Flower', appeared in 'Temple Bar' for December 1864 -- an immature work, as is also 'Incognita' dated 1866. But 'Une marquise', written in 1868, and 'The Story of Rosina', in 1869, showed the perfection of his talents. These appeared in 'St Paul's', and to its editor, Anthony Trollope, Dobson dedicated his first volume, 'Vignettes in Rhyme' (1873). It contained some of his most characteristic pieces, mixed with inferior stuff. 'Proverbs in Porcelain', published in 1877, was almost all in his best vein. These two works, blended in one volume with certain additions and omissions, appeared in the United States in 1880 as 'Vignettes in Rhyme'. In 1883 this selection, again somewhat altered, was published in London as 'Old World Idylls' and achieved immense popularity. Two years later a companion book, 'At the Sign of the Lyre', was equally successful. The latter contained some of his best compositions -- 'The Ladies of St James's', 'The Old Sedan Chair', and the enchanting verses 'My Books', written as late as 1883-4. But though he continued to write verse intermittently for the rest of his life, and at least a quarter of his collected 'Poetical Works' is dated after 1885, none of this later verse has much importance. 
Dobson's first prose volume, 'The Civil Service Handbook of English Literature', published in 1874, was probably written as a piece of hack work. But in 1879, when he was at his best in verse writing, his 'William Hogarth', part of the 'Great Artists' series, appeared. By this time his acquaintance with the eighteenth century was becoming well known, and in 1883 John Morley persuaded him to write 'Fielding' for the 'English Men of Letters' series. He next wrote 'Thomas Bewick and his Pupils' (1884) and biographies of Richard Steele (1886) and Oliver Goldsmith (1888). In 1890 he reprinted, under the title 'Four Frenchwomen', essays on Charlotte Corday, Madame Roland, the Princesse de Lamballe, and Madame de Genlis, which had appeared as early as 1866 in the 'Domestic Magazine'. This was followed by a memoir of Horace Walpole (1890) with an appendix listing the books printed at Strawberry Hill, Walpole's home, an extended memoir of Hogarth (1891), and a series of 'Eighteenth Century Vignettes' (1892-6). In 1902 he published 'Samuel Richardson' and in the following year 'Fanny Burney', both for the 'English Men of Letters' series. From this time any publisher intending to reissue an eighteenth-century work went to Dobson for an introduction. Altogether, some fifty such volumes with his editorial superintendence have been catalogued. Of his complete prose works, over and above 'The Civil Service Handbook of English Literature', there are eight biographies and ten volumes of collected essays to his credit. 
Dobson's immense knowledge of eighteenth-century literature and art should have made the past live again in his biographies, but his achievement varied. His style, though simple, serviceable, and pleasant, never for an instant suggested a poet's prose. His mastery of artificial rhythms was excellent, but at his lightest he lacked gaiety; at his gravest he lacked weight; as a poet he lacked personality. Yet nobody could read the best of his verses -- and at least fifty pieces were of his best -- without delight in the witty invention, the ease of movement, and the exquisite finish in the style of Restoration poetry that had his verses likened to 'Dresden china'. 
In 1868 Dobson married Frances Mary, the daughter of Nathaniel Beardmore, civil engineer, of Broxbourne, Hertfordshire. They had five sons and five daughters, all of whom survived their father when he died at his home, 75 Eaton Rise, Ealing, London, on 2 September 1921. His funeral was held on 6 September at St Peter's Church, Ealing, and his remains were interred at the Kensington Hanwell cemetery, Ealing. 


@@@@@


doc= 32846


Dobson, Sir Roy Hardy (1891-1968), aircraft manufacturer, was born at Horsforth, Yorkshire, on 27 September 1891, the eldest child of Horace Dobson, farmer, and his wife, Mary Ann Hardy. He became an engineering apprentice with T. and R. Lees, a firm then operating in Hollinwood, near Manchester. He joined the company of A. V. Roe, aeroplane manufacturer, in 1914, becoming its works manager in 1919 and general manager in 1934. He was elected to the board of the company in 1936 and became managing director in 1941, retaining that position until he became in 1958 managing director of the Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd, a company of which A. V. Roe had become a subsidiary in 1935, and to which Dobson was appointed a director in 1944. 
The increasing possibility of war in the late thirties gave Dobson an opportunity to develop his talents to the full. During the 1930s A. V. Roe had been engaged in the design of a twin-engined bomber aircraft, the Manchester, which suffered from underpowered and unreliable engines and seemed bound to fail. At the time, the Merlin engine, developed by Rolls-Royce, was designed to be used in fighter aircraft. Roy Chadwick, then chief designer at A. V. Roe, felt that if he could redesign the twin-engined Manchester using four of the Merlins, he might overcome the problems. This was a proposal which the authorities were loath to accept, if only because they felt that the need for fighters would absorb as many Merlins as could be provided. Dobson faced this problem with characteristic vigour. Somehow four Merlins were obtained and speedily fitted into the Manchester prototype. From this work emerged the Lancaster, which was undoubtedly the most successful bomber developed by either side in the war. Dobson's ability to procure such a new and vital weapon displayed to the full his energy, determination, and imagination. 
With similar vigour Dobson initiated and supervised the provision of resources to manufacture this aeroplane in quantity for Hawker Siddeley in Canada, as he was also doing in English factories. In Canada, however, he was starting from the beginning, and he created a factory which produced an excellent product in large numbers. An aero-engine factory was set up at the same time. At the end of the war Dobson arranged the purchase by Hawker Siddeley of both the aeroplane and engine units. At this time he set up A. V. Roe Canada Ltd, and Orenda Engines Ltd, as design and manufacturing organizations. He was the first president of these companies and later, in 1951, became their chairman. Their first product was a successful military aircraft, the Avro CF100, powered by an engine (the Orenda) designed and built by Orenda Engines. The Canadian company also built a prototype jet-propelled civil aircraft which was almost certainly the first jet civil machine to fly. It was slightly ahead of the Comet, designed by De Havilland in England, although it did not enter passenger service, as did the Comet, which therefore became the first jet-propelled aircraft to carry commercial passengers. 
Under Dobson's chairmanship, A. V. Roe Canada proceeded from these successes to design and build, in conjunction with the Canadian government, prototypes of a very advanced fighting aircraft which became known as the Arrow. In retrospect it can be seen that this very costly venture was probably beyond the financial resources of a country with the small population then possessed by Canada, and the Arrow, although technically successful, was cancelled in a storm of controversy. Dobson, perhaps sensing that there were limits to the investment which Canada could make alone in military development, had already extended the business of A. V. Roe Canada into other areas, particularly railway engineering in which he made a series of company acquisitions. He had many associates in Canada, a country for which he had great affection, and was a director of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (1955-66). 
Despite his heavy responsibilities in Canada, Dobson continued to develop his interests in England. After the war A. V. Roe designed and built the revolutionary delta-winged Vulcan bomber and entered the civil aviation field with the Avro 748, which enjoyed a long production run. As a director and managing director of the Hawker Siddeley Group, and subsequently its chairman (1963-7), Dobson did much to widen the company's aeronautical interests, particularly in the early 1960s, when he initiated the acquisition of the De Havilland, Blackburn, and Folland companies, so forming, with the existing Hawker Siddeley aviation interests, a strong aeronautical unit which eventually became Hawker Siddeley Aviation Ltd. Simultaneously he initiated early moves to bring the company into areas of engineering other than aeronautics. He retired from his chairmanship in 1967 at the age of seventy-five. 
Dobson -- known the world over as Dobbie -- was a man of great vigour and imagination, with a drive and determination which enabled him to make a definitive impact on the development of industry and particularly the aeronautical industry. He was warm-hearted and enthusiastic, if sometimes a little hard on others in his outbursts of anger when things went wrong, but always immediately contrite if he had been too harsh. He was apt, from time to time, to address people in somewhat heightened language, but never to an extent greater than he would readily apply to himself if he concluded that the fault was really his own. He was a colourful man with a tremendous capacity for hard work and for overcoming difficulties. He gathered around him others whose devotion to him increased the more he drove them, although not without the occasional casualty. 
Dobson was created CBE in 1942, was knighted in 1945, and was awarded an honorary fellowship of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1956. In 1916 he married Annie Smith (died 1954). They had two sons, one of whom was killed in a flying accident in 1946, and a daughter. He died at King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst, Sussex, on 7 July 1968. 
Arnold Hall', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32847


Dodd, Francis Edgar (1874-1949), painter and etcher, was born in Upper Park Street, Holyhead, Anglesey, on 29 November 1874, the third son of the Revd Benjamin Dodd, a Wesleyan Methodist minister who had once been a blacksmith, and his wife, Jane Frances, daughter of Jonathan Shaw, cotton broker, of Liverpool. After his family had moved to Glasgow, Dodd attended Garnett Hill School. There in 1889 he began to learn painting. There he also met his future brother-in-law and lifelong friend the painter and etcher Muirhead Bone. While he worked as a china decorator with Messrs MacDougal he began to study at the Glasgow School of Art, winning the Haldane travelling scholarship of $100 per annum, which he eked out for eighteen months, in 1893. He went to Aman-Jean's academy in Paris but on the advice of J. A. M. Whistler he spent some time in Venice, studying Tintoretto, and visited Florence, Milan, and Antwerp. 
In 1895 Dodd settled with his family at Manchester. His circle of acquaintance included the newspaper editor C. P. Scott and the literary scholar Oliver Elton, whose portraits he etched in 1916. He was closely associated with the artist Susan Isabel Dacre (1844-1933), who posed for his painting 'Signora Lotto' (1906), now in Manchester City Galleries. She was also the model for some of his first drypoints as in 'Looking at a Picture' (1907). He had absorbed something of the Glasgow school's impressionism and something of the style of the painter Alfred Stevens. At Manchester he began to explore the possibilities of painting suburban scenes. Works in various media were exhibited by him in the Manchester Academy, and in 1898 Bernhard Sickert invited him to exhibit with the New English Art Club. He became an active member of both institutions; the latter owed much to his skilful handling of its finances. 
In 1901 Dodd went on the first of three visits to Spain, and in 1904 he settled in London. His friends at this period included Charles March Gere, Henry Lamb, and Henry Rushbury; all four later became Royal Academicians. Dodd began to exhibit at the Royal Academy in 1923, and was elected an associate in 1927 and Royal Academician in 1935. He was also a member of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours and of the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, and a trustee of the Tate Gallery (1929-35). As official artist to the Ministry of Information during the First World War, Dodd made portraits of British naval and military commanders, and was afterwards attached to the Admiralty to carry out drawings of submarines. These are now in the Imperial War Museum. Portraits by him are in the National Portrait Gallery, London, at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 
It was in his portraits that Dodd excelled as an etcher, above all in those of his brother artists. Direct, relaxed, and highly competent, the portraits reveal him as a master of his craft. Dodd got off to a flying start producing thirty-six plates in 1907 and 1908, among them the forceful image of his fellow etcher, 'Bone at the Press'. In 1909 Dodd executed the drypoint which Bone considered 'a masterpiece', of the young sculptor Jacob Epstein. In 1915 he made twenty-three plates, the most he ever produced in a year, including David Muirhead seated at his easel, and the Lancastrian architect Charles Holden. Charles Cundall, in his studio (1926), was another of his best subjects. He did only eighteen plates after 1929, but he produced a total of 210. He gave a complete collection of his prints to the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford in 1948. 
On 8 April 1911 Dodd married Mary Arabella (1871/2-1948), daughter of John Brouncker Ingle, a solicitor, of London. On 27 January 1949 he married, as his second wife, Ellen (Nell) Margaret ('b'. 1908/9), daughter of Charles Tanner, builder's assistant, of London. She had been his model for many years. There were no children by either marriage. Dodd gassed himself at his home at 51 Blackheath Park, Blackheath, Greenwich, and died on 7 March 1949. Examples of Dodd's work are in the Tate collection, the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Manchester City Galleries, and the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 32848


Dodgson, Campbell (1867-1948), museum curator and art historian, was born at Oakwood, Crayford, Kent, on 13 August 1867, the youngest child in the family of one daughter and seven sons of William Oliver Dodgson, stockbroker, and his wife, Lucy Elizabeth Smith. He was educated at Winchester College (1880-86), before going up to New College, Oxford, where he took a first-class honours degree in Greats in 1890 and a second in theology in 1891. He abandoned his initial intention to take holy orders, and in 1893 was appointed to the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum; he succeeded Sir Sidney Colvin as keeper in 1912, a post he held until his retirement in 1932. 
Although he came with no prior expertise in the field, Dodgson swiftly established himself as a formidable print scholar of international repute, specializing in the early German school after the British Museum's acquisition in 1895 of William Mitchell's collection of woodcuts of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Dodgson's 'Catalogue of Early German and Flemish Woodcuts in the British Museum' (2 vols., 1903-11) immediately became the standard work on the subject. He was co-editor of the Durer Society publications (1898-1911), and a tireless contributor on many aspects of print connoisseurship to all the major scholarly journals in his field, including the Viennese periodical 'Die graphischen Kunste', the 'Burlington Magazine' -- he was a member of its advisory board from 1903, the date of its inception -- and the 'Print Collectors' Quarterly', which he helped to found in 1911 and edited single-handed from 1921 to 1936. Apart from his work on the German school he was actively engaged in the acquisition of important French eighteenth-century prints for the British Museum, publishing a book entitled 'Old French Colour Prints' in 1924, and in 1933, after his retirement, the Roxburghe Club catalogue of the proof states for Goya's 'Desastres de la guerra'. 
Dodgson's importance was not confined to the field of old master prints. Using the income derived from the family firm of Hope, Dodgson, and Cobbold, he built an extensive private collection which ranged from fine examples of the work of Manet, Degas, Pissarro, Toulouse-Lautrec, Odilon Redon, Kathe Kollwitz, and Carl Larsson to comprehensive holdings of many contemporary French and British printmakers. Muirhead Bone, Charles Conder, and Augustus John were among many artists working in Britain of whose prints he published 'catalogues raisonnes'. From the outset, Dodgson developed his collection to complement the holdings of the prints and drawings department, ultimately bequeathing more than 5000 items to the British Museum, together with the sum of $3000 to be administered by the National Art Collections Fund for the department's benefit. In 1919 he was a prime mover in establishing a special prints and drawings fund under the auspices of the Contemporary Art Society, from which the British Museum had first refusal on all purchases until 1945. 
Dodgson was an outstanding public servant in the integrity and mental discipline he brought to bear on all that he did. After supervising the move of the British Museum's prints and drawings collection to new quarters in the Edward VIIth Wing shortly before the outbreak of the First World War, he ran the department virtually single-handed from 1916 to 1918; at the same time he was working in intelligence for the War Office, a service for which he was made a CBE in 1918. After his retirement the pattern of Dodgson's existence remained much the same; he frequented the Burlington Fine Arts Club (of which he became a member in 1902), travelled extensively until the Second World War, and continued to both collect and publish to the very end of his life, as well as serving as honorary keeper of prints at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge from 1939 to 1946. He received the German government's Goethe medal for services to the history of German art in July 1933, honorary degrees from Oxford and Cambridge in 1934 and 1936, and decorations from France and Belgium. 
As a personality, Dodgson appeared an austere man of retiring manner whose iron-clad sense of duty -- 'Diligentia' was the Dodgson family motto which appeared on Dodgson's own book-plate designed by Thomas Sturge Moore in 1909 -- did not always endear him to more gregarious colleagues such as Sidney Colvin and Laurence Binyon; to the young John Pope-Hennessy he appeared in the latter part of his life to be 'like an old tortoise' (Pope-Hennessy to Antony Griffiths, 23 April 1978, BM), an impression aptly conveyed by the portrait of him etched by Andrew Freeth in 1938. Behind this reserve a more passionate nature was glimpsed by Oscar Wilde, who met him in February 1893 when Dodgson was engaged as a tutor to Lord Alfred Douglas. The engagement lasted no more than a few days, but Dodgson confessed to their mutual friend the poet Lionel Johnson to being quite spellbound by Wilde. 
On 24 September 1913 Dodgson married (Frances) Catharine Spooner (1883-1954) ['see 'Dodgson, (Frances) Catharine], daughter of William Archibald Spooner, warden of New College, Oxford, and his wife, Frances; she was a practising artist who had studied at the Ruskin School of Drawing in Oxford and at the Royal Academy Schools and the Slade School of Fine Art in London. They set up house at 22 Montagu Square, Marylebone, London, where they maintained a comfortable existence devoted to serious cultural pursuits, holding regular exhibitions of Dodgson's own collection and the work acquired for the Contemporary Art Society after 1919. Although they had no children, the Dodgsons were notably kind to Campbell's many nieces and nephews, among whom they were particularly close to John Dodgson, who became a professional artist, and to Eveline Dodgson, who also studied at the Slade. She was briefly married to James Byam Shaw of Colnaghis, who remained a close friend until Dodgson's death, which occurred on 11 July 1948 at Chapel House, Mattock Lane, Ealing, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 32849


Dodgson, (Frances) Catharine (1883-1954), portrait painter, was born on 15 December 1883 at Oxford, the eldest daughter of the Revd William Archibald Spooner (1844-1930), afterwards warden of New College, Oxford, and his wife, Frances Wycliffe, daughter of Harvey Goodwin, bishop of Carlisle. At the age of fifteen she studied drawing at the Ruskin School of Drawing at Oxford, and later attended the Royal Academy Schools and (for a short period) the Slade School of Fine Art. In 1913 she married Campbell Dodgson (1867-1948), keeper of prints and drawings in the British Museum, and from that time until her husband's retirement in 1932 she was chiefly occupied with social and domestic responsibilities in her house in Montagu Square, and found little time for drawing or painting. An oil painting by her, a portrait of Dean Inge (whose wife was her first cousin), was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1923; but it was not until the middle of the 1930s that Catharine Dodgson began again to indulge her artistic inclinations, and it was from then onwards that most of her surviving work was produced. She then abandoned painting in oils, and her favourite medium, in which she achieved considerable success, was drawing in pen or black or red chalk, with transparent washes of pale brown, often on coloured paper and heightened with white. 
Between 1933 and 1945 Catharine Dodgson exhibited about a dozen portrait drawings at the Royal Academy, including those of her husband (1933; British Museum), of Dean Inge (1934; priv. coll.), and of Sir Thomas Barlow (1936; priv. coll.). She had a real flair for catching a likeness, her portrait drawings were in great demand, and she could have had many more commissions than she had time or inclination to carry out. She remained in the best sense an amateur; she was too conscientious to enjoy a commission for its own sake, and she lacked the self-confidence that enables a professional portrait painter to impose his personality on a subject in which he is not particularly interested. Her best portraits, therefore, were those of her own family, of intimate friends, or of children. 
A visit with her husband to Wurzburg, and the charming gardens of Veitshochheim, provided Dodgson with a new source of inspiration, with equally successful results; and excellent examples of her elegant drawings of German rococo sculpture, made on this occasion, are now in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford and in various private collections. In the same vein she drew the busts of Sir Christopher Wren by Edward Pierce (Ashmolean Museum) and Charles II by Honore Pelle in the Victoria and Albert Museum. She also produced some drawings of dancers in the Covent Garden Opera in the same medium, and, towards the end of the war of 1939-45, some sketches of Regent's Park, rather more elaborate in colour, and remarkable for their lightness and deftness of touch. 
Her husband's illness a year or two before his death in 1948 affected Catharine Dodgson's own health very seriously, and she hardly drew again; she died in London on 30 April 1954. Two exhibitions of her drawings were held at Colnaghi's in Bond Street, in the autumn of 1936 and in the spring of 1939, and both were warmly praised by the critics. She was modest to a fault, and was inclined to attribute this success to the writers' friendship with her husband, who was of course widely known and respected in artistic circles. But few seemed to share this view, least of all Campbell Dodgson himself, who was genuinely proud of her achievements. A loan exhibition in her memory was held in the same gallery after her death, October-November 1954. 
James Byam Shaw', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32850


Dods, Marcus (1834-1909), United Free Church of Scotland minister and biblical scholar, born in Belford vicarage, Northumberland, on 11 April 1834, was the youngest son of the theological writer Marcus Dods (1786-1838) and his wife, Sarah Palliser (died 1859). On the father's death in 1838 the family moved to Edinburgh, where Dods first attended a preparatory school and then Edinburgh Academy (1843-8). After spending two years in the head office of the National Bank in Edinburgh, he decided in 1850 to study for the ministry of the Free Church of Scotland. In 1854 he graduated MA at Edinburgh University and began his theological course at New College, Edinburgh; during his university career he acted as an assistant in the Signet Library. On 7 September 1858 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Edinburgh. 
Dods had a long probationership: although he preached in twenty-three vacancies, he failed for six years to get a church. During these years of enforced leisure he edited the complete works of Augustine (1871), translated a work by Johann Peter Lange as 'Life of Christ' (6 vols., 1864), and wrote his popular 'The Prayer that Teaches to Pray' (1863; 5th edn, 1885) and 'Epistles to the Seven Churches' (1865). Dods's characteristic humanity and humility emerge in his letters of this period: writing to his sister Marcia regarding Augustine, the 'great man' whose works he was then editing, he described Augustine's greatness and reflected on how difficult it is to be merely a 'great' and 'good little man'. As W. Robertson Nicoll remarked after Dods's death, it was above all this quality that friends, colleagues, and foes admired in Dods: his 'natural greatness of soul' coupled with his charming and utterly genuine selflessness and his complete truthfulness. 
On 4 August 1864 Dods was installed as minister of the Renfield Free Church, Glasgow; from its pulpit for the next twenty-five years he exercised considerable influence. Among those who benefited from his ministry was Henry Drummond. Sermons delivered at Renfield formed the substance of his popular books: 'Israel's Iron Age, or, Sketches from the Period of the Judges' (1874; 4th edn, 1880) and 'The Parables of Our Lord' (1st ser., 'Matthew', 1883; 2nd ser., 'Luke', 1885). They also provided material for his editions of 'Genesis' ('Expositor's Bible', 1888), of '1 Corinthians' ('Expositor's Bible', 1889), and of 'St John's gospel' ('Expositor's Bible', 1897). Dods continued throughout his life to enjoy preaching, which, he wrote, 'keeps life sweet'. 
Although not a theologian in the technical sense, Dods exhibited wide and exact scholarship and a gift for popularizing new critical views about the 'Bible'. In 1877 Dods published a sermon, 'Revelation and Inspiration', which questioned verbal inspiration, the doctrine that the 'Bible' was literally dictated to the writers of scripture by the Holy Spirit. The presbytery of Glasgow, while declining to enter on a judicial process against Dods, advised him to withdraw the sermon until it could be modified. Dods assented on conditions; the matter was brought in 1878 before the general assembly, which declined by a majority to intervene. 
In 1869 Dods refused an invitation to become colleague to Robert Smith Candlish at St George's Free Church, Edinburgh, the most influential congregation in the denomination. In 1889, when he celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of his ordination, he was appointed to the chair of 'New Testament' criticism and exegesis in New College, Edinburgh. The appointment implied that the Free Church of Scotland was now prepared to tolerate critical views of the 'Bible', for which William Robertson Smith had been removed from his chair only eight years before. At the general assembly of 1890 Dods and Alexander Balmain Bruce were charged with teaching doctrines at variance with their church. The assembly, after a protracted debate, acquitted Bruce and, while exhorting Dods to teach the faith held by his church, declined to institute a process which would formally dismiss him on the grounds of heresy. Through his gentleness and reputation for thorough, accurate scholarship Dods contributed enormously to the liberalization of the Free Church: he demonstrated an extraordinary ability to stretch conventional doctrinal boundaries in his theological tradition, while retaining the respect of those who opposed him. 
Other books by Dods in his later years included 'Mohammed, Buddha, and Christ' (1877), 'Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph' (1880), 'Erasmus and other Essays' (1891; 2nd edn, 1892), 'An Introduction to the New Testament' (1891), 'The Visions of a Prophet: Studies in Zechariah' (1895), 'Why be a Christian?' (1896), 'How to Become Like Christ and other Papers' (1897), and 'The Bible: its Nature and Origin' (Bross lectures, 1905), which provides a full account of his views on inspiration. Two additional volumes of sermons, 'Footsteps in the Path of Life' and 'Christ and Man', were posthumously published in 1909, while his 'Early Letters... (1850-1864)' and 'Later Letters... (1895-1909)' were edited by his son in 1910 and 1911 respectively. 
In 1871 Dods married Catherine, daughter of James Swanston of Marshall Meadows, Berwickshire; the couple had three sons and one daughter, Mary Christian, who later married Arthur Gray, Presbyterian minister and promotor of marriage guidance. In 1891 he received the honorary degree of DD from Edinburgh University, and in 1901 he declined nomination for the moderatorship of the general assembly of the United Free Church of Scotland (formed in the previous year by the union of the Free and United Presbyterian churches). Appointed in May 1907, on the death of Robert Rainy, principal of New College, Edinburgh, he was prevented by ill health from taking up that office. He died at his home, 23 Great King Street, Edinburgh, on 26 April 1909, and was buried in the Dean cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 32851


Doherty, (Hugh) Lawrence (1875-1919), tennis player, was born on 8 October 1875 at Beulah Villa, Hartfield Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, the son of William Doherty, a printer, later of Clapham Park, London, and his wife, Catherine Ann Davis. His elder brother 
Reggie Doherty won four consecutive All England singles championships at Wimbledon, his 'local' club, in 1897-1900, and with Charlotte Cooper he won the gold medal for mixed doubles at the Paris Olympics of 1900. With a perfect smash and volley game, Laurie Doherty won the Olympic men's singles in 1900. He was All England singles champion from 1902 to 1906, during which years he never lost a match in the Davis cup, despite meeting the best American players; indeed in 1903 he actually won the American championship, the only overseas player to do so between 1881 and 1925. 
The Doherty brothers became a formidable doubles partnership, with Reggie's polished groundstrokes, particularly the backhand, complementing Laurie's more aggressive style. Nicknamed Big Do and Little Do, they were also a contrast in size, Reggie tall and very thin and Laurie not even medium height. Reggie relied much on anticipation, covering the court with apparent ease, whereas Laurie thought out the game more thoroughly. They were as expert on covered courts -- as at Queen's Club, Kensington, where some of their best games were played -- as on grass. Their doubles record was impressive: they were All England champions eight times between 1897 and 1905; Olympic gold-medal winners in 1900; American title holders twice, in 1902 and 1903; and unbeaten in the five Davis cup matches in which they played together. 
After an arduous losing doubles final in 1906 neither brother played again at Wimbledon, reputedly as a promise to their mother, who feared for their health if they again overtaxed their strength. Reggie continued to play tennis, but only in selected major events, including the 1908 London Olympic games, where he again won the men's doubles, this time with George Hillyard. In 1909 he won two titles in South Africa but his health was failing. A few hours after returning from a Swiss nursing home, he died on 29 December 1910 of heart failure and neurasthenia at his home in the Albert Hall Mansions, Knightsbridge, which he shared with his brother. 
Laurie Doherty abandoned competitive tennis and took up golf, where he achieved a handicap of plus two and in 1908 reached the last sixteen of the British amateur championship at his home course of Royal St George's. In 1914 he joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve but the rigours of wartime service in an anti-aircraft unit took its toll on his frail constitution. After two years suffering from tubercular nephritis and cystitis he died on 21 August 1919 of toxaemia at Leon Cottage, North Foreland, Kent. His father, with whom he lived at the Albert Hall Mansions, was with him when he died; neither of the brothers was married. The tennis feats of the brothers are commemorated by the Doherty gates at the south-western entrance to the All England club, Wimbledon. 


@@@@@


doc= 32852


Dolling, Robert William Radclyffe (1851-1902), Church of England clergyman and social reformer, was born on 10 February 1851 in the old rectory, Magheralin, co. Down, the sixth of nine children and the elder son of Robert Holbeach Dolling (died 1878), a landlord in co. Down, and one time high sheriff of Londonderry, and his wife, Eliza (died 1870), third daughter of Josias Du Pre Alexander MP, a nephew of James Alexander, first earl of Caledon. Dolling's childhood was spent at Kilrea, in co. Londonderry. After education at a private school, The Grange, Stevenage, Hertfordshire (1861-4), and at Harrow School (1864-8), he matriculated in 1868 from Trinity College, Cambridge. Bad health and ophthalmia compelled his withdrawal in spring 1869, and he spent the next twelve months in foreign travel, mostly in Italy, including Florence. After his mother's death in 1870 he returned to Ireland, where he assisted his father in land agency work. His spare time in Kilrea was devoted to 'Bible' classes and night schools for young men, and clubs for working men, and he continued this work in Dublin, where his family soon moved. After his father's death on 28 September 1878 he went to England and made London his permanent home: there he became intimate friends with Arthur Henry Stanton (1839-1913) and Alexander Heriot Mackonochie (1825-1887), two Anglo-Catholic clergymen whom he had met earlier at Cambridge. These two clerics were at that time engaged in stubbornly defending the ritualistic services which they were conducting at St Alban the Martyr, Holborn. Under their influence Dolling became warden of the south London branch of the St Martin's Postman's League in 1879. But Brother Bob, as he was called by the postmen, found more satisfying work among the poorest classes in Southwark, where he exercised a magnetic influence. 
Early in 1882 Dolling entered Salisbury Theological College, where his anti-intellectual temperament and belief in practical Christianity came into conflict with student life and theological education. Ordained as a deacon on 20 May 1883 in Salisbury Cathedral by Bishop Robert Campbell Moberly, Dolling became curate of Corscombe, Dorset, and then missionary deacon of St Martin's Mission at Holy Trinity, Stepney. He was ordained as a priest by the bishop of London, Frederick Temple, on Trinity Sunday 1885 at St Paul's Cathedral. Failing health and difficulties on questions of ritual with Bishop Temple led to Dolling's retirement from Stepney on 1 July 1885. After a short stay at St Leonards, in the same year Dolling became vicar of the Winchester College Mission of St Agatha's, Landport, Portsmouth, where for ten years he did much to mitigate the social problems of slum life, especially prostitution, poverty, and drunkenness. He also supported the campaign for shorter working hours and better wages, and believed that it was 'not far distant when employers will find that the men's Unions are really a great gain in the solution of the whole Labour Question' (Dolling, 130). He was also involved in frequent controversy over liturgical practices. 
Dolling believed that the colour and spectacle of ritualism drew people to religion, a belief possibly not unconnected to his own enthusiasm for the theatre, which he attended frequently. Certainly, in conjunction with his strong personality and energetic evangelistic zeal, it attracted a large congregation to his church and contributed to his strong local influence, which was greatest over women and young people. His endorsement of confession, incense, extra-liturgical practices, and a small booklet, 'St Agatha's, Landport, Sunday Scholars' Book' (1890s?), which critics thought deviated from Anglican teaching on the eucharist, brought him into conflict with his bishops. Fresh disagreements with the newly appointed bishop of Winchester, Randall Davidson, caused Dolling's resignation of his living on 8 December 1895. St Agatha's Church had been rebuilt, and Davidson refused to grant a licence for it, as it contained an altar which would be used exclusively for requiem masses. Dolling, who had already decided to leave St Agatha's, would not compromise, and this affair provided him with a dramatic excuse. After he left Landport he wrote 'Ten Years in a Portsmouth Slum' (1896), which gave a full account of his work and experiences at St Agatha's and his problems with Davidson. 
During 1896-7 Dolling stayed in London with his sister Josephine at Earls Court, giving occasional addresses in various parts of England. In May 1897 he went to America, where he preached in numerous cities. At Chicago in March 1898 he was offered the deanery of the cathedral by Bishop William Edward McLaren, but he had already accepted the living of St Saviour's, Poplar, and returned to England in July 1898. At Poplar he again sought to solve the social and municipal problems of the district; the east London water famine of 1898, the evils of overcrowding, and the smallpox epidemic of 1901 roused all his energies, and he fiercely denounced those responsible for these scandals. In March 1901 Dolling's health failed, and after travelling abroad in hope of relief he died, unmarried, on 15 May 1902, at his sister's house in South Kensington. Solemn requiem masses were said at St Cuthbert's, Philbeach Gardens, and at St Saviour's, and he was buried next to A. H. Mackonochie at Woking on 21 May. In June 1902 a government annuity was purchased in his memory for his two sisters Elise and Geraldine, who had helped him in his work; the Dolling memorial home of rest for the working girls of Poplar and Landport was opened at Worthing under their management in 1903. 
The missionary enthusiasm of Father Dolling, as he was widely known, combined an almost evangelical fervour with a strong commitment to ritualist practices and pragmatic philanthropy. Impatient of ecclesiastical authority, he was an unconventional and essentially emotional preacher who appealed potently to marginal social groups. His commitment to the disadvantaged and dispossessed was evident in his radical politics: he strongly advocated Irish home rule, church disestablishment, and the labour movement. A stout man with a generous personality, he earned an unexpected tribute at his death from the nonconformist paper 'British Weekly' (22 May 1902), which commented aptly that he had 'lived and died in slum parishes, with outcasts sleeping under his roof, with vagabonds dining at his table'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32853


Dolmetsch, (Eugene) Arnold (1858-1940), maker of musical instruments, was born at Le Mans, France, on 24 February 1858. He came from a family of musicians. His grandfather, of Bohemian origin, settled in Zurich in 1808. There his father, Rudolf Arnold Dolmetsch, was born and became a piano maker; he was also known for his performances of Bach on the clavichord. His mother was Marie Zelie Guillouard, daughter of Armand Guillouard, a piano and organ maker who taught Arnold instrument making and how to play. Arnold was the eldest son. After his father's death he went to the Brussels Conservatoire for a general musical education and took violin lessons with Henri Vieuxtemps. In 1883 he entered the newly founded Royal College of Music in London, where he studied with Henry Holmes and Frederick Bridge, and was encouraged by its director, Sir George Grove, not only in his professional career as music master at Dulwich College but also in his investigations into the early English instrumental music which he found in the British Museum in 1889. 
Thereafter Dolmetsch's life work became the study of the performance of early music and the instruments on which to play it. Confronted with a lack of appropriate instruments he began to construct copies of lutes, virginals, clavichords, harpsichords, recorders, and ultimately viols and violins, and taught himself and others to play them. Dolmetsch made his first lute in 1893, his first recorder in 1919, his first clavichord in 1894; his first harpsichord, produced at the suggestion of William Morris, was shown in 1896. He also worked as an instrument builder in the USA (1905-11) and Paris (1911-14). 
Dolmetsch's main contributions to the English musical renaissance, which until then had concentrated mostly on the repertory for voices because of the lack of authentic instruments and players who could use them, were the rediscovery of a school of English composers for consorts of viols (of whom the chief were John Jenkins and William Lawes) and the re-establishment of the recorder as an instrument of popular music. By providing the environment for its performance and instruments, he initiated a movement which has burgeoned into prolific scholarship and technical mastery. In 1915 he published a landmark performance text, 'The Interpretation of the Music of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries', the first work of its kind. He settled soon after at Haslemere, Surrey, establishing instrument workshops there and starting, in 1925, an annual festival dedicated to performing early music. Here music that Dolmetsch had unearthed was often played for the first time since its composition on the instruments for which it was intended and in what was hoped to be the original style. The performers were Dolmetsch's family and distinguished circle of friends and pupils, which eventually included the young lutenist Diana Poulton, who was a close family friend in spite of finding Arnold an impatient, bad-tempered, and otherwise poor teacher. Regardless of his shortcomings as a teacher, Dolmetsch introduced many musicians to this repertory, providing them with instruments and the impetus to teach themselves to play. Sir Henry Hadow correctly commented that he 'opened the door to a forgotten treasure-house of beauty'. The festival concerts lacked the polish that later performers were to achieve, but Dolmetsch remained unabashed. He insisted: 'This music is of absolute and not antiquarian importance; it must be played as the composer intended and on the instruments for which it was written with their correct technique; and through it personal music-making can be restored to the home, from which two centuries of professionalism have divorced it' ('DNB'). This passionate and almost obsessive belief led him to turn his children -- Helene, Cecile, Nathalie, Rudolph, and Carl -- into versatile performers on many instruments. With his third wife, Mabel, the family formed a domestic consort every evening, frequently augmented by friends, in which all the participants were expected to perform on several different instruments. 
Dolmetsch's improved harpsichords encouraged the use of that instrument for the basso continuo of eighteenth-century operas and oratorios, now a standard practice. His work for viols and lute -- exemplified by his three articles in 'The Connoisseur' (1904) -- was of the greatest antiquarian, although of less musical, interest. His restoration of the recorder reopened early music to the amateur world, and, although his work making early instruments was quickly eclipsed by other specialist builders, the family name is still synonymous with finely crafted recorders. 
In 1928, in honour of Dolmetsch's seventieth birthday, the Dolmetsch Foundation was incorporated for the 'encouragement of the revival of early instrumental music'. In 1937 he was granted a civil-list pension; in 1938 he was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur; and in 1939 he received the honorary degree of doctor of music from Durham University. 
Dolmetsch's private life was complex, especially in the decade before 1903. He was thrice married: first, on 28 May 1878 (just after the birth of their daughter, Helene), to Marie Morel, of Namur, from whom he separated in 1894 (they were divorced in 1898); secondly, on 11 September 1899, in Zurich, to Elodie Desiree, divorced wife of Dolmetsch's brother Edgard (this marriage also ended in divorce, in September 1903); thirdly, on 23 September 1903, to Mabel (1874-1963), one of his pupils and thirteenth of the fourteen children of John Brookes Johnston, an insurance broker, of Denmark Hill. Dolmetsch's eldest daughter, Helene, was a fine viola da gamba player, but was estranged from her father from 1901 almost until her death. With his third wife -- a musicologist and viol player -- he had two daughters and two sons: Rudolph, generally believed to have been the most talented of all the children, died during the Second World War, while Carl Dolmetsch (1911-1997) perpetuated the style and approach of his father's work. Although the early music revival in Europe was largely due to Dolmetsch's work, his research did not move on as more information became available, and, despite the careful perpetuation of his tradition after his death -- at his home, Jesses, Grayswood Road, Haslemere, on 28 February 1940 -- its influence soon waned as other views about the performance of early music came to predominate. 


@@@@@


doc= 32854


Donald, Sir John Stewart (1861-1948), administrator in India, was born at Ferozepore, Punjab, on 8 September 1861, the son of Alexander John Stewart Donald ('b'. 1824), an Anglo-Indian in the Punjab provincial service, and his wife, Susan Britten ('b'. 'c'.1830), daughter of William Edward Hilliard. He was educated at Bishop Cotton School, Simla, and in April 1882 entered the Punjab provincial service. 
Initially posted to Ambala and Ludhiana, Donald was soon transferred to Dera Ghazi Khan on the north-west frontier. By 1885 his work there had attracted the attention of Robert Sandeman, who recruited him to implement his aggressive forward policy in Baluchistan. In 1890 Donald was put in charge of the newly opened Gomal pass in southern Waziristan and in the autumn of that year was attached to the Kidderzai column of the Shirani field force to pacify the Largha-Shirani territory, for which service he was admitted to the imperial civil service. This was a rare privilege for an Anglo-Indian, and in praising him in later years Donald's superiors would never quite be able to hide their surprise that one so humbly born had done so well. 
In August 1893 Donald accompanied Mortimer Durand's mission to Kabul to negotiate the Indo-Afghan frontier and in the following year was charged with demarcating the southern, Waziristan, and Kurram section of the frontier. Good-humoured patience aided his success and he was created CIE and awarded, from the Afghan side, the Izzat-i-Afghani. 
After eighteen months' furlough in 1896-7, Donald was appointed to Hoshiarpur, Miran Shah, and, from 1900, Bannu, a district bordering Waziristan in which the Mahsuds and Wazirs had proved less tractable than the more southern tribes of Baluchistan. In 1903 he served as British commissioner on the Anglo-Afghan boundary commission on the Kurram and Waziristan borders, following which he took his second furlough to Britain, where on 4 January 1905, in London, he married Henrietta Mary (died 1955), daughter of Colonel Edward Lacon Ommanney of the Indian political service. He returned to India in late 1905, and was appointed deputy commissioner of Hazara. 
In 1908, at the recommendation of Sir George Roos-Keppel, Donald became the first resident of Waziristan. In 1910 he again served on the Afghan boundary commission, for which he was made CSI in 1911. From August 1913 to January 1915 he officiated for Roos-Keppel as chief commissioner of the North-West Frontier Province. He was sceptical about the efficacy of the residency system and frequently urged the full occupation of the Mahsuds' territory in Waziristan, arguing that from a distance the British could not protect the individuals who were inclined to assist them. In spite of his criticism, however, he faithfully adhered to the government's haphazard 'carrot and stick' system of tribal allowances and punitive fines, generally adopting a wait-and-see approach to tribal incursions, and counselling against over-hasty punishment. 
In 1915 Roos-Keppel succeeded in getting a KCIE for Donald, even though the political department thought that he had already been amply decorated. He was due to retire in September 1916 but under wartime conditions stayed on as resident of Waziristan and additional member of the central legislative council. In 1917 he was appointed chief political officer with the Waziristan field force operating against the Mahsuds. 
Not one of the big names on the frontier, Donald nevertheless commanded the respect of his colleagues and also apparently that of the Mahsuds and Wazirs, who knew him simply as Dollan. Calm, measured, and fluent in Waziri Pushtu, he was able to gauge the tone and intent of a 'jirga' or tribal gathering before committing himself to action. He had a reputation for modesty but took pride in the service. He retired in 1920 and, having never lived for any length of time in Britain, settled first in Jersey and then in Cyprus, where he died in Amiandos Hospital on 30 July 1948. He was survived by his wife, who died in 1955, and a younger son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 32855


Donald, Sir Robert (1860-1933), journalist, was born in Dufftown, Banffshire, on 29 August 1860, the son of Robert Donald, mason, and his wife, Jane McConochie. He was educated at the local parish school. Later he taught himself shorthand and French and sought to improve himself by a programme of reading. His first job was as a clerk, but already he had determined on journalism as a career. From unsolicited, unpaid contributions to the local journal, he became a reporter for the Edinburgh 'Evening News', 'The Courant', and the 'Northampton Echo'. He freelanced in London, Paris, and New York before finally securing an appointment as a correspondent on the new evening daily, 'The Star'. Responsible for investigating London's government, he made a detailed study of the subject. Hoping to exploit his hard-won expertise, in February 1893, funded by the Progressives, he started a campaigning journal, 'London'. The enterprise quickly foundered. Undeterred, immediately he launched the 'Municipal Journal', and in 1897 the 'Municipal Year Book', editing both until 1902. These enterprises first brought him to the notice of the newspaper proprietor Frank Lloyd. Donald married in 1890 Marie-Jeanne, daughter of a French scientist, Professor Garassut. They had two daughters, one of whom predeceased him. 
In March 1895 Donald became news editor of the 'Daily Chronicle'. In 1899, for what then was the princely salary of $1000 a year, he became publicity manager for the Gordon Hotel group. He contemplated a parliamentary career and was adopted as Liberal and Progressive candidate for West Ham (North). But in January 1904 he accepted Frank Lloyd's invitation to edit the 'Daily Chronicle'. The new editor invigorated the newspaper; its circulation rose and its influence increased. From 1906 he also edited 'Lloyd's Sunday News'. In 1911 he was appointed managing director of United Newspapers. Made a fellow of the Institute of Journalists in 1909, his distinction and status in his profession were acknowledged in 1913 by his unanimous election as president. 
Though broadly sympathetic to Liberalism, Donald was never a party zealot. He believed the editor of a national newspaper should maintain close contacts with Westminster. For their part, Liberal Party leaders were happy to confide in 'so well-informed and sagacious an adviser' (Taylor, 50). His proprietor required him to follow broadly Liberal policies, but the editor alone interpreted that intention and carefully preserved his independence. It was supposed he was a close ally of Lloyd George. In 1916 the two men became estranged when the 'Daily Chronicle' urged that whoever replaced Kitchener as war minister should 'shine in his own orbit without infringing the orbit of the Chief of Staff' ('Daily Chronicle', 17 June 1916). Lloyd George resented this 'most harmful... most prejudicial' (Riddell, entry for 18 June 1916) advice that seemed to imply that Donald supported the generals. The former amity between Lloyd George and Donald was not restored until 1917. Their shared aversion to a negotiated peace brought them together, but Donald continued, as he saw fit, to question the prime minister's decisions. Lesser incursions became gravely compounded by the appointment of Major-General Sir Frederick Maurice as the 'Chronicle''s military correspondent. Interpreting this as a calculated provocation, Lloyd George determined to curb Donald's independence. 
In September 1918, after a series of earlier efforts had failed, Frank Lloyd was bought out for $1.6 million. Donald resigned, refusing to accept the editorship under the political control of a board chaired by Sir Henry Dalziel, who was Lloyd George's creature. Journalists generally agreed the whole transaction had been 'an especially unsavoury incident in the history of the modern political press' (Koss, 314). Donald was never to regain his former editorial prominence. In a speech that attracted much attention, he warned that editorial independence and freedom of thought were compromised when the press was controlled by ministers and run by businessmen. 
Donald secured a substantial holding in the 'Yorkshire Observer' and 'Bradford Daily Telegraph'. From 1919 to 1921 he owned 'The Globe', London's oldest evening journal, but had to sell out. It would have been wiser to acknowledge his earlier experience with the 'Echo and London Evening Chronicle' that he persuaded Lloyd to launch in February 1915; it folded within six weeks with losses of $100,000. Donald possessed neither the peculiar gifts nor the financial resources to be a successful proprietor. 
Between 1922 and 1924 Donald edited two Sunday papers, 'The People' and 'The Referee'. His resentment at Lloyd George's treatment of him was reflected in the uncharacteristically vituperative advice he offered Andrew Bonar Law on how to deal with Lloyd George in the forthcoming general election. 'Tell him he's a liar' (Donald to A. Bonar Law, 30 Oct 1922, Parl. Arch., Bonar Law MSS). He had long been a friend of Ramsay MacDonald, who, in 1931, made him chairman of the newly founded National Labour Party's publicity committee. Donald ran their fortnightly 'News-Letter'. In the summer of 1932 he acquired the weekly 'Everyman' as a vehicle for party propaganda. Donald was its chairman, managing director, editor, inspiration, and major contributor until his death. 
In the last decade and a half of his life Donald was increasingly occupied with public affairs. He sat on royal commissions and committees that examined aspects of local government, wireless telegraphy, transport, and the empire. He helped to organize a series of imperial press conferences and was chairman of the Empire Press Union (1915-26). In 1920 he was made an honorary doctor of laws of the University of Toronto, an honour he valued as much as the knighthood (GBE) conferred upon him in 1924. He expressed his concern about the problems of reconstruction in post-war Europe in three books: 'A Danger Spot in Europe' (1925), 'The Tragedy of Trianon' (1928), and 'The Polish Corridor and the Consequences' (1930). 
Donald's early entries in 'Who's Who' claimed he had 'no time to practise any recreations' ('WW', 1904). Later he took up golf, for twenty-seven years was a member of the Walton Heath club, and captained the London Press Golfing Society (1914-20). Genial and urbane, he was a shrewd observer and critic of public affairs. In controversy he was not disposed to hedge or trim and could be tenacious and combative. He never sought the limelight as an editor. He ran the 'Daily Chronicle', by his own admission, upon rather old-fashioned lines: 'No modern journalism but good solid stuff'. He was impervious to Northcliffe's ironic response, 'My dear fellow, why not print it in Gothic type?' ('Journals and Letters of Reginald, Viscount Esher', ed. M. V. Brett, 1934, 2.275). Just and considerate, the hallmark of Donald's journalism was his honesty and independence. Donald died in London on 17 February 1933 at his home, 12 Thorney Court, Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 32856


Donaldson, Sir James (1831-1915), educationist and classical and patristic scholar, was born in the Aberdeen area on 26 April 1831, son of James Donaldson (of whom nothing certain is known) and Christina McKay (subsequently married in 1849 to William Hannan, a widower). He was educated from 1842 at Aberdeen grammar school and from 1846 at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he became a protege of John Stuart Blackie, professor of Latin. After graduation he commenced training at New College, London, intending to become a Congregational minister. However, he already had other interests both in classical scholarship and the theory of education; moreover he studied also in Berlin, where he encountered the educational ideas of J. F. Herbart. 
In 1852 Donaldson abandoned New College to become assistant to Blackie, now professor of Greek at Edinburgh. At this time, many ideas long to dominate Donaldson's thinking were shaped. He owed much to Blackie: his interest in post-classical Greek (shown by an early publication, 'Modern Greek Grammar' (1853) intended for classics students, and a contribution to 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on Byzantine and neo-Hellenic literature); his admiration for the German educational tradition and for German views on the psychology of education; and perhaps also the ideological foundations for his Scottish nationalism, which was to emerge in his support for home rule for Scotland, and for his liberal politics, source of powerful support later in his career. On 4 January 1855 he married Margaret Kennedy (died 1887), with whom he had two sons, born in 1857 and 1859. 
After two years (1854-6) as rector of Stirling high school, Donaldson moved to Edinburgh high school where he was a classics master for ten years and rector from 1866 to 1882. In these years he made his main contributions to scholarship. His 'Critical History of Christian Literature and Doctrine from the Death of the Apostles to the Nicene Council' appeared in three volumes between 1864 and 1866, the first, 'The Apostolic Fathers', in 1864 (2nd edn, 1874), and the remaining two, 'The Apologists', in 1866. With Alexander Roberts he edited and contributed to the twenty-four volumes of 'The Ante-Nicene Christian Library' (1867-72). He also published 'Lectures on the History of Education in Prussia and England' (1874). Donaldson's educational activity extended beyond practice to history and theory, and beyond schools to universities. He was ambitious and highly political. He expressed strong objections to the 'Education (Scotland) Act' of 1872, in particular to the importation of 'English' ideas and the loss of the parish tradition. In 1882 he became professor of humanity in the University of Aberdeen where he continued to pursue his wide interests in education and assiduously cultivated his aristocratic contacts. At this time he opposed the foundation of teachers' training colleges, believing that the training of teachers should be done within universities. 
Donaldson's appointment to the Aberdeen chair was widely viewed as having been engineered by his friend and powerful patron, Lord Rosebery; and his appointment four years later as principal of United College at the University of St Andrews (when the previous dual principalship, of St Mary's and of United College, came to an end) was attended by highly controversial political manoeuvrings. Donaldson's continued active involvement in Liberal politics was recognized in 1910 when he was one of the Liberals whom Asquith intended to create peers, to secure the passing of the 'Parliament Act'. 
After an inauspicious and unpopular start Donaldson proved an effective and forceful principal at a time of great expansion and change; his astute and pragmatic administrative style emerges in his public addresses, published in 1911. The implementation of the provisions of the 'Universities (Scotland) Act' of 1889 engaged his energies in the early years. He presided over the difficult and protracted negotiations on the rival merits of incorporation or affiliation of University College, Dundee; these ended in 1897 with union (which he had favoured). Thereafter came a time of expansion, when Donaldson successfully raised money for extensive building projects. Notable benefactors were the marquess of Bute and Andrew Carnegie, successive rectors in this era. During Donaldson's term of office, in 1892, women were first admitted to degrees. It may have been the 'woman question' which prompted his revision and publication of earlier papers in the form of 'Woman: her Position and Influence in Ancient Greece and Rome, and among the Early Christians' (1907), his last classical work. 
After the death of his first wife Donaldson married again in 1890. His second wife, Mary Christie ('nee' Webster, first married name Laing), had twice been widowed and predeceased him in 1908. Donaldson was knighted in 1907, and continued his work as principal until a few weeks before his death, at his home in Scores Park, St Andrews, on 10 March 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 32857


Donaldson, St Clair George Alfred (1863-1935), bishop of Salisbury, was born at 22 Rutland Gate, Westminster, London, on 11 February 1863, the third of four sons of Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson (1812-1867) of Pangbourne, Berkshire, first premier of New South Wales, and his wife, Amelia, daughter of Frederick Cowper of Carleton Hall, Cumberland. He was nephew to the philologist J. W. Donaldson and younger brother of Sir Stuart Donaldson, master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and vice-chancellor, whom he much admired. Educated at Eton College (1877-81), Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took double firsts in classics (1885) and theology (1887), and Wells Theological College, St Clair Donaldson was made deacon in May 1888 by the bishop of London and immediately joined the diocesan mission at St Andrew's, Bethnal Green. He served simultaneously as a resident chaplain to Archbishop E. W. Benson of Canterbury, who in December 1889 priested him. In October 1891 he joined the Eton College Mission, first at St Augustine's, Hackney Wick, and then as vicar of St Mary, Hackney Wick (1894-1900) and head of the mission. In May 1901 he was mentioned as organizing secretary of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel but in January 1902 he became rector of Hornsey, Middlesex, and rural dean nine months later. In 1903 he was elected president of the London Junior Clergy Missionary Association. 
After an abortive election in 1903, the synod of the diocese of Brisbane delegated the choice of its fourth bishop to the archbishop of Canterbury alone. Randall Davidson had been resident chaplain with Donaldson at Lambeth Palace. Donaldson's Australian connections, his London experience in the East End and at Lambeth, his moderate high-churchmanship, and independent means all commended his nomination. He was consecrated in St Paul's Cathedral, London, by Davidson on 28 October 1904, and enthroned in St Luke's Pro-Cathedral, Brisbane, on 21 December. Created archbishop in 1905, he was metropolitan of Queensland, the most coherent province in Australia, and he very nearly became primate in 1909. 
Upon an uneven Australian bench, Donaldson stood out for his statesmanship, spiritual leadership, common sense, and unfailing good humour. His devotion and piety in private were matched by his vision and oratory in public. As diocesan of Brisbane, he built upon the financial and administrative structures set by his predecessor, W. T. T. Webber; here he was ably assisted by two men who accompanied him in 1904, Henry Le Fanu, his archdeacon (and after 1915, his coadjutor), and Francis de Witt Batty, his chaplain. Conscious of the complaint that the diocese was a 'practising shop' for English clergy on five-year contracts, in his seventeen years in Brisbane Donaldson doubled the number of his clergy, of whom in 1921 half were Australian born and trained. In 1905 he established at Charleville the least monastic of the three Queensland bush brotherhoods. At Nundah, a Brisbane suburb, he revived as a provincial institution a former diocesan theological college, dedicated in 1907 to St Francis: as metropolitan, he controlled the placement of all its students, often favouring the weaker dioceses of the province. In 1911, within a year of the opening of the University of Queensland and largely through his private benefaction, St John's Residential College for Men was founded: it failed, however, to provide a stream of ordinands. Donaldson encouraged the diocese to eschew primary education, already provided by the state and numerous Roman Catholic convents, and to concentrate upon secondary day and boarding-schools, for boys and girls. These included the Glennie School for Girls, Toowoomba (1908), St Hilda's Southport (acquired by the church in 1911), the Southport School (1901), acquired in 1913, and the renamed Brisbane Church of England Boys' Grammar, acquired in 1914. The choir, transepts, and first bay of St John's Cathedral, Brisbane, a French Gothic revival masterpiece designed by J. L. Pearson, were consecrated on 28 October 1910, the first public occasion upon which all the bishops of the province vested in copes and mitres. St Martin's Hospital, adjacent to the cathedral, was opened in 1921 as a war memorial. Long concerned with such social and moral issues as gambling, temperance, and birth control, Donaldson finally held a general mission to the province in 1917; it was a qualified success. 
Donaldson's greatest influence in Australia was felt beyond his diocese. On his election he welcomed the opportunity to work in a disestablished church; he quickly discovered the constraints imposed by the 'legal nexus' between the Australian church and the Church of England in the United Kingdom. He determined first to define that nexus, then to break it. He envisaged an autonomous Australian church, able to play an independent and prominent part in national affairs. In 1912 he helped prepare the questions upon which learned opinion was sought in England and which long remained the basis of the movement for autonomy. His farewell public speech in Australia was his peroration to the debate on this question at the 1921 general synod. The Brisbane church congress of 1913 owed much to his planning and leadership. With Bishop Gilbert White, he tried to reorganize general synod and its subsidiary, the Australian board of missions. Before the war Donaldson joined the Brisbane branch of the Round Table, which often met at Bishopsbourne; during the war, he actively encouraged recruitment. His Lenten series of addresses in the cathedral was published as 'Christian Patriotism' (1915). As a senior chaplain to the armed forces he was annoyed by what he considered the indecisiveness of the primate and the chaplain-general. His speeches and correspondence with Archbishop Davidson reveal his support for imperial responsibilities but his distaste for jingoism and for national and state politicians and their sectarian outbursts, which he despised. 
While Donaldson was in England in 1913-14, largely through the influence of his only sister, May, wife of the Hon. the Revd Algernon Lawley, his translation to an English see was mooted. The war intervened; but in October 1921, Donaldson was translated to Salisbury, so that he could inaugurate a post-war mission to the church overseas. His initial attempts to abandon the palace at Salisbury as his residence failed; he used it instead to entertain youth (the 'bishop's lipstick parties') and educated laity with minimal church affiliations. To lighten his administrative responsibilities, in 1925 he revived the suffragan see of Sherborne and attempted to have Le Fanu appointed. He became consultant on all matters Australian to successive archbishops of Canterbury. From 1921 to 1933 he was foundation chairman of the Church of England missionary council and inaugurated the Jerusalem Chamber Fellowship of Prayer; here he showed skill, patience, and practical wisdom, born of his Australian experience. In 1926 he was appointed to the Church of England council of overseas settlement. He supported the 'deposited' prayer book of 1928. In 1931 he was appointed to chair the joint committee of the convocation of Canterbury on 'The church and marriage', which reported in 1935. 
Donaldson received many awards, including honorary doctorates of Cambridge (1904), Durham (in civil laws, 1908), and Oxford (1920); in 1923 he became an honorary fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and in 1933, knight commander and prelate of the Order of St Michael and St George. He published in his lifetime only the customary discourses of diocesan bishops; however, 'A Meditation on the Acts of the Apostles' (London, 1937) reveals his intense personal piety. He died unmarried at the palace, Salisbury, on 7 December 1935 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 11 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 32858


Donat, (Frederick) Robert (1905-1958), actor, the fourth and youngest son of Ernst Emil Donat, civil engineer of Polish origin, and his wife, Rose Alice Green, was born at 42 Albert Road, Withington, Manchester, on 18 March 1905. He went to the Central School, Manchester, and later studied for the stage under James Bernard of the same city. In 1924 he joined Sir Frank Benson, whose company was not then so constantly on tour as it had been; thus Donat could alternate continuing membership with seasons in provincial repertory. This was well-varied and helpful schooling: the Shakespearian apprenticeship was valuable, for among Donat's enduring distinctions were the purity of his diction and the beauty of his voice. He worked for a while with Alfred Wareing, whose repertory seasons at the Theatre Royal, Huddersfield, had unusual ambition and quality. In 1928 he began a year at the Playhouse in Liverpool and this was followed by important work at Terence Gray's Festival Theatre in Cambridge where plays by Euripides, Pirandello, Sheridan, and Shakespeare gave him opportunities to experiment in a range of widely different and challenging leading roles. In 1929 he married Ella Annesley Voysey, having two sons and a daughter before the marriage ended in divorce. 
Donat made his mark decisively in London in 1931 when he created the part of Gideon Sarn in a dramatization of 'Precious Bane' by Mary Webb. His handsome features and beautiful delivery, together with the equipment of technique acquired in his repertory years, promised promotion to the front rank and there was confirmation of his powers in the Malvern festival of 1931. Again at Malvern, in 1933, he played the two Camerons in 'A Sleeping Clergyman' by James Bridie; the piece was transferred to London and had a long run at the Piccadilly Theatre. Donat's performance of the two roles, the dying consumptive and his son the brilliant doctor, was memorable and was repeated in a revival of 1947. To the simulation of a man with lung trouble he brought his own knowledge of pain, for he was himself a sufferer from asthma and his later career was much impeded by illness. 
Donat's success carried him to important film work, as Richard Hannay in Alfred Hitchcock's 'The 39 Steps' (1935) -- one of his best performances -- and with Alexander Korda, who was then recruiting remarkable casts from the leading theatre actors. His notable appearances were in 'The Private Life of Henry VIII' (1933), in which Charles Laughton played the king; 'The Ghost Goes West' (1935); and, as another Scottish doctor, Andrew Manson, in a screen version of A. J. Cronin's 'The Citadel' (1938), for which he was nominated for an Oscar. Perhaps his most widely appreciated film role was that of Mr Chips, the ageing schoolmaster in 'Goodbye Mr Chips' (1939), from the novel by James Hilton, and for which he won an Oscar. 
Donat continued to mingle screen work with important returns to the stage, taking on the management at the Queen's Theatre in 1936 when he presented J. L. Hodson's 'Red Night'. During the war he gave vigour and volume to the eloquence of Captain Shotover in a revival of Shaw's 'Heartbreak House' (1943). At the Westminster Theatre in 1945 he was much liked in a plebeian comedy part in 'The Cure for Love' by Walter Greenwood. His last venture as a manager was at the Aldwych Theatre in 1945 when he staged 'Much Ado about Nothing' with himself as Benedick. His spirited rendering of the wordy warfare with Beatrice was exemplary at a time when Shakespearian speaking on the British stage was much criticized. He gave another lesson in delivery when he joined the Old Vic company in 1953 to play Becket in a production of T. S. Eliot's 'Murder in the Cathedral'. Directed by Robert Helpmann, this was one of the most effective renderings of a play frequently revived. Donat was far from being a player attached to one type of character. He was, however, seen at his best in parts that asked for splendour of voice and dignity of bearing, and his Becket was held by those who knew the scope of his work to have a singular beauty. Asceticism was a quality that came naturally to his delicacy of feature, but he had learned in his repertory years to be richly versatile. In naming his favourite roles he included the two gusty, outspoken Camerons of 'A Sleeping Clergyman', which, with 'Murder in the Cathedral', were perhaps the summits of his achievement on the stage. 
In 1953 Donat married the actress (Dorothy) Renee Asherson (1915-2014). During the last five years of his life he was a constant invalid. He did not mind the seclusion since he was of a shy and retiring disposition and had never sought the bright lights of publicity. But the frustration was galling for an actor who was only just entering his fifties and should have been at the height of his powers. He died in the West End Hospital, Westminster, London, on 9 June 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 32859


Donkin, Bryan (1835-1902), mechanical engineer, was born on 29 August 1835 at 88 Blackfriars Road, London, the eldest son in the family of seven children of John Donkin (1802-1854) ['see under 'Donkin, Bryan (1768-1855)], engineer, and Caroline, daughter of Benjamin Hawes. His was the third generation of the distinguished engineering dynasty founded by his grandfather, Bryan Donkin FRS, and he was known as Bryan Donkin junior. He was educated at private schools and University College, London, before spending two years on an engineering course at the Ecole Centrale des Arts et Metiers in Paris. At the age of twenty-one he commenced his pupillage in the family engineering works of Bryan Donkin & Co., then managed by his uncles. 
In 1859 Donkin was sent to St Petersburg by the firm to superintend the construction of what was, at that time, the largest paper mill in Europe. The Donkins had obtained this contract in 1858 from the Russian government, for a mill to produce paper for banknotes and government stationery. In January 1862 he returned to London, and for the next six years worked for the family firm, designing and superintending the installation of machinery in Britain and on the continent. His European work brought him into contact with foreign engineers and engineering practice, which was to prove important in his later career. In 1868 Donkin became a partner in the firm, and when it was converted into a limited liability company in 1889 he became chairman. Although remaining as chairman after the amalgamation with Clench & Co. of Chesterfield in 1900, he stopped having an active part in the management at that time. Donkin married his first wife, Georgina Mary ('b'. 1847/8), daughter of Frank Dillon, on 15 July 1869. They had a daughter and a son before Georgina died. On 14 February 1888 he married a widow, Edith Dunn, 'nee' Marshman ('b'. 1849/50); they had a daughter. Edith, who survived him, was to help him with his writing later in his career. 
In the early 1870s the paper-making industry ceased to provide as much work for the firm as previously, and Donkin began to devote increasing amounts of his time to the scientific side of engine design. The earliest tests were concerned with the Farey engine, designed by Barnard William Farey, one of the partners in the firm. An example installed at a paper mill in Devon was tested with a view to measuring its efficiency and the result was published in 'Engineering' (3 November 1871), giving the consumption of water and coal per horsepower hour. At that time such efficiency tests were unknown. Donkin's steam consumption test relied upon measuring the condensed water flowing over a tumbling bay or weir. He described the method in a joint paper with Salter and Martin that was presented to the Institution of Civil Engineers ('Minutes of Proceedings', 66, 1880-81, 278-94). Supported by 'Engineering', the tests rapidly gained acceptance in the engineering community. 
This work was followed by research into the behaviour of steam in cylinders, and the advantages of jacketing and superheating. The research brought him into direct contact with Professor Dwelshauvers-Devy, and led Donkin to develop his 'revealer', a glass apparatus which, attached to a steam engine cylinder, enabled him to observe the extent of condensation under varying conditions. The insight which this gave into the state of the internal work of cylinders led to a long series of trials by Donkin himself, in collaboration with other leading engineers, such as Professor Hudson Bewe, Lieutenant-Colonel English, and Alexander Kennedy (1847-1928). Kennedy and Donkin's tests on different types of boilers, initially published in 'Engineering', appeared as a book, 'Experiments on Steam Boilers' (1897). A further work on steam boiler design, 'The Heat Efficiency of Steam Boilers', appeared in 1898. 
In the 1890s Donkin became interested in internal combustion engines. He produced one of the earliest and most popular textbooks on the subject, 'A Textbook on Gas, Oil and Air Engines' (1894), which was still in print, in its fifth edition, in 1911. He was also responsible for an early translation of Diesel's work 'Theorie und Konstruktion eines rationellen Warmemotors'. He was an early member of the Automobile Club. 
Donkin was an active member of many engineering societies, in the UK and overseas, presenting papers to the Institution of Civil Engineers, Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Incorporated Institute (later Institution) of Gas Engineers, Manchester Association of Engineers, and North of England Institution of Mining and Mechanical Engineers. He became a vice-president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1901, and was a member of its research committees on the steam jacket, marine engines, gas engines, and steam engines. For the Institution of Civil Engineers, which he joined in 1884, he served on committees on the thermal efficiency of steam engines, and on steam engine and boiler trials. At the end of his career Donkin was investigating the practicability of working gas engines using gases produced in blast furnaces, and this was the subject of his final paper in 1901. 
Donkin's obituarist in 'The Times' (8 March 1902, 9e) declared that no other Englishman was in such close touch with progress on the continent. The subjects of his research were reflected in developments within his firm, which had begun building internal combustion engines in the 1890s, and developing boilers using the Perret system of forced draught which he advocated. Donkin died suddenly of heart failure at the Grand Hotel, Brussels, on 4 March 1902, and was buried at Bromley, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 32860


Donnan, Frederick George (1870-1956), physical chemist, was born in Colombo, Ceylon, on 6 September 1870, the second of the six children of William Donnan, a merchant of Belfast, and his wife, Jane Rose Turnley Liggate, who was also from Northern Ireland. All Donnan's early life was spent in Ulster, where he returned at the age of three. In 1879 an accident caused the loss of his left eye, but he continued to play sport to a high standard. He attended the Belfast Royal Academy (1880-89), where his chief interest was mathematics and physical science; there being no laboratories in the academy he did some practical work externally. From there he went to the Queen's College, Belfast, where he was remarkably successful in his studies, obtaining his BA from the Royal University of Ireland in 1894. 
In 1893 Donnan obtained an 1851 Exhibition scholarship. In that year, before graduating from Ireland, he went to the University of Leipzig. He did a year's chemistry under Johannes Wislicenus (1835-1902) and then joined W. Ostwald (1853-1932) to devote himself to the emerging discipline of physical chemistry. He obtained his PhD 'summa cum laude' in 1896. He finished his European tour with a year in the laboratory of J. H. van't Hoff in Berlin, where he studied the hydrates of calcium sulphate and the vapour pressures of a number of saturated aqueous solutions of single and double salts occurring in van't Hoff's investigations on oceanic salt deposits. 
Returning to Ireland in 1897, Donnan sat the MA examination of the Royal University of Ireland. Awarded a four-year junior fellowship, he spent a year at home, 'to read more deeply in the literature of physical chemistry', before proceeding (in 1898) to University College, London, as a senior research student in the laboratory of William Ramsay. In 1901 he became assistant lecturer in Ramsay's laboratory; in 1902-3 he was assistant professor in University College; and in 1903-4 lecturer in organic chemistry in the Royal College of Science, Dublin. In 1904, however, he accepted the new chair of physical chemistry, founded at the University of Liverpool by Sir John Brunner. He supervised the building of the Muspratt Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and was its director from 1906 to 1913. He then succeeded Ramsay at University College, London, where he remained until his retirement in 1937. 
During the First World War, Donnan was a member of a number of committees including those on chemical warfare and nitrogen products. As a consultant to the Ministry of Munitions he played an important part in the early stages of the research work at University College on synthetic ammonia and nitric acid, and assisted K. B. Quinan in the designs of plant for the fixation of nitrogen and for the production of mustard gas. He was appointed CBE in 1920 in recognition of his wartime services. His connections with the chemical industry continued after the war: he was research consultant to Brunner, Mond & Co. from 1920 to 1926 and a member of the research council of Imperial Chemical Industries from 1926 to 1939. He was particularly successful in raising money from industry and other sources for scientific research. 
Although pre-eminently a teacher, Donnan was internationally known as a colloid chemist and in particular for his theory of membrane equilibrium, published in the 'Zeitschrift fur Elektrochemie' (1911). The theory had important applications in the technologies of leather and gelatin, but particularly to the understanding of living cells, and how ions and molecules are transported within them and between the cell and its environment. 
Donnan was elected FRS in 1911 and awarded the Davy medal in 1928. He received the Longstaff medal (1924) of the Chemical Society, over which he presided in 1937-9, had no fewer than eleven honorary degrees, and was an honorary member of numerous academies and learned societies. His range of interests was extraordinarily wide; his early appreciation of the necessity of a united Europe led him to the study of artificial languages, while in his old age he was much preoccupied with cosmic problems. He was tall, good looking, well built, and of great physical strength and endurance. His face in repose was often stern and rather sad, but when he began to talk he radiated charm and sympathy. A tremendous worker, he kept late hours. He was devoted to his friends but had his dislikes. To accompany him abroad was to take part in a royal progress. 
After his retirement Donnan remained in his home in Woburn Square until 1940, when he left only twelve hours before it was destroyed by a bomb. He went to live at Hartlip, near Sittingbourne, Kent, and died in hospital at Canterbury on 16 December 1956. He never married and owed much to two sisters who played an unobtrusive but important part in his life and both of whom died in the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 32861


Donnelly, Sir John Fretcheville Dykes (1834-1902), army officer and promoter of scientific education, born in the Bay of Bombay on 2 July 1834, was the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Donnelly (1802-1881), deputy adjutant-general of the Bombay army, and from 1851 staff captain and afterwards staff officer at the East India Company's military college at Addiscombe until it closed in 1861. His mother was Jane Christiana, second daughter of Joseph Ballantine Dykes of Dovenby Hall, Cumberland. Educated at Highgate School (1843-8), he had a year's private tuition before entering the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich at the head of the list in August 1849. He passed out first, and was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers on 23 June 1853, and promoted first lieutenant on 17 February 1854. 
Donnelly went out to the Crimea in June, joining his corps on its march to Balaklava on 23 September, and the next month was detailed for duty with the left attack on Sevastopol. He was present at the battle of Inkerman on 5 November, and subsequently worked energetically in the trenches before Sevastopol. Through the severe winter of 1854-5 he was much in the trenches. On the day after the abortive assault on the Redan (18 June), when he was with the second column, he obtained a substantial lodgement in the Russian rifle pits at the Little Mamelon. He was mentioned in dispatches soon after the fall of Sevastopol in September 1855. In November 1855 he was appointed aide-de-camp to Colonel E. T. Lloyd, the commanding royal engineer in the Crimea, and returned home in June 1856. He received the Legion d'honneur (fifth class); he had been recommended for the Victoria Cross, but without result. 
Donnelly joined the London military district in 1856, and commanded a detachment preparing for building purposes the ground purchased at South Kensington out of the surplus funds of the Great Exhibition of 1851. It was intended to erect there a permanent museum and centre of science and art. Sir Henry Cole, the director of the scheme, secured on 1 April 1858 Donnelly's services in reorganizing at South Kensington the Department of Science and Art, which was controlled by the privy council's committee of education. On 1 October 1859 he was appointed inspector for science under the department. He had been promoted second captain on 1 April 1859, but did not return to regimental duty; the rest of his career was identified with South Kensington, and in 1872 he was placed on the reserve list. His promotion continued, as he was still liable for emergency service, and he became lieutenant-colonel on 1 October 1877 and brevet colonel on 1 October 1881, retiring with the honorary rank of major-general on 31 December 1887. 
The success of the scheme for national instruction in science and art was largely due to Donnelly, although some of his methods were controversial. He arranged (by minute of 1859) that grants should be made to certificated teachers on the results of the examinations of their pupils. He obtained recognition for drawing and manual training as class subjects, and having induced the Society of Arts, which he joined in 1860, to form a class in wood-carving, he procured from City companies and other sources funds to carry it on as the School of Art Wood-Carving. 
In 1874 Donnelly's title at South Kensington became director of science, and his duties included the supervision not only of the science schools and classes throughout the country but of such scientific institutions as the Government School of Mines, the Museum of Practical Geology, the Royal College of Chemistry, the Edinburgh Museum of Science and Art, and the Museum of Irish Industry, which developed into the Royal College of Science for Ireland. In 1868, as a member of a commission appointed to consider the question, he had drafted a report adverse to the establishment of a separate Department of Science and Art for Ireland. In 1881 he was appointed in addition assistant secretary of the Department of Science and Art, and in 1884 secretary and permanent head of the department. 
Joining the council of the Society of Arts in 1870, Donnelly was mainly responsible in 1871 for the society's scheme of technical examinations, out of which by his advice the City Guilds Institute for technical education was developed. As chairman of the council of the Society of Arts in 1894 and 1895, he led the society to organize the International Congress on Technical Education in 1897. 
For many years the museums of science and art at Kensington had been in unsatisfactory temporary accommodation, and Donnelly was untiring in his efforts to secure parliamentary grants for permanent buildings. In 1896 the House of Commons appointed a select committee, on whose report in 1899 a sum of $800,000 was voted to complete the museums. Donnelly's administration was criticized by the committee in its 'Report and Evidence... on the Museums of the Science and Art Department' (1899). Whatever the quality of the educational policy, the number of science students had grown immensely under Donnelly's direction. Responding to the committee's report, he retired on 2 July 1899. A minute of the privy council dated the following day stated its full confidence in Colonel Donnelly and his staff, and Sir John Gorst, vice-president of the committee of council on education, publicly defended Donnelly. 
Donnelly was made CB in 1886 and KCB (civil) in 1893. A competent artist, from 1888 to 1901 he exhibited at the Royal Academy and the New Gallery. 
Donnelly was twice married. His first marriage, at Bridekirk, Cumberland, on 5 January 1871, was to his first cousin Adeliza (died 1873), second daughter of Fretcheville Lawson Ballantine Dykes of Dovenby Hall, Cumberland; they had two daughters. On 17 December 1881 he married at Neuchatel, Switzerland (the marriage would have been illegal in England), his deceased wife's elder sister, Mary Frances Dykes. They had two sons, Thomas and Gordon Harvey (both became Royal Garrison Artillery officers), and a daughter. Donnelly died on 5 April 1902 at his residence, 59 Onslow Gardens, London, survived by his wife. He was buried at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32862


Donnet, Sir James John Louis (1816-1905), inspector-general of hospitals and fleets, born at Gibraltar, was the son of Henry Donnet, a Royal Navy surgeon. After studying at the University of Paris, where he graduated B es L, and at Anderson College, Glasgow, he became LSA of London in 1838, LRCS of Edinburgh in 1840, and MD at St Andrews in 1857. He entered the navy as assistant surgeon in the 'Benbow' in 1840. He was at once appointed to the 'Vesuvius' and sent to the Mediterranean, where, on the coast of Syria, he had his first experience of war; and after the capture of Acre he was placed in charge of the wounded in a temporary hospital established on shore. In 1844 he was medical officer and secretary of an embassy to the emperor of Morocco under Sir John Drummond-Hay, who was appointed consul-general in 1845. 
Donnet was promoted surgeon, and in 1849 was in the 'Calypso' in the West Indies during a virulent outbreak of yellow fever. Clements Markham, who met him at this time, described him as 'handsome, with a slender aquiline nose and clear cut features, being slightly built.... His manner was gentle and quiet, he was well-read with considerable conversational powers and the best of mess-mates' (Markham, 'Story of my service'). In 1850-51 he was surgeon of the 'Assistance' in the Arctic with Captain Sir Erasmus Ommanney, and helped to break the tedium of the long winter by editing 'an excellent periodical, entitled the 'Aurora Borealis', to which the men as well as the officers contributed' (Markham, 'Life', 113). He married in 1852 Eliza (died 1903), daughter of James Meyer; they had no children. In 1854 he was surgeon of the 'President', flagship in the Pacific, and in her was present at the disastrous attacks on Petropavlovsky in Kamchatka, Siberia, on 29 August and 7 September (Clowes, 6.429-32). 
As staff surgeon at the Port Royal Hospital in Jamaica in 1866-7 Donnet prepared a detailed study of yellow fever at a time when an epidemic of the disease was raging. The study was published in the 'Health Report' of 1867. Donnet thus laid the foundation of modern medical practice in dealing with this disease. Later he published 'Notes on Yellow Fever'. In May 1867 he was promoted deputy inspector-general. 
In 1870 he was appointed honorary surgeon to the queen, and in 1873-4 he was placed in charge of the medical wards of Haslar naval hospital, Gosport, which was crowded with cases of smallpox, enteric fever, and dysentery after the Anglo-Asante War. On 14 April 1875 he was promoted inspector-general. After this he was employed on various committees and commissions, including one in 1876 to select a site for a college for naval cadets and one in 1877 to inquire into the causes of the outbreak of scurvy in Sir George Nares's Arctic expedition (1875-6). He was awarded a good-service pension in 1878, and was made KCB at Queen Victoria's 1897 jubilee. During his last years he resided at Bognor, and he died at his home, 3 Sidlaw Terrace, Clarence Road, Bognor, on 11 January 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 32863


Donoghue, Stephen (1884-1945), jockey and racehorse trainer, was born on 8 November 1884 at Aikin Street, Warrington, Lancashire, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Patrick Donoghue (1862-1936), an iron puddler at the steel-wire works of Pearson and Knowles, and his wife, Mary Mitchell (died 1936). He attended St Mary's Roman Catholic School, Buttermarket Street, Warrington, from the age of six until he was twelve, when he started work half-time in his father's works. In 1899, aged fourteen, he walked from Warrington to Chester races to secure employment in the Kingsclere stables of the famous trainer John Porter. Within four months, however, homesickness took him back to a job in a Warrington wireworks. Then, fearing he had killed a bully in a fight, Donoghue fled with his younger brother to the Middleham stables of Dobson Peacock, a leading northern trainer. However, the two had given assumed names and left in 1901 with the arrival of census officials, this time travelling to Newmarket, where Steve (as he was always called) joined the stables of Alfred Sadler junior. 
In 1903 Donoghue went to France where he gained experience of race riding and won for the first time, on Hanoi at Hyeres in April 1905. Two years later he went to ride for Philip Behan's stable in Ireland, and became the leading Irish jockey. He married Bridget Behan, the daughter of his employer, in 1908. In 1910 he was retained by H. S. 'Atty' Persse at Stockbridge, Hampshire, to replace the American Danny Maher, who was suffering from tuberculosis; by 1914 Donoghue had won the first of ten consecutive champion jockey titles. Rejected as unfit for military service, he rode two wartime Derby winners (at Newmarket), in 1915 and 1917. He spent a season in South Africa, after his return from where, in November 1917, his marriage was dissolved following his wife's adultery while he was there; there were two sons of the marriage, Stevie and Patrick (who had a brief riding career), and a daughter, Kathleen. During his visit to South Africa, Donoghue himself began a long affair with Lady Torrington, the actress Eleanor Souray ('c'.1882-1931). Together they trained her horses and enjoyed a high social life. She divorced her husband, the ninth Viscount Torrington, in 1921. 
Donoghue developed a reputation for having other riders 'jocked off' mounts in major races and was no respecter of his own contracts if he fancied the chances of another owner's horses. Although this enabled him to win four out of five Derbys between 1921 and 1925 (he won six Derbys in all), ultimately it cost him the chance of retainers later in his career as no owner or trainer would trust him to honour his obligations. After 1925 he rode no more classic winners until he piloted Exhibitionist to victory in the 1937 Oaks and One Thousand Guineas. At the end of that season he retired to become a trainer at Blewbury, though only with modest success. He also did some broadcasting and appeared in several films. Donoghue was a fearless jockey with great tactical skill, soft hands, and perfect balance, though never as strong in a finish after an accident in the 1925 grand prix de Paris in which he dislocated and fractured his left shoulder. Two horses are indelibly associated with him: at the start of his career he rode 'the spotted wonder', the unbeaten Tetrarch, and later he piloted Brown Jack to six consecutive wins in the Queen Alexandra stakes (1929-34). 
During the 1928 racing season Donoghue rode 108 consecutive losers. Worse was to follow. By then his relationship with Lady Torrington had become unhappy, not least because of financial problems due to their improvident living. In September a bankruptcy petition showed that he had debts estimated at $15,000 and assets of less than $600. His generosity to friends accounted for some of the problem but primarily it was due to illegal (for a jockey) and unsuccessful betting. Eventually he was rescued by a retainer from Sir Victor Sassoon and a decision by his creditors, early in 1929, to accept 5's'. in the pound. At the start of the 1929 season, on 17 March, Donoghue secretly married Ethel Finn ('b'. 'c'.1896), an American dancer. On 9 December 1931, following bankruptcy proceedings, Lady Torrington took her own life by gassing herself; a suicide verdict was returned. Donoghue's family disapproved of his 1929 marriage, which ended in separation in 1934. In April 1940 Ethel sued for arrears of maintenance payments but Donoghue showed that he had helped her on numerous occasions and her demand for $946 was reduced to $312. She died in February 1942 from an overdose of sleeping tablets; a verdict of misadventure was recorded. 
Donoghue himself died suddenly of a heart attack at 24 Porchester Gate, Paddington, on 23 March 1945, during a visit to the capital. He died intestate which meant that the mementoes of his career had to be sold. His son Pat bought the Manchester cup won by Steve in 1922 and the portrait of his father in the royal colours by Sir James Lavery. Donoghue was buried on 29 March 1945 in Warrington cemetery, where a memorial stone was erected. In 1957 a pair of gates dedicated to his memory was placed at the entrance to the Epsom grandstand. 


@@@@@


doc= 32864


Doodson, Arthur Thomas (1890-1968), mathematician and oceanographer, was born at Boothstown, near Worsley, in Lancashire, on 31 March 1890, the second son of Thomas Doodson, the manager of a cotton mill in Boothstown, who later moved to Rochdale and then to Shaw, near Oldham, and his wife, Eleanor Pendlebury, of Radcliffe, Lancashire. Doodson went to the village school and evening classes and studied as a pupil teacher before attending Rochdale secondary school and, in 1908, the University of Liverpool. He gave up the idea of teaching when he became seriously deaf and this may have led him to give up chemistry, though he was also encouraged to specialize in mathematics by Professor F. S. Carey. He gained a first-class BSc in chemistry and mathematics in 1911 and a first-class honours degree in mathematics in 1912, winning a prize for geometry. 
Deafness made it difficult for Doodson to get a job and he accepted a post as meter tester for Messrs Ferranti, but two years later obtained a more congenial post at the testing and standardizing department of the corporation of Manchester. In 1916 he was appointed to a post at University College, London, under Karl Pearson to do statistics but this was soon changed to ballistics for the War Office. In 1914 Doodson had been received into one of the churches of the community known as the Churches of God in the Fellowship of the Son of God, a breakaway sect from the Plymouth Brethren, and from then on his life was dominated by religion, to the exclusion of much social intercourse. It was therefore sad and paradoxical that he was obliged to work for some years on duties to which he had a conscientious objection. Nevertheless he did some impressive computations, producing tables of Riccati-Bessel functions and of sines and cosines of radians. He was awarded the MSc degree of Liverpool University in 1914 and their DSc in 1919. 
By then Doodson had acquired an aptitude and a liking for computational problems and he started what was to be the most important collaboration of his life, with Professor J. Proudman, who had persuaded shipowners to endow a Tidal Institute at Liverpool. Proudman was its honorary director and arranged for Doodson to be its secretary. 
In 1919 Doodson married Margaret, daughter of J. W. Galloway, a tramways engineer, of Halifax, Yorkshire. They had a daughter, who died in 1936, and a son; Margaret died shortly after the son's birth in 1931. In 1933 Doodson married Elsie May, daughter of W. A. Carey. Doodson built up the Tidal Institute until it was recognized worldwide as an authoritative source of tidal theory, observation, and analysis. He was associate director of the institute from 1929 to 1945. Doodson's own work was mainly on the computational aspects, where his skill complemented Proudman's expertise in tidal dynamics. His engineering ability also allowed him to design and install complicated tide predicting machines in many countries. He was active in studying meteorological effects on tides and, after the Thames floods of 1928, made intensive studies of coastal flooding, adopting the word 'surge', and inventing many of the techniques which were used for many years in forecasting dangerously high high waters. 
Doodson also had administrative charge of a growing institute and was skilled at the financial aspects. He was gifted, skilled, and kind, and had a quiet sense of humour. As soon as hearing aids became available he made full use of them. His probity and accounting skills were put to good purpose by the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics when in 1954 Doodson was made president of the finance committee. He was also the first director of the permanent service for mean sea level of the International Association of Physical Oceanography. 
For many years Doodson was an honorary lecturer of the University of Liverpool. In 1930 he was awarded the Thomas Gray memorial prize by the Royal Society of Arts for the benefit to navigation of his prediction of tidal currents. In 1933 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society and in 1953 an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was appointed CBE in 1956. Doodson died at the General Hospital, Birkenhead, Cheshire, on 10 January 1968. He was survived by his second wife. 
H. Charnock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32865


Doubleday, Herbert Arthur (1867-1941), publisher and genealogist, was born at Hamburg, Germany, on 23 November 1867, the second son of the five children of William Bennett Doubleday, a woollen factor of London, and his first wife, Agnes Hannah Newman Fenn, of Beccles. Doubleday was educated at Dulwich College and London University, and served with various booksellers and publishers in London. In 1891 he founded the firm of Archibald Constable & Co. with his stepmother's brother of that name, a grandson of Scott's publisher. Among other books they published works by Meredith and Conan Doyle, but their most important single project was the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England', conceived, designed, and launched mainly by Doubleday himself. On 30 September 1896 he married Katherine Alice Lucile 
(Kate; 'b'. 1871, died after 1941)
, the daughter of Thomas Lawrence, of Ratby, Leicestershire. They had two daughters. From 1901 to 1903 he was chief editor of the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England', and was then succeeded by William Page. Ten volumes of the history appeared under his sole editorship or in collaboration with Page. Doubleday possessed a keen appreciation of the qualities of good paper and type; both the 'History' and later 'The Complete Peerage' owed much to his skill and taste. 
In 1903 Doubleday left Constable & Co. and for a time lived in Bruges, where he published books in English and French. With Cuthbert Wilkinson he founded in 1908 the St Catherine Press (named after the Porte Ste Catherine in Bruges), a combination of two earlier enterprises, one in Bruges and one in London. The latter firm, Arthur Doubleday & Co., had already produced some notable fine books including a reprint of Evelyn's 'Sylva'. It was to the St Catherine Press that Vicary Gibbs entrusted his new edition of 'The Complete Peerage', and Doubleday designed the layout and chose the Caslon type for it. Almost from the first Doubleday's share was more than that of an ordinary publisher, and in volumes 3 and 4 his assistance was recognized by Gibbs on the title-page. In 1916 he formally became assistant editor and in 1920 editor. After Gibbs gave up control, Doubleday became solely responsible for producing 'The Complete Peerage'. Under his direction, and with various colleagues, volumes 5 to 10 and volume 13 were issued. The fact that the whole enterprise did not collapse was due entirely to his unflagging energy in simultaneously organizing the work of writing the volumes and raising the funds to produce them. He himself contributed an important appendix, 'Earldoms and baronies', to volume 4, and in 1920 replied in print to a hostile review of this by J. H. Round. Doubleday continued to work on 'The Complete Peerage' to within a few weeks of his death. His wide view of the scope of the work and his scholarly desire for authoritative reference to original sources make the later volumes (especially in their medieval matter) even more valuable to scholars than the first four volumes, which he always hoped one day to re-edit. 
Doubleday was a stocky man of medium height and a games player all his life. Latterly, playing golf once a week was his sole relaxation from editorial work. He had a keen sense of humour and was a kindly and understanding man. He died of cancer at his home, 27 The Terrace, Barnes, Surrey, on 27 March 1941; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32866


Doughty, Charles Montagu (1843-1926), explorer, travel writer, and poet, was born on 19 August 1843 at Theberton Hall, Leiston, Suffolk, the younger of two sons of the Revd Charles Montagu Doughty (1798-1850), landowner, and his wife, Frederica (died 1843), daughter of the Hon. Frederick Hotham, prebendary of Rochester and rector of Dennington, Suffolk, and granddaughter of Beaumont, second Baron Hotham. Charles Hotham Montagu Doughty-Wylie, killed while leading a heroic charge at Gallipoli, was the son of his elder brother. Although he was a minor poet, Doughty was the most important British explorer of Arabia and one of Britain's greatest travel writers. 
The future Arabian explorer was so weak-looking at birth that his father had him baptized immediately, but in manhood Doughty was 'tall and strongly, though not heavily built, with aquiline features and a thick beard which was reddish in early and middle life', according to W. D. Hogarth ('DNB'). Within a few months of his birth his mother passed away, and when he was six his father also died, leaving Charles and his brother, Henry, in the care of an uncle, Frederick Goodwin Doughty, of Martlesham Hall, Suffolk. In school at Laleham and at Elstree, he had the reputation of being shy but too good a fighter to be bullied by the other boys. He was prepared at the Beach House School, Portsmouth, for a career in the Royal Navy, but in 1856 he was rejected owing to a slight speech impediment. His later interest in the oral poetic traditions of England and Arabia may owe something to this fact. He then left the school and spent some time with a private tutor in France. His report to the British Association's meeting in Cambridge in 1862 on the flint implements that he had excavated at Hoxne attests to his growing interest in geology and archaeology. 
Doughty matriculated as a pensioner at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1861, but he transferred in 1863 to Downing College, which was more sympathetic to his geological interests and more liberal regarding attendance at lectures and chapel. He demonstrated a rugged independence during 1863-4 when he spent nine months lodging with farmers and gamekeepers while conducting the first investigation of two remote Norwegian glaciers. He reported the results to the British Association in 1864 (and published a pamphlet, 'On the Jostedal-brae Glaciers in Norway, with some General Remarks, and a Plate', in 1866). In 1865 he placed second in the second class of the natural sciences tripos, failing to achieve a higher result because of an inability (or refusal) to structure the wealth of details at his command. His masterpiece, 'Travels in Arabia deserta' (1888), would display a similarly unstructured approach to the vast amount of material that it contains. In 1866 he returned to Caius to take his degree. A fellow student at Downing recalled him as 'rather shy and quiet but very polite' (Hogarth, 6), outward qualities that masked a fierce determination to accomplish whatever goals he set himself. 
After graduation in 1865, Doughty began studying older English literature -- especially the works of Chaucer and Spenser, as well as Teutonic languages, as a means of readying himself for the writing of an epic of early Britain, intended as a patriotic substitute for his lost naval career. He hoped to reinvigorate what he regarded as a decayed Victorian English language by means of a poetic revival of earlier linguistic forms. The depreciation of his family's investments during this time left him with little money, and when he decided to travel to enhance the experience he felt necessary for writing his poem, it was as a poor student. 
In 1870-71 Doughty studied Dutch in Leiden and spent some time in Louvain, and then moved southward to Provence and Italy. A manuscript diary now in the Gonville and Caius College Library records his presence at the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 1872, an event described retrospectively with great power in 'Arabia deserta'. He went on to north Africa and Spain, back to Italy, and then, in 1874, to Greece. There he decided to extend his journey eastward, and visited the holy sites of Nazareth, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and Hebron, as well as the city of Damascus. In the autumn of 1874 he left the Holy Land via al- 'Arish and spent some time in Egypt. He then took a three-month camel journey through the Sinai peninsula beginning about February 1875, a trip described in a brief report to the Royal Geographical Society of Austria, in 'Arabia deserta' retrospectively, and, nearly half a century later, in the poem 'Mansoul' (1920), where he stresses its hardships. Leaving Sinai in the north-east, he arrived at Ma'an and Nabataean Petra, in what is now Jordan, in May 1875. Here he heard of the Nabataean inscriptions at Medain Salih and nearby Hejr, and resolved to return to make impressions of them, as he tells us in the opening section of 'Arabia deserta'. 
In Damascus Doughty found that neither the British Association nor the Royal Geographical Society was willing to fund his proposed trip to Medain Salih, but he decided to make the journey anyway after studying Arabic for a year. Despite a refusal of passport documents from the British and Turkish authorities in Damascus, Doughty, now using the name Khalil, 'clothed as a Syrian of simple fortune' (Doughty, 1.4) and equipped with a few medicines to sell, embarked on the trip southward with the pilgrim caravan on 10 November 1876. He planned only a relatively brief stay in Medain Salih and the surrounding area, but he would end up wandering in Arabia for almost two years. 

'Travels in Arabia deserta' records in more than one thousand pages of painstaking detail -- much of which has been verified by later travellers -- the course of Doughty's travels. The danger inherent in these wanderings was exacerbated by his lack of travel documents, by the Russo-Turkish War (which was perceived in Arabia as a Christian-Muslim conflict), and by his open admission of his Christianity and straightforward criticism of elements of Islamic culture that he did not like, such as polygamy and slavery. It did not help that he uttered these criticisms while remaining dependent upon the Arabs for hospitality and even food, but Doughty was convinced that truth may walk through the world unharmed, and he may have proved that point. The Arabs responded at some times with wry acceptance of his differences with them, and at others with passionate defences of their point of view or with overt hostility. Doughty's honest record of these debates (which he did not always win, and in which he often appears tactless) remains of great anthropological value. His various adventures, in the order in which he gives them in 'Arabia deserta', include the initial journey with the pilgrim caravan to the way station at Medain Salih, described in almost Chaucerian terms; a stay of several months with the Bedouin nearby, during which time an illness prevented him from joining a caravan to the Red Sea port al-Wajh and thereby leaving Arabia; a visit to Mohammed ibn Rashid, ruler of northern Arabia, who is described like a figure in a Shakespearian tragedy; an enforced stay at Khaybar, where a corrupt Turkish commandant, who almost appears to be a villain in a Gothic novel, made Doughty a prisoner for several months; a near escape from a riot at Buraydah; relief and good company at 'Unayzah until he was expelled; a physically dangerous episode close to Mecca, during the climax of which Doughty handed his pistol, butt first, to one of his assailants, as if challenging him to shoot him; relief and well-being at Ta'if as a guest of the sherif of Mecca; and a final miraculous emergence on the beach at Jiddah on the Red Sea on 2 August 1878. Doughty appears almost a religious martyr toward the end of his adventure, when 'The tunic was rent on my back, my mantle was old and torn; the hair was grown down under my kerchief to the shoulders, and the beard fallen and unkempt; I had bloodshot eyes, half blinded, and the scorched skin was cracked to the quick upon my face. (Doughty, 2.506)' Yet in spite of his suffering and his criticism of the Arabs, Doughty states at least three times in his book that the Bedouin way of life is the best in the world, and that after living with the Bedouin one 'will have all his life after a feeling of the desert' (ibid., 2.450). And Doughty's trials (many of which he caused himself) during this journey resulted in increased self-awareness, as he wrote in 1886: 'I am by nature self-willed, headstrong, and fierce with opponents, but my better reason and suffering in the world have bridled these faults and in part extinguished them' (Hogarth, 113). 
Doughty left Jiddah on a ship bound for India, where he rested in a hospital, recovering from the exhaustion, ophthalmia, and bilharzia he had contracted in Arabia. While in Bombay, he read to the Royal Asiatic Society branch a paper on his journey, which was published in its journal for 1878. He made his way to England, and published his geographical results in the German periodical 'Globus' in 1880-81. He addressed the Royal Geographical Society in 1883, and his paper was printed in its 'Proceedings' for July 1884, but only after a struggle over his unique English style, which Doughty refused to have edited. He wrote to the society's assistant secretary, H. W. Bates, that 'as an English Scholar I will never submit to have my language of the best times turned into the misery of today -- that were unworthy of me' (Hogarth, 108-9). 
Doughty's records of the Nabataean documents from Medain Salih and al- 'Ala were edited by Ernest Renan and published in 1884 by the French Academie des Inscriptions as 'Documents epigraphiques recueillis dans le nord de l'Arabie'. Scholars of the Nabataeans then as now have praised Doughty's contributions in the warmest terms. Indeed, 'Travels in Arabia deserta', on which Doughty laboured from 1879 to 1884 and which he continued correcting until its publication in 1888, is an unrivalled encyclopaedia of knowledge about all aspects of nineteenth-century and earlier Arabia. In a notable contemporary review in 'Academy', Sir Richard Francis Burton praised the book's scientific knowledge and its style ('pleasant for its reminiscences of the days when English was not vulgarised and Americanised'), although he felt that Doughty's forbearing attitude toward the Arabs reflected poorly on English honour. So reliable was the book's anthropology of the Bedouin peoples and its topography, that British intelligence mined it for information during the First and Second World wars. Doughty's contributions to all areas of Arabian knowledge continue to be praised by scholars. His principal geographical achievement was to confirm 'that the Wady er-Rummah system drains a large area, and definitely to the east', but his main contribution may well be the description of the land use, economy, and other features of the forty-odd settlements that he visited, according to geographer J. M. Wagstaff (Tabachnick, 'Explorations', 135, 145). His book is one of many sources that describe nineteenth-century Arabian history, but 'no single work paints an overall picture of nineteenth-century Arabian society that tells us more', according to historian Bayly Winder (ibid., 198). Geologists Reginald Shagam and Carol Faul state that, unlike some other contemporary geologists, Doughty 'failed to use the concept of faulting and he did not perceive the mass balance problem posed by the Dead Sea area', but on the other hand they find that 'his observation and mapping of the areas he travelled are correct' with few exceptions (ibid., 183, 172). 
Not the least of Doughty's achievements is the style of 'Arabia deserta', one of the few truly bilingual British literary works. Walt Taylor has shown the degree to which Arabic and older English permeate Doughty's text, and Annette McCormick has demonstrated how Doughty's syntax was influenced by English translations of the Hebrew 'Bible'. Because of the book's style, which ideally demands knowledge of older English and a Semitic language on the part of the reader, four commercial presses turned it down before Cambridge University Press agreed to publish it. Even that press recommended that Doughty's language be revised, but fortunately Doughty resisted all such attempts. As Professor Robert Fernea writes, 'With a knowledge of Arabic the connotative meanings of the dialogues become almost unsettling because unlike other contemporary ethnographic attempts one really seems to hear Arabs speaking' (Tabachnick, 'Explorations', 217). 
In its authenticity, originality, and power, Doughty's English-Arabic style rivals the work of other Victorian prose masters such as Carlyle, Ruskin, and Pater. Poet Robert Bridges quickly recognized 'Arabia deserta''s uniqueness, and it was one of William Morris's favourite books toward the end of his life. W. B. Yeats, who read the work three times, may have based his desert poetry, including 'The second coming', on it. T. S. Eliot disliked Doughty's poetry, but found 'Arabia deserta' a 'great work' (Eliot, 58). D. H. Lawrence, Leonard Woolf, Aldous Huxley, Herbert Read, Wyndham Lewis, Edwin Muir, Henry Green, Rex Warner, V. S. Pritchett, and the American writer Walker Percy were among the other literary admirers of Doughty's masterpiece. An abridgement was issued in 1908 under the title 'Wanderings in Arabia', and the selections 'Passages from 'Arabia deserta'' appeared in 1931. Philip O'Brien's descriptive bibliography includes French, German, Hebrew, and Swedish translations (Tabachnick, 'Explorations', 223-53). Unfortunately Doughty burned the manuscript of his great work in his garden, feeling that it was a digression from his poetry and of little value; but the notebooks are held in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, while the 'word notes' -- slips of paper on which he wrote synonyms for and associations with words that interested him -- are in the Caius College Library. 
Doughty's life after Arabia was devoted to his family and to poetry that has not lasted. He married Caroline Amelia ('b'. 1861/2), daughter of General Sir William Montagu Scott McMurdo, on 7 October 1886. In 1892 a daughter, (Susan) Dorothy, was born, and in 1894 a second, Frederica Gertrude (Freda), followed. In 1900 his slim, cliched volume of patriotic verse, 'Under Arms', intended to reinforce patriotic zeal for the South African War, was privately printed. In 1906-7 'The Dawn in Britain', his long-meditated epic of early Britain, was published by Duckworth. This 30,000-line poem in six volumes had a mixed reception, and has since lapsed from memory outside pockets of isolated enthusiasts. This is because Doughty was unable to create convincing characters from imagination; he succeeded in 'Arabia deserta' because he was describing genuine people. 'Adam Cast Forth', a 'sacred drama' based on a Muslim legend about Adam and Eve, is perhaps his sole imaginative work to achieve aesthetic success, but only because it convincingly recreates his desert sufferings. Doughty's science fiction dramas, 'The Cliffs' (1909) and 'The Clouds' (1912), predicted the First World War and the use of the submarine, airship, mine, torpedo, and other technical developments. But the poetic quality of these works never rises above stilted archaic dialogue and coincidental and vague plot structure, and they show that Doughty could react to an imagined attack on Great Britain with no less fanaticism than he often attributes to the Arabs in 'Arabia deserta'. 'The Titans' (1916), dealing with a time before Adam and Eve when giants and men battled for control of the earth, fails to come to life, and 'Mansoul' (1920; rev. edn, 1923), which was Doughty's own favourite work, is a neo-medieval dream vision in which the poet as Minimus describes an underworld journey marred by simplistic philosophical speculation and overt and incongruous attacks on the Kaiser. 
Visitors to the household speak of the calm outer life enjoyed by Doughty, but his wife never liked the bloody battle scenes from 'The Dawn in Britain' and his other poems, which he would declaim aloud to her. There is indeed a contradiction in the poetry between Doughty's proclaimed love of humanity and his bloodthirsty attraction to patriotic gore. Moreover, in the poetry there is no counter-voice to modify Doughty's sometimes extreme opinions, while in 'Arabia deserta' the Arab characters vigorously challenge them. A brief memoir by Edmund Gosse, dated 23 June 1914, records, tellingly, that toward the end of his life Doughty seemed at once very shy and very fierce. 
Doughty eventually achieved recognition in the form of the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society (1912), honorary degrees from both Oxford (1908) and Cambridge (1920), membership of the British Academy (1922), and warm admiration from the youthful (but not the older) T. E. Lawrence. Lawrence was instrumental in reviving 'Arabia deserta' in 1921, and he described Doughty's masterpiece best when he called it 'a book not like other books, but something particular, a bible of its kind' (Lawrence, 17). Doughty received an inheritance in 1923 around the same time that his shareholdings fortuitously appreciated, but until then he and his family were often in difficult financial circumstances. He died on 20 January 1926 at Sissinghurst, Kent, after having moved there from Eastbourne in 1923, and was cremated at Golders Green. Charles Montagu Doughty is gone, but the staunch, stubbornly honest, and all-too-human hero Khalil will live for ever in the pages of 'Travels in Arabia deserta'. 


@@@@@


doc= 32867


Wylie, Charles Hotham Montagu Doughty- (1868-1915), army officer and consul, was born on 23 July 1868 at Theberton Hall, near Leiston, Suffolk, the son of Henry Montagu Doughty (1841-1916), lord of the manor of Theberton, a former naval officer who had been called to the bar in 1863, and his wife, Edith Rebecca Cameron, daughter of the chief justice of Vancouver. Charles Montagu Doughty (1843-1926), the celebrated Arabian explorer, was his uncle. Edith Doughty died on 4 September 1870 after giving birth to another son, Henry Montagu Doughty. Charles Doughty was educated at Winchester College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, before being commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Welch Fusiliers on 21 September 1889. 
The late-Victorian army offered numerous opportunities of combat experience not only in small colonial 'brush fire' wars but also in wider conflicts. Doughty took his fill. The first fifteen years of his military service involved him in one military campaign after another: the Hazara expedition (1891); Chitral (1895); Crete (1896); the Sudan (1898-9); southern Africa (1900); Tientsin (Tianjin) (1900); and Somaliland (1903-4). His military service was not only intense but also varied, involving service on the north-west frontier of India, east and southern Africa, the Mediterranean, and the Far East. At Chitral he held the key post of transport officer on the staff of Sir William Gatacre. His posting to the British garrison on Crete during the tumultuous period of civil unrest that resulted in the removal of the Turkish presence on the island (November 1898) brought him into contact for the first time with the Ottoman empire, an involvement destined to become a central part of his life and career. In the Sudan he was a brigade major. In southern Africa and China he commanded mounted infantry, in Somaliland a detachment of the Somali camel corps. He was wounded twice, in the Hazara expedition and in southern Africa. 
In May 1904, while on leave in Bombay, Doughty finally found the time to marry. His bride was Lilian Oimara Adams (died 1960), widow of Lieutenant Henry Adams (died 1900) of the Indian Medical Service, and daughter of John Wylie, of West Cliffe Hall, Hampshire. They had no children. In December 1904 Charles Doughty added his wife's maiden name to his own by deed poll, becoming Doughty-Wylie. He was described as 'Tall and slightly though vigorously built', with a 'fair complexion and keen blue eyes' ('DNB'). 'He was an ardent sportsman, good rider and good shot... but he always retained the literary interests of a Winchester scholar. Simple, tenacious, chivalrous, and humorous, he quickly won sympathy and obedience, and was a born leader of fighting men' (ibid.). 
After almost twenty years of soldiering Doughty-Wylie's career changed tack. The late-Victorian and Edwardian army also offered opportunity of political employment and in September 1906 he became British military vice-consul in the Turkish province of Konia. This appointment, in an apparent backwater, provided little respite from Doughty-Wylie's life of action. On the contrary it brought him international acclaim. The Ottoman empire was in the throes of change, during which the Armenian minority often became the victims of violence. At Adana in 1909 Doughty-Wylie displayed outstanding courage and leadership by taking command of a group of Turkish regular troops and preventing a massacre, being wounded for the third time. He was portrayed as a defender of Christianity against Islam. His actions touched a raw nerve among the Western imperialist nations, aware of the potential vulnerability of their small governing elites, surrounded by millions of 'non-believers'. Doughty-Wylie's time in Turkey also complicated his personal life. Here, in 1907, he met the archaeologist Gertrude Bell (1868-1926), with whom he began an intimate correspondence. In August 1913, following a visit to the Bell family home, Rounton Grange in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the two became lovers. Their relationship remained a secret outside the Bell family and Doughty-Wylie's letters to Gertrude did not become publicly available until after his wife's death in 1960. 
Doughty-Wylie's achievements at Adana were rewarded by promotion to consul-general at Addis Ababa in Abyssinia. He served there for three years, until 1912, when he became chief director of the Red Cross on the Turkish side in the First Balkan War, a role in which he won the considerable respect and affection of the Turks. His wife, who was to develop her own distinguished career in military nursing, accompanied him to Constantinople as superintendent of nursing staff. The trust that Doughty-Wylie had established with the Turkish authorities made him an excellent choice as chairman of the commission that arbitrated the Greek-Albanian frontier in the wake of the Second Balkan War. He returned to Addis Ababa in 1913. 
The outbreak of war between Great Britain and Turkey in October 1914 changed everything for Doughty-Wylie. A man of his spirit and ambition had to be involved. His experience and knowledge of the Ottoman empire were also at a premium. This was recognized by General Sir John Maxwell, commander-in-chief, Egypt, who intercepted Doughty-Wylie in Cairo 'en route' for London in search of military employment. In February 1915 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and joined the staff of General Sir Ian Hamilton, commander designate of the Mediterranean expeditionary force, shortly to be charged with launching an ambitious and risky amphibious assault on the Gallipoli peninsula. On 25 April 1915, the day of the attack, Doughty-Wylie was on the converted collier SS 'River Clyde', off V Beach where it had landed troops under a murderous Turkish fire and with terrible loss. Aware of the desperate situation on the beach, Doughty-Wylie volunteered to go ashore after nightfall and assess the situation. The following morning he returned to the beach, together with his fellow staff officer Captain G. N. Walford, and took command. Recognizing the urgency of getting the men off the beach, he collected the remnants of three battalions, 2nd Hampshires, 1st Royal Dublin Fusiliers, and 1st Royal Munster Fusiliers, and led them in a successful attack on the old fort which commanded the approaches to the village of Sedd-el-Bahr. Doughty-Wylie personally led the charge that captured the village following the death of Walford. He then considered how best to capture hill 141, the feature that commanded the beach. He returned to the shore to arrange a naval bombardment of the position by the 15-inch guns of the 'Queen Elizabeth'. The infantry assault went in immediately after the bombardment ceased, about two o'clock in the afternoon, led by Doughty-Wylie, who was armed only with a cane, not wishing to bear arms against his former friends. Hill 141 was a tough obstacle, protected by barbed wire entanglements, its summit crowned by a redoubt, surrounded by a deep moat, but the charge carried the day. On 26 April Doughty-Wylie's leadership, energy, determination, tactical awareness, and complete disregard for his own safety had succeeded in transforming the dispirited remnants of the landing force and in securing the beach. At the moment of victory, Doughty-Wylie was struck just below the eye by a bullet that blew away the side of his face. He died instantly and was buried where he lay. His grave remains the only individual one on the peninsula, flanked by trees at the summit of the hill renamed Fort Doughty-Wylie in his honour. Doughty-Wylie was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross. He was the highest ranking officer to win the award during the Gallipoli campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 32868


Douglas, Sir Adye (1815-1906), politician in Australia, the son of Captain Henry Osborne Douglas, an army officer, and his wife, Eleanor Crabtree, was born at Thorpe, near Norwich, on 31 May 1815, and was intended for the navy. He was sent to school in Hampshire, and then to Caen, Normandy, for two years. On his return to England he was articled to a firm of solicitors in Southampton, and in 1838 was admitted to practice. He emigrated to Van Diemen's Land in 1839, and in the same year was admitted to the bar at Hobart. From 1840 to 1842, however, he and his brother were sheep farmers at Port Phillip (later Victoria). When he returned to Van Diemen's Land in 1842 he founded a legal firm in Launceston, and became one of the leading lawyers in the colony. 
In 1853, on the introduction of a regular municipal administration for Launceston, Douglas became an alderman of the town, of which he was later mayor (1865-6, 1880-82). He remained alderman until 1884. About this time he won notice by his vigorous opposition to the system of transportation, which he regarded as a major obstacle to progress on the island. He was defeated at his first attempt to enter the legislative council, but in July 1855 was elected as member for Launceston, and moved to the house of assembly in 1856 under the new constitution. He actively promoted public works, particularly public water supplies and railways, and was successful despite stiff opposition, his most notable achievement being the building of the Launceston-Deloraine railway. 
From 1862 to 1870 Douglas represented Westbury in the house of assembly; in 1871-2 he was member for Norfolk plains and from 1872 to 1884 for Fingal. On 15 August 1884 he became premier and chief secretary of Tasmania, and represented the island at the federal council of Australasia, a body which he had helped establish, and to which he expounded his vision of an Australasia independent of Britain. After a somewhat uneventful period of office he resigned on 8 March 1886 to go to England as first agent-general for the colony, an office he had established the previous year. In October 1887 he resigned his agency and returned to Tasmania. 
From 1890 to 1904 Douglas was member for Launceston in the legislative council, and he represented Tasmania at the federal convention at Sydney in 1891. He served in the Dobson ministry as chief secretary from 17 August 1892 to 14 April 1894, when he became president of the legislative council; this position he held for ten years, and was knighted at the coronation of Edward VII in 1902. In May 1904 he was defeated at the elections for Launceston, and retired from public life. 
Of striking personality, Douglas gave the impression of being brusque and unsympathetic, until he was better known. He was a good fighting leader, acute and tenacious in debate; an obituary in the Hobart 'Mercury' referred to him as 'the central figure in the progressive movement' (11 April 1906). He was married four times. Of his first wife nothing is known, save that the couple had four children by the 1840s and that she had died by 10 July 1858, when Douglas married, in London, a widow, Martha Matilda Collins, 'nee' Rolls. He married in Launceston on 18 January 1873 Charlotte Richards (1853/4-1876), with whom he had a daughter. His fourth wife, Charlotte's sister Ida, he married in Adelaide on 6 October 1877. They had four sons and four daughters. Douglas died on 10 April 1906 at Ryehope, Davey Street, Hobart, which had been his home for ten years; after a service in St David's Anglican Cathedral, Hobart, he was buried at the city's Cornelian Bay cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32869


Douglas, Lord Alfred Bruce (1870-1945), poet and biographer, was born on 22 October 1870 at Ham Hill near Worcester, the third son of John Sholto Douglas, ninth marquess of Queensberry (1844-1900), and his wife, Sybil (1845-1935), daughter of Alfred Montgomery, a commissioner of Inland Revenue. The favourite of his mother, who dubbed him Bosie (a version of Boysie that stuck to him for the rest of his life), he was educated at private schools, then sent to Winchester College (1884-8); there he was an average student but a good runner, winning the school steeplechase in 1887. He also started a magazine, the 'Winchester College Pentagram'; though it was hardly the success hoped for -- it ran for only ten issues -- his contributions gave promise of his developing into a capable poet and incisive writer of prose. In 1889 he entered Magdalen College, Oxford, where he continued running and winning races. Athletic and handsome, popular with his classmates, he applied himself more to writing verse than his studies (he did not take a degree), but while at Oxford he contributed to the 'Oxford Magazine' and edited the 'Spirit Lamp'. 
Lionel Johnson, a friend from Winchester, introduced Douglas to Oscar Wilde in June 1891. Flattered by Wilde's fawning attention and impressed by his literary prominence, Douglas entered into a relationship that proved mutually disastrous. In March 1895 Wilde, strongly encouraged by Douglas, sued Queensberry for libel (Queensberry having provoked him by leaving a card for Wilde at his club: 'To Oscar Wilde -- posing as Somdomite ['sic']'). By his own account, Wilde abandoned the case rather than call Douglas as a witness (Ellmann, 428). Wilde was then prosecuted and, at the second of two trials in 1895, sentenced to two years' hard labour, served at Pentonville and Reading gaols. Douglas was not called to give evidence at either trial, but his letters to Wilde were entered into evidence, as was his poem, 'Two Loves'. Called on to explain its memorable concluding line -- 'I am the love that dares not speak its name' -- Wilde answered in a great paean for the 'affection of an elder for a younger man' (Ellman, 435). Greatly distressed, Douglas wrote letters to the newspapers and unsuccessfully petitioned the queen for clemency for Wilde. Upon Wilde's release from prison in 1897, he took up with Douglas once again. They travelled through Italy together and met frequently in Paris. 
After Wilde's death in 1900 Douglas established a close friendship with 
Douglas himself completed more than twenty volumes of poetry and prose. 'Poems' (1896), 'The City of Soul' (1899), 'Sonnets' (1899), and 'Lyrics' (1935) rank among his best collections of verse; his 'Autobiography' (1929), 'Oscar Wilde and myself' (1914), and 'Oscar Wilde: a Summing Up' (1940) present vivid accounts of his creative but troubled life and his association with one of the most colourful personalities of the nineties. 
Douglas was egocentric, quarrelled often, and made many enemies. In 1907, after being appointed editor of 'The Academy', he became involved in a series of violent disagreements with the publisher and an assistant editor. His disputatious behaviour cost him the editorship. In 1913 he was charged with libelling his father-in-law. In 1915 his attacks on Robert Ross led to a prosecution for criminal libel, in which the jury disagreed. During the trial, Douglas fiercely criticized H. H. Asquith, the prime minister, for his association with Ross, and Asquith, with others, responded with a testimonial to Ross. Douglas published the most vitriolic of the many public attacks on Asquith at this time (Jenkins, 380). His vindictive nature occasioned several additional legal battles, including one with Winston Churchill in 1923, an action that resulted in Douglas's being sentenced to a six-month term in Wormwood Scrubs prison. One of the few consolations that sustained him at the time was his Roman Catholicism, to which he had converted in 1911. On 20 March 1945, while staying with friends in Lancing, he suffered a fatal heart attack. Three days later a requiem mass was said for the repose of his soul; and, as he had requested, he was interred beside his mother in the Franciscan friary cemetery in Crawley, Sussex. 
Estimates of Douglas's personality and poetry vary from commentator to commentator. He has been labelled everything from 'the most complete cad in history' (Read, 1009) to 'thoroughly goodhearted and by no means the moody, irascible revengeful person that many fancy' (Sherrard, 141). Considered opinion allows the inference that he neither ruined Wilde nor deserted him, as Douglas's enemies often alleged. The history of Wilde and his Bosie remains one of the most notorious scandals of the period. To accept Wilde's account as found in his 'De Profundis' at Douglas's expense is to be less than objective. Douglas's loyalty to the imprisoned Wilde, his financial generosity, and continued concern, must be viewed in the context of a turbulent relationship involving two highly self-centred and opinionated individuals. As a poet, Douglas excelled as a sonneteer, and that his carefully crafted verse failed to win critical acclaim distressed him deeply. The attention accorded T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, the Sitwells, and other so-called moderns, he was certain, was misdirected. He believed that the spotlight should have fallen on 'The Complete Poems of Lord Alfred Douglas' (1928), but Douglas was essentially a nineties' poet whose gifts did not survive into the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 32870


Douglas, Sir Charles Whittingham Horsley (1850-1914), army officer, was born on 17 July 1850 at the Cape of Good Hope, the second son of William Douglas of Lansdown House, near Bath, and his second wife, Caroline, daughter of Captain Joseph Hare. Educated privately, he was commissioned (by purchase) into the 92nd highlanders in December 1869; he was made lieutenant (by purchase) in October 1871. He was adjutant of the 2nd Gordon Highlanders from 1881 to 1884, and first saw active service in the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80), where he took part in Sir Frederick Sleigh (later Earl) Roberts's famous march from Kabul to Kandahar. After the action at Kandahar (1 September 1880), in which he had a horse shot from under him, Douglas was mentioned in dispatches. Promoted captain in July 1880 and brevet major in March 1881, he served with the Gordon Highlanders in the Anglo-Transvaal War (1880-81). Although he did not take part in the battle of Majuba Hill (27 February 1881) he wrote a detailed account of it from survivors' recollections, criticizing Major-General Sir George Pomeroy Colley and his staff, praising the Boers' marksmanship and skirmishing, and admitting that some of the British 'should have behaved better' (Douglas to Lieutenant-Colonel George White, 5 April 1881, BL OIOC, Sir George White MSS). In 1884 he was given a staff appointment (deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general) for the Suakin expedition, where he was again mentioned in dispatches. In May 1885 he was promoted major, and in 1893 was appointed brigade major to the 1st infantry brigade. In 1895 he became lieutenant-colonel on appointment as deputy assistant adjutant-general, Aldershot. In 1898 he was promoted assistant adjutant-general, Aldershot, with the brevet rank of colonel, and later that year was appointed aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria and made full colonel. In the South African War (1899-1902) he served initially as an assistant adjutant-general on the headquarters staff of Sir Redvers Buller's field force, before serving as chief staff officer to Lord Methuen and later commanding the 9th brigade and, finally, in 1900, a column of all arms in the South Africa field force. He was mentioned in dispatches twice, and was promoted major-general for distinguished service in the field. 
In 1901 Douglas was given command of the 1st infantry brigade at Aldershot, and, in 1902, of the 2nd division of the First Army corps. From 1904 to 1909 he was adjutant-general at the War Office and second military member on the first Army Council under the reforms introduced by Lord Esher's committee after the South African War. He advocated, without success, the restoration of corporal punishment in the army, and took part in protracted arguments with H. O. Arnold-Forster, the secretary of state for war, over the latter's opposition to the adoption of an 181/2-pounder field gun and his wish to introduce simultaneous recruiting for long and short service enlistments. As adjutant-general, Douglas strongly opposed the creation of a separate list of officers for the general staff, coupled with accelerated promotion opportunities for the newly proposed general staff, and also participated in the planning to reduce the volunteers. However, he subsequently tried to dissociate himself from a highly contentious circular (issued 20 June 1905, requesting reports from general officers commanding on volunteer units that might be disbanded or amalgamated for inefficiency or lack of numbers) that he had approved which was sent to volunteer commanding officers; on account of the 'considerable opposition' provoked by the circular, he argued that the policy of reduction had to be abandoned (Douglas to Arnold-Forster, 26 Sept 1905, BL, Arnold-Forster MSS). After the Liberals' triumph in the 1906 general election, Douglas found the incoming secretary of state for war, R. B. Haldane, much more congenial and he loyally assisted him with his reforms, particularly in the conversion of the militia infantry into a special reserve for the regular army. 
In 1909 Douglas was made general officer commanding-in-chief, southern command. Having been promoted lieutenant-general in 1905, he was made a full general in 1910. Created KCB in 1907, he was promoted GCB in 1911, and appointed colonel of the Gordon Highlanders in June 1912. Also in 1912 he was appointed inspector-general, home forces, and proved so conscientious that his staff tours were regarded as models of their kind. He had married Ida de Courcy, daughter of George Tomline Gordon JP, of Cuckney, Nottinghamshire, on 9 August 1887; they had no children, and she survived her husband. 
Naturally shy and reserved, Douglas gave the impression of being 'a hard man' (Macready, 135) who could be abrupt and overbearing to subordinates. Yet he had a 'unique knowledge of the details of all army matters' (Robertson, 195), and so his appointment as chief of the Imperial General Staff after Sir John French's resignation in 1914 was widely acclaimed. When Lord Kitchener was appointed secretary of state for war on the outbreak of the First World War he concentrated authority in his own hands, and the Army Council and general staff were allowed to drift into abeyance. Douglas rendered him considerable assistance as Kitchener knew little about the administration of the home army. Douglas found Kitchener difficult to serve, but worked indefatigably under him; indeed, the combination of stress and long hours on duty may have contributed, after a few days' illness, to his death (certified as from renal colic, bronchitis, and pulmonary congestion) at his home, 68 Eaton Square, Belgravia, London, on 25 October 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 32871


Douglas, Claude Gordon (1882-1963), physiologist, was born in Leicester on 26 February 1882, the second son of Claude Douglas, honorary surgeon to Leicester Royal Infirmary, and his wife, Louisa Bolitho Peregrine, of London. His elder brother, J. S. C. Douglas, was professor of pathology at Sheffield University, and his cousin, J. A. Douglas, was professor of geology at Oxford. He was a scholar at Wellington College, but moved to Wyggeston grammar school, Leicester, to study science. In 1900 he went up to Oxford, where he was a demy of Magdalen College. In 1904 he obtained first-class honours in natural science (animal physiology), after which he stayed on in the physiological laboratory, working for the research degree of BSc under the supervision of J. S. Haldane. In 1905 Douglas took up a London University scholarship at Guy's Hospital and completed his medical degree of BM, BCh (Oxon.) in December 1907. Six months earlier he had been elected to a fellowship and lectureship in natural science at St John's College, Oxford, a position he held for forty-two years. He became DM in 1913. 
Douglas's scientific career falls into three parts: the first, his collaborative work up to 1914 with J. S. Haldane on human breathing; the second, his work during the First World War on physiological aspects of gas warfare; and the third, back in Oxford, after Haldane's departure from the physiological laboratory, on general human metabolism, successively as university demonstrator (1927), reader (1937), and titular professor (1942), and, after he had passed the retiring age, as departmental demonstrator up to 1953. 
It was Douglas's good fortune to join the physiological laboratory when work on the regulation of body oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations, and exchange of these gases through the lungs, was still developing. He quickly became the best-known and the most permanent of the younger colleagues of Haldane, whose work since the turn of the twentieth century had transformed the subject of respiration. Douglas's name appears on some ten of the most important papers over this period, which show an insight into the principles of control physiology three or four decades ahead of their time. Douglas and Haldane provided a quantitative description of the transport of carbon dioxide by the blood between cells and lungs, and the facilitatory effect on it of oxygen transport in the opposite direction. This work complemented the earlier work of Christian Bohr, K. A. Hasselbalch, and S. A. S. Krogh, of Copenhagen, who had shown the facilitatory effects of carbon dioxide on oxygen transport. Work of this kind allowed Douglas and Haldane to develop a practical and bloodless method for measuring the rate of pumping of blood by the human heart under various conditions. 
Detailed and meticulous measurement allowed Douglas and J. S. Haldane (with some mathematical assistance from J. B. S. Haldane) to elucidate the equilibria between the oxygen-carrying substance haemoglobin and the concentrations of oxygen and carbon monoxide. They went on to show that certain conditions, notably residence at high altitude, altered the equilibria. Ingenious reasoning led them to conclude from this observation that oxygen could be transported against the concentration gradient across the lung capillary membranes (oxygen secretion). The question was open at the time, and the resulting controversy between them and their friends Krogh and Joseph Barcroft, of Cambridge, was one of the entertainments of early twentieth-century physiology. Subsequent developments decided the controversy against Oxford, but the basic observation remained unexplained. 
During this period Douglas began to measure the rate of uptake of oxygen and of the output of carbon dioxide by collecting expired air in a large canvas gasbag. The Douglas bag became well known for its convenience for measuring energy expenditure in people in various occupations. 
Douglas served in the Royal Army Medical Corps in the First World War, reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel. When gas warfare started in 1915, he was the serving officer in France with the detailed knowledge and deep understanding of respiratory physiology that allowed interpretation of the effects of the alarming new weapon. He held several appointments in the British expeditionary force related to gas warfare before being appointed physiological adviser in 1917 to the Directorate of Gas Services, where he worked with Harold Hartley. He was awarded the MC in 1916, was four times mentioned in dispatches, and was appointed CMG in 1919. He contributed extensively to the official history of the war, and Hartley felt that his chapter dealing with the development of gas warfare was by far the best summary of the use of the new weapon. 
After the war Douglas returned to Oxford, where he collaborated with J. G. Priestley in setting up and running a novel and thorough practical course in human physiology. The course was taken by all Oxford medical undergraduates over a period of some thirty years. 
After J. S. Haldane left the physiological laboratory, Douglas's interests moved towards the assessment of metabolic processes in humans in the light of the new insights provided by the rapid expansion of biochemistry. With a succession of research students, including F. C. Courtice, he applied the new knowledge to the interpretation of quantitative measurements. His conclusions put him in the vanguard of those who questioned the fashionable, though erroneous, view that carbohydrate was the sole source of energy for muscular contraction. Between the wars the departure of Haldane and the scanty material support received by his branch of physiology rendered difficult any achievement in his field of interest; the Oxford laboratory was more concerned with the exciting advances in neurophysiology of the school of C. S. Sherrington. 
During the Second World War Douglas remained in Oxford, teaching and helping with administration in college and the laboratory. After the war and before his final retirement in 1953 he supervised the work of three more research students, including Roger Bannister. 
From 1920 onwards Douglas was increasingly involved in government committee work, some of which he took over from J. S. Haldane, on such topics as chemical warfare, muscular activity in industry, health and safety in mines, conditions in hot and deep mines, research on pneumoconiosis, breathing apparatus for the National Fire Service, the Gas Research Council, heating and ventilation of buildings, and diet and energy requirements. As a chairman or member, Douglas prepared his papers meticulously, listened carefully, but spoke comparatively seldom. 
Douglas was a devoted senior member of St John's College, which was his home for twenty-eight years. He was a formidable walker, and a keen and very knowledgeable gardener and photographer. He was an excellent host in college and at home. Douglas was unmarried and lived with his younger sister, Margaret Douglas, for twenty-four years. 
In 1911 Douglas won the Radcliffe prize; in 1922 he was elected FRS and was on the council of the Royal Society (1928-30). He was an 'ad hominem' professor at a time when Oxford had few such. In 1945 he was awarded the Osler memorial medal, and in 1950 he was elected to an honorary fellowship of St John's. 
Douglas's early and best-known joint work in academic physiology probably stemmed in large part from Haldane's genius. However, his extraordinarily high standards of accuracy, his energy, his rare common sense and general competence must have contributed greatly to the joint achievement. His capacity as an independent scientist was obvious to his younger colleagues and to readers of his writings on chemical warfare. 
Douglas died in the Radcliffe Infirmary on 23 March 1963 after a street accident in Oxford. 
D. J. C. Cunningham', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32872


Douglas, Clifford Hugh (1879-1952), economic theorist, was born in Stockport, Cheshire, on 20 January 1879, the youngest son of Hugh Douglas, draper, and his wife, Louisa Arderne Hordern. Douglas was a complex and intensely secretive character, and little is known of his life. What biographical information he did release tended to magnify his importance, creating a public image that in some respects differed significantly from the reality. Having been educated at Stockport grammar school, he entered on an engineering and mechanical career, and was a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (1904-20) and of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers (1918-36). It is possible that his employment took him for a time to India, where he claimed to have been chief engineer and manager of the British Westinghouse Company, although the company has no record of his having worked for the firm. In 1910, at the late age of thirty-one, he went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge. In later life he was keen to give the impression of having been educated there in the fullest sense, when in fact he spent four terms only and left without taking a degree. During the First World War he was taken on at the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough, where he reorganized production and cost accounting. He was promoted to temporary captain in the Royal Flying Corps on 1 January 1916, and soon afterwards to temporary major on 1 June 1916. 
Douglas had already been reflecting on society's failure to exploit the full possibilities of modern technology; his work at Farnborough suggested an explanation of this, which in turn led to the theory of social credit. In every productive establishment the amount of money issued in a given period as wages, salaries, and dividends -- which he took to be the amount available to purchase the goods produced in that period -- was less than the collective price of those products. To remedy the supposed chronic deficiency of purchasing power he advocated issuing additional money to consumers, or subsidies to producers to enable them to set prices below costs. By these devices, which came to be known as social credit, production was to be liberated from the price system, inaugurating an era of plenty, freedom, leisure, and human dignity, without altering the system of private ownership, profit, and enterprise. 
Convinced that his analysis was the sole key to understanding and remedying the world's ills, Douglas devoted himself to developing its implications and pressing its claims. His critique of the economic system first appeared in articles in 'The Organiser' in 1917, and later in the 'English Review' (December 1918 - October 1919). In the meantime he was introduced to the journalist A. R. Orage, editor of the intellectual weekly 'New Age', which offered another platform for his views. In time the journal became completely devoted to advancing social credit theory. Orage's own critique of society had anticipated Douglas's, and he became an enthusiastic convert to Douglas's economic theory, publishing Douglas's first book, 'Economic Democracy' (1920), serially in the 'New Age' (June-August 1919) and collaborating in his second, 'Credit-Power and Democracy' (1920). Douglas's utopian vision of society rejected conventional politics, whether of the right or the left, as a means of change: 'There is no hope whatever in the hustings; but a modified credit-system could transform the world in five years' (Douglas, 'Credit-Power', 86). In 1921 and 1922 these ideas attracted considerable public attention but were opposed by socialist writers and the Labour Party, which formally rejected social credit doctrine in 1922. In 1923 Douglas was brought to Ottawa by some Canadian admirers to expound his views to the Canadian House of Commons committee on banking and commerce. 
Public discussion of social credit declined in Britain after 1922, but with the depression of the thirties it revived in greater volume, supported now by the 'New Age', the 'New English Weekly', Douglas's own weekly 'Social Credit', and various pamphlets and books, some of which went through several editions. 'What gave the Douglas movement its persistent strength, even after the complete fallacy of the social credit monetary theory had been repeatedly demonstrated, was its cutting denunciation of existing society and its epochal vision of a new society' (Macpherson, 96). Douglas testified to the Macmillan committee on finance and industry (1930) and lectured as far afield as New Zealand and Canada in 1934. 
By the late thirties the British social credit movement under Douglas's rather autocratic leadership had dwindled into an esoteric sect. But it had struck roots in western Canada, where Douglas had had a following from the early twenties. When he visited Alberta in 1934 he won such wide support that the ageing United Farmers government, in spite of being sceptical about social credit, appointed him (early in 1935) principal reconstruction adviser to the government of Alberta, with a two-year contract. However, the government was swept out of office by the more zealous Social Credit League in the elections of August 1935. Relations between Douglas and the new government soon became strained. He resigned as adviser in 1936, and published his account of the matter in 'The Alberta Experiment' (1937). In this lengthy work of self-justification Douglas did not conceal his contempt for the Alberta legislators: it was they who had failed the theory of social credit, and not the reverse. At the same time his writing showed deep compassion for the poor and a refusal to accept that in a land 'fertile, rich, and reasonably developed', such as Alberta, there should ever exist 'desperate poverty at the lower end of the social scale, and economic and political insecurity amongst all classes not in actual want' (Douglas, 'Alberta', 90). A back-benchers' revolt in the province in 1937 compelled the government to ask Douglas's further help. He sent two of his staff, who prepared legislation which, when enacted, was invalidated by federal authorities. The provincial government remained social credit in name but virtually abandoned Douglas's principles. 
Douglas's earlier writings were remarkable for their reasoned protest against the frustration of individuality by business civilization. But his economic theory never surmounted his initial fallacy of reasoning from one firm to the whole economy. And his social and political theory was vitiated by his engineering concepts. He saw social credit 'as an engineering solution to an engineering problem', and naively believed that he had only to identify the solution for the necessary change to be effected (Macpherson, 121). The failure of the political and financial establishments to take up his ideas in Britain forced him to seek public support, but when this too failed to realize his vision he was forced into increasing isolation. Ultimately he could explain this failure only in terms of a 'world plot' that aimed to undermine Christian civilization. He was driven to attribute the thwarting of technology, and hence of human freedom, to a conspiracy of world Jewry, freemasonry, international finance, Bolshevism, and Nazism, and finally to denigrate democracy and denounce the secret ballot. 'He died a lonely and embittered man, cut off even from the main body of his own supporters' (Finlay, 88). 
Douglas was married twice: first to Constance Mary, daughter of Edward Phillips, of Royston House, Hertfordshire. His second wife was Edith Mary, daughter of George Desborough Dale, of the Indian Civil Service; they had one daughter. He was a fisherman and yachtsman, and for a time ran a yacht-building shipyard at Swanwick, Southampton. He died in Dundee on 29 September 1952; his second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32873


Douglas, George Cunninghame Monteath (1826-1904), Hebrew scholar, was born on 2 March 1826, in Kilbarchan, west Renfrewshire, one of six children of Robert Douglas, minister of the parish, and his wife, Janet, daughter of John Monteath, minister of Houston. His brother, Carstairs Douglas (1830-1877), became a missionary, and was a Chinese scholar of repute. George was educated at home by his father with such success that he entered the University of Glasgow in 1837 at the early age of eleven, and took a distinguished place in the classes of languages and philosophy. He graduated BA in 1843, the year of the Disruption, and was awarded a DD in 1867. Deciding to become a minister in the Free Church, he took the prescribed four years' training in theology at New College in Edinburgh, which the Free Church had established with Dr Thomas Chalmers at its head. He was duly 'licensed to preach' by his presbytery, and, after some years spent in 'assistantships', was ordained in 1852 minister of Bridge of Weir, near Paisley, Renfrewshire. In 1856 the Free Church built a third theological college, at Glasgow, and Douglas was appointed tutor of Hebrew there. On 26 May 1857, aged thirty-one, he became professor, and he held this position until his retirement on 23 May 1892. On the death of Dr Patrick Fairbairn, Douglas succeeded him as principal (22 May 1875), and held office until 26 May 1902. His entire life was spent in Glasgow and his activities closely connected with university and educational matters. He took a keen interest in the establishment of a Scottish system of national education, was chairman of the Free Church committee on the matter, and was sent to London in 1869 to see the 'Education Bill' through parliament. He was member of the first two Glasgow school boards, and for several years an active member of Hutcheson's educational trust. He was also chairman of the university council's committee on university reform. Douglas was an early member of the Old Testament Revision Company established for the revision of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' (the Revised Version, afterwards replaced by the Revised Standard Version) and worked on the project until its completion in 1884. His knowledge of the Hebrew text made him a useful contributor. He died at Woodcliffe, Bridge of Allan, Stirlingshire, on 24 May 1904, and was buried in the necropolis, Glasgow. 
Douglas was a biblical scholar of the old school whose learning was considerable but whose approach became dated during his own lifetime. He had an exact and minute acquaintance with the Massoretic text of the 'Old Testament' and with extra-canonic Hebrew literature. He read widely and kept up with Hebrew scholarship in German, French, and English. But he was profoundly mistrustful of what he called 'the hasty generalisations' of the higher criticism, which changed the face of biblical scholarship and left Douglas of no intellectual interest to academics in his field. 'Why I Still Believe that Moses Wrote Deuteronomy' (1878) is a typical example of his conservatism. He wrote on a wide range of 'Old Testament' topics, but by the end of his own lifetime his writings were thought to have failed to do justice to his talents. 


@@@@@


doc= 32874


Douglas, (George) Norman (1868-1952), travel writer, was born on 8 December 1868, at Thuringen, Vorarlberg, Austria, the third son of John Sholto Douglass (1838-1874), mountaineer and archaeologist, and his wife, Vanda (1840-1902), daughter of Baron Ernst von Poellnitz and granddaughter of James Ochoncar, seventeenth Lord Forbes. When Douglas was five, his father was killed in a mountaineering accident, and in 1876 he was sent to be educated at Yarlet Hall, Lancashire, following his mother's second marriage. In 1881 he began two unhappy years at Edward Thring's Uppingham School, and later in life he recalled an ultimatum to his mother: either she remove him, or he would arrange to be expelled for 'sexual malpractice' (Holloway, 43). The threat worked, and he continued his education at the Karlsruhe 'Gymnasium', where he specialized in natural history, contributing scholarly articles to 'The Zoologist'. 
At twenty-one Douglas entered the Foreign Office, and was posted to St Petersburg, where after two years he was promoted to third secretary. While in Russia Douglas continued to contribute to 'The Zoologist' and other natural history periodicals, and published two monographs, 'The Herpetology of the Grand Duchy of Baden' and 'On the Darwinian Hypothesis of Sexual Selection'. In 1896 he resigned his post with the Foreign Office; he wished to leave the country, having impregnated Helen Demidoft, the daughter of an elite Russian family. He bought a villa at Posilipo in the Bay of Naples, intending to dedicate himself to botanical studies and travel. 
On 25 June 1898 Douglas married his cousin Elizabeth Louisa Theobaldina 
(Elsa; 1876-1916)
, daughter of Augustus FitzGibbon, at Fulham register office, London. The couple married secretly and in haste: Douglas thought himself syphilitic, while Elsa was two months pregnant. They lived at Posilipo, where their first child, Archie, was born, and a second son, Robin, the following year. While travelling in India and Tunisia in 1900, the couple collaborated on 'Unprofessional Tales', published under the joint pseudonym Normyx and dedicated to the popular novelist Ouida. Although the collection was not successful, Douglas later revised and republished one short story from it, 'Nerinda'. Towards the end of 1902 Douglas's mother died, and by 1903 his prolonged visits to Capri contributed to the breakdown of his marriage. He obtained a divorce in 1904 on the grounds of Elsa's adultery, gaining custody of their two sons. 
Douglas moved to Capri, sending his sons to boarding-school in England, and over the next few years privately published eight monographs about the island. In January 1905 Joseph Conrad visited the island for several months, and the two became friends. When by 1907 Douglas found himself short of money, he sold his Capri property, and in January 1908 moved to London, successfully contesting his wife's attempt to regain custody of her children on the grounds of her husband's 'rather faunesque pursuit of young boys' (Holloway, 161). His wife's lawsuit gave an early indication of the paedophilia which dominated Douglas's later years. 
By mid-1909 Douglas was establishing himself in London literary circles, writing for the 'Cornhill Magazine' and the 'English Review'. His eyewitness account of devastating earthquakes in Capri was serialized in the 'Cornhill Magazine', and later articles were incorporated into three books, 'Siren Land' (1911) about the Sorrento peninsula, 'Fountains in the Sand' (1912) on Tunisia, and 'Old Calabria' (1915). These were not financially successful, but 'Old Calabria' especially made him known. He was appointed assistant editor of the 'English Review' in 1912. Regular work at the 'English Review' brought him not only a necessary income, but also weekly contact with contributors -- including Edward Thomas, Rupert Brooke, James Elroy Flecker, Compton Mackenzie, and D. H. Lawrence. 
While working at the 'English Review' Douglas was drafting his best-known book, 'South Wind'. Meanwhile, he published 'London Street Games' (1916), in his terms a social document, intended to 'demonstrate the inventiveness of children' (Holloway, 225). Much of the material came from his friendship with Eric, an East End street urchin whom Douglas had adopted in 1911 and had taken touring with him around Europe. The book became a major source for James Joyce's 'Finnegans Wake', and was still acclaimed by child psychologists in the 1960s. Later in 1916 a darker aspect of Douglas's interest in young boys became evident when he was arrested and charged with sexually assaulting a sixteen-year-old boy. In January 1917 he was charged with further offences against two brothers aged ten and twelve. On the advice of Compton Mackenzie, Joseph Conrad, and other friends, he broke his bail conditions and returned to Capri. 
At Capri Douglas completed the proofs of 'South Wind', which enjoyed an immediate success. Its ironic questioning of conventional morality appealed to a war-weary public, and its humane values were praised by Virginia Woolf in the 'Times Literary Supplement'. It sold particularly well in America, but as Douglas was not protected by copyright there, his financial situation was not ameliorated. In 1917 he moved to Paris and later to St Malo, where poverty extending to near-starvation made it impossible to complete his next book. He finished it at Menton, and after protracted negotiations with various publishers, it appeared as 'They Went' in 1920. It was received with respectful acclaim, but without the enthusiasm which greeted 'South Wind'. 
From 1920 until 1937 Douglas was settled in Florence, where his financial troubles steadily abated. As his fame grew, he became much visited by inter-war writers, and forged close friendships with D. H. Lawrence and Bryher. During these years he lived with the publisher Giuseppe (Pino) Orioli, who helped him publish several limited editions, most of which were later commercially published in London. 'Alone' (1921) was the mellowest, most relaxed of his travel writings, the author's favourite and the last about Italy. It was followed by 'Together' (1923), a recollection of his Vorarlberg childhood which brought glowing tributes in the press, and admiring letters from Lytton Strachey and E. M. Forster. 
In 1925 Douglas published 'D. H. Lawrence and Maurice Magnus: a Plea for Better Manners', a biting polemic against Lawrence's 'ungentlemanly' biographical preface to the memoirs of their mutual friend Magnus, who had committed suicide two years earlier. The pamphlet was surprisingly successful: 500 copies were sold in the first fortnight, and the literary controversy was debated in the 'Times Literary Supplement'. The quarrel was continued in 'Experiments' (1925), causing Lawrence to retaliate in the 'New Statesman' where, he explained, he was 'weary of being slandered'. The two were reconciled in 1927, but a continuing rivalry with Lawrence was behind the private publication of 'Some Limericks' (1928), in Douglas's words 'one of the filthiest books in the English language, written for the Dirty Minded Elect', and in obvious dialogue with 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' (Holloway, 367). 
Douglas published 'Looking Back' in 1933, a discursive, leisurely autobiography drawing upon material accumulated over several decades, and brought out as a two-volume limited edition of 535 copies under the guidance of Charles Prentice, his friend and patron at Chatto and Windus. The entire edition was sold prior to publication, and Douglas left off writing for several years, turning down even light reviewing work. He spent the next few years travelling through India, revisiting Calabria, and assisting Orioli with his novel 'Moving Along'. 
In 1937 Douglas was forced to flee Florence after the police made enquiries concerning his friendship with a ten-year-old local girl. By his own account Douglas escaped the wrath of the girl's family 'with only an hour to spare', eventually settling in Lisbon with Orioli, though he spent much of 1940 in France. After Orioli's death in January 1942, he moved to London, where he eked out a living as a language teacher and publisher's reader. Later that year the second British edition of 'South Wind' was published, and 'The Bookseller' used the novel, which it characterized as 'one of the most famous books of the present century', to illustrate its campaign for the copyright protection of British books in the USA ('The Bookseller', Feb 1943). 
Douglas returned to Capri in 1946, publishing 'Late Harvest', in part an annotated anthology of extracts from earlier books, which contributed further chapters to his interrupted autobiography. During 1949 the Italian Lux Films company began to produce a film of 'South Wind', but by November that year the project had collapsed. Douglas died on Capri on 7 February 1952 after several months of illness, and was buried there. 'Footnote on Capri', a 10,000-word essay outlining the history of the island and accompanying Islay Lyons's photographs, was published posthumously. 


@@@@@


doc= 32875


Douglas, Sir (Henry) Percy (1876-1939), hydrographer, was born at Dacre Hill, Higher Bebington, Cheshire, on 1 November 1876, the second son of Admiral Sholto Douglas (1833-1913) and his first wife, Maria Louisa, the only daughter of William Bickford, of Stonehouse, Devon. He entered the training ship 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in 1890 and in 1892 was appointed to the 'Cleopatra' on the North America and West Indies station as midshipman. At the end of 1895 he was transferred to the 'Majestic', the flagship of Lord Walter Kerr in the channel squadron, and in 1896 he was promoted sub-lieutenant. Then followed the usual courses at Greenwich and Portsmouth. Having decided to enter the surveying branch, he served in the 'Stork', a surveying ship, in the Pacific for nearly three years; he was promoted lieutenant in 1898. In that year he married Katherine Chute, the second daughter of Captain John Mackenzie, Lincolnshire militia, of Belmont, near Kirkcudbright. They had one daughter. 
Until the end of 1906 Douglas was continuously employed on surveying work in the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, China, the west coast of Africa, and home waters. He then had a short spell ashore as naval assistant to the hydrographer, and in June 1907 joined the 'Egeria' at Esquimalt for survey work in the north Pacific. A year later he was selected for command of the 'Waterwitch' for the survey of the Malacca Strait and other Far Eastern waters. In March 1910 he was brought to Whitehall to be superintendent of charts in the hydrographic department, a post he held for nearly five years, and at the end of the year was promoted commander. By this time Douglas was recognized as one of the ablest of the younger surveying officers, and when Admiral John de Robeck, at the beginning of the Dardanelles campaign, asked the Admiralty for the addition to his staff of a good surveying officer, Douglas was sent out in February 1915 and joined the flagship 'Inflexible'. Later he transferred to the 'Queen Elizabeth' and 'Lord Nelson'. De Robeck's dispatches contain several mentions of his 'work of inestimable value to the fleet'. His expertise was in fact indispensable for successful landing operations: he compiled and printed new local charts and dealt with problems of minefields, ranges, and indirect bombardment. His zeal and ability were recognized by promotion to acting captain in October 1915, confirmed two months later. 
In June 1916, after the evacuation of the Gallipoli peninsula, Douglas returned to the hydrographic department and held the new office of director of the naval meteorological service from April 1917 until January 1918. Then Admiral Roger (afterwards Lord) Keyes, who had been chief of staff to de Robeck, asked for Douglas's assistance on his staff at Dover in preparation for the Zeebrugge and Ostend exploits. He was accordingly appointed to the 'Arrogant' (Keyes's flagship) for indirect firing duties. Keyes reported that his services were invaluable and his dispatches of May 1918 stated that the preparation of the routes from the starting point of attack by the removal of obstructions and the placing of navigational marks and marks for the long-range bombardments were carried out by Douglas and his assistant. For this service he was appointed CMG and received the Belgian order of Leopold and the Italian silver medal for valour. 
From February 1919 until July 1921 Douglas was assistant hydrographer, after which he resumed duty at sea in command of the 'Mutine', and later the 'Ormonde', for surveys in British Guiana and the West Indies. He received the official commendation of the governors of Honduras, Jamaica, and Bermuda for surveying work in their waters. 
Douglas returned to the Admiralty as hydrographer of the navy in October 1924 and, on completing the normal five years in that office, was offered and accepted an extension for three more years on condition of retiring from the active list. He was appointed CB in 1929 and KCB in 1933. He reached flag rank in February 1927 and was promoted vice-admiral on the retired list in 1931. 
Douglas was much interested in the technical side of his professional work and had a probing, inventive mind for the discovery of new aids to navigation. When in command of the 'Waterwitch' he developed the Douglas-Schafer sounding gear, which did much to facilitate the accurate determination of the depth of water in from 20 to 100 fathoms. He received the thanks of the Board of Admiralty 'for devising and perfecting a sounding traveller for rapid sounding for ships under weigh' and was given a money prize for this service. He was an enthusiastic advocate of echo-sounding, and it is mainly owing to his enterprise that this valuable invention was adopted for general use. Various improvements in surveying apparatus are due to him, especially the development of the 45 degree prismatic astrolabe. 
In hydrography, Douglas's interest was chiefly in improvements of instruments and the geodetic and astronomical control of marine surveys, and he did much to improve both; he maintained his study of meteorology, begun officially in 1917. He was from 1928 to 1932 Admiralty representative on the 'Discovery' executive committee, appointed by the Colonial Office for the promotion of research in the southern and Antarctic seas, and took a leading part in the design, equipment, and manning of the new ship built for that purpose. He gave close and invaluable personal attention to all her proceedings until she was finally laid up shortly before the outbreak of war in 1939. This work led to his being associated with other polar exploration schemes, in which his expert help was readily and unobtrusively given. He had many intimate friends, particularly in the scientific world, and seldom made enemies. He was a younger brother of Trinity House. 
After retirement from the service Douglas was appointed acting conservator of the Mersey and chairman of the Dover Harbour Board. On the outbreak of war in September 1939 he was employed as commodore superintendent of Dover, where he died on 4 November following; he was buried at sea on 7 November at his own wish in the Strait of Dover. 
V. W. Baddeley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32876


Douglas, (William) Sholto, Baron Douglas of Kirtleside (1893-1969), air force officer, was born in Oxford on 23 December 1893, the second of the three sons of the Revd Robert Langton Douglas (1864-1952), secretary of the Church of England Temperance Society, and his first wife, Margaret Jane (died 1958), the daughter of Percival Cannon, a printer. His father left the priesthood in 1898 after his marriage to Margaret Douglas was dissolved (his first divorce), and later became an authority on the history of Italian art, director of the Irish National Gallery, a citizen of the United States, and a Roman Catholic; he was married twice more and -- according to Douglas's reckoning -- fathered a total of ten legitimate and eight illegitimate children. Brought up in straitened circumstances by his mother, Douglas overcame the handicap of unsettled early years to flourish at St Clement's School, Headington, Oxford; Emmanuel School, Wandsworth; and Tonbridge preparatory school and Tonbridge School in Kent (1908-13), where he won a classical scholarship to Lincoln College, Oxford, in October 1913. He sang in the Bach Choir, attended Fabian Society meetings, and joined the artillery section of the Oxford University officer training corps. 
Douglas was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Field Artillery on 15 August 1914 and served in France, but transferred to the Royal Flying Corps as an observer with 2 squadron at Merville in northern France (flying BE 2a and b reconnaissance biplanes) from December 1914 to April 1915. He returned to England for pilot instruction in May and qualified in July. In August he was posted to 8 squadron on the western front, where he was promoted captain and flight commander in December and awarded a Military Cross in January 1916. On promotion to major in May he was sent to Montrose on the Scottish east coast where he formed and trained 43 squadron (equipped with the oddly named Sopwith One and a Half Strutter, a versatile machine, used for bombing and reconnaissance), which he took to France in January 1917. He was appointed to command 84 squadron, equipped with the SE 5a, an excellent single-seat fighter, in August. By the end of the war he was a lieutenant-colonel (promoted on 9 November 1918), a proven administrator, and an experienced pilot (awarded a Distinguished Flying Cross in February 1919), but he met with surprisingly little success in aerial combat: he achieved certainly fewer than the five victories which identify an ace, and perhaps none at all. In later years, however, he rated his performance during the First World War very highly: 'I was a well-known fighter pilot and an expert on air fighting when in its infancy', he told the literary agent A. D. Peters, on 29 March 1961. 'I commanded two crack fighter squadrons [the Sopwith was not a fighter] on the Western Front for a total period of nearly two years and was awarded three decorations for gallantry, ending up as the youngest lieutenant-colonel in the RAF at 23 [actually almost 25]' (Douglas papers). 
Douglas left the RAF in 1919, but did not return to Oxford to complete a degree. Instead, he joined the Handley Page Company as an air transport pilot, obtaining a commercial pilot's licence and flying from London to Manchester and Brussels. In October 1919 he married May Howard. A chance meeting with Sir Hugh Trenchard, chief of the air staff (CAS), encouraged him to return to the service in March 1920 with a permanent commission as a squadron leader. Trenchard decided to present a 'tournament' at Hendon, a display of flying skill, and Douglas suggested a fly-past by three four-engined Handley Page V/1500 bombers. He and Keith Park flew two of the machines on 3 July 1920 in what the editor of 'The Aeroplane' regarded as the highlight of the show. 'It was truly a terrifying sensation', he wrote, 'as the twelve Rolls-Royce Eagles roared towards the railings' (7 July 1920, 5), clearing them by no more than 15 feet. Trenchard delivered a stinging rebuke to all concerned. Nevertheless, both Douglas and Park were selected to attend the world's first air force staff college, at Andover in Hampshire, from April 1922 to January 1923 -- long enough to offer practical instruction in efficient management of paperwork and to sow the seeds of a 'school of thought'. Among the twenty officers selected were seven who occupied vital positions during the Second World War, but even in that august company three stood out: Charles Portal, Douglas, and Park -- and among their instructors was Wilfrid Freeman, one of the RAF's greatest officers. 
Douglas's education was further broadened in 1927 by a year at the Imperial Defence College (IDC) in London. He won the prestigious and well-rewarded ($30 plus books) R. M. Groves memorial prize in 1928 for an essay on how aircraft could best help to develop imperial communications. He served in the Middle East, mainly in Egypt and the Sudan, from August 1929 until March 1932, when he returned to the IDC as an instructor. His first marriage was dissolved in 1932, and in September 1933 he married Joan Leslie, the daughter of Colonel Hubert Cuthbert Denny. 
In January 1936 Douglas began an exceptionally long stint in the Air Ministry: first as director of staff duties (responsible for framing and amending the tasks assigned to senior operational and staff officers) until February 1938; next as assistant CAS until April 1940 (where his daily concerns were weapons and equipment, including the possibility of airborne radar, for the new fighters and bombers coming into service); and finally as deputy CAS (involved in operational policy at the highest level) until 25 November 1940. He then succeeded Sir Hugh Dowding as head of Fighter Command at Bentley Priory in Stanmore, north-west London. Appropriate promotions accompanied his rise towards the top: wing commander (January 1925), group captain (January 1932), air commodore (July 1935), air vice-marshal (January 1938), and air marshal (on arrival at Bentley Priory). He was appointed CB in July 1940 and knighted (KCB) a year later. 
By October 1940 moves to replace Dowding at Fighter Command were gathering momentum. He had failed to settle a bitter -- and increasingly public -- quarrel between his two principal group commanders (Keith Park and Trafford Leigh-Mallory) over the most effective tactics to employ against German daylight raids during the battle of Britain. The Germans had switched to an increasingly destructive night offensive in September, and Dowding seemed at a loss, energetic only in brusquely rejecting Air Ministry suggestions made (or at least supported) by Douglas. Several powerful men, among them Trenchard, Sir John Salmond (also a former CAS, currently conducting an investigation into the problems of night defence), Sir Archibald Sinclair (secretary of state for air), and Harold Balfour (his under-secretary), wanted Dowding's head -- and that of the CAS, Sir Cyril Newall, long regarded as a lame duck. The situation was ideal for new commanders to step forward: young, confident, articulate, aggressive and (not least) untainted by what Trenchard and others regarded as mistakes in strategy and tactics since the outbreak of war. 
Douglas supported Leigh-Mallory's opposition to the emphasis on defence by Dowding and Park throughout the day battle. As far back as 11 August 1938 he had declared that it was 'immaterial in the long view whether the enemy bomber is shot down before or after he has dropped his bombs on his objective' (Orange, 121). Douglas agreed with Leigh-Mallory that targets should be defended primarily by anti-aircraft guns, balloons, and searchlights, while a concentrated attack was prepared by massed fighters on enemy bombers -- if necessary, after they had bombed. It was a risky policy, especially given Fighter Command's lack of combat-hardened pilots by October 1940. Douglas, however, never accepted a distinction between flying ability and fighting experience. On 31 October, for example, he wrote that the pilot position had undergone a 'kaleidoscopic change' recently: 'in the case of Fighter Command we are actually faced with a surplus'. Two days later, Douglas Evill (Dowding's chief staff officer) reported realistically that the command was 'at about the lowest ebb in operational pilots', as opposed to young men who could more or less control high-performance aircraft, at which it could function (Orange, 107). 
Some years later, in February 1956, Douglas was given an opportunity to comment on a draft of Basil Collier's official history of this period, 'The Defence of the United Kingdom' (1957). Douglas argued that causing heavy casualties and therefore using large forces was one way to diminish and end an assault. Interception before the enemy reached his target obliged the use of small forces and the risk of defeat in detail. In the short run the effect of bombing was minimized by interception, but in the long run the best answer might be to withhold attack until large fighter forces were massed. 'Of course, I realise that Dowding and Park were under pressure from the government to try and break up the attacks before they reached their objective at any cost, and that they could not afford to disregard this pressure' (Orange, 134-5). This political reason (not mentioned by Douglas in 1940) weighed less with Dowding and Park than the military reason. Douglas and his supporters thought constantly in terms of a single raid on a single target. Had that been the normal pattern of the attack, it would certainly have made sense to assemble a massive counter-attack, but the Luftwaffe rarely made it so easy for the defence. 
Meanwhile, on 17 October 1940, Douglas had presided (in the absence of the 'indisposed' Newall) over an Air Ministry meeting with Dowding and his group commanders that has become famous. The subsequent minutes, about which Park protested in vain, made many critical points concerning the conduct of operations and left no doubt in the minds of Dowding's many opponents that he and Park (who was deemed to be exhausted) should be replaced by Douglas and Leigh-Mallory; Portal should also succeed the ineffectual Newall. 
During his Air Ministry days Douglas had clearly recognized that aerial combat in daylight and darkness required completely different machines. He therefore strongly advocated the development of a twin-engined, two-seat machine -- the Bristol Beaufighter -- for work at night. Its long endurance, heavy armament, and airborne radar helped Britain's defences to take an increasing toll of German bombers before the blitz was suspended in May 1941. And yet as head of Fighter Command Douglas also encouraged the use at night of a single-engined, single-seat day fighter, the Hawker Hurricane. Its long nose, exhaust glare, and short range made it entirely unsuitable for such operations, which served only to illustrate Douglas's commitment to aggression at all costs. From December 1940 onwards, Spitfires and Hurricanes carried out large-scale 'sweeps' across the channel, but short-range fighters, denied help from radar chains and the observer corps, proved as vulnerable over occupied Europe as did German fighters over England. As early as 12 February 1941 Douglas was unhappy. 'Our idea', he complained to Leigh-Mallory, 'was to go over the other side and leap on the enemy from a great height in superior numbers; instead of which it looks as though we ourselves are being leapt on' (Orange, 138). Evill vainly urged Douglas to insist on intensive training during this lull in the daylight offensive, rather than on offensive sweeps of little military value over territory where the Luftwaffe had every advantage. 
Tragically, Douglas followed Trenchard in his belief that continuous offensive enhanced morale. This belief was bolstered after the German assault on the Soviet Union in June 1941 by the hope -- unrealized, in fact -- that fighter sweeps might oblige the Luftwaffe to retain strong forces in the west or even withdraw units from the eastern front. Fighter Command lost more pilots and inflicted far fewer casualties in 1941 than during the battle of Britain and achieved no comparable strategic advantage. 
The main event of 1942, so far as Fighter Command was concerned, was its participation in the raid on Dieppe in August. An ill-planned and poorly executed venture, it cost more than 4000 casualties, mainly Canadians; Fighter Command lost 106 aircraft, the Luftwaffe only forty-eight. Although Douglas was not among those primarily responsible for the disaster, neither he nor Leigh-Mallory voiced reservations about employing short-range fighters far beyond their bases. Nothing had been learned by either man from their mishandling of the command in 1941. Douglas was promoted air chief marshal in July 1942. 
In December 1942 Douglas succeeded Sir Arthur Tedder in Cairo as head of RAF Middle East. During 1943 the centre of operations moved westwards, to Tunisia, Sicily, and Italy, and planning for operation Overlord (the allied attempt to liberate western Europe) became serious. But the British prime minister, Winston Churchill, hoped to generate a new campaign in the Balkans and the Dodecanese Islands that might add Turkey to the allied coalition. Although Douglas eagerly supported Churchill's plans, General Dwight D. Eisenhower (supreme allied commander) and his principal army, navy, and air subordinates, General Harold Alexander, Admiral Andrew Cunningham, and Tedder, did not. Such a campaign, they argued, diverted attention from Italy, the short-term target, and Overlord, the long-term target. Tedder's unwavering support for American resistance to operation Accolade helped to ensure him a high place in Overlord. Denis Richards, an official British historian, castigated Accolade: 'this rash experiment... ill-judged from the beginning, had been the result of over-confidence, an unconscious flouting of a cardinal principle of modern warfare' (Richards and Saunders, 2.345). Douglas and his army and navy colleagues in Cairo did what they could with their own resources and received some assistance from Eisenhower's subordinates, but it was never sufficient. Douglas shared Churchill's intense excitement over these adventures in the eastern Mediterranean, but he -- of all men -- quite overlooked the fact that the Luftwaffe enjoyed local air superiority, and neither Douglas nor Churchill had a convincing answer to the question asked by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in October 1943: where do the allies go from the Aegean? Accolade collapsed in November, at a cost of some 5000 British casualties, and Turkey remained neutral. The collapse deeply angered Douglas, who even contemplated resignation; he went to his grave convinced that a great opportunity had been wasted by the timidity of others. 
While he was still pressing on with his 'rash experiment', Douglas learned that the Americans had vetoed his appointment as allied commander in south-east Asia, an appointment prematurely offered to him by Sinclair with Churchill's approval. The Americans were unimpressed by his conduct of operations at Fighter Command, still less by his support for Accolade, and some of them regarded him as a difficult colleague, overbearing and self-satisfied. Their reservations about Douglas's personality were soon confirmed. During December 1943 it was decided that Lieutenant-General Ira C. Eaker be made first commander-in-chief of the newly formed Mediterranean allied air forces, with Douglas as his deputy. Douglas was upset, although he liked Eaker, 'and respected his ability. But it was a strange state of affairs in which an officer of my seniority in high command could be appointed as deputy to an American officer so much junior in rank and experience' (Douglas papers). Even granting these objections, which are arguable, Douglas overlooked the fact that in a coalition the partner providing most of the equipment and manpower must sometimes be allowed overall command. 'Tedder was sympathetic', Douglas continued, 'but the way he expressed it angered me. 'The great chess players do not, I think,' he wrote, 'have much regard for pawns like you and me.' I have never been able to regard myself as a pawn' (ibid.). 
Douglas accepted the position, with a bad grace, but at the last moment Portal offered to bring him back to England in January 1944 as head of Coastal Command -- an appointment which delighted him, even though he knew nothing about its highly specialized war against submarines, surface warships, and coastal shipping. Sir John Slessor, an officer of greater ability and wider experience who understood the realities of coalition warfare, took over as Eaker's deputy. Coastal Command had become, under Slessor, a large and successful organization, stretching from Iceland to Gibraltar, and working closely with the Royal Navy. Under Douglas's direction, it kept open for Overlord the vital cross-channel links before and after D-day, 6 June 1944. 
In August 1945 Douglas was appointed head of British air forces of occupation (BAFO) in Germany under Field Marshal Montgomery. He was responsible for overseeing the disarmament of the Luftwaffe in a devastated land, securing access to the western sectors of Berlin, dealing with Soviet suspicion and reluctance to co-operate in restoring something approaching 'normal' life in Germany, and returning Polish and Czech airmen, who had served with the RAF, to their homes -- if they still had any. It was an appointment he hated, not only for the long hours and hard travelling, but for the constant sense of wrestling with problems which had no satisfactory solutions in any foreseeable future. Consolation came in January 1946, when he was knighted again (GCB) and promoted to the rank of marshal: only he and Sir Arthur Harris, head of Bomber Command, reached five-star status in RAF history without serving as chiefs of the air staff. In May he succeeded Montgomery as head of all British forces in Germany, military governor of the British zone, and British member of the four-power Allied Control Commission. Although he doubted the propriety of the Nuremberg war trials, he found himself obliged to confirm the sentences passed. He retired in November 1947, ending what he described as the unhappiest period of his life. 
Douglas's military career, though distinguished, left him unsatisfied. He arrived in Fighter Command 'after' the battle of Britain, in Egypt 'after' Rommel's last departure, in Coastal Command 'after' victory over the U-boats, and in Germany 'after' the defeat of Hitler. Historians express reservations about his conduct of Fighter Command and his Aegean campaign; he was denied a great allied command in the Far East and, although Churchill often spoke warmly of his merits, both Tedder and Slessor stood ahead of him as candidates for the succession to Portal as CAS. 
Douglas was created a peer in February 1948 and sat on the Labour benches. At the suggestion of Lord Pakenham he was appointed a director of the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) in 1948, but resigned in March 1949 when he was appointed chairman of British European Airways (BEA), which had been created as a result of the Attlee government's nationalization of civil aviation. His appointment was regularly renewed until 1964. During his time, BEA grew rapidly -- from about 750,000 passengers in 1949 to 5.6 million in 1964 -- and was turned around from making serious losses to a net profit. Under his chairmanship BEA expanded both business and leisure travel into Europe, encouraging demand by introducing reduced tourist fares in 1953, and achieved economies by using larger aircraft. Jet airliners were introduced and commercial agreements were made with companies outside the EEC. The longest-serving, and one of the most successful among chairmen of nationalized industries, he 'handled the board and the politicians with a direct firmness which brooked no interference' (Masefield). 
After his second marriage was dissolved in 1954 Douglas married, in 1955, Hazel, the daughter of George Eric Maas Walker and the widow of Captain W. E. R. Walker. They had a daughter, Katherine, Douglas's only child. He produced two volumes of memoirs, 'Years of Combat' and 'Years of Command', in 1963 and 1966, with essential assistance from his former personal assistant, Wing Commander Robert Wright. Although valuable, both volumes suffer from the fact that most official records were then withheld from public scrutiny. Douglas was a burly man, well aware that his face usually wore a forbidding frown, which he protested was beyond his power to control. He could certainly be charming, to men as well as women, for he had a powerful personality. He was often ill in his last years and died in hospital in Northampton on 29 October 1969. He was buried privately at St Clement Danes in the Strand, London, on 4 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 32877


Douglas, Sir William Scott (1890-1953), civil servant, was born in Edinburgh on 20 August 1890, the elder child and only son of Daniel Douglas, solicitor, and his wife, Margaret Dougal. William Scott Douglas (1815-1883) was his grandfather. Douglas went to George Heriot's School and Edinburgh University, where he won the Lanfine bursary in economics (1911) and graduated with second-class honours in history (1912). In 1914 he passed into the first division of the civil service, in which his career was astonishingly varied. He had a natural talent for administration and could turn his hand to any administrative task without becoming deeply involved with the subject. What fascinated him was negotiation and management of both people and things; at these he was superbly good. 
Douglas started in the customs and excise department, but in 1920 he was appointed financial adviser to the Allenstein plebiscite commission which dealt with adjustments to the frontiers between East Prussia and Poland. There he attracted the notice of Sir John Bradbury, principal British delegate to the reparation commission in Paris, whose private secretary Douglas became on first joining the delegation. He greatly enjoyed his period in Paris, becoming a fluent French speaker. Customs and excise, to which he returned in 1926, was never his spiritual home, but in those days civil servants were seldom consulted about their wishes. However, in 1929 he transferred to the Ministry of Labour to face the tremendous problem of unemployment, as divisional controller for the midlands (1931-3), for Scotland (1933-5), and as an assistant secretary (1935-7). In 1937 he became secretary of the Department of Health for Scotland, where he was a popular chief and did a great deal to bring the department into the administrative structure of the service and to lay the foundations of its future. 
In 1939 Douglas moved to the Treasury as third secretary in charge of the establishment division, succeeding the greatly loved Sir James (Jimmy) Rae who had done so much to make the service one service and so enable it to take the strain of war. Douglas was probably not at his happiest without his own machine to manage; the endless struggle to keep the fast expanding departments amenable to some kind of financial discipline in pay and complements hardly suited his style. The story goes that he settled one battle with his old Scottish department by playing for it at golf; probably the Treasury came off best since he was a scratch performer. His major contribution in the Treasury lay in the planning and manning of the new departments needed for war, and in starting the 'exchange and mart' by which the Treasury sought to place experienced men where they were most needed. 
In 1942 Sir Andrew Duncan returned to the Ministry of Supply and picked Douglas to replace the permanent secretary, who was ill. The two made an excellent team. Douglas was both adviser and friend to the minister, and under the two of them the department worked both hard and effectively. It was a difficult ministry to manage, because of the nature of some of the individuals with whom he had to deal, and his personal skills were both necessary and effective. 
In 1945 came Douglas's last and longest job, with his transfer to the Ministry of Health, where Aneurin Bevan was setting up the National Health Service. There his gift for negotiation proved invaluable. It was not the detail, even the purpose, of the health service which absorbed him, but getting it across. It was an immense help that he got on extremely well with the, to him, new world of the medical profession and all its auxiliaries. Less personally involved than either the minister or the departmental officers who were closest to the operation, he could often smooth over difficulties or suggest a solution to an impasse. Surprisingly, given their different backgrounds and views, he and Bevan had a comfortable and productive working relationship. Douglas considered Bevan the best minister he had ever worked for; Bevan returned the compliment by specifically mentioning Douglas in his speech to the House of Commons on the tenth anniversary of the National Health Service. On the housing side he took a great interest in the building of non-traditional houses. 
When in 1951 the housing and local government side of the ministry joined with the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, and the health side became a separate ministry, Douglas stayed with the health work but retired later in the same year. He acquired several directorships and particularly enjoyed one at Slazengers, for golf was always a ruling passion. He was chairman of the civil service preparatory commission which investigated the form the public service should take under the proposed federation of central Africa, whose draft report was published in 1952. He was appointed CB in 1938, KBE in 1941, KCB in 1943, and GCB in 1950. He was also awarded the American medal of freedom (with gold palm) in 1947. 
In 1919 Douglas married Vera Paterson, daughter of George Macpherson Duffes, chief assistant keeper of the Sasines in Edinburgh, whom he had met while she was still at school. They had two daughters and took care that both should be born in Scotland. His retirement promised to be as varied and active as his civil service career, but was cut short by his death on 17 February 1953, at the hospital, Rye Street, Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 32878


Pennant, George Sholto Gordon Douglas-, second Baron Penrhyn (1836-1907), landowner and quarry owner, was born on 30 September 1836 at Linton Springs, Yorkshire, the elder son and third child of Edward Gordon Douglas (1800-1886), third son of John Douglas, second son of James Douglas, sixteenth earl of Morton. His mother (his father's first wife) was Juliana Isabella Mary (1808-1842), eldest daughter and coheir of George Hay Dawkins-Pennant of Penrhyn Castle. In 1841 Edward Gordon Douglas assumed the additional surname of Pennant by royal licence after his wife inherited a large estate in north Wales; he was raised to the peerage on 3 August 1866 as first Baron Penrhyn. Douglas-Pennant had a brother, four sisters, and five half-sisters. His stepmother was Maria Louisa Fitzroy (died 1912), daughter of the fifth duke of Grafton. 
Douglas-Pennant was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford. In August 1860 he married Pamela Blanche (1839-1869), daughter of Sir Charles Rushout; they had a son, Edward Sholto (1864-1927), who succeeded as third Baron Penrhyn, and six daughters, the youngest of whom was Violet Douglas-Pennant. Douglas-Pennant's second wife, whom he married in October 1875, was Gertrude Jessy (died 1940), daughter of Henry Glynne and niece by marriage of W. E. Gladstone (who was called on to deal with several family disputes); they had two sons and six daughters. Penrhyn Castle was built by Thomas Hopper (1776-1856) over the years 1820 to 1837 in the revived Norman style. The Pennants' London house was Mortimer House, Halkin Street, Belgravia, and they had country houses at Wicken, Stony Stratford, at Betws-y-coed in Caernarvonshire, and at Cairnton in Banffshire. Master of the Grafton hounds from 1882 to 1891, Douglas-Pennant enjoyed horse-racing, shooting, and fishing. 
In 1860 Douglas-Pennant became major commanding the Caernarvonshire rifle volunteers, which was affiliated in 1881 to the 4th (militia) battalion, Royal Welch Fusiliers; he later became its honorary colonel. He was a JP, a county councillor, and the deputy lieutenant of Caernarvonshire. In 1866 he was elected unopposed as Conservative MP for Caernarvonshire, but in 1868 he was defeated by the Liberal T. L. D. Jones-Parry. He regained the seat in 1874, but lost it in 1880 to the Liberal Watkin Williams. 
Douglas-Pennant succeeded to the peerage in 1886 as second Baron Penrhyn; his inheritance included 41,348 acres in Caernarvonshire, and Penrhyn quarry, which, with 3000 men, was the largest slate quarry in the world. He was a controversial figure in north Wales. In his evidence to the Welsh land commissioners in 1893 he described the North Wales Property Association, which he had founded in 1886, as a 'mutual self-protection' society against the plans for land nationalization being promoted by sections of the Welsh press. He said the depression in agriculture had meant that for many years he had received from his land no income in excess of his expenditure upon it; and he indicated that in Wales land reform was linked to nationalism and to hatred of the 'alien' race. 
Penrhyn quarry had a history of strikes, despite the wide-ranging paternalism of the Pennants. Many of the quarrymen lived in the nonconformist stronghold of Bethesda, 5 miles from Bangor, or in small quarrying communities. Increasingly, the Pennants were regarded as divided from the workers by class, language, politics, and religion. In 1901 half the workforce spoke Welsh only, but there were political and sectarian divisions as a minority were Conservatives and Anglicans. Unity was further reduced by disparity of earnings resulting from variations in the quality of the rock allocated to different groups, which encouraged favouritism. Lord Penrhyn's first action was to terminate the Pennant Lloyd agreement of 1874, which had allowed a workers' committee to control management, wages, and prices. The North Wales Quarrymen's Union (NWQU), established in 1874, was seen by him as a means of giving control to the workers, and he refused to accept collective bargaining. Arthur Wyatt, the inefficient manager, was discreetly dismissed, and was replaced in 1886 by E. A. Young (1860-1910), an energetic English businessman. 
In August 1896 long-standing resentment over the employment of unskilled contractors flared up. On 29 September the men refused to accept their 'bargains' (allocations of rock), and they were locked out. Their grievances included strict discipline and lack of union recognition. They hoped for intervention by the Board of Trade, but under the 'Conciliation (Trades Disputes) Act' of 1896 the board had voluntary powers only. In 1897 Lord Penrhyn and Young joined the National Free Labour Association, and three attempts to reopen the quarry failed. After complicated negotiations, which involved W. J. Parry, who had been secretary and president of the NWQU, the men accepted the terms of settlement in August 1897. Belatedly they realized that these terms contained no concessions. The net profit of the quarry for the year 1898 was $133,000, but uneasy labour relations prevailed. 
The Penrhyn dispute (1900-03) began on 24 October 1900 with an outbreak of violence against two unpopular contractors, one of whom was seriously injured. On 1 November there was a further riot against another contractor, and the Bangor magistrates authorized the chief constable of Caernarvonshire to call in the troops. Six of the ringleaders were found guilty and fined. The men returned to the quarry on 22 November in resentful mood, and soon walked out again. Young closed the quarry, and Bethesda was besieged by London journalists. Many of the men took trains to south Wales in search of work. Relief for the suffering families came from the 'Daily News' and 'The Clarion', the Penrhyn Relief Fund, the General Federation of Trade Unions, the NWQU, and the Penrhyn choirs. Bethesda was improbably promoted as a holiday resort. On 11 June 1901 the quarry was reopened with about 600 men, whose individual applications had been vetted. Lord Penrhyn met the men and applauded their courage. Each was given a gold sovereign and a pay rise at the end of the day. At the mass meeting in the Bethesda market hall that night, a decision was taken to display notices in Welsh in the strikers' windows reading, 'There is no traitor in this house.' 
In July 1901 W. J. Parry accused Lord Penrhyn of causing the death-rate to rise in Bethesda, although no rise had occurred. Penrhyn brought a successful libel action against Parry, and was awarded $500 damages in March 1903. Violence between the two sides erupted frequently, especially at holiday times when the strikers returned home, and on three occasions troops were brought in. Extra police were provided to escort the workers to and from the quarry. In March and April 1903 the Liberal Party and the Labour Party vied with each other in debates in the House of Commons in supporting the strikers and reviling Lord Penrhyn. The drying-up of funds finally forced the men to surrender, and on 14 November 1903 Henry Jones, chairman of the regular mass meetings, wrote to Lord Penrhyn that the struggle was at an end. Penrhyn acknowledged this letter briefly, and wrote to a friend that he had fought to deter 'socialist agitators' from 'deluding the working classes'. The steady decline in the slate industry reduced the number of jobs available, and many of the strikers were not re-employed. Union membership in the quarry almost collapsed, but Bethesda nursed its grievances and the divisions never completely healed. 
A tall, spare, bearded figure, with a long, narrow face and melancholy eyes, Lord Penrhyn was slightly deaf. He died suddenly of influenza at Mortimer House on 10 March 1907, and was buried at St John's Church near Wicken. 


@@@@@


doc= 32879


Montagu, John Walter Edward Douglas-Scott-, second Baron Montagu of Beaulieu (1866-1929), promoter of motoring, was born on 10 June 1866 at 3 Tilney Street, London, the eldest son of Lord Henry John Montagu-Douglas-Scott (1832-1905), landowner, and his wife, the Hon. Cecily Susan, younger daughter of John Stuart-Wortley, second Baron Wharncliffe ['see under 'Wortley, James Archibald Stuart-, first Baron Wharncliffe]. His father was the second son of the fifth duke of Buccleuch and was raised to the peerage in 1885 as Lord Henry John Douglas-Scott-Montagu, first Baron Montagu of Beaulieu. On Lord Henry's marriage in 1866 he was given the family estate of Beaulieu, Hampshire, which provided the background to Montagu's childhood and stimulated his interest in rural life. 
In childhood Montagu developed asthma, which caused him to be educated by private tutors until deemed strong enough at fourteen to go to Eton. As well as rowing, he enjoyed shooting and captained the school's shooting eight for three successive years. He joined the Eton College Volunteers, becoming a colour sergeant, and proceeded to a commission in the 4th battalion, Hampshire volunteers, after leaving school. His interest in transport developed while at Eton, in the form of cycling. At New College, Oxford, from 1886 Montagu led an active sporting and social life, stroking the college boat to the head of the river in 1887 and joining in Oxford amateur dramatics. However he had no commitment to the subject of his studies, history, and left in 1889 without a degree. By this time he had already shown his dedicated enthusiasm for another form of transport by training as a competent engine driver and fitter. On 4 June 1889 he married Lady Cecil Victor Constance Kerr (died 1919); they had two daughters. 
In 1890 Montagu was adopted as the tory candidate for the New Forest constituency and he was returned in the 1892 general election. In the same year he visited southern Africa, where his father had business interests. On his return he championed Cecil Rhodes and became a director of six companies operating in Africa; his interest in and business connections with Rhodesia remained strong for many years. These interests prompted a visit of several months to South Africa in 1896, when he combined some journalism with military action. 
In the months following Montagu's return in July 1896 the 'Locomotives on Highways Bill' moved towards its passage into law in November 1896. During this period he developed the passion for motor cars which was to dominate his life. He acquired his first, a Daimler, in 1898 and in January of the following year joined the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (later the RAC), becoming a member of its committee six months later. In 1899 Montagu established the right of MPs to drive their cars into Palace Yard and took the prince of Wales for a drive, which seems to have confirmed the latter in his intention to acquire a car. Montagu also took part in the Paris-Ostend race in 1899, finishing third despite mechanical problems. In 1900 he participated in the Automobile Club's Thousand Miles Trial, with its object of proving the general safety and reliability of the motor car under a variety of conditions. 
The motor car was by now Montagu's primary interest and he took steps to establish a new publication, having first sought advice (including a temporary placement on the staff of the 'Daily Mail') from Alfred Harmsworth, who had underwritten the Thousand Miles Trial. At the end of May 1902 Montagu launched 'Car Illustrated' as a 'quality' weekly. Subtitled 'A Journal of Travel by Land, Sea and Air', it necessarily drew on a wide range of contributors, including Charles Rolls, known to Montagu as a fellow competitor in the Paris-Ostend race and participant in the Thousand Miles Trial. The 'Car Illustrated' offered readers the benefit of insurance and travel and technical information, and motoring-related guides and books, written or edited by Montagu. It remained in Montagu's ownership for fourteen years, but only made a profit in five of those years; a sister monthly, the 'Car Magazine', had to be abandoned, but 'Car Illustrated' proved to be influential. For all his enthusiasm, Montagu was realistic and moderate in his advocacy of motoring interests. Thus, in return for the abolition of the speed limit (of 12 m.p.h.), his 'Motor Vehicles Registration Bill' of 1902, supported by the legislative committee of the Automobile Club, provided for the registration of motor vehicles and the display of registration plates to enable motoring offenders to be identified. Montagu's original bill failed to get a second reading, but in July 1903 the cabinet introduced its own 'Motor Car Bill', which included a speed limit, determined, as a compromise, at 20 m.p.h. Montagu's unwillingness to oppose the government's introduction of a speed limit aroused strong criticism from some of his motoring colleagues. The decision led to a major shake-up within the Automobile Club, Montagu leading a successful reform movement. 
Montagu's journalistic ambition led him in 1904 into an abortive attempt, in collaboration with Harmsworth, to purchase the 'Standard' from the Johnstone family. After protracted and complex negotiations Montagu's efforts were beaten by a high bid from Arthur Pearson, but Montagu eventually negotiated with Harmsworth an annual retainer as a parliamentary journalist, contributing a nightly article to the 'Daily Mail' while parliament was in session. Meanwhile another form of transport took up Montagu's enthusiasm and energy in 1904-5, the motor boat or 'sea racer', a version of which he had proposed for naval reconnaissance in November 1902. In partnership with Lionel de Rothschild, he had two successful seasons' racing in 1905 and 1906, but he had succeeded to the title and the Beaulieu estates on his father's death on 4 November 1905. New responsibilities and journalistic commitments left him little time to continue with competitive power boating. 
The motor car made an additional claim on Montagu through his involvement with Rolls-Royce and Brooklands, the racing circuit at Weybridge developed by H. F. Locke-King in 1907. 'Car Illustrated' gave publicity both to the Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost and to the circuit and Montagu opened the new Rolls-Royce factory at Derby in 1908. With Charles Rolls he attended the International Road Congress in Paris in 1908, then visited Wilbur Wright's flying demonstration at Camp d'Auvours. The short demonstration he saw reinforced his belief in the supremacy of air power. He was a founder member of the Aerial (later Air) League, a pressure group for the commercial as well as military use of aviation. 
Shortly after the outbreak of war Montagu was gazetted to command the 7th Hampshire reserve battalion, which was sent out to India early in 1915; however, on arrival he was appointed to the army general staff as inspector of motor vehicles. In that capacity Montagu produced a critical report on the Indian armoured car force and advocated a chain of air bases. He also strongly urged the mechanization of army transport, with the prerequisite of an improved road network. In the summer of 1915 Montagu returned to England to plead India's case for military vehicles, and also for aeroplanes for the north-west frontier. 
Sailing back to India at the end of 1915 Montagu narrowly escaped death when the SS 'Persia' was torpedoed. His long-time secretary and mistress, Eleanor Velasco Thornton, who was travelling with him as far as Port Said, died in the disaster. This loss was deeply felt by Montagu, the more so in that its severity could not be openly acknowledged. Eleanor Thornton was reputed to have inspired the famous Rolls-Royce figurehead (carried on the bonnet of every car), and she and Montagu had a daughter. Although fostered, the girl was later befriended by Montagu as her 'uncle'. 
During a subsequent visit to England, Montagu organized military transport for India, including 'Indian standard lorries'. He also entered the fierce air power debate, reviving his pre-war charges of national unreadiness for war in the air, arguing for the establishment of an air ministry, and proposing to the Air Board that aero-engine components should be made by motor manufacturers. Montagu gave evidence to the Bailhache committee of 1916 on the efficiency of the Royal Flying Corps but some of his allegations against the Royal Aircraft Factory failed to impress. He returned to India at the end of 1916 but the Admiralty's proposed purchase of Ditton Park, one of his family estates, brought him home once again in March 1917. The Gotha bombing offensive of 1917 then involved Montagu in a contentious public debate on aerial warfare and the need for enhanced air defences. He also served on the civil aerial transport committee of the Air Board. 
After a speaking tour in Canada, advocating an imperial air service, Montagu returned to India, not finally leaving until April 1919. During his time there he had successfully implemented the motorization of military transport. His wife died in September 1919 and on 10 August the following year he married Alice Pearl Barrington-Crake; they had three daughters and a son. 
Although he had failed to secure the future of the road board in 1919, Montagu re-established himself as a leading spokesman for road transport, partly through a series of articles in 'The Times' in the summer of 1921. From 1923 to 1925 he was chairman of a syndicate which sought to build a private enterprise motorway, albeit with some public financial support, from London to Liverpool via Birmingham and Manchester. The project became enmeshed in political discussion about its delaying effects on local authority road-building schemes and its implications for other projects to reduce unemployment, as well as the principle of private enterprise road provision. The final objection came from a surprising quarter: in December 1924 the president of the Commercial Motor Users' Association wrote to 'The Times' expressing his total opposition to the project and supporting through traffic on improved railways. Two further transport projects then engaged Montagu. In 1925 in collaboration with Sir Samuel Instone he proposed a Thames express service of large diesel launches, but this foundered over proposed funding of new piers by the London county council. Then, at the request of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, Montagu visited Persia and Iraq with his wife in 1927 to advise the company on transport problems. 
By the end of the following year Montagu was increasingly troubled by ill health and he died on 30 March 1929 at 29 Wimpole Street, Marylebone, London, from pneumonia and a post-operative chest infection. He was succeeded as third baron by Edward John Barrington Douglas-Scott-Montagu ('b'. 1926), who created the National Motor Museum at Beaulieu in his memory. Montagu, who was survived by his wife, was buried in Beaulieu Abbey church. 


@@@@@


doc= 32880


Dove, Dame (Jane) Frances (1847-1942), founder of Wycombe Abbey School, was born at Bordeaux, France, on 27 June 1847, the eldest of the ten children of the Revd John Thomas Dove (1821-1906), vicar of Cowbit, Lincolnshire, for more than forty years, and chairman of the Spalding board of poor-law guardians and of the South Holland magistrates' bench, and his wife, Jane Ding, daughter of Thomas Lawrence of Dunsby, Lincolnshire. Her education began at home in London, where she was taught by her father, with her two brothers. Subsequently she attended Queen's College, Harley Street, for nearly three years. At this time her father was curate to the Revd Llewelyn Davies, rector of Christ Church Marylebone. This association with the Davies family and their acquaintances brought an early exposure to the debate on women's education. At the age of fifteen her formal education was interrupted when her father was appointed to Cowbit, which in 1862 was an isolated fen village. There was little diversion for the Dove children beyond 'watering cabbages'. At her own request, Frances Dove was sent to a boarding-school, which she later described as being 'everything a school should not be' (Bowerman, 15). After a year away she returned home to a much busier life, educating the younger children, making their clothes, and undertaking parish visiting. 
In 1871, at the age of twenty-four, Frances Dove was prompted to enter Girton College by news of the new college for women brought from London by her father. She prepared for the entrance examination virtually unaided and, although the aggregate of her marks placed her sixth of the eleven candidates, her performance in the arithmetic paper was outstanding. She was one of the nine students who, with Emily Davies (Llewelyn Davies's sister) as mistress, migrated from Hitchin to Girton in 1873. Her story of Davies's meeting her, the first student to enter the new building, surrounded by builders' debris, passed into college history. She and another member of her year were the first women to sit the natural sciences tripos, and as such were the first to be admitted to university lectures in anatomy, physiology, and chemistry. In 1874 she attained the standard of the ordinary degree; this she was able to convert to an MA in 1905 when Trinity College, Dublin, offered suitably qualified women 'quasi ad eundem' degrees. 
While she was still at Girton, Dove was engaged by Miss Beale to teach mathematics and physiology at Cheltenham Ladies' College. Constance Maynard, a contemporary at Girton, called it a 'capital beginning'. Maynard and another Girtonian, Louisa Lumsden, were to follow Frances Dove to Cheltenham, and when in 1877 Lumsden was invited to become the first headmistress of St Andrews School for Girls, Dove and Maynard joined her on the staff. However, their incompatible temperaments made them uneasy colleagues. In 1882, when Louisa Lumsden resigned, Frances Dove was appointed headmistress in her place. It was under her supervision that the school was rehoused in new buildings and changed its name to St Leonards. Her most important task was to establish a tradition of excellence which would outlast the pioneer enthusiasm which had carried the school in its early years. By the time she announced her resignation in 1895 the school had more than doubled in size. 
Dove's decision to leave St Andrews to found a sister school in England was, as she later admitted, 'a great venture of faith'. The prospectus of the Girls' Education Company, which she founded in 1896 to raise the necessary finance for the enterprise, stated that, 'The proposed system of education aims at doing for girls, with suitable modifications, what the existing great Public Schools do for boys' (Bowerman, 79). Lord Carrington's house near High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, was purchased, and Wycombe Abbey School opened in September 1896. Although she never spoke of the school in proprietary terms, it was nevertheless the realization of Frances Dove's educational ideals, brought about largely by her own energy and organizational ability. Starting with forty girls, she built up the numbers to 230, with fifty mistresses, by the time of her retirement in 1910. Her success inspired the foundation of Benenden School in 1923, and made her an important figure in disseminating the model for girls' boarding-schools pioneered at St Leonards. 
The underlying principle of Dove's educational thinking was education for citizenship. She set out her philosophy in her essay 'Cultivation of the body' in the volume which she edited with Dorothea Beale and Lucy Soulsby, 'Work and Play in Girls' Schools' (1898). She argued that women should be taught corporate virtues, and that to be good citizens it was essential to have wide interests, a sense of discipline, and 'esprit de corps'. She applied these principles at Wycombe, believing that the best place to instil ideals of citizenship was the school. Like headmasters of boys' public schools, she regarded team games as the best medium for developing character, and introduced cricket, hockey, and lacrosse as compulsory activities. A regime of daily cold baths and unheated dormitories was intended to develop hardiness in the girls; she was comparatively uninterested in their clothes or appearance, though she favoured 'rational dress'. The curriculum at Wycombe included gardening, carpentry, and Swedish gymnastics as well as more conventional academic subjects, though she was suspicious of music, fearing that the emotional nature of girls might be 'overstimulated by excessive time spent on music, especially if the music is of a certain kind' ('Cultivation of the body', 55). A devout high-church Anglican, she ensured that the religious life of the school was centred on the parish church at High Wycombe. 
Dove regarded the school as a preparation for a life of service. Pupils were expected to become involved in community work through the United Girls' School Mission at Camberwell, and in missionary work abroad by contributing to the Melanesian mission. On her own retirement she devoted her time to public work in High Wycombe. In 1906 she had inaugurated the Central Aid Society in the town, involving welfare work with invalid children and workhouse girls, and infant health. She was a governor of schools and raised funds for church schools. She was a committed suffragist, believing that women could exercise a wholesome influence upon public life. At the first elections open to women candidates for borough and county councils, held in November 1907, she stood for High Wycombe town council, one of the women candidates co-ordinated by the Women's Local Government Society. Staff at Wycombe Abbey School assisted in her campaign, after which she was returned at the top of the poll. Her nomination to the mayoralty in October 1908 appeared to be a formality, but unexpected opposition, stirred up by a reaction against the suffragettes, defeated the motion for her appointment, preventing her from becoming the first woman mayor in England. She lost her council seat in 1913. Thereafter she continued to undertake voluntary work for the diocese and the county education committee, and was made a JP for Buckinghamshire in 1921, learning to drive at an advanced age in order to fulfil her many commitments in the county. She was a member of Girton College council from 1902 to 1924, becoming thereafter a life governor. In January 1928 she was created DBE. 
A photograph taken in the year of Wycombe Abbey's foundation shows a youthful-looking Frances Dove with clear dark eyes and upswept white hair in a high-necked, smocked dress. It is a great deal less intimidating a portrait than that painted by Sir William Richmond and presented to her in 1904. There is no doubt that both pupils and peers sometimes found her forbidding. However, just as her spartan lifestyle was tempered by a love of fine art, so those who recalled her indomitable will and autocratic manner remembered an affectionate and generous nature. Frances Dove died, unmarried, at her home, 24 Priory Avenue, High Wycombe, on 21 June 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 32881


Dove, John (1872-1934), colonial official and journalist, was born on 6 November 1872 in Birkenhead, Cheshire, the second son of John Matthew Dove, of Birkenhead and Boreatton Hall, Shropshire, managing director of the Liverpool, London and Globe Insurance Company, and his wife, Amy Gordon, 'nee' Wood. He was educated at Rugby School and New College, Oxford, where he was an exact contemporary of Lionel Curtis and two years senior to Lionel Hichens and Richard Feetham, all of whom became close friends. He took a third in classical moderations in 1893 and a fourth in 'literae humaniores' in 1895. He then read in chambers with J. A. Hamilton (later Lord Sumner), and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1898. 
A lifelong propensity to ill health was made worse by the effects of an early hunting accident, and it was partly in the hope that the warm, dry climate of the veldt would improve his health that in 1903 Dove applied successfully (with the help of a recommendation from Sir William Anson) for the post of assistant town clerk of Johannesburg. There he worked directly under Feetham (in whose house he lived) and joined Curtis and Hichens in the activities of Lord Milner's 'kindergarten'. He succeeded Feetham as town clerk in 1905, but resigned following the victory of Het Volk in the Transvaal elections of February 1907. He then worked directly for Lord Selborne (Milner's successor as governor of the Transvaal and high commissioner of South Africa) as chairman of the Transvaal land settlement board, set up to protect the interests of British settlers in the colony. He was closely involved in the kindergarten's activities in support of the unification of the South African colonies, spending autumn 1908 in England attempting to drum up support, and then helping Curtis in the organization of Closer Union societies. 
Dove returned to England in spring 1910, exhausted. Nevertheless he was pressed into service as Curtis's assistant in forming Round Table groups around the empire, to discuss and (their founders hoped) agitate for imperial federation, prompting Lady Selborne to comment that 'it was clear that his duty was now to die for the Empire, though on the whole not to die in the Transvaal' (Lavin, 101). He undertook a successful tour of Australia, but shortly after his return to England in March 1911 suffered a physical collapse, necessitating a major operation and a long period of convalescence. He recovered sufficiently to serve in France in the intelligence department of the War Office from late 1917. At the end of 1918 he became a director of the Commonwealth Trust, set up to administer the properties of German and German-Swiss missionary bodies which had been sequestrated during the First World War. On behalf of the trust he undertook journeys to India in 1919 and Mesopotamia in 1919-20. 
Late in 1920 Dove was persuaded to become editor of the 'Round Table' in succession to Geoffrey Dawson. He wrote little for the journal (most editorials still being written by Philip Kerr), and when he did he tended, as he admitted, 'to make bricks without straw or rather you may say to steal some of other peoples' straw' (May, 254). Nevertheless he was an assiduous editor, and one whose style suited the collegiate nature of the journal's editorial board. He remained a firm believer in imperial federation, though under his editorship the journal moved with the times in accepting co-operation as the theme of Anglo-dominion relations. He travelled frequently to Germany and Switzerland to seek cures, and some of his observations on central European politics were published in the journal. He was assisted as editor by H. V. (Harry) Hodson from 1931. 
After Dove's death Robert Brand recalled his 'inexhaustible courage, battling to the very last of his days with ill-health, with physical difficulties and with still more baffling difficulties of the mind and spirit too' (Brand, 'Letters', vi). Profoundly religious, he was nevertheless prone to doubts and uncertainties, and was not at all dogmatic. Dougal Malcolm thought that he 'came as near to real saintliness as is given to our frail humanity' (May, 59). A keen chess player, in his youth he enjoyed hunting, fishing, shooting, and golf, but had progressively to give up these pursuits. He retained an interest in art, and at the end of his life hoped to enrol as a student at the Slade School of Fine Art. He made light of his physical difficulties, and had an impish sense of humour. He was fortunate in having a private income which allowed him to live in comfort, though he was not extravagant and had a streak of austerity. He was unmarried. He died at his home, the Lower House, North Aston, Oxfordshire, on 18 April 1934. After his death a volume of his letters (mainly from travels in India, Mesopotamia, and Europe) was published, edited by Robert Brand. 


@@@@@


doc= 32882


Dowden, Edward (1843-1913), literary scholar and poet, was born on 3 May 1843 at Cork, the second son of John Wheeler Dowden (1799-1891), linen merchant and landowner, and his wife, Alicia Bennett (died 1869). His elder brother, John Dowden (1840-1910), became bishop of Edinburgh in 1886. There were two sisters, Margaret and Anna. Edward was educated at home and at Queen's College, Cork, from 1858, before being admitted in 1859 to Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated in 1863. On 23 October 1866 he married Mary (died 1892), daughter of David Clerke; they had four children, a son and two daughters, and a fourth child who died before 1914. Also in 1866 he became professor of English at Alexandra College, Dublin, a post he resigned in July 1867. The same year he was appointed to the newly founded chair of English literature in Trinity College. 
At Trinity College, Dublin, in 1873 Dowden prepared a number of lectures entitled 'The mind and art of Shakespere', lectures that were, eventually, the materials for what was to be his most influential work, 'Shakespere: a Critical Study of his Mind and Art' (1876). The book went through a number of editions and was translated into a number of languages. Dowden's view of Shakespeare's philosophy was coloured by his study of the positivism of Auguste Comte. There followed a spate of books, biographies, editions, and articles, prominent among which were a 'Shakespere Primer' (1877), 'Studies in Literature' (1878), and 'New Studies in Literature' (1895). Short biographies of Southey, Browning, and Montaigne were crowned by his most extensive work, the biography of Shelley (2 vols.) on which he laboured from 1883 to its publication in 1886. In the biography of Shelley Dowden was faced with the problem of the poet's marriage to Harriet Westbrook and its unsavoury aftermath. Harriet, estranged from Shelley, drowned herself in the Serpentine on 13 December 1816. Dowden wrote of her: 'There is no doubt that she wandered from the ways of upright living; how far she wandered we need not inquire. If she sinned, she also sorrowed; we would think of her, not as a desperate fugitive from life, but as the fair, bright, innocent, kind-hearted Harriet of her early wedded days. That no act of Shelley's during the two years which immediately preceded her death tended to cause the rash act which brought her life to its close, seems certain. (E. Dowden, 'The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley', 1950, 332-3)' The biography was both damned and praised. Dowden was an early admirer of Whitman's poetry and devoted one chapter of his 'Studies in Literature' to 'The poetry of democracy' in which he discussed Whitman's poetry extensively. 
On 12 December 1895 Dowden married Elizabeth Dickinson West, daughter of John West, dean of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. She was a minor poet and translator, a student of his at Alexandra College, with whom he corresponded throughout his first, unsatisfactory, marriage. For her he wrote a little volume of poems, 'A Woman's Reliquary', published posthumously in 1913. There were no children of this marriage. 
Dowden was an opponent of a national Anglo-Irish literature as well as an outspoken opponent of home rule. In the introduction to his 'New Studies in Literature' (1895) Dowden disclaimed any desire to be thought of as an Irish writer, stating 'I confess that I am not ambitious of intensifying my intellectual or spiritual brogue' (p. 19), with more in the same vein. He was not, understandably, popular with, among others, W. B. Yeats. Dowden had praised the young Yeats, son of his friend, J. B. Yeats, on the publication of the younger Yeats's 'The Wandering of Oisin', when such praise was very welcome. Indeed, the younger Yeats later admitted to having virtually worshipped Dowden. But Dowden's lack of sympathy for Anglo-Irish literature alienated Yeats, and in an article, 'The poetry of Samuel Ferguson', in the 'Dublin University Review' for November 1886, he wrote: 'It is a question whether the most distinguished of our critics, Professor Dowden, would not only have more consulted the interests of his country, but more also, in the long run, his own dignity and reputation which are dear to all Irishmen, if he had devoted some of those elaborate pages which he has spent on the much bewritten George Eliot, to a man like the subject of this article. (Yeats, 'Prose', 89)' In his 'Autobiographies: Reveries over Childhood' (1915), Yeats devoted sections 24 and 25 to his recollections of Dowden, in which he records his final damning estimation of him. In his essay 'At Stratford-on-Avon', of May 1901, Yeats wrote that he had read Dowden's 'Shakespere... his Mind and Art' diligently and went on to disagree radically with his characterization of Richard II in Shakespeare's play. But the two did not become enemies, and Dowden writes in a letter of 14 April 1907 of a visit by Yeats, of whom he says that he 'comes and goes and is always intelligent and interesting -- but after all, wisdom is better than folly, and he ought to be attending to his higher sense' ('Letters', 351). Dowden died on 4 April 1913 at Rochdale, Orwell Road, Rathgar, Dublin. In 1893-5 he delivered the Clark lectures at Cambridge and gave the Taylorian lectures at Oxford in 1899. With the exception of these engagements and visits to the United States and Canada, he had spent his entire life in that city. 


@@@@@


doc= 32883


Dowden, John (1840-1910), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Edinburgh and scholar, was born on 29 June 1840 at Cork, the fifth of the five surviving children of John Wheeler Dowden (1799-1891), linen draper, and his wife, Alicia Bennett (died 1869), daughter of John Barter Bennett, surgeon and chemist. His father, a leading merchant in the town, had interests in literature and contemporary thought which were not restricted by his devout Presbyterianism. His mother was an equally devout member of the Church of Ireland. Throughout his life Dowden was close to his father, and to his younger brother Edward Dowden, later professor of English literature at Dublin University. 
In Cork Dowden attended both the Scots Church and the local parish church. Educated at the diocesan school, by private tutors, and at Dr Douglas's school, at the age of sixteen he matriculated at Queen's College, Cork, gaining scholarships in his first and second years. But throughout his education uncertain health prevented him from realizing his full intellectual potential. Previously set on a medical career, he began to consider becoming a clergyman in the Church of Ireland, and accordingly his father sent him in October 1858 to Trinity College, Dublin, while he made up his mind. 
Dowden attended Trinity College from 1858 to 1864, exhibiting a lifelong love of literature and music. He graduated BA in 1861 with first-class honours in logic and ethics, and then joined the divinity class, becoming known for his attachment to the theology of the Oxford Movement. Although reverencing John Henry Newman, he was never attracted to ritualist extremes. He was ordained deacon by Bishop Verschoyle of Kilmore on 17 July 1864 to the curacy of St John's, Sligo. On 15 September 1864 he married Louisa Jones, daughter of Francis Jones, a civil engineer, and they had six children. Ordained priest in 1865, with his delicate health and scholarly bent he found the ministry in a small county town difficult, being generally regarded by the parishioners as high-church. In 1867 he was appointed perpetual curate of Calry, a suburb of Cork. Not a natural, but a conscientious pastor, Dowden also began to develop his liturgical scholarship in articles in the new 'Contemporary Review'. In 1870 he was appointed one of the chaplains to Lord Spenser, the lord lieutenant. A more congenial appointment came in 1872 when the rector of the fashionable Dublin church, St Stephen's, invited him to be one of the curates. 
In September 1874 Dowden accepted the appointment as Pantonian professor of theology at the Scottish Episcopal church's Trinity College, Glenalmond, the warden being an acquaintance from his parish days in Cork. Before leaving for Scotland he graduated BD at Trinity College, Dublin. Glenalmond was founded in 1846 to be both a public school and a divinity institution, but the latter was struggling when he arrived in 1874, owing to the school's remoteness and the age differences between divinity students and schoolboys. A fire in the school the next year saw the theological institution move to Edinburgh, which gave Dowden the combination he wanted of a liberal theological environment with a devotional grounding, and student numbers began to increase. An exacting though sympathetic teacher, Dowden was devoted to the advancement of Scots in the higher offices of the church as against the contemporary Episcopalian preference for educated Englishmen. In 1876 he was awarded a DD from Trinity College. His scholarship bore lasting fruit in 1884 in his still authoritative annotated edition of the Scottish communion office, the eucharistic liturgy of the eighteenth-century nonjuring Episcopalians which continued to be used by various congregations of the Scottish Episcopal church. The work contributed to a renewed sympathy for the Scottish office among Scottish Episcopalians. Widening recognition of his scholarship saw the University of Dublin appoint him Donnellan lecturer in 1885-6, and in 1886-7 he was select preacher there and in 1888 at the University of Cambridge. 
In 1886 Dowden was elected bishop of Edinburgh (after the refusal of the position by Canon Henry Liddon); he was consecrated on 21 September, the most scholarly Scottish Episcopal bishop of his day. This scholarship could have unfortunate consequences: he adopted the archaic Latin title of John Edenburgen which, by its apparent territorial implications, offended Presbyterian sensibilities, as did his hard line against Episcopalians preaching in Presbyterian churches in his diocese. But Dowden continued to be best known as a theologian. In 1896 he was invited to the United States as the Paddock lecturer at the General Seminary, New York. Back in Scotland he became involved in possible prayer book and canonical revision from 1894, and his work was to make an important posthumous contribution to eventual revision in 1912. In the latter part of his episcopate his scholarship brought recognition in Scotland, where he had been one of the founders of the Scottish History Society in 1886. The University of Edinburgh awarded him in 1904 an honorary LLD. An acknowledged authority in liturgical history, his 'Scottish Communion Office, 1764' (1922) is still authoritative. He contributed to the 'Scottish Historical Review' and wrote works on the medieval church history of Scotland, including 'The Medieval Church in Scotland' (1910). Developing a later interest in Christian reunion, he was a regular attender at the meetings of the Christian Unity Association. Dowden died at his home, 13 Learmonth Terrace, Edinburgh, on 30 January 1910. His funeral was held in St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh, from where he was buried in the Dean cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 32884


Dowding, Hugh Caswall Tremenheere, first Baron Dowding (1882-1970), air force officer, was born in Moffat, Dumfriesshire, on 24 April 1882, eldest of the four children of Arthur John Caswall Dowding (1855?-1932), founder and headmaster of St Ninian's preparatory school in Moffat, and his wife, Maud Caroline (1855?-1934), daughter of Lieutenant-General Charles William Tremenheere, chief engineer in the public works department, Bombay presidency. Dowding's two brothers also made their mark: Arthur Ninian Dowding (1886-1966) was superintendent of the Devonport naval dockyard from 1938 to 1945, and Kenneth Tremenheere Dowding ('b'. 1889) joined the Royal Flying Corps in 1914, qualified as a pilot, ended the war as a major and squadron commander, and was awarded the DFC in January 1919. Their sister, Hilda Dowding, never married. 
Dowding was educated at St Ninian's and, like his father, at Winchester College (1895-9), but ancient Greek proved beyond him. Unable therefore to follow his father to New College, Oxford, he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in September 1899 and was commissioned in the Royal Garrison Artillery on 18 August 1900. After service in Gibraltar, Ceylon, and Hong Kong, he transferred in 1904 to the mountain artillery based in Rawalpindi, India. The next six years, he assured both his biographers, were the happiest of his entire career: plenty of shooting, fishing, polo, and interesting military exercises in a grand country. During one such exercise, he and his men 'annihilated' two companies of Gurkhas commanded by Cyril Newall, an officer who would later be preferred to him as head of the RAF. 
Lieutenant Dowding was accepted by the Staff College, Camberley, in January 1912, having returned to England in 1911 with a year's leave on reduced pay in order to prepare for an exacting entrance examination. Promoted to captain on 18 August 1913, he learnt to fly (at his own expense, in his own time) at Brooklands, and was awarded a pilot's certificate -- after a mere 100 minutes in the air, few of them in sole charge -- by the Royal Aero Club on 20 December 1913, the day he passed out from Camberley. It was during these staff college years that he earned his lifelong nickname Stuffy, visited Switzerland, and began his lifelong addiction to skiing, a hobby which became an off-duty obsession. 
Dowding spent the first three months of 1914 at the Central Flying School, Upavon, where he became known to two officers who reached the highest air rank: John Salmond (his flying instructor) and Hugh Trenchard (assistant commandant). Neither Trenchard nor Salmond ever warmed to him -- few men did -- although they learnt to respect his uncompromising character, devotion to duty (as he saw it), and sheer professional knowledge. At the end of 1940, however, both men actively sought his removal from Fighter Command. 
Dowding resumed his gunner career at Sandown, Isle of Wight, in April 1914, but transferred to the Royal Flying Corps on the outbreak of war in August. He was sent to Dover to organize the departure of four squadrons joining the British expeditionary force, and then to Farnborough, to help form 7 squadron. Persistent pestering finally provoked Trenchard into sending him abroad in October with 6 squadron -- but as an observer, not as a pilot. Although he soon regained pilot status, he never made a name in aerial combat, even though he was reputedly a fine shot. Perhaps he was too old (in his thirty-third year) to learn new tricks. Or perhaps, given his long experience of military procedures, he was considered too valuable an asset on the ground for such a new service to risk losing him in the air, where younger men were more at home. 
He therefore found himself employed as a staff officer in France, but in January 1915 he managed a return to Brooklands to command (as a major, from March) a 'wireless experimental establishment'. This appointment introduced him to the exciting challenges of rapid communication, a field in which his practical direction of the work of scientists and technicians would lie at the root of Britain's successful air defence system in 1940. His unit was charged to find a means of using Marconi's discovery (not yet twenty years old) that messages could be sent between two places without connecting cables. The military advantages for all armed services were obvious. Dowding claimed to be 'the first person, certainly in England if not in the world, to listen to a wireless telephone message from the air' (Collier, 103). Unfortunately, he was sent back to France in July 1915 and took no further part in this important work. 
For six unhappy months he took command of 16 squadron, near Merville, some 18 miles west of Lille. In 1933 Duncan Grinnell-Milne, a squadron pilot, recorded his impressions of the major: 'He was efficient, strict and calm; he had a sense of duty. But he was too reserved and aloof from his juniors; he cared too much for his own job, too little for theirs... he was not a good pilot, seldom flew, and had none of that fire which I then believed and later knew to be essential in the leader of a good squadron. (Grinnell-Milne, 42-3)' Recalled to England in January 1916, Dowding was promoted to lieutenant-colonel and in June took command of 9 wing (responsible for four squadrons, under the eye of Trenchard himself) at Fienvillers (west of Albert on the Somme front) for six happier months, absorbed in problems of supply and replacement of men and equipment, and devising an efficient organization. He returned to England, was promoted to colonel in January 1917 and to brigadier-general in June, but never served in another operational theatre. Instead, he commanded southern training brigade in Salisbury until April 1918, and was then sent to York as chief staff officer to the RAF's senior administrative officer in that area. 
Dowding married on 16 February 1918 Clarice Maud Vancourt, daughter of Captain John Williams of the Indian army and widow of an army officer named Vancourt who was killed before 1914. They had one child, a son. Clarice died suddenly on 28 June 1920. 
The armistice in November 1918 seemed likely to mark the end of Dowding's aviation career, even though he was made a CMG in January 1919. He had quarrelled with Trenchard, soon to be confirmed as head of a very small post-war air force and influential in the choice of senior officers to be offered permanent commissions. Dowding believed that Trenchard's insistence on offensive action cost too many casualties for too little military advantage. He also believed that Trenchard failed to emphasize the need for sufficient realistic training before sending men into combat. For his part, Trenchard believed that Dowding's limitations as a field commander were not outweighed by any value he might have in post-war administrative, training, or technical appointments. 
Trenchard, however, was persuaded to change his mind for once, perhaps because the demand for field commanders was likely to be small in the foreseeable future, and Dowding accepted a permanent commission on 1 August 1919 in the rank of group captain (equivalent to colonel in the army). As head of no. 1 group at Kenley from February 1920 he was responsible for two of Hendon's enormously popular annual air pageants: and nothing, he recalled, including presumably the darkest days of 1940, 'has ever induced in me a comparable state of prostration' (Wright, 46). Promoted to air commodore -- brigadier-general -- in January 1922, he served as chief staff officer at Inland Area headquarters, Uxbridge, from February 1923 and then at the headquarters of Iraq command, Baghdad, from September 1924. 
Dowding's first influential post came in May 1926 when he was appointed director of training in the Air Ministry. Working closely with Trenchard in a demanding task which enthused him, he gradually earned that formidable man's respect, was made a CB in January 1928, and promoted to air vice-marshal a year later. Trenchard sent him to Palestine and Transjordan in September to study security problems in the light of Arab-Jewish unrest. His long reports -- considered sensible and constructive by Trenchard -- paved the way for further elevation. 
The new decade began with a tragedy for which Dowding was partly responsible. He joined the Air Council in September 1930 as air member for supply and research, and one of his first acts was to sanction the issue of an airworthiness certificate to a new airship (the R101), which crashed on 5 October, killing forty-eight of those on board. He was aware of severe pressure to permit the flight -- intended to carry Lord Thomson, secretary of state for air, to India -- and accepted without question optimistic technical reports. 'I think I was wrong not to insist on much more extensive trials and tests', he later admitted (Wright, 53). 
In his new position Dowding soon became aware that dramatic improvements to the design, construction, and production of airframes and aero-engines were pending. These improvements coincided, from 1933 onwards, with a steadily growing fear that another major war was also pending. Although without scientific or technical training, he now confirmed (as his wireless experiments of 1915 suggested) that he had a rare capacity -- among senior RAF officers -- for grasping scientific and technical principles, and gave vital practical support to the work of experts, service or civilian. 
Dowding was promoted to air marshal in January 1933 and made a KCB in June. In January 1935 his title was changed to air member for research and development, to reflect his actual responsibilities at a time of rapid expansion, when the RAF was receiving (and devising) new equipment on the ground as well as in the air. Matters of supply and organization were assigned to Newall. 
Two single-engined monoplane fighters -- the Hurricane and the Spitfire -- were under development in 1934. They eventually had the unprecedented armament of eight wing-mounted machine-guns (no previous British fighter had more than two). Work also began on four-engined long-range bombers. Radios were improved and research into what became known as radar -- a method of detecting hostile aircraft at a distance -- was encouraged. 
Dowding was appointed first head of the newly created Fighter Command in July 1936, with his headquarters at Bentley Priory in Stanmore, north-west London, and received his last promotion -- to air chief marshal -- in January 1937. There he prepared the world's first effective air defence system, based on two excellent fighter aircraft (some of which were assigned to photo-reconnaissance duties), two chains of coastal radar stations (one to detect high-flying intruders, the other to spot those approaching at low levels), and operations rooms, equipped to receive information not only from radar stations but also from members of a revived and ever-expanding observer corps. The human eye (assisted by binoculars) remained a necessary supplement to a fallible radar system, which in any case looked only seaward. Information came also from anti-aircraft gunners, and those working searchlights, barrage balloons, and wireless interception stations. Air-raid warning was controlled from Bentley Priory. 
On Dowding's initiative, or with his active encouragement, fighters gradually received vital equipment: improved radios, bulletproof windscreens, armoured seats, self-sealing fuel tanks, and an electronic device to distinguish them from enemy fighters. Hard runways began to be constructed. If he had died 'before' the battle of Britain was fought, 'his work in the field of technical development would place him high among his country's saviours' ('The Times', 16 Feb 1970). 
Dowding learnt in February 1937 that he had been passed over for the RAF's highest office -- chief of the air staff (CAS) -- in favour of Cyril Newall, who succeeded Sir Edward Ellington in September. He was somewhat consoled in July by a most unusual elevation for an airman, the GCVO. His personal grief turned out to be a national blessing, however, as he himself later recognized. He had all the qualities needed at Fighter Command, few of those needed in Whitehall, and during the next three critical years he and Newall proved to be round pegs in round holes. 
Even so, it was Newall who advised Dowding in July 1938 that he must leave his command in June 1939. He would by then have held it for three years (longer than many appointments) and Newall was justified in wishing to promote a younger officer to replace one past his fifty-seventh birthday. The ever-escalating crisis with Germany (and hindsight) may make that decision seem unwise, but it is the subsequent dithering in the Air Ministry -- resulting in brief extensions of his tenure, tardily notified -- that merits criticism. He was to have been replaced by Christopher Courtney, an officer without air defence experience. 
In June 1939, shortly before he was injured in an aircraft accident, Courtney learnt that he would not now take over Fighter Command until 1 April 1940. He was in fact appointed air member for supply and organization in January 1940, and remained in that position for the rest of the war. On 31 March 1940, the day before Dowding expected to leave Bentley Priory, he was invited by Newall to stay on for a further fifteen weeks, until 14 July. Newall wrote again, on 5 July, to ask him to remain in office until the end of October. In view of Britain's desperate situation, Fighter Command's key role in remedying it (and his own conviction that he was still the best man available for the job), Dowding asked to remain in office until 24 April 1942, his sixtieth birthday, unless the war ended before then, or he wished to leave. Both Newall and Sir Archibald Sinclair (secretary of state for air) apologized for past discourtesy, and on 13 August 1940 Newall informed him that he was to remain in office indefinitely (Wright, 138-43, 158). 
'Since I was a child', Dowding later recalled, 'I have never accepted ideas purely because they were orthodox, and consequently I have frequently found myself in opposition to generally-accepted views', adding, somewhat smugly, 'Perhaps, in retrospect, this has not been altogether a bad thing' (Collier, title-page). His opinions, he believed, were soundly based; once they were formed and expressed, he proved most reluctant to change them. He argued forcefully and constantly that the needs of his command should prevail over those of any other -- and, indeed, over any other branch of the armed services, except those of the Royal Navy. Britain's security, resting on command of the air and sea approaches, must have absolute priority over offensive action. 
He therefore resisted using fighters, especially Spitfires, to support operations in France. Their presence could not affect the issue there, whereas their absence from the home base would leave Britain vulnerable to invasion. On 16 May 1940, when a German invasion -- then in its seventh day -- was sweeping virtually unchecked through western Europe, he wrote out his case against sending more fighters to France in what has become a famous letter to the Air Ministry, often quoted. The framed original now hangs in the RAF College at Cranwell. It is less well known that Newall attached this letter to a clear statement on air defence weakness which he circulated to his fellow chiefs of staff that same day. Fighter Command, he argued, could give no further assistance to France: 'if we are to have any chance of protecting the United Kingdom, the Fleet, our sea-borne trade, our aircraft industry, and all the vital centres throughout the country on which we must depend for our ability to continue the war. (Wright, 116)' Dowding appeared before the cabinet on 3 June to reinforce that statement. The Dunkirk evacuation was then drawing to a close and no more fighters were sent to France. 
Dowding delegated the actual conduct of the battle to his group commanders, especially to Keith Park, his second in command at Bentley Priory from July 1938 until April 1940, when he went to Uxbridge, west London, as head of no. 11 group, the most important of the command's four subdivisions, covering London and south-east England. Trafford Leigh-Mallory, head of no. 12 group in central England, advocated the use of large formations -- three or more squadrons working together in a single wing -- but most historians agree that these were ill-suited to defensive fighting because they took so long to assemble and move into action; they were also difficult to control, either from the ground or in the air. Park disagreed strongly with Leigh-Mallory's tactics and Dowding failed to decide between them. 
The system, nevertheless, withstood the German challenge admirably. That said, German errors made a major contribution to Fighter Command's avoidance of defeat. The German assault, hastily mounted, suffered from inept leadership, faulty tactics, and poor target selection, as a result of inadequate intelligence information about either Fighter Command's organization or the key centres of British industry. German bombers were incapable of carrying a devastating load and German fighters lacked the range to afford them continuous escort or to engage British fighters in prolonged combat. 
The daytime assault had been rebuffed by mid-September, and the Germans then mounted a much more destructive night offensive. But Fighter Command was neither equipped nor trained for night fighting. In Park's words, tactics at night were 'those of a cat stalking a mouse rather than a greyhound chasing a hare' (Orange, 116). Different aircraft, aircrews, ground organization, methods of control, and, above all, a radar set small enough to be carried in an aircraft, were needed, but not yet available. A night air defence committee was formed in September 1940, chaired by Salmond. Both Salmond and most members -- among them Wilfrid Freeman, Arthur Tedder, and Sholto Douglas -- wanted a new commander in Bentley Priory. 
Dowding was undermined by his antipathy to those who worked in the Air Ministry; his blunt resistance to suggestions made by Salmond's committee; his failure to control his group commanders; his vocal enthusiasm for Lord Beaverbrook, minister of aircraft production (hated, as he well knew, by most senior officers); the active opposition of Trenchard and Salmond behind the scenes; the alarming success of German night bombers; and a strong feeling that it was time for new blood. 
Dowding was informed by Sinclair on 13 November 1940 that he must go, but Sir Charles Portal (who had succeeded Newall as CAS in October) asked him to stay on until 25 November, when Douglas -- deputy CAS -- took over. Leigh-Mallory succeeded Park at no. 11 group in December. At that time Britain was suffering severe nightly attack, aerial defences were evidently impotent, and winter had hardly begun. Come the spring, a heavier and better managed daytime attack was likely. Consequently, the mood in governing circles, air force or civilian, was more fearful of future destruction than grateful for past deliverance. It was a time for new faces and new methods. Few who knew Dowding regretted his impending departure -- sweetened, incidentally, in October with yet another honour, the GCB. 
In June 1943 Dowding became the first RAF officer since Trenchard in 1919 to be offered a barony. Accepting, he most appropriately added the territorial designation Bentley Priory to his title. He might also have been promoted to the highest rank -- marshal of the RAF -- at that time, when the significance of the battle of Britain as a turning point in the war was already obvious. Quite apart from the recognition, the promotion would almost have doubled his income. But he was overlooked, as he was again in January 1946, when Arthur Harris and Sholto Douglas were elevated despite an alleged prohibition against officers who had not served as CAS. He was, however, offered and refused a highly desirable appointment as governor of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), and he expressed disdain -- 'guinea pigging', he called it -- when directorships in the City of London were mentioned. In 1957 he declared in a preface to the first biography of him that he had 'no sense of grievance' (Collier, 12) over his removal from Fighter Command. But a decade later, while co-operating with Robert Wright in the writing of another biography, he was encouraged -- or decided -- to tell a very different story. 
Dowding was persuaded by Churchill and Beaverbrook to go to the United States in 1940 on an ill-defined mission to look into the purchase or production for Britain of American aircraft or engines. A delicate task, it required diplomatic and commercial skills that he conspicuously lacked. As early as 25 March 1941 Lord Halifax (British ambassador to the United States) asked Churchill to send him home because he was expressing personal views in contradiction of official policy. By June he was back in England and took up the more congenial task of composing a detailed account of the battle. Completed in October, it was published in 1946. Churchill then found him another delicate task -- inquiring into the RAF's economic management -- which he thankfully abandoned in July 1942, when he actually retired. 
Churchill barred publication until 1946 of Dowding's essay, 'Twelve Legions of Angels', the last work he wrote based on his military experience. From 1942 onwards he gradually became as single-mindedly devoted to spiritualism as he had once been to the organization and equipment of Fighter Command. He was also attracted by theosophy, a movement seeking some universal truth supposed to be common to all religions. He published four books on these themes: 'Many Mansions' (1943), 'Lychgate' (1945), 'God's Magic' (1946), 'The Dark Star' (1951), and became a regular lecturer on occult subjects. His 'very unfashionable' retirement interests, as he described them, 'may appear to the orthodox as being strange, heretical and, still worse, 'non-U'' (Collier, 12); they included belief in fairies, flying saucers, and the possibility of intelligent communication between the living and the dead. 
Dowding married again, at Caxton Hall on 25 September 1951; his second wife was Muriel (1908-1993), ['see 'Dowding, Muriel] daughter of John Albino and widow of Jack Maxwell Whiting (a flight engineer in Bomber Command, killed in 1944). Muriel shared her new husband's spiritual beliefs, and converted him to her own hatred of cruelty to animals. He gave up shooting and became a vegetarian, and they lived contentedly at her home, 1 Calverley Park, Tunbridge Wells. 
Dowding was elected president of the Battle of Britain Fighter Association and regularly attended its reunions, at which he was regarded as a revered icon. During the summer of 1968, he visited Hawkinge, an airfield near Folkestone, where scenes for a film about the battle were being shot. Dowding was portrayed by Laurence Olivier, Park by Trevor Howard. Dowding told Howard: 'If it hadn't been for Keith Park's conduct in the battle, and his loyalty to me as his Commander-in-Chief, we should not be here today' (Wright, 281). His last public appearance was at the London premiere of that film in September 1969. Sadly crippled by arthritis and confined to a wheelchair, he was given a standing ovation by some 350 of his former pilots: 'Dowding's chicks', as Churchill called them. He died at his home on 15 February 1970 and his ashes reside below the battle of Britain memorial window in the RAF chapel, Westminster Abbey. His son, Derek Hugh Tremenheere Dowding (1919-1992), who served as a fighter pilot during the battle of Britain and retired as a wing commander in 1956, succeeded him as second Baron Dowding. 
For good or ill, Dowding was not a man to compromise, thereby provoking anger, exasperation, respect, and devotion -- sometimes all of these in a single day -- but he was also a man who cared deeply about casualties and always did his best to keep these down. Although well read, with a dry wit, he was too abstemious and intensely serious to be easy company, even off duty. He had no ready flow of words and did not impress in debate across a table, preferring instead to state his case or to give instruction in writing: always cogently, often bluntly, and sometimes offensively. His appearance matched his personality: upright, lean, correct, unsmiling. He mellowed in his last years, cherished by Muriel, but the 'loving-kindness' he then radiated was 'redeemed from mawkishness by a sense of fun and an undimmed eye for human foibles' ('The Times', 16 Feb 1970). The queen mother unveiled a statue of him outside St Clement Danes (a church specially dedicated to the RAF) in the Strand, London, on 30 October 1988. His expression blends 'surprise, severity and faint disapproval' of this ultimate elevation (Ray, 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 32885


Dowie, John Alexander (1847-1907), faith healer and leader of a religious group, was born in Leith Street Terrace, Edinburgh, on 25 May 1847, the son of John Dowie, a breeches maker, and his wife, Ann Macfarlan. At a school in Arthur Street, Edinburgh, he gained a silver medal at the age of fourteen (1861). His parents emigrated to Adelaide, South Australia, in 1860 and Dowie soon followed them. In 1868 Dowie, who had been working for a grocery wholesaler, returned to Scotland, and, with a view to entering the Congregational ministry, attended Edinburgh University for two sessions, 1869-71. His first place of ministry was the Congregational church at Alma, near Adelaide, from where he soon moved to the charge of Manly church, Sydney, and later to a church at Newton, a suburb of Sydney. On 26 May 1876 he married his cousin Jane Dowie in Adelaide. At this period he was well known as a social reformer, a temperance advocate, and a pleader for free, compulsory, and undenominational education. In 1878 he declared himself against a paid ministry and resigned his charge. Two lectures, which he delivered in the Victoria Theatre, Sydney, in 1879, entitled 'The drama, the press, and the pulpit', attracted attention and were published. By 1880 he was regarded as eccentric, and was subjected to ridicule in the press. He began to be involved in injudicious financial loans and schemes. After a period at the Sackville Street Tabernacle, Collingwood, in 1882 -- which led to a rupture with the congregation described in 'Sin in the Camp' (1882) -- Dowie built a new tabernacle in Johnston Street, Fitzroy. Disputes about its ownership led to his imprisonment. At these tabernacles, Dowie developed a ministry of faith healing. He claimed that over a period of ten years he laid hands on 18,000 sick people and healed most of them. He made expeditions to New Zealand, San Francisco (1888), and Nebraska (1890), and in July 1890 made Chicago his headquarters, though extending his travels to Canada. In May 1893 he opened Zion's Tabernacle, at Chicago, as a centre for the Divine Healing Association. 
Dowie's move for the independent organization of a new religious community in November 1895 led to trouble in the law courts. About 100 charges were brought against him, but none succeeded. On 22 January 1896 he established the Christian Catholic Church in Zion, with a hierarchy of overseers, evangelists, deacons, and deaconesses. On 22 February Dowie was made general overseer; his wife, Jane, was the only woman overseer. The wives of overseers were usually made elders; no unmarried man could be more than deacon. Zion City, on Lake Michigan, 42 miles north of Chicago, was chosen as the site for the community on 22 February 1899; on 1 January 1900, 6500 acres of land were secured, the title deeds being held by Dowie as proprietor and general overseer. If Dowie is to be believed, his following had by 29 April 1900 increased from 500 to 50,000; his critics say that he never had more than half that number. The site of Zion Temple was consecrated on 14 July 1900. Dowie now announced himself as 'Elijah the restorer', otherwise 'the prophet Elijah' and 'the third Elijah'. 
The gates of Zion City were opened on 15 July 1901; by 2 August the first residence was ready. The religious organization of the community, completed on 7 April 1902, was supplemented on 21 September by the formation of a body of picked men, known as the 'Zion restoration host'. The city was ostentatiously planned with winter and summer residences for its inhabitants. Dowie distinguished himself by a showy costume of oriental appearance. On 18 September 1904 he consecrated himself First Apostle, with authority to elect eleven others; the title of the body was enlarged to Christian Catholic Apostolic Church in Zion, and its purpose, frankly avowed by Dowie, was 'to smash every other church in existence'. Its members were bound to minute particulars of personal and ceremonial observance, alcohol and tobacco being prohibited. The leading motive was evidently the establishment of a sheer autocracy, wielded by Dowie. The publications of this body, including their journal, 'Leaves of Healing', were translated into German and French, some of them into Danish, Norwegian, and Dutch, and some even into Chinese and Japanese. Dowie twice visited England, where a congregation of disciples had been formed in London. In 1903 he was not well received in London and Manchester; in 1904 some disrespectful allusions to Edward VII, uttered in Australia, caused an uproar at the Zionist tabernacle in Euston Road, London. 
In April 1906, while Dowie was in Mexico for his health, there was a revolt in Zion led by his chief follower, Wilbur G. Voliva. Dowie was charged with having advocated polygamy in private, and was deposed by the officers of his church, who, with the agreement of his wife and son, put Deacon Granger in possession not only of the church property but even of Dowie's private belongings. Dowie began a suit in the United States district court for reinstatement, estimating the value of the property at $2 million. The court decided that, as the property had been made by contributions to Dowie in his representative capacity, it passed to his successor in the office of general overseer. In the course of the suit it was stated that Dowie's account in Zion City Bank was overdrawn more than $480,000, that he had been drawing for his personal use at the rate of $84,000 a year, and had lost $1.2 million on Wall Street in the slump of 1903-4. Dowie was now a broken man. He was afflicted with partial paralysis, and with strange illusions as to the importance of his intervention in international politics. He died on 9 March 1907 at Shiloh House, Zion City, Illinois. 
Dowie was an attractive personality, a man of fine build, though obese and bow-legged, with brilliant, sparkling eyes and a flowing white beard; a turban covered his baldness, and his ostentatious dress was tasteful and picturesque. He did not shine as a speaker, being long-winded and dull. After his death a rival fanatic, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, 'the promised Messiah', published a pamphlet (n.d., but written in April 1907), in which the fate of Dowie was interpreted as a 'divine judgment' on his opposition to Islam. 


@@@@@


doc= 32886


Downey, Richard Joseph (1881-1953), Roman Catholic archbishop of Liverpool, was born on 5 May 1881 in Kilkenny, the eldest of three children and only son of Thomas Downey, chemist, and his wife, Mary (Minnie) Casey. The family moved to Liverpool and he attended St Edward's College junior seminary in 1894. In 1901 he moved to the senior seminary, St Joseph's College, at Upholland, near Wigan, where he was ordained priest in 1907. Sent to Rome to pursue higher studies at Beda College and the Gregorian University, Downey gained a doctorate of divinity with distinction in 1911. In that year he was appointed a member of the Catholic Missionary Society, dedicated to the conversion of non-Catholics to the Roman Catholic faith. This involved him in preaching and lecturing throughout the British Isles. In 1918 he became co-founder and first editor of the 'Catholic Gazette' (a successor to the 'Missionary Gazette') which began to cater for a more educated Catholic readership. During these years he also had part-time posts teaching philosophy and theology. In 1926 he returned to teach at Upholland, and became vice-rector there the following year. 
In 1928 Downey was appointed archbishop of Liverpool, and was consecrated in the pro-cathedral on 21 September, a meteoric rise to ecclesiastical power. At forty-seven he was the youngest Roman Catholic archbishop in the world. With a Catholic population of 374,000 it was by far the most populous diocese in England and Wales. Downey was decisive in manner, unashamedly triumphalist, and would not compromise over Catholic principles. A good conversationalist with a ready wit, he was able to relax in an easy manner with his senior clergy (who referred to him as Dickie). Almost immediately he began to grapple with the thorny question of Catholic education. In his Advent pastoral letter of 1928 he argued that the funding of Catholic schools was not merely a political matter but was a question of justice for Catholics and that the church had to be vigorously involved in the debate. In October 1928 Downey coined the slogan 'The cathedral in our time'. He subsequently engaged the prominent architect Sir Edwin Lutyens to design a cathedral that would be worthy of the city and diocese, and which would be second in size only to St Peter's in Rome. In order to finance this Downey established a Catholic Emancipation Fund, and put a lot of his energy into fund-raising. 
With his Liverpool background Downey was familiar with the bitter sectarian divisions which bedevilled politics in the city -- and with which a Catholic archbishop had to contend. The powerful Working Men's Conservative Association was strongly Orange in composition. The local Labour Party had reached its inter-war peak with fifty-seven councillors facing seventy-nine Conservatives. However, one third of the Labour councillors were Roman Catholic and the party had strong support from the Roman Catholic working-class population. Even so, Downey had misgivings about the socialist tendencies of the Labour Party. He banned his clergy from electioneering and forbade the Catholic Representation Association (founded by his predecessor) from using the word 'Catholic' in its title. (It subsequently became the Centre Party.) Downey forged a close personal friendship with Sir James Reynolds, a prominent Catholic businessman, high sheriff of Lancashire (1927-8), and Conservative MP for Liverpool Exchange (1929-32). 
In 1930 the 9 acre site of Brownlow Hill workhouse came on the market as the city corporation of Liverpool took over responsibility for poor relief. Downey put in a bid of $100,000 for it as a site for his projected cathedral. There was bitter Orange opposition: Councillor Longbottom said that he would prefer 'a poison germ factory' there rather than a Catholic cathedral. Eventually the Catholic bid, the only one standing, was accepted by an overwhelming vote in the city council. The foundation stone was laid at Whitsuntide 1933 in the presence of a papal legate. Because of the war building had to cease in 1941, when only the massive crypt had been partially completed. After the war escalating costs made it impracticable to continue building on Lutyens's scale or design. 
The Hadow report of 1926 (the consultative committee on the education of the adolescent) had recommended replacing the system of parallel secondary and all age elementary schools with a diversified education after the age of eleven according to age, ability, and aptitude of the child. It also recommended raising the school-leaving age to fifteen. The Catholic bishops welcomed these suggestions, but could not sustain the costs which this would entail. Archbishop Downey, both in articles and by addressing mass rallies in Liverpool and in many centres throughout the country, pressed the Catholic claim that they should be given financial support for this reorganization parallel to that given to local education authorities. In the run-up to the general election of 1930 Downey questioned fifty-nine parliamentary candidates in the Liverpool area as to whether they were willing to support the Catholic cause; thirty-eight agreed to do so. An education bill drawn up by the Labour government proved unacceptable to the Catholic bishops because it allowed local education authorities (LEAs) to appoint teachers in denominational schools except for a few reserved places. After five years of campaigning the Catholic bishops under Cardinal Hinsley agreed to accept the terms of the 1936 'Education Act' which allowed LEAs to give grants of up to 75 per cent of the cost of reorganizing denominational schools (although by now Church of England and free church authorities had agreed to use LEA schools with an agreed syllabus for religious education). The first school built under this act was a Catholic one in Southport, in the Liverpool archdiocese. Because of the sectarian opposition to 'Rome on the rates' Liverpool city council refused to pay any grants to Catholic schools and Downey called upon Catholics to make it an issue at the forthcoming local election. The Catholics lost this fight, but in 1938 the Board of Education stepped in and withheld $180,000 of Liverpool's grants. Eventually, by means of a private act, a solution was reached whereby the diocese rented schools from the LEA. 
Archbishop Downey was not on friendly terms with the Church of England diocesan bishop of Liverpool, Dr Albert David (1923-44). Their differences became public when David criticized Downey for refusing to join protestants even to sing hymns at the Cenotaph, and attacked the Roman Catholic clergy, and also the Catholic Evidence Guild for bringing relentless pressure to bear upon non-Catholic partners in mixed marriages. Downey rejected David's invitation to an ecumenical service: 'an Archbishop of the Catholic Church can hardly be expected to accept the spiritual leadership of an Anglican Bishop', he wrote ('The Times', 3 Dec 1930). At a later stage he was to lead the opposition among the Catholic bishops to Cardinal Hinsley's ecumenical prayers with Bishop George Bell at meetings of the 'Sword of the Spirit' in May 1941. None the less his popularity as an after dinner speaker and his power as an orator at public functions built many bridges at the secular level. 
Downey suffered from obesity and in 1932, although he was only 5 feet 4 inches, he weighed 18 stone. This did not restrict his activity but it alarmed his doctor. By rigid dieting he had reduced his weight by half by 1939. He was a capable administrator, increasing the number of deans from fourteen to twenty. Through them he kept in touch with every part of the diocese, whose population grew from 374,000 to 437,000. At the same time the number of clergy, both secular and regular, grew steadily from 445 in 1928 to 683 in 1953. Downey met the need for more clergy partly by recruiting newly ordained priests from Ireland. Some of these priests gained a reputation for fund-raising and the building of new churches and schools. Under the nickname of the Kerry gang they were believed to have considerable unofficial influence with the archbishop. Meanwhile, the number of churches had increased from 152 to 195. 
After a brief illness Downey died in Gateacre Grange, a convent nursing home in Woolton, Liverpool, on 16 June 1953. His requiem mass took place at the pro-cathedral of St Nicholas and he was buried on 23 June in a tomb designed by Lutyens in the unfinished crypt of the cathedral of which he had dreamed. 


@@@@@


doc= 32887


Doyle, Sir Arthur Ignatius Conan (1859-1930), writer, was born at 11 Picardy Place, Edinburgh, on 22 May 1859, the eldest son and third of the nine children of Charles Altamont Doyle (1832-1893), an artist and draughtsman in the Edinburgh office of works, and his wife Mary, 'nee' Foley (1838-1921), daughter of Catherine Foley, 'nee' Pack. Mary and her mother were immigrants from Ireland and were descended from landed Irish Catholic and protestant stock. They supplemented their meagre income by taking in lodgers, one of whom was Charles Doyle. In 1864 Charles's growing alcoholism led to a temporary breakup during which Arthur was domiciled at Liberton Bank with sisters of the historiographer-royal for Scotland, John Hill Burton, who influenced the young Doyle's development as historian and bibliophile. 
In 1867 the Doyle family reunited and inhabited the overcrowded tenement flats at 3 Sciennes Place, Edinburgh, the poorer half of a Newington cul-de-sac. Arthur headed a local street gang of boys, from whom he later evolved Sherlock Holmes's youthful allies, the Baker Street Irregulars. Funded by wealthy uncles, he attended Hodder preparatory school from 1868 to 1870 and then its senior school, Stonyhurst College, from 1870 to 1875. He was happy at Hodder, less happy at Stonyhurst, but developed talents as a story-teller and sportsman. Homesickness increased his love of Sir Walter Scott, possibly the greatest single literary influence on his work in general. The school grounds in the Ribble valley later reappeared in his fiction, notably the building, yew walk, observatory, and mists which transferred to the Dartmoor terrain of 'The Hound of the Baskervilles'. Loneliness was offset by a close friendship with a fellow Scot, James Ryan of Glasgow, presumably the initial basis for the Holmes-Watson companionship. He spent a final year of schooling at Feldkirch, Austria, in 1875-6, which added to his remarkable ability to view the past from non-British perspectives. Yet he lost his belief in Catholic doctrine while at Stonyhurst, although he later regained some of its attendant cults (guardian angels, the communion of saints) when fashioning his spiritualist faith. 
Conan Doyle, as he became known, entered Edinburgh University medical school in 1876 and witnessed a variety of medical characters, chief among them his mentor, Joseph Bell. Bell was a master of deduction from minutiae of evidence, such as gravel on a shoe conveying a patient's route to work, the better to impress the patient and his own attendant students. Otherwise, Bell was austere and scientific with students and patients, in contrast to Sir Patrick Heron Watson, of whom it was said that 'nobody in Scotland was ready to die until they had first seen Watson'. The contrast between Bell's and P. H. Watson's manners survives in Holmes's cold-bloodedness contrasted with John Watson's humanity. 
During his student days Conan Doyle sent his earliest surviving fictional work, 'The Haunted Grange of Goresthorpe' (unrelated to a similar title published in 1883), to 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', but it was not used. His first published story was a mock-authentic South African yarn, 'The Mystery of Sasassa Valley', which appeared in 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal' on 6 September 1879. Later that month, on 20 September, he published his first non-fictional article, 'Gelseminum as a poison' in the 'British Medical Journal'. Neither was noteworthy in itself, but each presaged fine work to come. His university studies were interrupted by work as a doctor's assistant in Birmingham where he passed an examination in pharmacology extramurally and by service as a ship's doctor on the Greenland whaler 'Hope' of Peterhead from February to September 1880. Conan Doyle graduated MB CM in 1881. From October 1881 to January 1882 he was surgeon on the steamer 'Mayumba' to west Africa, where he met and treated the dying African-American anti-slavery leader Henry Highland Garnet, who inspired his hostility to the Ku Klux Klan and sympathy for racial intermarriage as expressed, unfashionably at the time, in the Holmes stories of 1891 and 1893, 'The Five Orange Pips' and 'The Yellow Face'. To his other degrees, he added his MD, also from Edinburgh, in 1885 (on aspects of syphilis, using literary as well as medical evidence). 
After an ill-fated partnership in Plymouth general practice with George Turnavine Budd, Conan Doyle settled in Southsea, Portsmouth, and built a successful practice. One of his patients, Major-General Alfred Wilks Drayson, fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, exposed him to theosophy. While Conan Doyle became suspicious of the Blavatsky cult, it nevertheless gave him the plot of his first novel, 'The Mystery of Cloomber' (not published until 1888). He also built up a fine portfolio of short stories, particularly two derived from his seafaring. 'The Captain of the 'Pole-Star'' takes place on a whaler haunted by the ghost of the captain's dead love while his ship is temporarily cut off from further voyage by icebergs. 'J. Habakuk Jephson's Statement' offered a solution to the sea mystery of the 'Mary Celeste'. The latter was so successful that posterity has always employed its orthography, ''Marie Celeste''. Its explanation of an ex-slave's vengeance derived from Garnet's passionate account of his people's suffering under slavery. The homicidal Septimius Goring supplies Conan Doyle's most memorable narrator up to that time -- a black voice. It won a place in Thackeray's old magazine, 'The Cornhill', in January 1884. 
On 6 August 1885, Conan Doyle married Louisa (Louise) Hawkins (1856/7-1906), sister of one of his patients, John Hawkins, who died while in residence at Conan Doyle's Southsea surgery. Charles Doyle had by now succumbed to alcoholism and epilepsy. Confined in a number of Scottish mental institutions, he nevertheless was given some commissions for illustrations for his son's books. Mary Doyle continued to live in a cottage on the estate of their former lodger, Bryan Charles Waller, at Masongill, on the Yorkshire border. 
Conan Doyle's fiction made astonishing progress in the early 1880s. He learned the economics of the short story from the work of Guy de Maupassant and from the Edinburgh medical journals with their logical progress from case-statement to collection of symptoms, rival diagnoses, and finally to ultimate conclusion and explanation. His first translation of these techniques into fiction ended in what is now called 'A Study in Scarlet'. The story brought together Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson for the first time and a lifelong series was launched. Both 'A Study in Scarlet' and 'Micah Clarke', Conan Doyle's historical novel set during the Monmouth rebellion, struggled to find publishers. 'A Study in Scarlet' found a badly paid home with Ward Lock, who gave Conan Doyle $25 for all his rights on 20 November 1886. The story was published a year later in 'Beeton's Christmas Annual' and was singled out for enthusiastic review in 'The Scotsman' and the 'Glasgow Herald'. A sequel, 'The Sign of the Four', was commissioned and published by 'Lippincott's Magazine' in co-operation with Ward Lock (February 1890) but Conan Doyle's anger against Ward Lock for exploiting the innocence of a struggling author left book publication to Spencer Blackett. Meanwhile Ward and Downey had published 'The Mystery of Cloomber' in December 1888, after serialization in the 'Pall Mall Gazette'. 'The Cornhill' serialized and Smith Elder published his medieval romance, 'The White Company', a remarkable piece of research on fourteenth-century English mercenary warfare in France and Spain. 'Micah Clarke' was taken on by Longmans in 1889 after a recommendation from Andrew Lang. 'The Captain of the 'Pole-Star' and other Tales' appeared in 1890, as did his partly autobiographical long thriller 'The Firm of Girdlestone'. 
It was still medical ambition that took Conan Doyle and his family (now including his daughter Mary, born in 1889) from his successful Southsea practice to residence in London, first at Montague Place and then at South Norwood in 1891. His attempt at eye specialization foundered, partly because of his success in transferring Watson and Holmes to the short story in the newly founded 'Strand Magazine' edited by H. Greenhough Smith. Introduced into the July 1891 number towards the back, it rapidly won its way to the front and the magazine's circulation nearly doubled. Conan Doyle had now perfected the formula of a series of stories featuring the same characters but without continuous plot, so that the occasional number might be lost without injury to the suspense. The new arrangement, positing a Watson married since the love interest of 'The Sign of the Four', increased audience identification. They were radical stories in the ways in which they singled out social wrongs, a king's betrayal of an opera singer, a stepfather's deception of his ward as a fictitious lover, an aristocratic crook's exploitation of a failing pawnbroker, a beggar's extensive estate in Kent. The early stories in particular are sharply critical of official incompetence and aristocratic privilege, and at least two in the first dozen short stories ('A Scandal in Bohemia' and 'The Beryl Coronet') are thinly disguised versions of the amorous and financial chicanery of Albert Edward, prince of Wales. Against that, the stories praised a new professionalism: the struggles of the well-qualified aspirant in an unjust world reflected the anxieties of both author and readers. 
But now Conan Doyle faced the danger of too much success. The 'Strand Magazine' demanded another six stories after the first series and then a further twelve. Conan Doyle twice raised his rates, without demur. Holmes became so famous that the author feared that he would be known only as the detective's creator. He therefore confronted Holmes with the evil genius of Professor Moriarty, a confrontation which resulted in their apparent mutual destruction in 'The Final Problem' ('Strand Magazine', Dec 1893). The author left himself a slight loophole, but the death story itself was a miniature epic of such dramatic force that it consolidated Holmes's hold over the public. 
It was essentially to realize his capabilities in historical fiction, particularly with a view to mastering the era of Napoleon, that Conan Doyle ditched Holmes. His first attempt here had been founded on medical experience: 'A Straggler of '15', the last days of a Waterloo veteran, was published in 'Black and White' (21 March 1891). It became a roaring success on the stage as 'Waterloo', starring Henry Irving (1895). A novel, 'The Great Shadow' (1892) gave a Scottish boy's impression of the crisis leading to Waterloo, with a cameo appearance of Walter Scott as literary homage. Conan Doyle published collected medical stories in 1894 as 'Round the Red Lamp', which ranged from elegant defence of elderly unscientific medical wisdom in 'Behind the Times' and of woman doctors ('The Doctors of Hoyland') to horrific manoeuvre, where a surgeon unwittingly mutilates his adulterous mistress ('The Case of Lady Sannox'). The Brigadier Gerard stories, which looked at Napoleon's Europe through the eyes of a besotted, somewhat absurd, but profoundly heroic and unquestionably lovable French devotee, replaced Holmes in the 'Strand Magazine'. All save one were composed between 1894 and 1903. The Gerard stories are distinguished achievements in intellectual no less than military and social history. They were later collected in 'The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard' (1896) and 'Adventures of Gerard' (1903), with the late story 'The Marriage of the Brigadier' included in 'The Last Galley' (1911). Even without Holmes, Conan Doyle successfully invaded historical fiction using deductive methods and mistakes for Gerard and others. 
For all of Holmes's identification with London, Conan Doyle's time there was short. His son Alleyne Kingsley Conan Doyle was born in 1892, but Louise, his wife, contracted tuberculosis and, after visits to Switzerland, the family moved from 12 Tennison Road, South Norwood, to the therapeutic neighbourhood of Hindhead, Haslemere, Surrey. He accepted a lecturing tour in the United States for much of 1894 in company with his younger brother Innes. He took his wife on a recuperative journey down the Nile, which stimulated 'The Tragedy of Korosko' (1898), about the adventures of a band of travellers during a Muslim rising. In 1898-9 he produced 'Round the Fire Stories' for the 'Strand Magazine', a mystery series worthy of recognition alongside the best of the Holmes cycle. They were not given book publication until 1908 on an absurd plea of inadequacy: it is more likely that they were withheld because of content. Charles Doyle died in 1893, and passages echo details of his certification ('The Beetle Hunter'), alcoholism ('The Japanned Box'), and incarceration ('The Sealed Room'). Furthermore, 'The man with the Watches' deals with homosexuality and cross-dressing and culminates in a man's saving the gambler who has debauched and accidentally killed his brother. 
Conan Doyle enthusiastically supported the British effort in the South African War and served as a doctor in the volunteer-staffed Langman Hospital in 1900, after which he defended British policy if not always British practice in 'The Great Boer War' (1900) and in 'The War in South Africa: its Cause and Conduct' (1902). The latter, translated into many foreign languages and braille, became the major international advocate of the British case in the controversial war, and bowing to his mother's insistence a somewhat reluctant Conan Doyle accepted a knighthood for it in 1902. Hitherto his finest work on warfare in modern fiction had been 'The Green flag' and 'The Lord of Chateau Noir', short stories portraying Irish mutiny in British imperial ranks in the 1880s and French guerrilla resistance after German conquest in 1870. 'The Hound of the Baskervilles', supposedly an overlooked adventure of Holmes from before his death, was published in 1902. In response to an offer of $45,000 from 'McClure's Magazine' in the United States, Conan Doyle revealed that his famous creation had not died when Moriarty was killed at the Reichenbach Falls. 'The Return of Sherlock Holmes', a collection of thirteen new stories, appeared in 1905 after 'Strand' serialization (1903-04). 
Conan Doyle celebrated martial virtues, notably in 'Sir Nigel' (1906), a violently anti-clerical account of the youth of his medieval hero in the thick of the Hundred Years' War. But he was no bellicose warmonger in the years before the First World War, being converted to the belief in a German threat only two years before its outbreak: he had cherished the memories of his schooldays among German speakers and drew on Goethe and Heine. Yet his stories published in the last years of peace reflect a disintegrating world. He confronted this in his crusade against the Belgians' continuation of Leopold's slave state in Congo, in his support for the legalization of divorce, and in his part in the exposure of grave miscarriages of British justice, namely those of George Edalji, convicted of a series of horse and cattle mutilations, and Oscar Slater, imprisoned for the murder of an elderly Edinburgh spinster, Marion Gilchrist. Conan Doyle also championed Irish home rule after two Unionist candidacies in Scotland in 1900 and 1906. His sense of the glory and nonsense of scientific advance found happy resolution in 'The Lost World' (1912), where academic vendetta at its most ludicrous continually punctuates a thrilling quest to establish the survival of dinosaurs. 
Louise Conan Doyle succumbed to tuberculosis on 4 July 1906. On 18 September 1907 Conan Doyle married Jean Blyth Leckie (1872/3-1940), daughter of James Blyth Leckie of Glebe House, Blackheath, whom he had known for over ten years. Each year he marked their anniversary by presenting Jean with a single snowdrop. They had three children: Denis ('b'. 1909), Adrian ('b'. 1910), and Jean Lena Annette (1912-1997), later Air Commandant Dame Jean Conan Doyle, head of the Women's Royal Air Force. 
Conan Doyle's most valuable piece of reminiscence is 'Through the Magic Door' (1907), his appreciation of some of the major literary influences, including Scott, Macaulay, Carlyle, Boswell, Stevenson, Melville, and Froissart. In it he evangelizes for great literature; he believed his works stood in a great tradition but also that they were accessible rather than elitist. He read, as he wrote, for everybody. The last long Holmes story, 'The Valley of Fear', was serialized in 1914-15. Conan Doyle also served as military correspondent and pro-ally historian in the First World War, with several volumes culminating in the 'British Campaign in France and Flanders' (1920), the original six volumes recording each year of war as soon as possible thereafter, with two volumes for 1918. 
Death had been an unobtrusive but lifelong companion for Conan Doyle. His memoirs, 'Memories and Adventures' (1924-30), describe his grandmother's corpse as his first memory. His Jesuit schooling reinforced his hope for a life after death, which his loss of faith undermined; his medical training exposed him to scientific scepticism, but left him critical of what seemed to be professional callousness. His first marriage evidently originated in his sorrow -- and possibly his guilt -- at the death of John Hawkins, and much of it was overladen by the battle to save his wife from tuberculosis. His fiction became death-obsessed, beyond the detective story norm. Death in his writing is not the occasion of a puzzle but the inevitability of an adventure. His son Kingsley died in 1918 from influenza aggravated by war wounds in the British army, where he had won the rank of captain. His brother Innes Doyle, a general, died of pneumonia in the wake of the war. Like other war propagandists, he had to measure the magnitude of the slaughter against the reality of its justification. Spiritualism -- denial of death -- gave him some degree of peace. The 1920s were dominated for him by a world crusade to evangelize for spiritualism, resulting in most of his last books, including 'The Wanderings of a Spiritualist' (1921), 'The History of Spiritualism' (1926), and 'Pheneas Speaks: Direct Spirit Communications in the Family Circle' (1927). 'The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes' (1927) made no attempt to interfere with Holmes's scepticism, but sexual themes were handled much more vigorously than hitherto, and Holmes denounced human cravings for artificial prolongation of life as well as rejecting suicide. 
Conan Doyle's 'The Coming of the Fairies' (1922) showed an endearing credulity for fairy phenomena which now appear to have been faked by two little girls at Cottingley, Yorkshire, Elsie Wright and Frances Griffiths. His gallantry and enthusiasm may have prevented their confession at the time. Belatedly but firmly the verdict that his novels have 'no claim to literary distinction' ('DNB') has been overturned. While he was no remarkable poet, his three volumes of verse, collected as 'Poems' (1927), include judicious economic instruction ('Advice to a Young Author') as well as self-analysis ('The Inner Room'), as he lists the many contrasting personalities within himself. 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle died at his home, Windlesham, Crowborough, Sussex, on 7 July 1930, and was buried on 11 July 1930 in the rose garden of Windlesham. He was reinterred with his wife in Minstead churchyard in the New Forest, Hampshire. 
Edmund Wilson, in 'Mr Holmes, they were the Footprints of a Gigantic Hound' ('Classics and Commercials', 1950), observed that 'Sherlock Holmes 'is' literature on a humble but not ignoble level... by virtue of imagination and style'. While Conan Doyle most wanted to be remembered as a champion of spiritualism and as a historical novelist, it is Sherlock Holmes who has continued to capture the imagination of the public. The stories have inspired numerous imitators and have lent themselves to stage and screen adaptation. The first Holmes film was made in 1908, and a number of actors have become forever associated with 'the Great Detective'. The American William Gillette played Holmes on the stage from 1899 to 1932. Basil Rathbone starred as Holmes alongside Nigel Bruce as Dr Watson in fourteen films between 1939 and 1946, while Jeremy Brett recreated the role in the Granada television series between 1984 and 1993. The Holmes character has equally inspired parodies, musicals, and even a Disney film. Countless Holmes societies exist all over the world, from the Societe Sherlock Holmes de France to the Baker Street Irregulars, an exclusive, invitation-only club founded in London in 1934. In the United States regional groups pay homage to the detective, from the Diogenes Club of Dallas to the Noble and Most Singular Order of the Blue Carbuncle in Portland, Oregon. 
Recent biographies and critical studies have gone some way to presenting a more rounded view of Conan Doyle, his work, and his beliefs. The Arthur Conan Doyle Society was founded in 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 32888


Doyle, John Andrew (1844-1907), historian, was born on 14 May 1844, the only child of Andrew Doyle (died 1888), one-time editor of the 'Morning Chronicle' and later a poor-law inspector, and Louisa (died 1896), daughter and coheir of Sir John Easthope (1784-1865). He was educated at Eton College (1853-62) and then, after a year of private tuition, at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1867 with first-class honours in 'literae humaniores'. Doyle remained in Oxford to study history, and in 1869 won the Arnold prize for an essay entitled 'The English colonies in America before the Declaration of Independence'. Later in the same year he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, which he held for the rest of his life. 
Of sufficient private means not to have to earn a living, Doyle pursued two largely separate careers. In Oxford he was active and conscientious as a fellow of his college, serving as librarian (1881-8) and helping to frame the revised All Souls statutes arising from the commission of 1887. His scholarly interest was in the British North American (mainland) colonies of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, on which he wrote a series of volumes over the course of twenty-five years. This work presumably originated in his prize essay of 1869, which may in turn have reflected an interest arising from the American Civil War. His first publication was a textbook on the history of the USA (1875). Although Doyle's writings are seldom consulted today and have only a limited historiographical interest, they constitute the fullest and fairest treatment of colonial America by any British historian; they were only superseded by the works of American scholars in the early and mid-twentieth century. Apart from state papers in the Public Record Office (which were not then fully calendared), Doyle worked from printed sources and secondary works. Although he made at least one visit to the United States, it is not clear how well he knew the country, even those parts which had been settled by 1763. None the less, for someone writing in the reigns of Victoria and Edward VII, his grasp and relatively detached judgement are commendable. 
When he was not in Oxford, Doyle lived with his parents, first in north Wales and then from 1880 in Brecknockshire, where after their deaths he remained in the house which they had had built for the rest of his own life. He took an active part in local affairs, and served as a justice of the peace, county councillor, deputy lieutenant, and sheriff. He was interested in the provision of higher education for the poor as well as the rich, but even more in field sports, notably the breeding of racehorses and fox-terriers. Mountain rock-climbing too was among his pastimes. 
One interest drew together the Oxford and the Welsh halves of Doyle's life: rifle-shooting and the volunteer movement. Whether or not he was stimulated in this by his knowledge of American superiority over the British as marksmen in the eighteenth century, the efforts of such as Doyle surely contributed to the quality of British rifle-shooting in the South African War of 1899-1902 and again in 1914. His health never seems to have been robust, and he died on 4 August 1907, after a long but unspecified illness, at his home, Pendarren, Crickhowell, Brecknockshire. His near contemporary and the author of his article in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', the warden of All Souls, Sir William Anson, would seem to have been his closest friend. A photograph reproduced in Doyle's posthumous 'Essays on Various Subjects' (1911) shows a good-looking man in early middle age, with a terrier perched on his knee. 


@@@@@


doc= 32889


Drayton, Harold Charles Gilbert (1901-1966), financier, was born on 19 November 1901 at Streatham, the elder of two sons of Bob Drayton and his wife, Annie Keep. His father, who came from Lincolnshire, was employed by the London county council as a gardener. His mother died when the boys were still very young and they were subsequently brought up mainly in the house of a family called Low, who had recently arrived in Croydon from Dinnet in Aberdeenshire. Alexander Low, a sanitary inspector, had several children and in 1926 Drayton married one of the daughters, Christine Collie. 
Soon after leaving school at the age of thirteen Harley Drayton, as he was always known, got a job as office boy in the St Davids group of companies in Dashwood House, Old Broad Street, London. He was hired by J. S. Austen, an able solicitor whom Lord St Davids had enlisted to help run his investment trust companies. Austen spotted the boy's talent, encouraged and befriended him, and indeed subsequently bequeathed to him his estate in Suffolk. Drayton had at that time read little except the 'Bible' (he later always maintained that 'Ecclesiasticus' contained all the principles of finance that any businessman needed) and he now turned his attention to reading what was lying around the office -- financial newspapers, journals, and company reports. It became apparent that he had an uncanny knack of assimilating and remembering figures, and the encyclopaedic knowledge that he acquired made him indispensable. By 1928 he was manager of the securities agency and it was not long before the economic blizzard swept across the world and his powers were tested. He revealed the courage and tenacity of purpose for which he became known. Lord St Davids died in 1938 and Drayton became 'de facto' head of the group, but the outbreak of war prevented him for some time from exercising his new responsibilities to the full. 
The first assignment on which Drayton's reputation began to be built was the management and liquidation of the Lloyd George Political Fund. This entailed close co-operation with certain companies in which there were large shareholdings. His success led to the adoption of a new policy in the St Davids investment trusts of buying into companies in difficulty or in their infancy and helping them with money and advice. Some 20 per cent of the trusts' money was committed in this type of investment, largely unquoted on the stock exchange, and the policy was the subject of criticism by those who thought that investment trusts should not interfere in company management. In fact the technique was so successful that in 1945 a larger-scale operation was launched in the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation. The financial results were most gratifying; Drayton picked his companies well and, without interfering with their managements, was a source of inspiration to them. 
During the war Drayton was appointed to the three-man commission sent to Argentina to prepare the ground for the sale of the then British-owned Argentine Railways. The sale was consummated a year or two after the war ended and shareholders got their money and had reason to be satisfied. 
In the 1945 general election Drayton stood as Liberal candidate for Bury St Edmunds, where at least he saved his deposit. He took no further active part in politics, but was always ready to give his views in favour of freedom of action and thought. For the next twenty-one years he settled down to heading the group which in 1971, five years after his death, was renamed the Drayton group. He was chairman of the larger trusts in the group. He was elected to the board of British Electric Traction in 1933 and in 1947 he took over the chairmanship, being responsible for two big decisions during his term of office. He successfully resisted the nationalization of the provincial bus companies under the Attlee government and a good many opponents of nationalization were encouraged by his show of independence. Then he took the decision to back independent television; and it needed great courage to see this through. After two years the losses amounted to $6 million, at which point some of the largest participants wanted to withdraw, but typically Drayton bought them out; his faith was justified and the reward was rich. 
Drayton had many other business interests. He was chairman of Mitchell Cotts, which led to journeys all over Africa. He was chairman of United Newspapers and was largely responsible for building up the group because of his ability to make acquisitions. He was a director of the Midland Bank and of Eagle Star Insurance. He served his term as chairman of the Association of Investment Trusts and was treasurer of the Institute of Directors on its resuscitation in 1946. 
In all these offices Drayton showed his constructive independence and a personal touch. He had originality, conviction, and courage. Smoking his pipe, he would make quick decisions on which he never went back. He was forthright, obstinate, and reliable, like the countryman he always remained. He never received any official recognition of his achievements -- perhaps on account of his unwillingness to compromise and conform. Had he been a better public speaker he might have been more widely known. 
Drayton's chief interests outside the City were country pursuits which centred around Plumton Hall, Whepstead, near Bury St Edmunds, in Suffolk, which J. S. Austen had left to him. He became an enthusiastic farmer, pampered his pigs, loved his garden, and enjoyed entertaining his friends at shooting parties. He was high sheriff of Suffolk in 1957. He collected pictures and books, at first specializing in eighteenth-century pamphlets, then Kiplingiana, and later in fine illustrated books, which also reflected his interest in ornithology. He learned to like the best, and this applied not least to claret, which he dispensed generously. 
There were no children of the marriage to Christine Collie Low, which was a very happy one, but he was exceedingly popular with the children of his friends. Indeed, Drayton gave confidence to all with whom he came into contact, and was an active ally and friend. He died on 7 April 1966 at his London house, 20 Kensington Palace Gardens; Princess Alexandra was present at his funeral at St Petronella, Whepstead, near Bury St Edmunds, on 14 April, and an enormous concourse attended his memorial service in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Antony Hornby', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 32890


Dredge, James (1840-1906), civil engineer and journalist, was born in Bath on 29 July 1840, the younger son of James Dredge and his wife, Anne Vine. The elder James Dredge was an engineer who designed and patented a form of suspension bridge with inclined suspension rods carrying the roadway. The younger James's elder brother, William, under whom he served articles, was also an engineer. After education at Bath grammar school Dredge spent three years (1858-61) in the office of D. K. Clark; in 1862 he entered the office of John Fowler, and was engaged for several years in London on work connected with the Metropolitan District Railway. However, Dredge soon gave up practical engineering for engineering journalism. From the start in January 1866 of the weekly periodical 'Engineering', which was founded by Zerah Colburn on his retirement from the editorship of 'The Engineer' in 1865, Dredge helped in illustrating and occasionally wrote for the paper. On Colburn's death in 1870 Dredge and W. H. Maw, the sub-editor, became joint editors and proprietors. Dredge helped actively in the management until May 1903, when he was disabled by paralysis. He published several books on technical subjects, which mainly derived from his writings in 'Engineering'. 
Dredge was keenly interested in international exhibitions. He described for his journal those at Vienna (1873), Philadelphia (1876), and Paris (1878 and 1889), publishing his reports of the first and last in book form. He was also officially connected as a British commissioner with exhibitions at Chicago (1893), Antwerp (1894), Brussels (1897), and Milan (1906). For services at Paris in 1889 he was appointed an officer of the Legion d'honneur and for his work at Brussels he was made CMG in 1898. 
As a close friend of the American engineer Alexander Lyman Holley he delivered an address in Chickering Hall, New York, on 2 October 1890, at the installation of a bronze bust of Holley in Washington Square, New York. He was also elected in 1886 an honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 4 February 1896, and of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1874, and was a member of the council of the Society of Arts (1890-93). In 1901 he founded, as a monthly supplement to 'Engineering', a journal called 'Traction and Transmission', which he edited with much care until it ceased in 1904. Dredge died at Pinner Wood Cottage, Pinner, Middlesex, on 15 August 1906. He was long a widower; an only child, Marie Louise, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32891


Dreschfeld, Julius (1845-1907), pathologist and physician, was born on 13 October 1845 at Niederwaren, near Bamberg, Bavaria, the youngest son in a family of five sons and five daughters of Samuel Dreschfeld, a well-to-do merchant, and his wife, Giedel. His parents were well-respected Orthodox Jews; his father lived until the age of ninety-two, and his mother to ninety-seven. In 1861, after completing his early education at the Bamberg Gymnasium, he came to Britain to live with his brother Leopold Dreschfeld (1824-1897), a dentist in Manchester. Julius entered Owens College (the forerunner of Manchester University), and gained prizes in English, mathematics, and science, including the Dalton chemical prize (1863) and the Dalton junior mathematical scholarship (1864). He attended the Manchester Royal School of Medicine in Pine Street, but in 1864 he returned to Bavaria to continue his medical study at the University of Wurzburg. In 1866 his studies were interrupted by the 'seven week' Austro-Prussian War, during which he acted as assistant surgeon in the Bavarian army. On his return to Wurzburg he graduated MD in 1867 with a thesis 'Reflex action of the vagus nerve on blood pressure'. He acted as assistant to Albert von Bezold (1838-1868), professor of physiology, and made a special study of pathology, the area of medicine in which he was to specialize. In 1869 he returned to Britain, and after becoming licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, he set up in practice in Manchester. In 1872 he was appointed honorary physician to the Hulme Dispensary, Manchester, and the following year honorary assistant physician at the Manchester Royal Infirmary; in 1883, on the resignation of Sir William Roberts, he was made a full honorary physician, and in due course senior honorary physician in 1899, and the first honorary consulting physician in 1905. 
Dreschfeld's most important contributions were to the study of pathology, especially related to diseases of the nervous system. In 1875 he was asked to supervise and catalogue the pathological collection in the Owens College medical museum, and the following year he was promoted to lecturer in pathology. Under his influence the pathology department rapidly expanded and played an increasingly important role in the medical school. In 1881 he was appointed as professor of general pathology, morbid anatomy, and morbid histology, the first chairs in these subjects in England. Dreschfeld's knowledge of the French and German medical literature was encyclopaedic, and he travelled widely throughout Europe visiting medical laboratories to learn new techniques. His pathology laboratory at Owens College, one of the first of its kind in Britain, was modelled on those in the continental medical schools. He stressed the importance of pathology in medical training, and argued that a good knowledge of pathology was essential to the practice of clinical medicine. He was said to be an extremely good teacher both at the bedside and in the lecture theatre; the number of his students rose from 3 in 1873 to 110 in 1891. He urged his students to look beyond the superficial manifestations of disease, and to try to explain their patients' symptoms in terms of the underlying pathology. It was mainly due to Dreschfeld's influence that pathology became established as an essential part of the medical curriculum in Britain. His most enduring research contribution to pathology was his paper 'A new staining fluid' in the 'Journal of Anatomy and Physiology' (1876), which described the use of eosin dye to stain tissue slides to reveal microscopic detail -- this became a standard technique, still in present use. His work on rabies during the 1882-3 epidemic in Manchester is also well known -- he attempted to develop an attenuated anti-rabies vaccine by injecting infected spinal tissue into rabbits. His technique was similar to that used by Louis Pasteur for anthrax in 1881 (Pasteur's own anti-rabies vaccine was not available until 1888). Dreschfeld's work on rabies may have succeeded, but it was never completed because of the 'Cruelty to Animals Act' (1876). He explained in the 'British Medical Journal' (14 August 1886) that the experiments had to be carried out immediately after the death of a rabies victim, and there was never sufficient time to apply for the necessary animal licence. He thought the act was too restrictive, and was holding back medical research in Britain. 
In 1891 Dreschfeld gave up his chair in pathology to take over the chair of medicine from John Edward Morgan -- a unique achievement, and a tribute to his breadth of medical knowledge. Dreschfeld was one of the best-known physicians in England, his opinion was greatly respected, and he was widely consulted, especially for neurological problems. Apart from his work at the Royal Infirmary he held honorary posts at the Manchester Skin Hospital, the Manchester Jewish Hospital, and the Christie Cancer Hospital. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1875 and a fellow in 1883; he delivered the Bradshawe lecture on 'diabetic coma' in 1887. He was married twice: first in 1888 to Selina (died 1904), daughter of Felix Gaspari of Berlin, with whom he had two sons and two daughters; and again in 1905, to Ethel, daughter of Dr James Harvey Lilley of Leamington Spa, who survived him. 
Dreschfeld took a prominent part in many local medical, scientific, and philanthropic societies. He helped to form the Pathological Society of Manchester (1885), and was a founder member of the Pathological Society of Great Britain (1906); he was president of the Manchester Medical Society in 1888, and president of the Manchester Therapeutics Society in 1899. He took an active part in the British Medical Association, acting as president of the pathological section in 1886, and president of the section of medicine in 1902. He was a strong supporter of the Manchester Society for Aiding Distressed Foreigners, and was medical adviser to the Manchester Royal School of Music. 
A slowly progressive disease of the spinal cord from which he suffered since 1897 (said by some of his colleagues to be a form of multiple sclerosis) impaired his walking, but scarcely affected his varied industry. While preparing his forthcoming Lumleian lecture to the Royal College of Physicians, he died suddenly at his home, Stanley House, Wilmslow Road, Withington, Manchester, from heart failure on 13 June 1907. He had previously converted to Christianity, and following a Church of England service, attended by a large congregation of friends and colleagues from Manchester, he was buried in a family vault in Holy Trinity churchyard, Hoghton Street, Southport, on 18 June. He was remembered by a memorial scholarship, founded by his wife and colleagues, for new medical students. 
Dreschfeld wrote over 120 papers in English, French, and German; a full bibliography can be found in the 'Dreschfeld Memorial Volume' compiled by Professor E. M. Brockbank in 1908. Dreschfeld's published works covered all aspects of general medicine; he made important observations on the metabolic effects of diabetes, and the classification of Hodgkin's disease; he wrote the sections on peptic ulceration, endocarditis, and typhoid for Clifford Allbutt's textbook 'System of Medicine' (1896-8). He was an authority on diseases of the nervous system and his most important contributions were in this area; he described the pathology of motor neurone disease, alcoholic paralysis, neurosyphilis, and numerous other rare neurological disorders. His work in clinical medicine and neurology is well known; he can be regarded as one of the founders of neuropathology, and many of his observations can still be traced in modern-day medical practice. However, it is arguable that his contribution to British medical education was even more important than his clinical and laboratory work; his introduction of pathology into the medical curriculum signalled a new approach to the understanding of disease, and raised the standard of medical teaching. In this respect Dreschfeld should be remembered not only as a great teacher, but also as one of the founders of modern scientific medicine. 


@@@@@


doc= 32892


Drew, Sir Thomas (1838-1910), architect, born at Victoria Place, Belfast, on 18 September 1838, came from a well-known Limerick family. His father, Thomas Drew (died 1870), a staunch Orangeman, was long rector of Christ Church, Belfast, before becoming rector of Seaforde, co. Down, and precentor of Down Cathedral. A sister, Catharine Drew (1825/6-1910), was a well-known journalist in London. Thomas was educated in Belfast, and in 1854 was articled to Charles Lanyon. After serving his apprenticeship he formed a brief partnership in Belfast with another pupil of Lanyon, Thomas Turner (1820-1891), before moving to Dublin, where he was to settle for the rest of his life. In 1862 he entered the office, in Dublin, of William George Murray (died 1871). Next year he began to write for the 'Dublin Builder', and subsequently acted for a time as editor, introducing articles on antiquarian subjects. In 1864 he was awarded a special silver medal by the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland for his set of measured drawings of the Portlester Chapel in St Audoen's Church, Dublin. In 1870 he was elected associate of the Royal Hibernian Academy and the following year he became a full member. He married in 1871 Adelaide Anne, daughter of William Murray, formerly architect of the board of works, Ireland, and a collateral descendant of the architect Francis Johnston, founder of the Royal Hibernian Academy. 
In 1875 Drew began independent practice in North Frederick Street, Dublin; he subsequently moved to Upper Sackville Street (now O'Connell Street), and then to 6 St Stephen's Green, a house designed by himself, and finally to 22 Clare Street. Noted by a contemporary for 'a robust and virile Gothic' ('DNB'), Drew built up a reputation for ecclesiastical work which was the basis of his independent practice, almost all of it for the Church of Ireland denomination. As diocesan architect for Down, Connor, and Dromore, he designed a significant number of churches in the eastern part of Ulster in the 1860s and 1870s. His most important ecclesiastical work was St Anne's Cathedral in Belfast, in a Romanesque style, which was started to his designs in 1899 but completed by others following his death. He was also responsible for the restoration of Waterford Church of Ireland Cathedral and consulting architect to a number of other Church of Ireland cathedrals. 
Among the other chief buildings designed by Drew were several in Dublin, including Rathmines town hall (1890-94), the Ulster Bank in College Green (1888-91), and the graduates' tercentenary memorial building at Trinity College (1899-1902). He was also the only Irish architect to be invited to submit a design for the Queen Victoria memorial in London in 1901. 
In 1889 Drew was elected fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. In 1892 he was elected president of the Royal Institute of Architects of Ireland and in 1902 he became the first president of the Ulster Society of Architects. Known to his contemporaries as a fluent and witty speaker, he delivered from 1891 an annual lecture on St Stephen's day, in Christ Church Cathedral, on its history and fabric. He was also instrumental in establishing in the crypt a museum of Irish antiquities. In 1895-7 he was president of the Royal Society of the Antiquaries of Ireland. 
Drew was elected tenth president of the Royal Hibernian Academy on 18 October 1900, on the death of Sir Thomas Farrell, the sculptor, and was knighted the same year by the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Earl Cadogan. In 1905 Dublin University conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD, and in 1910 he was asked by the National University of Ireland to fill the newly established chair of architecture at University College, Dublin. Drew died in hospital in Lower Mount Street, Dublin, on 13 March 1910 and was buried in Dean's Grange cemetery, co. Dublin. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 32893


Dreyer, Sir Frederic Charles (1878-1956), naval officer, was born on 8 January 1878 at Parsonstown, King's county, Ireland, the second son of the Danish-born John Louis Emil Dreyer (1852-1926), then astronomer to the fourth earl of Rosse, and his wife, Katherine Hannah (died 1923), daughter of John Tuthill, of Kilmore, co. Limerick. From the Royal School, Armagh, Dreyer entered the training ship 'Britannia' in 1891 and in his final naval examinations was placed fifth in his term. He continued to obtain class 1 certificates in nearly all his courses for sub-lieutenant and lieutenant (promoted July 1898) and for gunnery lieutenant; in 1900 he was the author of 'How to Get a First Class in Seamanship'. In 1901, on the demanding advanced course for gunnery and torpedo lieutenants at Greenwich, he came first, with honours, in his class of three; he then joined the staff of the gunnery school, Sheerness. On 26 June 1901 Dreyer married Una Maria (1876-1959), daughter of John Thomas Hallett, vicar of Bishop's Tachbrook, Warwickshire; they had three sons and two daughters. 
In 1903 Dreyer became the gunnery officer of 'Exmouth' and, after the battleship was recommissioned in 1904 as the flagship of the Home (later Channel) Fleet, gunnery adviser to Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson. For three years to 1907 the 'Exmouth' was first in the Channel Fleet in both gunlayers' test and battle practice. In 1905 Dreyer served on the calibration committee chaired by Rear-Admiral Percy Scott and, in January 1907, joined 'Dreadnought' for her first cruise as experimental gunnery officer. On his return he went to the Admiralty as an assistant to the director of naval ordnance (DNO), Captain John Jellicoe, but was quickly selected by Sir John Fisher (on Wilson's recommendation) to advise the nucleus crews of the Home Fleet in their gunnery training. At the close of 1907 he was promoted commander and then assisted Wilson during the trials of Arthur Pollen's rangefinder mounting and plotter in 'Ariadne'. Afterwards Dreyer returned to the DNO's department (now under Captain Reginald Bacon) until he was appointed commander of 'Vanguard' in late 1909. A year later he was invited by Jellicoe to be his flag commander, first in 'Prince of Wales' and, from December 1911, in 'Hercules', appointments which established their 'long and close connection which has been so valuable to me' (Jellicoe). Jellicoe also arranged for Dreyer to take command of the new cruiser 'Amphion' in 1913, and promotion to captain followed in June. 'Amphion' was first in the whole navy in that year's gunlayers' test and first in its category at battle practice. In October 1913 Dreyer became flag captain to Rear-Admiral Sir Robert Arbuthnot in 'Orion', and in 1914 he received the civil CB for services to gunnery. 
From 1899 onwards Dreyer had submitted a number of gunnery inventions. These were not successful until he and his elder brother, Captain John Tuthill Dreyer RA (1876-1959), who was himself a prolific inventor, put forward a device for obtaining range-rates from a plot of ranges against time. This led directly to the improvised rate plot used by Wilson shortly after the trials on 'Ariadne' had finished, and from 1908 there was open rivalry between Frederic Dreyer and Pollen. However, the Royal Navy continued to experiment with manual course-plotting and it was not until Dreyer became commander of 'Vanguard' that he first assembled a fire control system based on standard service instruments and a range-rate plotter patented by both Dreyer brothers in 1908. In September 1910 Frederic applied for a patent on a fire control table comprising a Dumaresq (an instrument, named after its inventor, modelling the relationship between speeds, courses, target bearing, range-rate, and deflection), range clock, and rate plotters for both range and bearing. Its novelty lay mainly in the integration of the components so that the results from the plots could be used to refine the settings of the Dumaresq. The 'original Dreyer table' was designed and built by the firm of Elliott Brothers under the direction of Keith Elphinstone and installed in 'Prince of Wales' in September 1911. After successful trials an order was placed for five improved mark III tables, which incorporated manually set range and bearing clocks and a drive controlled from a gyrocompass receiver; subject to the limitations of manual working, the last feature (which was not included in Pollen's contemporary Argo clocks marks III and IV) enabled the table to continue predicting ranges and bearings during changes of course, even if the target was obscured. The Dreyer table mark IV (the first was installed in 'Iron Duke' in 1914) was fully automatic, though its design was mainly the work of Elphinstone. In 1916 Dreyer was awarded $5000 for his inventions (which also included a range of tactical instruments). Although the Argo clock was superior mechanically, the automatic two-axis follower of the later Dreyer tables was equally innovative: these tables proved adaptable (in ways inconceivable for the separate and unconnected Argo clock and plotter) to new gunnery methods. The post-war Admiralty fire control tables used Argo- or Ford-type variable speed drives, but their integrated design with separate plotting of ranges and bearings derived from the earlier Dreyer tables. 
In 1915 Dreyer became Jellicoe's flag captain in 'Iron Duke'. After Jutland he and his ship's gunnery were praised in the commander-in-chief's dispatches and he was appointed a military CB. He then accompanied Jellicoe to the Admiralty, initially as assistant director, anti-submarine division, but from March 1917 as DNO. Proving himself 'outstandingly able and of great energy and pertinacity' (Chatfield, 157), with the aid of a small committee, which included his elder brother (now colonel and eventually major-general and director of artillery), he drove through the development and supply of new and effective armour-piercing shell for the Grand Fleet, despite conflicts with the controller of armament production, Sir Vincent Raven. In 1918 he joined the naval staff as director of naval artillery and torpedoes. In 1919 he was appointed commodore and chief of staff for Jellicoe's empire mission and was made CBE. On his return Dreyer in 1920 resumed his staff duties as director of the gunnery division until he took command of the battle cruiser 'Repulse' in 1922. He was promoted rear-admiral at the end of 1923; in the following year he became assistant chief of the naval staff and was responsible for founding the Tactical School at Portsmouth. In 1927 he hoisted his flag in 'Hood' in command of the battle-cruiser squadron (which included two aircraft-carriers). He was promoted vice-admiral in 1929 and became deputy chief of the naval staff in 1930. Thus Dreyer was a member of the board at the time of the Invergordon mutiny and had to accept that he would not, as he had hoped, be appointed commander-in-chief, Atlantic Fleet; instead, after promotion to admiral in 1932, he served as commander-in-chief, China station, from 1933 to 1936. He was promoted KCB in 1932 and GBE in 1936, and was placed on the retired list in 1939. 
On the outbreak of war Dreyer immediately volunteered as a commodore, Royal Naval Reserve, of convoys. In 1940 he joined the staff of the general officer commanding-in-chief, home forces, on anti-invasion measures, and was then chairman of the Admiralty committee assessing U-boat losses. From 1941 he was a highly effective inspector of merchant navy gunnery until a temporary appointment as chief of naval air services in 1942. He briefly held the position of deputy chief of naval air equipment early in 1943 before finally returning to the retired list. 
Dreyer died on 11 December 1956 at his home, Freelands, St Cross, Winchester, a year after publishing his memoirs, 'The Sea Heritage: a Study in Maritime Warfare'. His body was cremated and his ashes scattered at sea. All three sons and both sons-in-law were naval officers; the second son, Sir Desmond Parry Dreyer, also commanded in the Far East and subsequently became second sea lord. 
Beginning with Captain Stephen Roskill, who acknowledged an antipathy (Roskill, 'Naval Policy', 2.130), and Jon Sumida, later historians have been very critical of Dreyer himself and of the fire control tables. Yet Dreyer rate-plotting could make better use than the Argo true-course plotter of the intermittent and inaccurate target data actually available and, in battle, when conditions were comparable, German ships shot as well as or better than the British using a system of meaning ranges which was similar in principle to Dreyer's. At the end of the First World War Dreyer's ability and achievements were widely praised by senior officers; Jellicoe thought him 'one of the best captains of ships I have ever known' (F. C. Dreyer, 238). However, he was unapologetically ambitious and a disciplinarian who did not seek popularity. 'A large man without much sense of humour' (King-Hall, 247), he acquired a reputation as 'one of the most outspoken of twentieth-century admirals' (Marder, 1.35) who was also prolix on paper (Roskill, 'Naval Policy', 2.130); particularly in his defence of the board after Invergordon and as commander-in-chief, China (though also in early 1943), his lack of tact caused offence. Even so Dreyer more than Pollen established the foundations on which subsequent developments in British fire control were based, and he accomplished much, both in command afloat and at the Admiralty. 


@@@@@


doc= 32894


Dreyer, Georges (1873-1934), pathologist, was born at Shanghai on 4 July 1873, the second son and third and youngest child of Captain Georg Hannibal Napoleon Dreyer, of the Royal Danish Navy, and his wife, Dagmar Alvilde, daughter of Judge W. T. Qvistgaard, a well-known jurist of Fredensborg. They lived in Copenhagen, but at the time of Dreyer's birth his father was in Shanghai as diplomatic adviser to the Great Northern Cable Company. Dreyer went to the Borgerdydsskolen at Christianshavn, then to the University of Copenhagen, where he graduated MD in 1900. His unusually rich education in mathematics, physics, and chemistry, and periods of postgraduate research in Denmark, Germany, and England under Carl Julius Salomonsen, Niels Ryberg Finsen, Albert Neisser, and Sir J. Burdon Sanderson, gave him a command of languages and supremely fitted him for a scientific career. He married, in 1900, Margrete Caroline, daughter of Laurits Jorgersen, of Sollestedgaard Manor, Laaland, Denmark, who survived him. There were no children. 
Dreyer's first appointment as demonstrator of pathology in the University of Copenhagen combined research with arduous routine. In collaboration with Thorvald Madsen he contributed to the knowledge of diphtheria toxin and anti-toxin, and studied the effects of ultraviolet radiations on micro-organisms. From the beginning a passionate precision of technique and a loathing of slipshod thought characterized all his work, and it was in the accurate quantitative measurement of biological processes that he made many of his most notable contributions to science. 
Appointed in 1907, when only thirty-four, to the chair of pathology at Oxford, which he held until his death, Dreyer revolutionized the teaching, and by his vivid personality, enthusiasm, and learning attracted a steady succession of collaborators. Among the varied fields of research pursued in his department were the principle and practice of the serological diagnosis of intestinal infections; quantitative studies of blood volume, the size of the aorta, vital capacity, and their relations to height and weight; the calculation of the dosage of toxins and drugs according to the surface area of the individual; inoculation against typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, and its effects on the Widal reaction; and methods of serological diagnosis in syphilis. 
Dreyer was naturalized in 1912. During the First World War he was appointed to the pathological advisory committee where he pressed for triple inoculation in the place of typhoid inoculation only. He was commissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps in 1915 and sent to Wimereux to organize the laboratory diagnosis of enteric fever and dysentery. In the course of this project he instituted, in 1915, the standards laboratory at Oxford which for the next thirty years provided this country and the dominions with scientifically standardized reagents for serological diagnosis. Later came investigations on the quantitative estimation of tuberculin, on variations in the virulence of the tubercle bacillus, and on the preparation and use of immunizing reagents against tuberculosis. His field test of the latter in Danish cattle did not, however, live up to its early promise. 
Although in his later years he paid increasing attention to university business and to the building of the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, which is his monument, Dreyer could not be parted from his own research, which in this period turned to the action of radiations on bacteria (a revival of an earlier interest) and the devising of quantitative methods for the estimation of bacteriophage potency. 
Dreyer was elected a member of the Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab in 1909, and in 1913 received the French order of Officier de l'Instruction Publique. For his war work on the oxygen supply to aircrews and on the diagnosis of enteric fever he was appointed CBE in 1919, and he was elected FRS in 1921. 
In 1912 Dreyer was elected a fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, which profited greatly from his interest and wise counsels. He served for many years on the hebdomadal council where his unusual power of understanding the points at issue, shown in university, college, and scientific matters, caused his opinions and judgement to command respect. He died suddenly while on holiday at Sollestedgaard on 17 August 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 32895


Dreyer, John Louis Emil (1852-1926), astronomer and historian of astronomy, was born at Copenhagen on 13 February 1852, the third son of John Christopher Dreyer, lieutenant-general in the Danish army, and his wife, Ida Nicoline Margarethe Rangrup. At the age of fourteen he read a book about Tycho Brahe which inspired him to 'be an astronomer and nothing else'; he 'admired the bold use of large instruments and the ambitious cataloguing undertaken by his countryman' (Gingerich, 'Dreyer and his NGC', 621). During monthly visits to the Copenhagen University observatory he was encouraged by Hans Schjellerup, an assistant there. He entered the university in 1869 to study logic, mathematics, and astronomy, and by 1870 he was given free access to the instruments of the observatory and encouraged to compute. In 1874 he was awarded a gold medal by the university for an essay on 'Personal errors in observations'. He graduated MA, and received a PhD in 1882 for his memoir on 'The constant of precession'. 
Dreyer's wife, Katherine Hannah, whom he married in 1875, was the daughter of John Tuthill of Kilmore, co. Limerick, Ireland. This connection and Dreyer's reputation gained him an invitation the previous year to succeed as astronomer in charge of the fourth earl of Rosse's observatory at Birr Castle, Parsonstown, King's county. His task was to complete the third earl's observations of nebulae and clusters made between 1848 and 1867 and prepare the work for publication. With the great 36 inch and 72 inch reflecting telescopes he made many observations. There was no good catalogue of nebulae and clusters: Messier had catalogued 109 objects, John Herschel 5079 more. In an important supplement to Herschel's catalogue of 1864, Dreyer provided notes and corrections to Herschel's objects and added 1172 more. This completed the work at Birr, and demonstrated Dreyer's skills in assessing errors and making precision measurements and his painstaking scholarship. In 1878 he became an assistant at the Dublin University observatory at Dunsink, and took charge of the new meridian circle. 
In June 1882 Dreyer became the fourth director of the Church of Ireland's observatory at Armagh. The best candidate in Ireland, he was the first incumbent not to be Irish, clerical, and a graduate of Trinity College. He completed and reduced the meridian observations made by his predecessor, T. R. Robinson, since 1859, and the accuracy of the positions after his analysis of the systematic errors of the observations, together with his identification of the proper motions of twenty-nine stars, gave the 'Second Armagh Catalogue of 3300 Stars' (1886) lasting value. The observatory's meridian instruments of 1827 were obsolete. The site, noted for 'extreme unfavourableness' of climate in 1796, had been rendered 'never again [suitable] for fundamental measurement' by a railway in 1874 (Bennett, 46, 150). The 1869 disestablishment of the church had halved observatory income; in 1884 Dreyer's salary was reduced, and his assistant paid only enough for meteorology. The Treasury declined support, but made a one-off grant of $2000. Dreyer installed a new 10 inch Grubb equatorial refractor in 1885, and until the early 1900s made micrometric positional measurements of nebulae with respect to comparison stars. 
In 1886 Dreyer submitted to the council of the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) a second supplementary catalogue of nebulae, but the council invited him instead to compile a complete catalogue of all known nebulae. Dreyer completed the enormous task in only two years. It was published as 'A new general catalogue of nebulae and clusters of stars, being the catalogue of Sir John Herschel, revised, corrected and enlarged' (1888) ('NGC'), and contained the positions and descriptions of 7840 nebulae and clusters. Two index catalogues of 1895 and 1908 added 5386 more, all listed in order of right ascension, with their north polar distances. A major contribution to astronomy, the 'NGC' numbers remain the universally employed nomenclature. 
Dreyer's historical curiosity and empathy disposed him to many years studying all sources on Tycho Brahe. In 1890 he published a biography of his hero, which was superseded only by Victor Thoren's 'Lord of Uraniborg' (1991). Dreyer complemented his work with the classic 'History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler' (1906). This drew on original sources, and explained man's conception of the universe from about 500 BC to Kepler's mathematical proof of the Copernican system. 
Dreyer 'enriched astronomy by three monumental works of research, collection, and editing' ('DSB'). The first was the 'NGC' of 1888-1908. In 1908 Dreyer began the second, a complete edition of the observations of Tycho Brahe, under the auspices of the Carlsberg Institute. Later, the generosity of G. A. Hagemann of Copenhagen made it possible to include all the works and correspondence of Brahe, published and unpublished. The fourteen volumes of 'Tychonis Brahe opera omnia' (1913-26) in Latin include two long introductions by Dreyer, one an account of Brahe's work, the other regarding the quality of his observations, both translated into Latin. Despite its inaccessibility, it remains the foundation of contemporary work on Brahe. Dreyer's third monumental work resulted from the councils of the Royal Society and the RAS inviting him to edit a complete edition of the works of Sir William Herschel. 'The Scientific Papers of Sir William Herschel' (2 vols., 1912) contain seventy-one published and some thirty unpublished papers. Dreyer checked the original observations and reductions of nebulae and double stars, and added a fine introductory biography based mainly on unpublished material. 
Meanwhile, Dreyer never lost interest in practical astronomy. Recognizing that visual micrometer work had been superseded, in 1898 he purchased a micrometer microscope to enable him to measure photographic plates of nebulae supplied by Isaac Roberts. That work, 'a step on Dreyer's path from the dome to the study' (Bennett, 168), engaged him from 1899 until Roberts's death in 1904. 
After a new financial crisis in 1897, Dreyer's salary slumped to $140, that appropriate to a junior assistant, and the whole situation must have been dispiriting. Dreyer promptly applied for the newly vacant Radcliffe observership at Oxford, but the appointment went to Arthur Alcock Rambaut from Dunsink. He applied on 30 July to William Christie, the astronomer royal, for a reference to support his application to return to Dunsink in place of Rambaut. After all his underpaid service to Irish astronomy he was surely bitter to receive a reply on 5 October that Christie was supporting two 'very well qualified' young Cambridge candidates from his own staff, and would support no others (Christie to Dreyer, 5 Oct 1897, CUL, RGO 7 156 Radcl.). Meanwhile Trinity College appointed Charles J. Joly (1864-1906), a mathematician and one of their own fellows since 1894, but a man who had no knowledge of practical astronomy. 
In 1916 Dreyer was awarded the RAS gold medal for the 'NGC' and historical work. Fortunately the Carlsberg Institute enabled him to retire to Oxford and devote himself to writing. He served on the council of the RAS from 1917, and was president in 1923 and 1924. In that office he collaborated with Professor H. H. Turner and supervised 'A History of the Royal Astronomical Society, 1820-1920' in commemoration of the society's centenary. 
Dreyer's astronomical posts were less important than his linguistic, historical, and scientific skills, and the thoroughness of his scholarship, 'such as rarely decorates our science' (Sampson, 'Dreyer's 'Tycho Brahe'', 159), gave his astronomical as well as his historical work lasting importance. His gifts were matched by an unsparing devotion to astronomy. He was endeared to many friends by his gentle and amiable disposition. In late 1925 his health began to fail as a consequence of stomach cancer, and he died at his home, 14 Staverton Road, Oxford, on 14 September 1926. He had been naturalized a British citizen in March 1885, and received an honorary DSc from Queen's University, Belfast, and an honorary MA from Oxford. Dreyer's wife had died in 1923; they had a daughter and three sons, the second of whom was Sir Frederic Dreyer (1878-1956). 


@@@@@


doc= 32896


Drinkwater, John (1882-1937), poet and playwright, was born at Leytonstone, Essex, on 1 June 1882, son of Albert Edwin Drinkwater (1852-1923), schoolmaster and, later, actor, and his wife, Annie Beck, 'nee' Brown (died 1891). He was educated at Oxford high school from 1891 to 1897, leaving before his sixteenth birthday. Like his contemporary Harley Granville Barker, in later life he frequently expressed regret and embarrassment at not having had a university education. He had some leanings towards a theatre career but his father, who himself had deserted schoolteaching to become an actor in 1896, nevertheless steered his son in the direction of commerce, securing for him an appointment in the Nottingham offices of the Northern Assurance Company. The young Drinkwater did fairly well in his new profession, though he hated it throughout the twelve years of it that he had to endure. It provided (though only just) a livelihood and gave him independence of a sort, but he was desperately poor. He wrote in his autobiography that the very first book that he was able to buy for himself was 'The Ingoldsby Legends', and he had to wait until he was twenty before he dared lash out so extravagantly. He effected his escape eventually, partly by discovering his own writing talent and partly by way of an invitation from Barry Jackson, who was setting up a new and exciting provincial theatre in Birmingham. Jackson's invitation, founded upon some modest amateur acting experience that Drinkwater had had in Nottingham, was to play Feste in an amateur production of 'Twelfth Night' in the extensive garden of The Grange, the palatial mansion belonging to Barry Jackson's father. Jackson was two years senior to John Drinkwater. Both were passionate about the theatre, and liked each other. In 1907 they joined forces to found a group of amateur actors which they called the Pilgrim Players. Eschewing light, popular fare, the Pilgrim Players gradually gained a serious-minded Birmingham audience for plays of quality. Among the players was Drinkwater's wife, Kathleen Walpole 
(Cathleen Orford; 'b'. 1881/2)
, whom he had married on 11 January 1906. After five years, with Jackson's money behind them, they turned their amateur theatre company into a professional one and erected a theatre building of their own, calling it the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. It opened in 1913 with a production of 'Twelfth Night', with Drinkwater as Malvolio and Cathleen Orford as Maria. Drinkwater had also written a prologue-like celebratory verse, 'Lines for the Opening of the Birmingham Repertory Theatre', to be spoken by Barry Jackson. It is among Drinkwater's 'Poems, 1908-1914' (1917). He became the new theatre's general manager -- a position that included acting, directing, and play-writing as well as the more ordinary managerial duties. By 1918, when he left Birmingham in triumph to take his own play, 'Abraham Lincoln', to London and thence to New York, he had played about forty parts at the new Repertory Theatre and directed sixty productions in six years. 
Also during his Birmingham years Drinkwater had established himself as a published poet whose lyric verses had begun to win a good deal of respect and to find their way into the better anthologies. In the second volume of his unfinished autobiography ('Discovery', 1932) he tells about the moment, walking home late one night along the Moseley Road in January 1903, when he realized that poetry was his true vocation. His first small book of verse was 'The Death of Leander and other Poems' (1906), and in the next twelve years he published three more, and contributed individual poems to eight or nine leading national magazines and anthologies, including Edward Marsh's 'Georgian Poetry' (1912; 'see 'Georgian poets) and 'New Numbers' (1914), published by the Dymock poets. These poems included the beautiful and much-anthologized 'Moonlit Apples', which appeared in his collection called 'Tides' in 1917. 
Drinkwater returned from America in 1920 a temporarily famous man, much respected for his plays and his poetry. But his writing, in the later 1920s and early 1930s -- except in the case of 'Bird in Hand' in 1927 -- failed to live up to the promise of his first, fine, careless rapture and his fame gradually declined. 'Bird in Hand' was produced at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre in 1927, with Laurence Olivier and Peggy Ashcroft in the leading parts, under Drinkwater's direction. After an absence of many years he also returned to acting, though not at Birmingham. He played Prospero at the Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in 1933 and Duke Senior, also at Regent's Park, in 1934. Also in 1934 he played Malvolio at His Majesty's Theatre. All in all, it must in honesty be said that his reputation died before he did. 
Drinkwater's marriage to Cathleen Orford was dissolved in 1920, and on 16 December 1924 he married, at the Kensington register office, the violinist Daisy Fowler ('b'. 1892/3); she was the daughter of Joseph Arthur Kennedy, schoolmaster, of Norwood, Adelaide, Australia, and formerly wife of Benno Moiseiwitsch, the Russian pianist. Their daughter, Penelope, was born in 1929. She is saluted in a group of six poems in 'Summer Harvest: Poems, 1924-33' (1933). 'Qua' poetry they are mawkishly embarrassing; but as snatches of overheard private conversation or glances at the kind of private diaries that ought never to be published, they are interesting, informative, and moving. 
There are signs in one of his books that Drinkwater, for all his passion and fervour, may have inadvertently missed his true calling. The book is 'The Gentle Art of Theatre-Going', commissioned for a 'Gentle Art of...' series and published in 1927. The circumstances of its publication strongly suggest that it was mere bread-and-butter work, but the text itself rises above this level. Its liveliness and persuasiveness suggest that he would have made a first-class theatre critic if he had given himself to that occupation on a regular and long-term basis. 
Through the 1920s and 1930s Drinkwater lived a busy and useful public life. He belonged to many societies and committees, he travelled quite widely, he wrote a new play for Barry Jackson's new festival at Malvern (not a very good play, unfortunately), he wrote two volumes of autobiography -- 'Inheritance' (1931) and 'Discovery' (1932); and throughout he retained to a large extent a boyish enthusiasm combined with a middle-aged worthiness. And he left behind, among a fair amount of lesser material, one extremely fine play (though just short of greatness), several short plays that ought still to be played but are not, and some poetry that still glints and gleams here and there (and was never as nerveless as its more severe critics made out). He had once been condemned by Middleton Murry ('The Athenaeum', 5 Dec 1919), as being guilty of 'a false simplicity'. The criticism is not without substance but there are among Drinkwater's various works some vivid and still-resonant exceptions. His total output amounted to seventeen plays (including an adaptation into English of a play about Napoleon by Benito Mussolini), nine volumes of verse, biographies of Pepys and Shakespeare, critical studies of Byron, Swinburne, and William Morris, and the two volumes of autobiography. 
Drinkwater died at his home, North Hall, Mortimer Crescent, Maida Vale, London, of heart disease, on 25 March 1937. Several times, from quite early days onward, one finds him -- in effect -- writing his own epitaph, as in his poem about his family ancestors, 'who were before me' ('Seeds of Time', 1921). The poem 'Petition' in the collection 'Olton Pools' (1916) concludes: '
That, when I die, this word may stand for me -- 

He had a heart to praise, an eye to see, 

And beauty was his king. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 34151


James James (1832-1902), musician, father and son, composed respectively the words and music of 'Hen wlad fy nhadau' ('Land of my fathers'), the national anthem of Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 34555


Sir James Lithgow, first baronet (1883-1952), was born on 27 January 1883 at Huntly Bank, Port Glasgow. The same year his parents established the family home at Drums, at Langbank, overlooking the Clyde, where his brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 34673


Robert MacBryde (1913-1966), painter, was born on 5 December 1913 at Weevers Vennel, Maybole, Ayrshire, the eldest child of John McBride and his wife, Agnes McKay. MacBryde's background was more humble than Colquhoun's. His father's meagre wage as an unskilled hide stripper in a tannery was supplemented by that of his mother, who sold reject fabric scraps from local mills. Having left school at fourteen, MacBryde found menial employment in a boot factory and a grocer's shop before entering the Glasgow School of Art at a similar time to Colquhoun. 


@@@@@


doc= 34798


Sir Frederick Orridge Macmillan (1851-1936), was born at 29 Regent Street, Cambridge, on 5 October 1851, and had been educated at Uppingham School under Edward Thring, the well-known headmaster, and had then chosen to learn the retail bookselling business under his cousin Robert Bowes, at Cambridge, where he also studied printing technologies. In 1871 he was dispatched to the New York branch, where he remained for five years. On 15 April 1874 he took an American bride, Georgiana Elizabeth Warrin (1846-1943), daughter of Thomas Warrin of New Town, Long Island. The couple had no children. By 1876 he returned to London and entered the business as a partner. 
Alexander Macmillan's eldest son, Malcolm Kingsley (1852-1889), was talented in literature and the arts, but seemingly had no head for business. He attended Marlborough College briefly, then King's College School, and after a gap entered Balliol College, Oxford, where it was said he made many valuable contacts; but he was destined for a tragic end. In July 1889, while hiking with a friend on Mount Olympus, he disappeared mysteriously and was never heard of again. A full investigation was conducted, but no body was ever found. It was a terrible blow to his father, who bore up bravely, but never really recovered from the shock. 
Maurice Crawford (1853-1936), Daniel Macmillan's second son, attended Uppingham School, where he won a scholarship in 1867, and graduated from Christ's College, Cambridge, taking a first in the classical tripos, 1875. He was classics master at St Paul's School, 1875-83, during which time he published the first 'Macmillan family' book, 'First Latin Grammar' (1879) which by 1886 had been reprinted three times. At the end of 1883 he entered the family firm. On 24 November 1884 he also took an American bride, Helen Artie Tarleton Hill (1856-1937) (a widow), daughter of Joshua Tarleton Belles MD of Spencer, Indiana, and they had three sons. The couple toured extensively in Australia and India (1884-5), when Maurice first began to sense the importance of a broader overseas base, an opportunity for expansion that would be so important to the second Macmillan generation. His lifelong special interests were scholarship, the classics, the British empire, and the Far East. 
George Augustin (1855-1936), Alexander Macmillan's second son, was educated at Eton College, as a king's scholar, 1868, and entered the firm in 1874. In July 1879 he married Margaret Helen Lucas and they had one son and one daughter. He became chairman of Stainer and Bell, music publishers, where he served for many years; he was a founder and honorary secretary of the Hellenic Society (1879-1919), and honorary treasurer until 1934. He also served as the honorary secretary of the British School at Athens (1886-97). Because of his wide contacts many important books came to Macmillan in archaeology, classical art, history, and literature. The firm began publishing the 'Journal of Hellenic Studies' (1880) because of his influence, but perhaps his greatest achievement was bringing in Arthur Evans's 'The Palace of Minos at Knossos' (1922-35), the fascinating account of his excavations on the island of Crete. 
By the mid-1880s, after working together for more than a decade, the Macmillan cousins had developed into a smoothly efficient team. Frederick supervised general business matters, fiction, poetry, art, and American ties. Maurice presided over India, education, the classics, and foreign expansion. George was in charge of Greek literature, archaeology, and music. Mention must also be made of William Jack, who served, during the 1870s, as a partner and adviser on mathematics until he left in 1879 to accept the chair in mathematics at the University of Glasgow. The boundaries of responsibility were fluid, however, and each of the cousins might develop and supervise any title in which he became interested. They established a working relationship that was as flawless and as understanding as the original partnership between Daniel and Alexander. 
With new and younger men now directing the company, publishing trends were certain to change. There were new titles on a wide range of fresh subjects: Pater's 'Studies in the Renaissance' (1874); Lady Barker's 'First Lessons in the Principles of Cooking' (1874); in the same year, R. Jardin's 'Elements of Psychology'; and Rhoda and Agnes Garrett's 'Suggestions for House Decoration' (1876). Practical business concerns dictated, after passage of the 1870 'Education Act', that texts, readers, and primers should proliferate. The younger Macmillans were not slow to recognize this new market, in the same way their forebears had profited from the Cambridge connection. 
Accordingly, books appeared on a wide range of topics including algebra, anatomy and physiology, arithmetic, astronomy, calculus, chemistry, and classics. G. Eugene Fasnacht prepared no fewer than seventeen texts on teaching and learning the French and German languages; and he edited ten volumes of literary classics in those languages, together with biographical notes, historical introduction, glossary, and scholarly notes for each volume. Charles Colbeck edited a series, 'Foreign School Classics', in twenty-one volumes, as well as geology and geography primers and sketches. Several other important professional textbooks were added to the list: Henry Sidgwick's 'Principles of Political Economy' (1883); James Fitzjames Stephen's 'A Digest of the Criminal Law: Crimes and Punishments' (1883-87); and 'A Text-Book of Pathological Anatomy and Pathogenesis' by Ernst Ziegler and Donald MacAlister (1883-7). 
New names began to appear on the list, for which the Macmillan cousins shared the responsibility. Louis Pasteur published 'Studies in Fermentation' with Macmillan in 1879. Joseph Henry Shorthouse came to the firm upon the recommendation of Mrs Humphry Ward. His 'John Inglesant' (1881), a historical novel set in the English civil war, had first been published privately by the author, but now became a surprise best-seller for Macmillan, with six editions by February 1883, including one in the 'Globe' series in two volumes. George Saintsbury, eventually to be one of the period's best-known literary critics, first became acquainted with Macmillan as a contributor to 'The English Poets' (1880), edited by T. H. Ward, and remained because of his admiration for Frederick. They published his 'Dryden' (1881), reprinted in the 'English Men of Letters' series, and his influential study 'History of Elizabethan Literature' (1887). An American expatriate, F. Marion Crawford, although difficult to deal with in royalty matters, nevertheless between 1882 and 1909 published all but three of his forty novels with Macmillan, including 'Zoroaster' (1885), 'A Tale of a Lonely Parish' (1886), 'Sant' Ilario' (1889), and 'Don Orsino' (1892). 
From earliest days Alexander Macmillan and Alfred Tennyson had known and respected each other. Macmillan and David Masson visited the poet and his wife for three days in October 1859, at their home on the Isle of Wight. Despite their friendship the poet had been elusive about joining the Macmillan family of authors. Instead, he rotated among such houses as H. S. King, Alexander Strahan, and Kegan Paul, on short, five-year contracts. Finally, in 1884, as both men were nearing the end of their careers, Tennyson came to Macmillan but at the cost of a hard bargain. He insisted on a guarantee of $4000 plus any additional royalties earned beyond that, but the two old friends were together at last. 
Macmillan's 'Colonial Library' was inaugurated in 1886, under the direction of Maurice Macmillan, who had long envisioned this type of expansion for the firm. It was a natural augmentation of his father's 1875 scheme of a 'Text-Books for Indian Schools' series. The idea was developed as an attempt to satisfy the reading needs of India and the other colonies, and also to make use of the copyrights of standard works and popular fiction which Macmillan already owned or others which they could acquire cheaply. Several methods of supply were employed: some books from the regular list were shipped out; some were specifically planned for India but manufactured in London; others were actually published abroad. To accomplish this branches of Macmillan were established in Bombay in 1901, in Calcutta in 1907, and in Madras in 1912; there were agencies in Bangalore, Colombo, and Rangoon. Macmillan was not the first British company to publish in India; it was preceded by John Murray, Bentley, and Routledge, but these other firms' lists were composed chiefly of history, travel, biography, and memoirs, whereas 94 per cent of Macmillan's selections were fiction. The families of Indian middle classes had, since the 'India Act' of 1835, been exposed to English in their schools and they had now come to enjoy literature for itself, primarily fiction. Macmillan also published in its 'Colonial Library' some of Fasnacht's teaching texts for French and German, some Greek and Latin readers, and a few textbooks for Indian schools, but it was their fiction that carried the day. Between 1886 and 1916, 640 titles were published, a high percentage being novels, including works by Crawford, Mrs Oliphant, Yonge, Thomas Hardy, Lady Barker, and Hugh Conway. Ironically, a colonial author was added to the 'Colonial Library' when Macmillan published an Australian classic previously published by Remington & Co., 'Robbery under Arms' (1889) by Alexander Browne, a police magistrate of New South Wales who used the pseudonym Rolf Boldrewood. Two of his three-deckers followed: 'Miner's Right' and 'The Colonial Reformer' (both 1890). Australia was another profitable market for the 'Colonial Library' and, indeed, in both countries British expatriates, as well as the native population, were eager purchasers. 
Although Thomas Hardy's early novels had been rejected by Macmillan, he first established contact there when 'The Woodlanders' was accepted by 'Macmillan's Magazine' in 1886; it was published in book form in three volumes in 1887 and followed by 'Wessex Tales' (1888). In 1886 Maurice Macmillan secured 'The Mayor of Casterbridge' for the 'Colonial Library', while in 1893 Macmillan successfully acquired a dozen Hardy novels, but for the 'Colonial Library' only, including 'Tess of the d'Urbervilles', which had first been published by Osgood McIlvaine in 1891. Hardy transferred all his books to Macmillan in 1902, which also published 'The Dynasts' in three parts (1904-8). Hardy continued to send work to the firm for the next twenty years. 
James G. Frazer, a rising young Cambridge scholar and fellow of Trinity College, wrote to George Macmillan in 1889, proposing a book based on his work over the last five years, to be entitled 'The Golden Bough', where he would offer a comparative study of the beliefs and institutions of mankind, in order to study the progress of thought from the magical, to the religious, to the scientific. The book would look at customs such as fertility rites, the sacrificial killing of kings, the dying god, and the scapegoat, in an attempt to analyse the primitive mind. George, and his reader John Morley, realized immediately that this would be a unique contribution to social anthropology and they accepted the idea at once, not realizing they were initiating an enterprise that would last more than forty years. Publication proceeded slowly, the first two volumes appearing in May 1890; the second edition in three volumes in 1900. The third edition (still in print) began publication in 1906, and was completed in twelve volumes in 1915. 'Aftermath: a Supplement' followed in 1936, making the thirteen-volume set, which is the definitive edition. Each edition was an enlargement of its predecessor. A one-volume abridged edition appeared in 1922 of which 30,000 were in print by 1933, and it thus influenced a much larger reading public. A huge correspondence remains in the Macmillan archives, including letters to and from Frazer's wife, Lilly, who edited several French schoolbooks for Macmillan. While Frazer's methods and many of his conclusions have been rendered unacceptable by more modern research, nevertheless his book stirred public imagination and he was widely considered as one of the founders of modern anthropology. Macmillan published Frazer's other works as well, including his translations, with commentaries, of 'Pausanias' (1898) and the 'Fasti' (1929). Because of his success with 'The Golden Bough' many other books on anthropology, myth, and comparative religion were offered to George, including Edvard Westermarck's 'History of Human Marriage' (1891) and 'Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco' (1914); Arthur Evans's 'The Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult' (1901); and W. W. Skeat's and C. O. Blagden's 'Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula' (1906). 
Towards the end of the 1880s Alexander Macmillan was less and less involved with the company. He was in his seventies, after a life of hard work, and was devastated by the death of his eldest son, Malcolm, but work continued with the second generation of the family. Alexander Macmillan died on 26 January 1896 at his home, 21 Portland Place, London, and was buried in the Bramshott churchyard, Haslemere. After his death Macmillan & Co. became a limited company, with Frederick Orridge Macmillan as its first chairman. 
During the pre-war years, literary observers sometimes suggested that Macmillan & Co., and particularly its readers, failed to stay abreast of the new trends in fiction during the years 1890 to 1914. Critics were puzzled to note that the company rejected H. G. Wells's 'Ann Veronica' (1909) and 'The New Machiavelli' (1910); the same was true for books by George Bernard Shaw, Arnold Bennett, and Somerset Maugham. In his brash way, Wells spoke out: 'I don't think you advertise well and I think you are out of touch with the contemporary movement in literature... On the other hand, you are solid and sound and sane' (Morgan, 147). The firm did, however, publish his 'Twelve Stories and a Dream' (1903), 'The Food of the Gods and how it Came to Earth' (1904), 'Kipps' (1905), 'In the Days of the Comet' (1906), 'Tono-Bungay' (1909), 'Marriage' (1912), 'The Passionate Friends' (1913), 'The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman' (1914), 'The World Set Free' (1914), and 'The Research Magnificent' (1915). Macmillan also published Maurice Hewlett's 'The Forest Lovers', a romantic novel set in the middle ages and a best-seller of 1898. The firm's American novelists included Winston Churchill, Gertrude Atherton, and Owen Wister ('The Virginian', 1902). As with so many others, Rudyard Kipling first came to the publisher through 'Macmillan's Magazine', where eight of his stories appeared between December 1889 and January 1893 (see 'Wellesley index', 1.633-42), beginning with 'The Incarnation of Krishna Mulvaney'. His enormous early popularity with the reading public resulted in a large number of collected editions of his work, under such labels as Uniform, Pocket, Deluxe, and School. 
Early in 1890 Frederick Macmillan stepped forward to offer leadership in a bitter controversy dividing the publishing and bookselling world. The trouble had been brewing for years because booksellers ignored the price fixed on a book by a publisher, in favour of their own discounted one, thus instigating cut-throat competition. Frederick Macmillan suggested what became known as the net book agreement, whereby there would be two classes of books, with different kinds of prices: the 'net' price fixed by the publisher and adhered to by all, for which, if accepted by a bookseller, the bookseller would receive a set discount, and the 'subject', where booksellers would be free to set their own selling price. Frederick began his campaign for reform with a letter to 'The Bookseller' (6 March 1890), outlining his plan, and provoking spirited discussion in the trade. As a test case, he selected, in July 1890, an important book, 'Principles of Economics' by Alfred Marshall, and 'fixed' the price, declaring, 'If a book is good enough, a bookseller cannot afford to be without it' (Morgan, 179). The dispute was so heated and so sensitive, however, that no compromise seemed possible until January 1899, when the Publishers' Association was finally able to send to the Associated Booksellers a proposal that proved acceptable. 
Frederick Macmillan again stepped forward as a leader in 1905 when 'The Times' introduced a scheme seemingly designed to subvert the net book agreement. It offered membership in a new Times Book Club to its annual subscribers, the club to serve as a lending library for current books. Soon officials of the club were found to be selling as 'used' books volumes that had been circulated only once or twice, and setting their own prices. The result was a bitter struggle between publishers and 'The Times', which would only be resolved after ownership of the newspaper changed hands. The new owner, Lord Northcliffe, paid Frederick Macmillan a secret visit to enlist his help in settling the dispute. Even with the best efforts of both men to avert a book war, it was not until the end of the year that 'The Times' retreated. Macmillan served as president of the Publishers' Association from 1900 to 1902, and again from 1911 to 1913. He received a knighthood in 1909, not for his services to publishing, but for his work as chairman, from 1903, of the board of management of the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic, Queen Square, London. 
The years 1897 and 1898 were marked by two important events for Macmillan. The first was construction of a new building for the firm's headquarters in St Martin's Street between Leicester Square and the National Gallery. Designed and equipped specially for publishing needs, it served for many years as Macmillan's principal place of business. The second event, purchase of all the stock and possessions of Richard Bentley & Son, of 8 New Burlington Street, had a far-reaching impact on Macmillan's family of authors. The firm had originally been founded by Charles Colburn about 1806, and underwent various changes in ownership until it became Richard Bentley in 1832, and ultimately Richard Bentley & Son from 1871 to 1898. For the sum of $8000 Macmillan acquired a quantity of unwanted stock, the steel and copperplates of the illustrators George Cruikshank, John Tenniel, and George Du Maurier, plus a number of fine old portraits, all of which were sold to finance the purchase. What Macmillan kept resulted in a dramatic addition to their list. The firm gained R. H. Barham's 'Ingoldsby Legends' (1840-46) and 'Life and Remains of Thomas Hook' (1849); Theodore Mommsen's 'History of Rome' (1862-75); Frederick Courtney Selous's 'Hunter's Wanderings in Africa' (1881); Edward Fitzgerald's 'Letters to Fanny Kemble' (1895); and Harold Fielding-Hall's 'The Soul of a People' (1898). A number of female novelists were added: Mrs W. K. Clifford, Mrs Annie Edwards, Rhoda Broughton, Helen Mathers, Mary Cholmondeley, Jessie Fothergill, Florence Montgomery, Rosa N. Carey, and Mrs Henry Wood. Male novelists acquired were Anthony Trollope, Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu, and Marcus Clarke. Two periodicals were also included: 'The Argosy' and 'Temple Bar'. 
The early years of the twentieth century brought a mixed group of publishing events to Macmillan. John Morley's long-awaited 'Life of Gladstone' (1903) was a critical success, and sold 25,041 copies in the first year, but was only a token success financially; the Gladstone family had published on commission and reaped the profit. Some early Irish writers appeared. Sidney Royse Lysaght brought 'Poems of the Unknown Way' (1901) and 'Horizons and Landmarks' (1911); and Stephen Gwynn, 'Old Knowledge' (1901), 'John Maxwell's Marriage' (1903), 'The Masters of English Literature' (1904), and 'Robert Emmet' (1909). A new 'English Men of Letters' series was also begun at this time, under the editorship of J. C. Squire. It ran to twenty-five titles between 1902 and 1919, including: 'George Eliot' (1902) by Leslie Stephen, 'Robert Browning' (1903) by G. K. Chesterton, and 'Jane Austen' (1919) by F. Warre-Cornish. The eminent Bengali poet, critic, and short fiction writer Rabindranath Tagore also joined Macmillan with his free-verse re-creations of his Bengali poems modelled on a medieval Indian devotional lyric, 'Gitanjali: Song Offerings' (1913), which won the Nobel prize for literature, the first for an Asian writer. 
Two third-generation Macmillans joined the board in 1911: William Edward Frank (1880-1954), known as Will, George's son, and 


@@@@@


doc= 35064


Alfred Moritz Mond, first Baron Melchett (1868-1930), industrialist, financier, and politician, was born at Farnworth on 23 October 1868. He was educated at Cheltenham College, and at St John's College, Cambridge. He began his adult life with the shock of failing his natural sciences tripos, but went on to Edinburgh University to study law with some success. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1894. Although his ambitions were mainly political he first made use of his considerable scientific ability. He put politics on one side for a while and in 1895 joined his father's business, Brunner Mond & Co., becoming a director in 1895 and, soon after, managing director. He combined this with being managing director of the Mond Nickel Company. In 1894 he married Violet Florence Mabel, daughter of James Henry Goetze, coffee merchant of Mincing Lane, London. They had one son, Henry Ludwig, who succeeded his father, and three daughters. 
Alfred Mond's future success came from possessing a harmonious mixture of talents, which enabled him to look at the overall structure of industry in relation to its political relevance; he expressed his views in a book, 'Industry and Politics' (1927). He advocated and put into practice processes of rationalization and amalgamation, exemplified in his gradual dominance of the Welsh anthracite coal industry through Amalgamated Anthracite Collieries. He added to his directorships those of the International Nickel Company of Canada, the Westminster Bank, and the Industrial Finance Investment Corporation. He gradually took on a leading role in the creation by amalgamation and development of what must be considered his most long-lasting achievement -- one of the world's largest industrial corporations, ICI (Imperial Chemical Industries). An important factor in this success was his ability to encourage organization and research in the manufacturing process. He always advocated close co-operation between employer and employed. He believed that industry worked better in large units than in small and the aim of industry should be the achievement of greater units, and the effective joint use of resources. Nevertheless, he realized that there are limits to the size of enterprise that can be controlled effectively. From this stemmed his opposition to the ideas of socialism and of nationalization. He was anxious that there should be good relations between management and workforce and to this end insisted on good arrangements for the comfort and welfare of both blue-collar and white-collar workers wherever he was able to have an influence. He tried to encourage this attitude in others from both sides of industry. 
Alfred Mond did his best to avert the coal strike of 1926 by bringing coalowners together in a joint selling organization and, following the general strike of 1926, he initiated meetings between leaders of the Trades Union Congress and of employers' organizations. He held meetings with Ben Turner, who was then chairman of the general council of the Trades Union Congress, and they established a method of conciliation, but there was not at the time sufficient cohesion between the various employers' organizations for this to lead anywhere. 
Mond was not an immediately engaging character in appearance and manner, having remnants of the family German accent and a forbidding personal bearing. However his honesty and sincerity carried him through any social barriers and he was always eventually listened to with respectful attention. This was particularly true of his political career. He sat as a Liberal, first for Chester in 1906, then for Swansea from 1910, when he was created a baronet, to 1923 and then from 1924 to 1928. He was sworn of the privy council in 1913. He was not outstanding as a party man but was effective in office, as first commissioner of works (1916-21) in Lloyd George's coalition ministry, and then as minister of health from 1921 to 1922. In 1926, convinced he should adhere to the Conservative policy of protection, he joined the Conservative and Unionist Party. 
Sir Alfred Mond's parliamentary life took a new turn in 1928 when he achieved a long-standing ambition to enter the House of Lords, as Baron Melchett of Landford in the county of Southampton. The spelling Melchett was a deliberate modification of the name of his home. He expounded a principle of imperial economic unity, was chairman of the Empire Economic Union, and in 1930 published a book, 'Imperial Economic Unity', on the subject. His argument was, that in addition to tariff preferences, common action could produce large imperial combines through which production and marketing could be systematically allocated. 
Sir Alfred Mond was generous to good causes and in 1924 provided for the housing at the National Gallery of his father's bequest of forty-two pictures. In 1929 he bought ground in Chelsea for the Chelsea Health Society, of which his wife was president. A deeply rooted enthusiasm which developed after the First World War came out of Mond's Jewish heritage. In 1921 he visited Palestine in company with Dr Chaim Weizmann. He became an enthusiastic Zionist, contributed a large sum to the Jewish Colonization Corporation for Palestine in 1928, and wrote for Zionist publications. He was an active member of the Jewish agency set up to administer the British mandate but resigned in 1930 in protest against a change in the British government's attitude to the national home in Palestine which followed the riots in Jerusalem. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1928, and received honorary degrees from Oxford, Paris, and other universities. He died at his London home, 35 Lowndes Square, on 27 December 1930, and was buried in St Pancras cemetery, East Finchley. 



@@@@@


doc= 35065


Ludwig Mond (1839-1909) was born on 7 March 1839 at Kassel, Germany, son of a Jewish merchant, Moritz B. Mond, and his wife, Henriette ('nee' Levinsohn). He was educated at first in Kassel, at the 'Realschule' and the polytechnic school. This was followed by university studies at Marburg, under Hermann Kolbe, and at Heidelberg, under Robert Wilhelm Bunsen. He then pursued a lifetime of industrial work, first in factories in Germany and the Netherlands, moving to England to John Hutchinson & Co. in Widnes in 1862 and, from 1864 to 1867, extending his experience in Utrecht. In 1866 he married his cousin Frida Lowenthal (1847-1923). They had two sons, Robert Ludwig and Alfred Moritz. 
In 1867 Mond began his involvement in chemical business affairs by forming a partnership with John Hutchinson to promote a process for recovering sulphur from the waste products of the clumsy and uneconomic Leblanc process for making soda (a substance of central importance in many manufactures) from salt. From now on England was his home and he became a naturalized British subject in 1880. His success began, however, with another process. In 1872 he met Ernest Solvay, a Belgian chemist who was perfecting a better process of making soda (the ammonia-soda process, originated by H. G. Dyer and J. Hemming in 1838). Mond purchased rights to operate Solvay's process. He entered into partnership with John Tomlinson Brunner, a friend from his Hutchinson days, to set up a Solvay process factory at Widnes. It took time to bring the process to commercial profitability, but by its success it turned the firm, within twenty years, into the largest producer of soda in the world. 
Mond recognized the economic importance in all industry of energy sources and put his mind and inventive capacity to processes such as that for making producer gas, in which inconvenient solid fuel is converted into convenient gaseous fuel. He was also able to convert the nitrogen of the solid fuel into ammonia. Following the original efforts of William Grove he also made attempts to produce electrical energy direct from gaseous reactions, but was no more successful than many others before and after him. 
Ludwig Mond's other most important, commercially fruitful, discovery originated in the study of failed experiments on the recovery of the chlorine lost in the calcium chloride waste of the ammonia-soda process. Nickel components and nickel compounds had been used in the apparatus. With two assistants, C. Langer and F. Quincke, Mond traced the faults to the conversion by carbon monoxide of the nickel to a hitherto unknown substance, nickel carbonyl. This was remarkable in being the first identified gaseous compound of a metallic element. Since the nickel carbonyl could easily be decomposed to yield pure nickel, Mond saw in this a completely novel metallurgical extraction process and proceeded to commercialize it with great success. He exploited Canadian nickel ores, which were given a preliminary enrichment in Canada and then shipped to a new works at Clydach, near Swansea, for the final purification by the carbonyl route. Several personal accounts of his work, presented in the first place as lectures, were later published. The work on nickel opened up new fields of investigation which were explored by his son Robert. 
Allied with Brunner's business and political acumen, Mond's discoveries and his genius for developing their practical applications led to the establishment of the British chemical industry on a scale capable of challenging that of any other country. All the same, in spite of his identification with great industrial enterprises, he always maintained that scientific education should be centred on pure science, not on its profitable application, the industry growing out of the science, not the other way round. He made a personal statement of his convictions in this respect in an address to students at the opening of the Schorlemmer Laboratory at Manchester University on 3 May 1895. His own research was carried out in privacy. He bought a farm at Combe Bank, Sevenoaks, intending it for the use of his sons, and there built a useful laboratory. 
Mond was very active in the organization and support of scientific societies, taking a lead (with Sir Henry Roscoe) to expand the small Lancashire Chemical Society into the nationwide Society of Chemical Industry, established in 1881. He supported this body financially until it could stand on its own feet, and acted as its foreign secretary until elected to its presidency in 1888. The society honoured him with its Messel medal, recognizing his leadership in the development of large-scale British chemical industry. 
Mond was a man of impressive presence, not tall, but full-bearded and clearly of Jewish extraction, as is seen in a painting and several sculptures. He was elected to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1891, and to membership of the German Chemical Society, of the Societa Reale of Naples in 1908, and of the Prussian Akademie der Wissenschaften in 1909. He received honorary doctorates from the universities of Padua (1892), Heidelberg (1896), Manchester (1904), and Oxford (1907). He was awarded the grand cordon of the Crown of Italy in 1909. Throughout his industrial career he was much concerned with the welfare of his employees, a care which extended into their retirement years. He was generous in his lifetime to scientific organizations, giving the Royal Society $16,000 in support of its 'Catalogue of Scientific Papers' and funding a prize at the Italian Accademia dei Lincei in memory of Stanislas Cannizzaro. His most notable benefaction was that to the Royal Institution of Great Britain, providing a house next door to its main premises to be used for research purposes under the name of the Davy-Faraday Laboratory. 
In his will Ludwig Mond left $20,000 to the town of Kassel, with an additional $5000 for a Jewish charitable foundation. This was only one of many charitable gifts, to Jewish as well as other beneficiaries, many of them anonymous. One bequest was to the Munich Akademie der bildenen Kunst, a reflection of a personal enthusiasm. From 1892 onwards he was able to indulge his taste for works of art, and built up a fine collection, mainly early Italian. In this he was advised by Dr J. P. Richter who published a two-volume account of it in 1910. Subject to a life interest for his wife, the greater portion of his collection was left to the National Gallery. 
After the birth of his sons Mond's main British residence was at Winnington, Cheshire, until 1884 when he moved to London. In addition he spent most of his winters in Rome, at the Palazzo Zuccari which he had bought and restored. He suffered from heart disease, from which he died on 11 December 1909 at his house, The Poplars, 20 Avenue Road, Regent's Park, London. In his later years he had given much thought to the Jewish religion, in which he had been brought up but whose observances he had neglected. He was buried with Jewish rites at the St Pancras cemetery, Finchley. His sons later erected a mausoleum there for all the family remains. 
The elder of Ludwig Mond's two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 35066


Sir Robert Ludwig Mond (1867-1938), chemist and archaeologist, was born at Farnworth, near Widnes, Lancashire, on 9 September 1867. He was educated at Cheltenham College, at Peterhouse, Cambridge, at Zurich Polytechnic, at Edinburgh University, and at Glasgow University, where he worked under Sir William Thomson. He became a good chemist and eventually had a number of papers to his credit on subjects which related to his father's discoveries, such as metal carbonyls, and the electrolytic production of zinc. He was the originator of a number of patents. However, he was not by temperament a solitary investigator and was less interested in novel discovery than in application and the encouragement of colleagues. For a time after his father's death he made trials of scientific farming methods at Combe Bank, Sevenoaks (which his father had bought with Robert's needs in mind), pioneering the production of high-quality milk from a selected herd of dairy cows. It was at Combe Bank, in the laboratory installed by his father, that he did most of his scientific investigation. He continued the connection with the Davy-Faraday Laboratory at the Royal Institution, was its honorary secretary for life (an appointment which had been a condition of his father's gift), and contributed substantially to its reconstruction and re-equipment in 1931. His industrial connections included a directorship of Brunner Mond & Co. and chairmanship of the Mond Nickel Company. His work with the nickel mines at Sudbury, Ontario, led him to make a close relationship with the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto, of which he became a trustee. He made it gifts of money and, later, of important objects from his archaeological investigations in Egypt. 
Robert Mond was twice married, first, in 1898, to Helen Edith, third daughter of Julius Levis. They had two daughters. She died in 1905 following the birth of the second daughter, and in her memory Robert Mond founded the Infant's Hospital, Vincent Square. His second marriage, in 1922, was to Marie Louise, daughter of Guillaume Jean Le Manach, of Belle-Ile-en-Terre, Brittany, and widow of Simon Guggenheim. 
Robert Mond was greatly attached to life in France, having homes in Paris and at Dinard. He contributed largely towards the conversion of the town house of the ducs d'Estissac in the rue Dominique in Paris into the Maison de la Chimie, for meetings of French chemical societies and work on the documentation of chemical literature. He founded a Societe des Amis de la Maison de la Chimie. He was a benefactor of the British Institute in Paris and an active supporter of the France-Grande Bretagne Association. He also contributed to the National Council for Chemistry and supported the cause of a 'chemistry house' for Great Britain. In 1937 he helped to found a society for the history of alchemy (at present the Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry) and its journal, 'Ambix'. He was one of the original subscribers to the Hill Observatory Corporation for the establishment of an observatory at Sidmouth, Devon, later named the Norman Lockyer Observatory. He was personally responsible for some buildings and novel photographic astronomical equipment. He also made large benefactions to the universities of Liverpool, Manchester, and Toronto. 
Convalescence in Egypt after a serious illness led Robert Mond to develop a lifelong and creative interest in Egyptian archaeology, to which he made considerable contributions not only as benefactor but also as a worker in the field. He collaborated first with Percy Edward Newberry, and then with Howard Carter and Arthur E. P. B. Weigall. Following his assistance in a first publication on the Theban tombs by Alan Gardiner and Weigall, he played a large part in the restoration and protection of the Theban necropolis. Resuming work after the interruption of the First World War, he initiated the preservation of the tomb of Rameses, in association with the University of Liverpool Institute of Archaeology. His work in this and other excavations brought him into close and sometimes active collaboration with some of the most distinguished archaeologists of his time, as for example a joint publication on 'The Bucheum' (1934) with Oliver Myers. He was a discriminating collector, exhibiting his collection magnificently in his own home in London and then bequeathing much of it to the British Museum. His support extended to the development of archaeological work by British scholars in Palestine when this became a British mandated territory under the League of Nations. He stimulated and gave financial help to the foundation of a British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem. 
Another interest was that in model soldiers. Robert Mond gave the United Services Institution a gift of 900 figures representing all the regiments in Napoleon's army, a collection it had taken him thirty-five years to build up. With his brother Alfred he set up the mausoleum at the St Pancras cemetery, Finchley, which their father had envisaged, for the burial of members of the family. Eventually it was to receive both Jew and Christian. 
Mond was knighted in 1932. Among the many honours he received, from academic bodies and governments, were the honorary degrees of LLD from the universities of Liverpool and Toronto, an honorary DSc from the University of London, the presidency of the Faraday Society, and the Messel medal of the Society of Chemical Industry, which his father had helped to found. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and fellow of the Royal Society. He also received French honours, first officer and later commander of the Legion d'honneur, and then member of the Academie des Inscriptions et des Lettres, thus becoming a member of the Institut de France. He was elected president of the Societe de Chimie Industrielle. He died in Paris on 22 October 1938, was cremated at the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, and his ashes buried at Belle-Ile-en-Terre. 
Ludwig Mond's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 35074


Montagu, Edwin Samuel (1879-1924), politician, was born on 6 February 1879 at 12 Kensington Palace Gardens, London. He was the second son of Samuel Montagu, the first Baron Swaythling (1832-1911), a millionaire banker and later Liberal MP, and his wife, Ellen (1848-1919), daughter of Louis Cohen, a member of the prominent Jewish banking family of Liverpool. Henrietta Franklin (1866-1964) and Lilian Helen Montagu (1873-1963) were his elder sisters. 
From 1887 to 1891 Montagu attended Doreck College, a preparatory school in Kensington Gardens Square. In 1891 he was sent to a boarding-school, Clifton College, where he did not settle, suffering from frequent bouts of homesickness, especially missing his mother, to whom he was very close. Severe headaches resulted in his being sent on a recuperative sea voyage round the world from December 1891 to April 1892, accompanied by a young tutor, J. D. Israel. His personal unhappiness was reflected in increasingly poor grades and he was removed from Clifton on 7 April 1893, being enrolled soon after in the City of London School. 
Though an intelligent student with an interest in the sciences, Montagu was not strongly academic and his full potential was not reflected in school reports. He cared little for sport, but took a keen interest in ornithology, shooting, and walking, which became lifelong passions. In December 1895 he entered University College, London, specializing in biology, and in June 1896 was placed in the first division, being awarded an exhibition and gold medal in the bachelor of science examination. Although he failed in his attempt to pass the inter-science degree exam in July 1897, he succeeded a year later. After briefly attending University College Hospital as a medical student, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1898. 
Montagu's years at Cambridge were eventful. In strictly academic terms he was an undistinguished student, obtaining a second in part 1 (1900) and a third in part 2 (1902) of the natural sciences tripos. Instead, he made his mark in the extracurricular field as a witty and eloquent debater, editor, and amateur dramatist. He was elected librarian (and later acting president) of the Amateur Dramatic Club in 1900, president of the Magpie and Stump (the celebrated Trinity College debating society); and secretary (1902) then president (1903) of the prestigious Liberal club. Finally, after two unsuccessful attempts, he was elected president of the Cambridge Union in 1902. 
Montagu increasingly focused his energies in two areas -- the law and politics. In 1903 he started work with Messrs Coward Hawksley and Chance, solicitors, at 30 Mincing Lane, London, and later in 1904 in the chambers of Mr Pollock KC. In November 1905 he passed the constitutional law section of the bar examination. However, he disliked studying law and realized that the legal profession did not appeal to him as a short cut into politics. Instead, he paid greater attention to the political arena itself. In autumn 1903 he went to Canada with Auberon Herbert in order to test the 'imperial value' of Joseph Chamberlain's imperial preference proposals. Montagu and Herbert were free-trade imperialists and their book, 'Canada and the Empire: an Examination of Trade Preferences' (1904), argued vigorously that Canada did not wish to receive imperial preference. 
While at Cambridge, Montagu had come to the attention of Liberal leaders, especially H. H. Asquith, as an intelligent and eloquent debater at the Liberal club. He also began speaking for the Liberal Party at meetings throughout the country, earning a reputation as an up-and-coming Liberal of radical opinions. He was rewarded for his exertions when he was adopted as the Liberal candidate for the West Cambridgeshire (Chesterton) constituency, and was elected to parliament as part of the Liberal landslide of 1906. He held the seat until 1918, representing the combined county of Cambridgeshire from 1918 until November 1922. 
Montagu rose to prominence under Asquith's wing, beginning a close political and personal partnership that lasted until the end of Asquith's premiership, serving as his parliamentary private secretary when the latter was chancellor of the exchequer from February 1906, and retaining his post when Asquith became prime minister in 1908. Among Montagu's chief concerns during these years was land reform, in which his constituency's strongly rural character gave him a special interest. He took an interest, also, in fiscal issues, and his calls for the reform of the tax system (and especially income tax), while not always successful, highlighted his radicalism. 
Montagu's official connection with India began in early 1910 when he was appointed under-secretary of state at the India Office, serving under lords Morley and Crewe until February 1914. His maiden Indian budget speech in July 1910 was a 'tour de force' and marked him out for a considerable political future. Apart from financial issues, Montagu concerned himself with political matters, particularly the growing unrest in India. While acknowledging that demands for increasing political participation emanated from a small section of the educated intelligentsia, he nevertheless asserted the importance of responding to the challenging nationalist climate constructively in order to avoid major conflagration, for 'the amount of yeast necessary to leaven a loaf is very small'. In 1912 he left for his first tour of the Indian subcontinent, being keen to establish a personal understanding of the land, its people, and its problems. Accompanied by his brother Lionel, Montagu's visit enabled him to make valuable contacts with several influential Indians (including politicians and princes) that endured for the rest of his career and cemented a growing passion for the Indian empire. 
In February 1914 Montagu became financial secretary to the Treasury, and held several posts between 1914 and 1917. He joined the cabinet (and was sworn of the privy council) in February 1915 as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. However, in May he was replaced by Winston Churchill and returned to his former post at the Treasury with the formation of the first coalition ministry. During his second tenure at the Treasury he played a leading role in popularizing the first war loans and in establishing voluntary war savings associations and the issue of war savings certificates (February 1916). In July 1916 he was appointed minister of munitions with a seat on the war committee of the cabinet. An agreement he made with J. P. Morgan & Co. saved the allies millions of pounds in their American purchases. 
Forced to resign with the fall of Asquith's coalition in December 1916, Montagu continued to harbour hopes of re-entering the government. The opportunity first arose in January 1917 when the new prime minister, Lloyd George, offered him a cabinet post as minister without portfolio in charge of reconstruction. Montagu accepted, much to the annoyance of the Asquithian Liberals, becoming vice-chairman of a second reconstruction committee with Lloyd George as its titular head. 
These were eventful years in the history of the subcontinent, with a growing nationalist movement and an increasing realization among the British ruling elite that more co-operation and political reform were urgently required. Such concerns were made more acute by India's immense contribution to the war effort. Montagu was impatient to play an active part in this process and hoped to succeed Lord Hardinge as viceroy in 1915. 'Indian problems attract me with an intensity -- which I can find for no other problems. I have no other ambition save to go to India' (Kaul, 'Press and empire', 112). Although unsuccessful in his bid to become viceroy, his interest in the governance of India found unexpected fulfilment when, following the resignation in July 1917 of the Conservative secretary of state, Austen Chamberlain, Montagu was appointed in his place. Montagu was the last Liberal and only Jew to become secretary of state, and his period of office constituted a turning point in the history of the raj. 
Montagu inherited a difficult situation, and one of his first acts was to make a clear statement of the government's position on future constitutional advance for India, a position which had broad cross-party support and had been drafted by the former viceroy, Lord Curzon. His historic pronouncement in the Commons in August 1917 declared that: 'The policy of His Majesty's Government, with which the Government of India are in complete accord, is that of the increasing association of Indians in every branch of the administration, and the gradual development of self-governing institutions with a view to the progressive realisation of responsible government in India as an integral part of the British Empire.('Report on Indian constitutional reforms', 'Parl. papers', 1918, 8.60, Cd 9109; also S. Char, ed., 'Readings in the Constitutional History of India', 1983, 457)' Montagu was personally committed to this process, and his enthusiasm was evidenced by his decision in winter 1917-18 to undertake an extensive tour of India in order to ascertain public opinion at first hand and formulate with the viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, a concrete scheme for constitutional reform. Apart from a brief visit by Crewe accompanying the king for the Delhi durbar in 1912, no secretary of state had officially visited the subcontinent over whose destinies they presided, and Montagu's tour proved a landmark. He kept a daily record of the visit, published posthumously as 'An Indian Diary' (1930). The 'Diary' reveals his frank opinions on a range of issues, including the nature of the political problems confronting India; the need for major reforms and an overhaul of the machinery of empire; the hundreds of Indian political delegations he received; his frustration at what he considered unnecessary bureaucracy and the inherent conservatism of the Indian Civil Service; his fluctuating and often less than charitable views of Chelmsford; as well as the pleasures of dining, shooting, and birdwatching with his many friends in princely India. 
The resultant Montagu-Chelmsford report of July 1918 formed the basis of the 'Government of India Act', which formally entered the statute book in December 1919. One of the major innovations was the introduction of diarchy, or dual government (the concept being first mooted by Lionel Curtis and the Round Table organization), under which there was to be a devolution of power and responsibility in the executive and legislative spheres to Indian administrators elected on a restricted franchise at the provincial level. Subjects 'transferred' to Indian ministers included education, agriculture, and local self-government, although several 'reserved' subjects such as irrigation, police, the press, finance, and justice were retained under British control. Reserve powers were also vested in the governors and the viceroy, and the central government retained overriding powers. A bicameral system was set up at the centre with the legislative assembly having elected majorities but no control over ministers. The electorates were enlarged to 5.5 million in the provinces and 1.5 million in the imperial legislature. 
Apart from the moderates, most Indian nationalist leaders criticized the report and subsequent act for promising much but delivering little actual power into Indian hands, given the impractical division of duties through diarchy, the fact that politically less important departments were transferred to Indians with limited funds, the extension of the system of separate electorates, and the extensive veto powers retained by the British. Provincial diarchy was, in fact, subsequently revoked in the 1935 act. Nevertheless, the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms did represent an important step in the advance of self-government and a stage on the road to the complete devolution of constitutional power. 
The constitutional process was jeopardized, however, by the political repercussions of the government of India's clumsy handling of disturbances during 1919, and in particular by the massacre at Jallianwalla Bagh in Amritsar. The officiating General Dyer was eventually dismissed from the army and the Hunter committee report (1920) was critical of official actions. Montagu was appalled by the massacre and by the justifications offered by Dyer and his supporters, and in the Commons spoke out against the evils of racial arrogance and government by 'terrorism'. However, his emotional outburst was resented by a significant section of the Conservative-dominated Commons, and die-hard back-benchers called for his resignation. He withstood the opposition, but his political position was severely shaken. 
The non-cooperation movement (1920-22) was a further testing period for the secretary of state as the raj witnessed unprecedented India-wide opposition. Montagu, as head of the government of India, was increasingly blamed in parliament for the troubles, while Lord Reading, the new viceroy, adopted a cautious policy, preferring to avoid or postpone confrontation. To Montagu's critics this implied weakness and a lack of decisive leadership, and his position in the Commons grew increasingly precarious. Ironically, Montagu enjoyed a more harmonious relationship with Reading. They were friends and liberal Jews who shared a common approach to imperial policy and governance, had worked together during the war, and were temperamentally better suited -- Reading's charm, diplomacy, and political pragmatism proving a useful counterfoil to Montagu's impetuousness and idealism. 
Montagu was eventually compelled to resign from the India Office on 9 March 1922, following his decision to publish the views of the Indian government on the revision of the treaty of Sevres without previously consulting his cabinet colleagues -- thus flouting the principle of collective responsibility. These views were critical of Lloyd George's anti-Turkish stance in the conflict between Greece and Turkey, an attitude which aroused strong feeling among the Muslim population of India. Montagu felt he had been harshly treated by Lloyd George at the instigation in particular of Curzon, the foreign secretary. Montagu and Lloyd George were not close, and when the prime minister's position as the Liberal head of a Conservative-dominated coalition became more precarious Montagu, who was increasingly seen as a political liability, represented a convenient scapegoat. His earlier betrayal of Asquith meant that he was now politically isolated, and in the general election of November 1922 he lost his seat. 
Montagu was a tall, slim man with a reflective and studious manner. His appearance was striking rather than handsome, with large eyes, black moustache, dark hair, and a receding hairline on a large head, a dark and faintly pock-marked complexion, with a monocle producing a slightly owlish effect. His first love was the natural world. He was a keen ornithologist and was active in the pursuit of country sports, especially shooting. He devoted considerable time and expenditure to renovating his country residence, Breccles Hall near Attleborough in Norfolk, which he purchased in 1916. Along with Lord Grey of Fallodon he established a bird sanctuary at nearby Hickling Broad. 
Despite an apparently abundant and successful life, Montagu frequently appeared a solitary and insecure figure. His incisive eloquence and often abrupt manner won him few political friends and helped to alienate potential allies. He was rarely relaxed, was painfully self-deprecating, and suffered a range of health, marital, familial, and religious problems. After a protracted, and not always smooth, courtship Montagu married on 26 July 1915 the Hon. Beatrice Venetia (1887-1948), youngest daughter of Edward Lyulph Stanley, fourth Baron Sheffield and Baron Stanley of Alderley ['see 'Stanley, (Beatrice) Venetia]. Their relationship lacked passion, and Montagu bravely tolerated his wife's many indiscretions -- her affair with Lord Beaverbrook being only the most prominent -- and her profligate and expensive lifestyle. The triangular relationship between Asquith, Montagu, and Venetia created a major stir in society circles and widened the rift between mentor and protege. Montagu's close personal friendship with the Asquith family, including Asquith's wife, Margot, meant that his marriage to Venetia and subsequent decision to join Lloyd George's government were highly damaging personally as well as politically. 
Montagu had always had a tempestuous relationship with his father, finding his insistence on the strict observance of the Orthodox Jewish faith intellectually and temperamentally hard to countenance. His relationship with his father remained a source of strain, both emotional and financial, into adulthood, as Samuel Montagu used his monetary control over his son to enforce his Orthodox opinions. Samuel Montagu had financed his son's university and legal studies, and paid $500 p.a. as support for his political career. The result was conflict and resentment and a continual financial straightjacket for Montagu. Even after his father's death, when he had an annual income of $10,000 p.a., Venetia was compelled to convert to Judaism upon marriage in order to save his inheritance. For Montagu, religion was a purely personal affair; he had no formal religious beliefs, was anti-Zionist, and constantly emphasized his foremost identity as a Briton. 
It has been contended that, although Montagu was not a practising Jew, religious persecution afflicted him throughout his life and helped to destroy his career. His case exemplifies a fundamental paradox in English society: namely, that while England permitted Jews to climb to the pinnacle of economic and political success, it condoned antisemitism (Levine, 4-5). However, concrete links between religious persecution and the ultimate fate of Montagu as a politician are tenuous and can be exaggerated, as no doubt they often were in Montagu's own mind. Personal and political differences were often confused, and developments in his career owed more to a combination of factors within and outside his control than to overt religious bigotry. 
This is not to deny that antisemitism was a constant undermining factor in his political life. Conservative critics often portrayed him as unreliable, disreputable, and corrupt on grounds of his religion. In 1913, while under-secretary at the India Office, Montagu had to endure antisemitic taunts in parliament and in the press in connection with the contracts of his cousin, Sir Stuart Samuel, and his father's firm, Samuel Montagu & Co., to supply silver to the Indian government. Montagu had played no part in these proceedings, but though cleared of all charges of corruption he was tainted by the connection. Subsequently, during the Dyer debates in parliament, Montagu riled the Conservative back-benchers. Although his words were insensitive, there is no doubt that antisemitism was a component of the strong reaction they evoked. However, it is important to consider the fate of Montagu in the light of other factors, including the momentous changes that he helped to effect in India, his advanced and idealist views on Britain's imperial mission, his penetrating criticism of Indian government officials, his popularity among Indian politicians, his alienation of key political affiliations in the domestic context, and no doubt his overall political tactlessness. As he himself noted to Chelmsford: 'You see you and I are so much more vulnerable than any other Secretary of State and Viceroy because we have set our signatures to plans and proposals which are controversial... when beaten in the attacks on our scheme, they find it easier to attack us. (Kaul, 'Press and empire', 121)' 

India had been Montagu's lifelong passion and after his dismissal he was, in significant respects, a broken man. He continued to work half-heartedly on a number of business ventures and always planned to revisit India, though he never did. In February 1923 he became vice-chairman of the board of De Beers, and later that year joined the board of the Underground Electric Railways and the board of the Metropolitan and District Railway Company. He was a deeply unhappy man in the last years of his life, and continued to suffer from stress and a variety of medical symptoms. Though these were not always serious, he remained preoccupied with premonitions of an early death. On his return from a trip to Brazil (December 1923 to January 1924), undertaken in his capacity as chairman of a British financial mission sent to advise the government on financial and banking reforms, he complained of sickness. 
Montagu's condition worsened, though doctors were unable to agree on a diagnosis. He was admitted to a nursing home at 7 Queen Anne Street, London, in autumn 1924, and died there on 15 November 1924. The cause of death was given as a combination of arteriosclerosis and septicaemia coma. He was buried, in accordance with his wishes, in the grounds of his beloved Breccles, on 20 November, in a private ceremony without a religious service -- though a rabbi, Vivian G. Simmons, officiated at the gravesite. A public memorial service, at the behest of his family, was held on 21 November in the West London Synagogue, which Venetia did not attend. He left his property equally divided between Venetia and a daughter, Judith, born in February 1923, though there is some weight in the speculation that her father was, in fact, Eric Ednam, the third earl of Dudley. 


@@@@@


doc= 35075


Montagu, Lord Robert (1825-1902), politician and religious controversialist, born at Melchbourne, Bedfordshire, on 24 January 1825, was the second son of George Montagu, sixth duke of Manchester (1799-1855), and his first wife, Millicent (1798-1848), daughter and heir of Brigadier-General Bernard Sparrow of Brampton Park, Huntingdonshire. Educated privately, he graduated MA from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1849. 
In April 1859 Montagu was returned as a Conservative MP for Huntingdonshire and held the seat until February 1874. He quickly made his mark as a speaker, championing church rates and retrenchment. In 1852 he published 'Naval Architecture: a Treatise on Ship-Building' and advocated the establishment of a naval school of architecture and engineering on the model of the Royal Military Academy. In foreign affairs Montagu was no less active. His 'Few Words on Garibaldi' (1861) attacked its subject as an adventurer. He opposed Roebuck's resolution (30 June 1863) for recognition of the Confederacy, and he spoke strongly in favour of non-intervention between Denmark and the German powers (5 July 1864). In later years he gave much attention to the Eastern question. On political reform, Montagu showed characteristic individuality. He advocated plural voting, with additional franchises to property and the professions to balance the increase in the numbers enfranchised. On social questions his attitude was more liberal. As early as 1860 he supported a measure for a council of conciliation in labour disputes; and in 1875, in a debate on the 'Employers and Workmen Bill', he declared trade unions to be 'not only a natural right but a preservative of order'. On his motion (April 1864) a select committee on which he sat inquired into the disposal of sewage in large towns; and subsequent legislation on the subject owed much to his labours. On 19 March 1867 Montagu was made, on the reconstruction of Lord Derby's third ministry, vice-president of the committee of council on education, and was appointed first charity commissioner, being sworn of the privy council. He held office until Disraeli's resignation in December 1868. As education minister Montagu sought vigorously to enforce the conscience clause in all schools that received grants from public funds, and advocated the extension of technical education. But he was an awkward colleague. Lord Stanley observed: 'though industrious and quick, his total want of tact makes it impossible that he should be entrusted with the conduct of an important measure' (Vincent, 327). He carried a bill assimilating the vaccination procedure of England to that of Scotland and Ireland, and took effective measures to deal with a serious cattle plague which had spread from the continent to England. 
While in opposition Montagu voted against Irish disestablishment in 1869. But in 1870 he became a Roman Catholic and in 1873 he was formally expelled from the Conservative Party (Thornley, 200). He became a Conservative home-ruler, sitting for County Westmeath from 1874 to 1880, later claiming that the tories had promised him a cabinet seat if he endorsed home rule (Thornley, 201). He quickly proved an unreliable member of Isaac Butt's party and by 1877 had left it, but without a reconciliation with the tories, whose Eastern and Indian policy he condemned. 'Foreign Policy' (1877) was a substantial and quite well-documented attack on the tory government's policy. 
On his retirement from parliament in 1880 Montagu devoted himself to religious controversy. In 1864 he had defended church establishments and upheld Anglicanism in 'The Four Experiments in Church and State and the Conflicts of Churches'; but his conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1870 prompted several pamphlets from a different point of view. However, in 1882 he rejoined the Church of England on ethical and political rather than on theological grounds (see his 'Reasons for Leaving the Church of Rome', 1886). Thereupon he pursued a vigorous campaign against Romanist doctrine and practice, professing in a series of pamphlets -- notably 'Scylla or Charybdis, which? Gladstone or Salisbury?' (1887) -- to expose a conspiracy, in which the leaders of both political parties were involved, to bring England under the dominion of the papacy. 'The Sower and the Virgin' (1887) was an exhaustive confutation of the doctrines of the immaculate conception and papal infallibility. 'The Lambeth Judgment, or, The Marks of Sacerdotalism' (1891) minutely analysed Bishop King's case. 
Montagu married first, on 12 February 1850, Mary (died 1857), only child and heiress of John Cromie, of Cromore, co. Antrim, with whom he had two sons and two daughters; second, on 18 October 1862, Elizabeth Catherine (died 1897), daughter of William Wade, with whom he had three sons and two daughters. Not surprisingly, Montagu's violent switches of political and religious allegiance baffled his colleagues in public life and are still hard to explain. He died at his home, 91 Queen's Gate, London, on 6 May 1902, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35076


Montagu, Samuel, first Baron Swaythling (1832-1911), merchant banker and philanthropist, was born Montagu Samuel in Liverpool on 21 December 1832, the second son and youngest child of Louis Samuel (1794-1859), watchmaker and silversmith of Liverpool, and his wife, Henrietta, daughter of Israel Israel of Bury Street, St Mary Axe, London. The Samuel family had emigrated from Mecklenburg-Strelitz in northern Germany in the mid-eighteenth century. Both of Montagu's parents were Orthodox Jews and he was to remain a strict adherent of Orthodox Judaism. 
Montagu's parents altered his given name of Montagu Samuel to Samuel Montagu as soon as he completed his education at the Mechanics' Institution (later the Liverpool Institute). His name change was confirmed by royal licence in 1894. After Louis Samuel retired from business in 1847, the family moved to London, where Montagu joined the money-changing business of his brother-in-law Adam Spielmann. In 1850 or 1851 he was appointed London manager of V. Monteaux & Co., a private bank in Paris, but in 1852 he persuaded his father to provide $5000 to start his own firm. This investment was on condition that Montagu -- not yet twenty-one -- should run the business in partnership with his elder brother, Edwin Samuel, who was a bullion merchant and banker in Liverpool. On this basis the firm of Montagu and Samuel was founded at 142 Leadenhall Street, London, in February 1853. The brothers took on Monteaux's lease at 21 Cornhill in 1862 and in 1865 moved to 60 (later renumbered 114) Old Broad Street, which remained the firm's address until 1987. 
The new firm specialized in bullion and exchange services, bill collection, and bankers' drafts. Montagu's experience and expertise in bullion and foreign exchange were the key factors in the business, and within two decades the firm had 'assumed an undisputed lead in the silver market' ('Jewish Chronicle', 20 Jan 1911). His skilful use of fine margins in foreign exchange gave him the reputation of founding his fortune on 'the quarter-pfennig and the half-centime' (Franklin, 4). 
Edwin Samuel played little part in the development of the firm, remaining in Liverpool until he wound up his own bank in 1872. Montagu's main support came from Ellis Abraham Franklin, who had been the firm's first employee. Franklin married Montagu's sister Adelaide in 1856 and became a partner in 1862. The business was then renamed Samuel, Montagu & Co. (the comma was dropped from the title when Edwin died in 1877). In 1868 the three partners, who were each to have four sons, founded and financed the independent firm of A. Keyser & Co. at their old office in Cornhill; it was later agreed that two sons of each partner in Samuel, Montagu & Co. would be admitted to the new concern. 
By the 1870s Montagu had diversified into the market for foreign loans and bills. He cultivated this new interest by frequent visits to western Europe, where he acted as 'the bank's courier' (Montagu, 61). In 1896 these international contacts led to the appointment of Samuel Montagu as the issuing house for the Belgian government's $1 million 3 per cent loan. By that time the financial success of the firm was assured. Montagu himself admitted in 1896 that 'we have a capital of at least $1,000,000. Some people give us credit for having more than this' (Green, 299). 'For practical purposes', reported one London banker in the same year, 'they are as good as Rothschilds' (HSBC Group Archives, M153/44). 
Throughout his career Montagu maintained direct and narrow control over the firm. Procurations, for example, were not granted to members of staff; consequently for the first fifty years of the firm's existence it was necessary for Montagu or Franklin to sign every letter and every cheque issued by the bank. Montagu was also famously impatient with staff or customers who would not accept instructions and advice. Outside the partnership he was an active shareholder in many British and overseas companies. As an investor in the Chartered Mercantile Bank of India, for example, he was a powerful influence in the successful reconstruction of the company as the Mercantile Bank in 1893. 
Montagu was elected Liberal MP for the Whitechapel division of Tower Hamlets in 1885. Although he was 'far from being a brilliant speaker' (Montagu, 67), he was a popular figure in his East End constituency and in the Commons. In 1888 he was a member of the select committee of the House of Commons on alien immigration, an issue on which he opposed over-restriction and spoke for the interests of persecuted Jews. A devoted follower of Gladstone, he was active as a 'home-ruler' (he contributed to the Parnell expenses fund) and as an advocate of free trade. He was chief author of the 'Weights and Measures Act' 1897 which legalized the use of metric weights and measures, and he ensured that the 'Finance Act' of 1894 exempted from death duties bequests to public libraries, museums, and art galleries. An ardent supporter of bimetallism, he was a member of the gold and silver commission (1887-90) and president of the Decimal Association; he advised both Liberal and Unionist governments on financial issues and gave evidence to the national monetary commission in the USA. 
In his activities outside business and politics, Montagu was equally tenacious and purposeful. He was closely identified with the work of the Anglo-Jewish community. He was a life member of the council of the United Synagogue, a prominent member of the Board of Deputies of British Jews (from 1862), and a member of the board of guardians and the religious education board. In 1870 he founded and became president of the Jewish working men's club in Aldgate. He was until 1909 president of the Shechita board (for supervising the slaughtering of animals according to Jewish practice) and he was chairman of the building committee of the New West End Synagogue in Bayswater (his own place of worship). One of his greatest services to the Jewish community was the formation in 1887 of the federation of the smaller East End synagogues, where he insisted that English became the official language. He was a seat holder at no fewer than forty synagogues. 
Montagu worked energetically in the interests of the east London poor, both Jewish and non-Jewish. He was treasurer of the Jews' Temporary Shelter, founder of the East London Apprenticeship Fund in 1887, trustee of the People's Palace at Mile End, member of the house committee at the London Hospital, and a director of the Four Per Cent Industrial Dwellings Company. In 1903 he gave $10,000 to London county council for its housing scheme for the poor of Tottenham. 
Montagu frequently travelled overseas in the interests of his co-religionists. In 1875 he visited the Holy Land and later founded with Lord Rothschild the first secular and industrial school in Jerusalem. In 1884 he visited the United States to assist the formation of Jewish agricultural colonies in the far west, and two years later he visited all the chief towns of Russia in order to investigate the condition of the Jews there -- an enterprise which on his arrival in Moscow led to his expulsion from Russia at forty-eight hours' notice. Thereafter he was prominent in the affairs of the Mansion House Fund (later the Russo-Jewish Committee), and he served as president from 1896 to 1909. 
Samuel Montagu, who was made a baronet on 23 June 1894, retired from the House of Commons in 1900 and was succeeded there by his nephew and partner Stuart Montagu Samuel. On Campbell-Bannerman's recommendation, in 1907 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Swaythling, taking his title from Swaythling near Southampton, where he had a country house, at South Stoneham. 
In 1862 Montagu married Ellen (1848-1919), the youngest daughter of Louis Cohen, a merchant and stockbroker. They had ten children, including Henrietta Franklin (1866-1964), educationist and suffragist Edwin Montagu (1879-1924), later secretary of state for India, and Lilian Montagu (1873-1963), vice-president of the Jewish Religious Union. Over several decades Montagu amassed a large and celebrated collection of antique silver and a fine collection of English paintings (including works by Reynolds, Turner, and Morland). He was elected a fellow of the Society of Arts in 1897 and he was a conscientious contributor to Palgrave's 'Dictionary of Political Economy', the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and the 'Jewish Chronicle'. He retired from active business life in 1909 and died on 12 January 1911 at his London home, 12 Kensington Palace Gardens, leaving an estate with a gross probate value of $1,150,000. He was buried at the Federation Jewish cemetery at Edmonton, Middlesex, and was survived by his wife, four sons, and six daughters. Most of his fortune was left in trust for his children on the condition that they should neither leave nor marry outside the Jewish faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 35077


Montague, Charles Edward (1867-1928), journalist and novelist, was born at Ealing, Middlesex, on 1 January 1867, the third of the four sons of Francis Montague (died 1893) and his wife, Rosa McCabe (died 1906), daughter of a merchant in Drogheda, Ireland. His father renounced his priesthood in the Roman Catholic church and settled in England. Montague was educated at the City of London School (1879-85) and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he obtained a first class in classical moderations in 1887 and a second in 'literae humaniores' in 1889. He was recruited to the staff of the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1890 by its editor, Charles Prestwich Scott; six years later Montague became chief leader writer. He opposed the South African War, and his commitment to the great Liberal causes was demonstrated during the Edwardian era in his leaders on protectionism, female suffrage, home rule, and the constitutional crisis. His novel 'A Hind Let Loose' (1910), which was first written as a farce during the South African War, angrily condemned 'rotten journalism' and was inscribed 'To C.P.S., through whom an English paper is clear of these stains'. 
Although Montague was often acting editor after 1906, when C. P. Scott was an MP, their differences of outlook became more apparent. In August 1914 Montague's leaders quickly noted that Germany was responsible for the war and that 'Prussian Junkerdom' must be defeated ('Manchester Guardian', 24 Aug 1914). Conversely, C. P. Scott worked for peace and feared the 'impossibility of harmony of feeling' with Montague on this vital issue (C. P. Scott to L. T. Hobhouse, 12 Dec 1914, Guardian archives 132/186). In the autumn months of 1914 Montague, aged forty-seven, astonished his colleagues by his urgent attempts to enlist. In December 1898 he had married Madeline (1876-1958), daughter of C. P. Scott and the educationist Rachel Scott, at Platt Unitarian Chapel, Rusholme, and they had five sons and two daughters. The couple were keen mountaineers and climbed together in the Alps and the Lake District before the First World War. In December 1914 Montague dyed his white hair -- a widely cited action in the literature of the war -- and succeeded in joining a unit for 'elderly' sportsmen. This battalion, the 24th service battalion, Royal Fusiliers, appeared as the king's own Middlesex fusiliers in his later writings. He joined as an alpinist, as mountaineering was his favourite recreation, made clear in 'The Morning's War' (1913). 
In 1915 Montague revelled in the comradeship of soldier-sportsmen, who sacrificed comfortable standards of living and believed, with crusading innocence, in the cause of defending small nations. His personal experience of enlistment, training, embarkation, and a brief period of front-line service, up to February 1916, provided raw material for his post-war writing. After slow recovery from a bombing incident and a wretched period at base depot, Montague was posted to a reserve battalion at Leith. 
In June 1916 he was commissioned into the intelligence department at general headquarters, where he accompanied war correspondents to the front line and censored their daily reports. Captain Montague courteously and quietly fulfilled the role of a conducting officer and he also guided guests such as H. G. Wells and Bernard Shaw on their journeys on the western front. 
Montague was demobilized in January 1919, appointed OBE (military), and returned to the 'Manchester Guardian', but not to the role of chief leader writer, for L. T. Hobhouse, J. L. Hammond, and Ted Scott were more influential adjuncts of C. P. Scott's seemingly endless editorship. Instead, in short leaders, Montague became the voice of the demoralized provincial middle class. The years before 1914 became 'a lost Golden age' ('Manchester Guardian', 30 Dec 1920) when compared with the 'discordant, blatant and vulgar' post-war years, characterized by revolution, industrial unrest, decadence, and the loss of self-control ('Armistice day meditation', 'Manchester Guardian', 11 Nov 1920). 

'Disenchantment' was an episodic and impressionistic commentary on the course and impact of the war, comprising articles published in the 'Manchester Guardian' between April 1920 and November 1921. As an early liberal perspective on the war in France it has no equal, but its title has erroneously been used to identify a school of anti-war writers. Montague opposed the 'conduct' of the British war effort and the lack of generosity and decency in the post-war years. The delicate allusiveness, romanticized treatment of voluntary recruiting, and pungent wit did not mask the moral indignation in 'Disenchantment'. As a highly contemporary manual for living it had a didactic purpose, and character stereotypes were used to explore the themes of idealism and cynicism. 
Montague revisited these themes in a collection of short stories, 'Fiery Particles' (1923), in which the moral shallowness of the political elite featured strongly. 'The Right Place' (1924) continued the condition of England theme, but conveyed with much enjoyment the propinquity of landscape. In those years Montague expressed the interests and distinctiveness of Manchester in a newspaper which had begun to emphasize political news from London. The closure of Miss Horniman's Gaiety Theatre in 1920 effectively ended his work as a theatre critic, which earlier in his career was published in 'The Manchester Stage, 1880-1900' (1900) and 'Dramatic Values' (1911). In December 1925 he departed from the 'Manchester Guardian' with much dignity and regret. 

'Rough Justice' was published in 1926. It presented in fiction the message of 'Disenchantment', but was much more popular; in 1926 20,000 copies were sold. Montague made much use of his war diary in this depiction of England at war. Molly and Auberon were hero types, but social 'betters' had generally failed the test of war and the only redeeming feature of English society was the 'ineradicable decency of the plain man' (Montague MSS I.8). As an old Liberal Montague expended much literary effort in charting institutional failure, a dysfunctional social structure, and a cultural shift which affronted his adherence to individualism and anti-modernism. He was a diffident writer, whose elliptical phrasing and awkward rendition of vernacular idiom provided feats of linguistic contortion. 
After 'Rough Justice', which is full of his own experiences, Montague could not think of another plot for a novel and feared that he would be remembered primarily as an essayist. After the publication of 'Right off the Map' (1927), an allegorical study of the causes and consequences of war, Chatto and Windus suggested that a further opportunity for reflections on Englishness would lie in a series of semi-historical essays. However, his final, posthumously published works were 'Action and other Stories' (1928) and 'A Writer's Notes on his Trade' (1930). 
In retirement Montague lived at Burford, Oxfordshire, and in 1926 he received the honorary degree of LittD from the University of Manchester. He remained a director of Manchester Guardian Ltd. He died of pneumonia at The Firs, Fallowfield, Manchester, on 28 May 1928, and was cremated on 30 May at the Manchester crematorium. His wife, one of the first female magistrates appointed in Manchester (1920), died on 11 December 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 35078


Montague, Francis Charles (1858-1935), historian, was born at the York Hotel, Albemarle Street, Piccadilly, London, on 31 August 1858, the eldest son of Francis Montague (1815/16-1893), formerly of Drogheda, and his wife, Rosa McCabe (1826/7-1906), daughter of a Drogheda merchant. Charles Edward Montague was his younger brother. His parents had married at Brighton in June 1858, and his father, a Roman Catholic priest, had renounced his priesthood. The family settled in St Margaret's, Twickenham, and lived off independent means. 
Montague was a precocious child, reputedly able to read Greek at the age of eight. From University College School and University College, London, he went to Balliol College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner in 1875. After gaining a first class in classical moderations (1877) and in 'literae humaniores' (1879), he graduated BA and became a prize-fellow of Oriel College in 1881, having also been elected fellow of University College, London, in 1880. He then took up law as a profession and was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1883, but returned to Oxford in 1891. There he lectured on law and was later lecturer in modern history at Oriel (1893-1927), simultaneously acting as professor emeritus of history at University College, London; he travelled regularly between Oxford and London to deliver his lectures. He also played an important part in the training of candidates for the Indian Civil Service (1892-1920), and was curator of the Indian Institute from 1900 to 1913. 
For about twenty years Montague maintained a steady output of historical publications, all of them judicious, accurate, and well written. Besides reviews, an elementary textbook on English constitutional history, and contributions to the 'Cambridge Modern History', he published an essay entitled 'The Limits of Individual Liberty' (1885) and a 'Life of Sir Robert Peel' (1888). He also edited Bentham's 'Fragment on Government' (1891) and Macaulay's 'Essays' (1903) and wrote volume 7 (the history of England in the Stuart period, 1603-60) for Longman's 'Political History of England' (1907). In 1930 he was elected an honorary fellow of Oriel and was considered one of the most gifted members of the common room society. 
Montague was a widely read and cultured man, with much of the eighteenth century in his mind and outlook: he was a tolerant rationalist and a blameless epicurean. A self-absorbed scholar, he seems to have been unsuited not only to his first profession of law but also to that of teaching and lecturing, only enjoying the company of his best pupils. Perhaps it is not surprising that in later life he became something of a recluse. He died, unmarried, at his home, 177 Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 8 April 1935, and was buried at Wolvercote cemetery on 11 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 35079


Monteath, Sir James (1847-1929), administrator in India, was born at Guileburn, Lockerbie, on 7 September 1847, the fourth son of Thomas Monteath, of the Bank of Scotland, who came from an old Perthshire family, and his wife, Hannah Johnstone. Monteath attended the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, and afterwards Queen's College, Belfast, where he graduated MA. In 1868 he passed the open competition for the Indian Civil Service and in November 1870 arrived in Bombay to begin a career in the Bombay presidency ['see 'competition wallahs]. 
Monteath was initially posted to Dharwar as an assistant collector and thence, in October 1871, to Kanara, where for several months in 1873 he was engaged on the Kanara land assessment case. Subsequently he wrote chapters on the land revenue administration and history of Kanara for the 'Bombay Gazetteer' (1883). On 9 December 1872, while still based at Kanara, he married Amelia (died 1927), daughter of Thomas Hunter of Belfast, a member of a Scottish family long settled in Ireland, with whom he had five sons and three daughters. 
In April 1874 Monteath began a short stint as under-secretary to the government in the revenue, financial, and general departments, the first of many postings in the secretariat. He returned to Kanara in February 1875, but was called back to the secretariat in 1878, after which he undertook only one extensive period of district work as the collector of Bijapur from 1892 to 1895. He was private secretary to Lord Reay, governor of Bombay, from 1885 until 1890, and in July 1896 was appointed chief secretary to the government of Bombay. 
As chief secretary it fell to Monteath to deal with the Bombay famine of 1896-7, an onerous duty for which he was created a CSI. In spite of the official recognition, however, implicit criticism of his famine administration appeared in the reports of the two famine commissions of 1899 and 1901, each of which castigated the Bombay government for over-enthusiastic collection of land revenue during the crisis. 
In August 1900 Lord Northcote, governor of Bombay, appointed Monteath revenue member of his council with special responsibility for famine. Monteath was thus in charge again throughout the famine years of 1899-1902, during which time his health began to falter from overwork. As both Northcote and Lord Curzon noted with some dismay, Monteath lacked the instincts of a politician and often blundered, not least when he sent a curtly worded letter to 'The Times of India' in July 1900 stating that he would take no notice of anonymous complaints about the famine administration. In May 1901 he introduced a land bill into the Bombay legislative council which, in the aftermath of famine indebtedness, was designed to limit the transfer of land from cultivating castes to moneylending castes by prohibiting the alienation of land by tenants whose revenue payments were in arrears. Possibly because he had little faith in the bill himself, Monteath promoted it with such ineptitude that its attempt to free peasants from the grip of moneylenders was perceived instead as an attack by the state on the occupancy rights of indebted tenants. Opposition came from many quarters, but Monteath persisted with the bill, provoking a walk-out on 23 August 1901 by five Indian members of the council when he accused them of opposing it on the grounds of economic self-interest. 
Monteath retired in August 1905. He had served as acting governor of Bombay from 6 September to 13 December 1903 and in January of that year had been promoted to KCSI, an honour which Northcote had requested for him on account of his loyalty in implementing a revenue policy he personally disliked and the intense public criticism to which his work had been subject. A Conservative, he was delighted to receive a farewell letter from Curzon praising his devotion to duty. 
After retirement Monteath lived at Buckerell Lodge, Honiton, Devon, where he died on 19 April 1929; he was buried on 23 April. His wife, Amelia, had died in 1927. Of their five sons, two followed their father into the Bombay civil service, a third joined the Indian forest service, and a fourth entered the India Office and became private secretary to the secretary of state. 


@@@@@


doc= 35080


Montefiore, Claude Joseph Goldsmid- (1858-1938), scholar and founder of Liberal Judaism, was born in London on 6 June 1858, the youngest of four children born to Nathaniel Mayer Montefiore (1819-1883), medical practitioner, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Goldsmid (1819-1902). On his father's side Montefiore was a nephew of Sir Moses Montefiore; on his mother's he was the grandson of Isaac Lyon Goldsmid. His roots were thus firmly planted within some of the wealthiest Anglo-Jewish families. A delicate, thoughtful child, his early ambition was to enter the rabbinate. Educated privately and then at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated BA with a first in classics (1881), he came under the influence of liberal ideas, particularly the religious liberalism of the then master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett. In 1881-2 he studied Jewish subjects in Berlin, at the Hochschule (later Lehranstalt) fur die Wissenschaft des Judentums, where he met, and from which he brought to England as his tutor in rabbinic literature, the Romanian-Jewish academic Solomon Schechter, later reader in rabbinic and Talmudic literature at Cambridge. Schechter was a thoroughly Orthodox Jew, but one who was not afraid of approaching Jewish texts in a critical manner. 
Montefiore's own religious leanings had already veered away from the nominal orthodoxy of his father and were at this time heavily influenced by the Reform Judaism of his mother. Montefiore, like her, questioned and found wanting the eternal truths of Orthodox Judaism. In 1886 he married, at the West London Synagogue of British [Reform] Jews, Therese (died 1889), daughter of Lazar Schorstein of Reuter's agency, London. Three years later Therese died in childbirth. Montefiore abandoned plans to become a rabbi, and instead used the leisure his private wealth secured to deepen and broaden his religious studies, which were now taking him well beyond the modest radicalism of the West London Synagogue. In 1891, at Jowett's invitation, he delivered the Hibbert lectures at Oxford, entitled 'The origins of religion as illustrated by the ancient Hebrews'. In these he set out the prospectus for a new form of Judaism, the doctrine of which he developed to maturity over the next decade. 
The essence of Montefiore's theology was to be found within an entirely de-nationalized and de-ritualized Judaism. He rejected the central tenet of Orthodox Judaism, that the Hebrew 'Bible' was the revealed word of God, and he rejected the claim that the 'Talmud' represented the definitive interpretation of that word. What was left was simply an amalgam of moral and ethical values, based on a vague monotheism: the good Jew was the good citizen, charged with the task of bearing witness to 'righteousness in action and truthfulness of the heart' ('Jewish Quarterly Review', 1/2, 152). Such were the intellectual origins of Liberal Judaism, the founding tenets of which Montefiore proclaimed from the pulpit of the West London Synagogue on 1 February 1896. The condemnation of him, and his philosophy, from the world of Orthodox Judaism was almost without qualification. However, he found a number of kindred spirits, especially in Lily Montagu, a daughter of the ultra-Orthodox Jewish banker and MP, Sir Samuel Montagu. Lily's rebellion against the oppressive Orthodox observance which she had to endure in her father's house could not have been more complete or more public. Lily warmed to Montefiore; in truth she wished to marry him, but was rebuffed. She formed the idea of founding an organization to promote his religious views, and hers. On 16 February 1902 the Jewish Religious Union (from 1909 the Jewish Religious Union for the Advancement of Liberal Judaism) was born. Montefiore was its president and philosopher-in-chief from its foundation until his death. 
Scarcely less important to Montefiore than his Liberal Judaism was his anti-Zionism. In common with most members of the emancipated Anglo-Jewish gentry, Montefiore harboured and articulated a strong aversion to Jewish nationalism, which he regarded as quite incompatible with his status as a Briton of the Jewish persuasion. In his capacity as president of the Anglo-Jewish Association from 1896 to 1921 he was one of the two signatories of a letter published in 'The Times' of 24 May 1917, which argued that Jews were not 'a homeless people' and had 'no separate national aspirations'. The appearance of the letter created a sensation within Anglo-Jewry: Montefiore's co-signatory, David Lindo Alexander, was compelled to resign as president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews. But at the Anglo-Jewish Association, a self-appointed body whose membership reflected the views of like-minded British Jews, Montefiore was assured of support. Later that year, following the promulgation of the Balfour declaration, he became a founder member of the League of British Jews, dedicated to resisting the allegation that Jewish people constituted a separate political entity. In his anti-Zionist faith Montefiore was unshakeable, even when Nazism cast its shadow across Europe. Under his influence the Liberal Jewish Synagogue in London became a bastion of anti-Zionist propaganda. Montefiore blamed Zionism, in part, for Hitler's rise to power. 
Montefiore was a prolific writer, especially on biblical subjects and in popularizing the Jewish origins of Christianity. From 1888 to 1908 he served as joint editor of the 'Jewish Quarterly Review'. In 1909 he published 'The Synoptic Gospels', the following year 'Some Elements of the Religious Teaching of Jesus', and in 1914 'Judaism and St Paul'. His 'Bible for Home Reading', a work of some 1400 pages, first published in 1897, went into three editions. He received honorary degrees from Manchester University in 1920 and Oxford University in 1927, and in 1930 he was awarded the British Academy medal for biblical studies. Montefiore was also deeply interested in educational matters and in social welfare. For a few months in 1888 he served as a co-opted member of the London school board. He was instrumental in the establishment of the Froebel Institute at Roehampton and in 1913 he became president of Hartley College, precursor of Southampton University. 
Montefiore assumed the additional surname of Goldsmid by letters patent in 1883. In 1902 he married his first wife's tutor, Florence Fyfe Brereton (died December 1938), daughter of Richard James Ward; she had been a vice-principal of Girton College, Cambridge, and underwent a formal conversion to Judaism. He died at his London home, 42 Portman Square, on 9 July 1938 and was survived by Leonard (1889-1961), the son of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 35081


Montgomerie, Robert Archibald James (1855-1908), naval officer, born at Rothesay, Isle of Bute, on 11 September 1855, was the son of James Montgomerie MD, of Edinburgh, and his wife, Mary Campbell of Lochnell. He entered the navy on board the 'Britannia' in August 1869 and became sub-lieutenant in September 1875; while serving on the 'Immortalite' in the detached squadron, on 6 April 1877 he jumped overboard to save life. It was a dark night, the sea was rough, the ship was before the wind, and the latitude was infested with sharks. Montgomerie therefore, in addition to the Albert medal and the silver medal of the Royal Humane Society, was awarded the Stanhope gold medal for the act of greatest gallantry during the year, and shortly afterwards was appointed to the royal yacht. From her he was promoted lieutenant on 13 September 1878. He was serving in the 'Carysfort', under Captain H. F. Stephenson, during the Egyptian campaign of 1882, and, landed with the naval brigade, was present at the battle of Tell al-Kebir on 13 September. 
In January 1885 the naval brigade under Lord Charles Beresford was organized to help attempt the relief of Gordon at Khartoum, and Montgomerie, then a lieutenant of the 'Inflexible', joined it at Gubat and served in the gunboat 'Safieh' in some of the operations above Metemmah. From March to July 1885 he was naval transport officer at Dongola, and was specially mentioned in Lord Wolseley's dispatches; from August 1885 to June 1886 he served on the staff of General Sir Frederick Stephenson, and was placed in command of all the armed steamers on the Nile and appointed to superintend the river transport. He was then assigned to the royal yacht, an appointment almost invariably awarded for services which otherwise would go unrequited. From the yacht he was promoted commander on 24 August 1887, and served on the East India station in the 'Boadicea', the flagship of Sir E. R. Fremantle. In October 1890 he took part in the Witu expedition, commanding the field battery, which was actively engaged. He was again mentioned in dispatches, and in May 1892 was made a CB. 
In September 1891 Montgomerie was appointed to command the training ship 'Lion', and on 1 January 1894 was promoted captain. After commanding the cruiser 'Bonaventure' on the China station and the battleship 'Prince George' in the channel, he was appointed to the 'Charybdis' in November 1901 for the North American station, and was commodore in Newfoundland waters during the fishery season. He served as commodore under Sir Archibald Douglas during the Venezuelan operations of December 1902, and blockaded the coast and bombarded Puerto Cabello. In April 1904 he was appointed a naval aide-de-camp to Edward VII, and in May became inspecting captain of boys' training ships. In 1904 he was created CMG, and on 5 July 1905 he was promoted rear-admiral. He hoisted his flag on 1 January 1907 in command of the destroyers and submarines in commission with nucleus crews, an appointment he held for a year. In August 1907 he was created CVO. 
Montgomerie married in 1886 Alethe Marian, the eldest daughter of Spencer Charrington, of Hunsdon House, Hertfordshire; they had one son. Montgomerie was a distinguished athlete, and at one time was heavy-weight boxing champion of the navy. A keen sportsman, he hunted big game in many parts of the world. He died at his home, 22 Embankment Gardens, Chelsea, in London, on 1 September 1908, survived by his wife, and was buried at Hunsdon, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35082


Massingberd, Sir Archibald Armar Montgomery- (1871-1947), army officer, was born Archibald Armar Montgomery on 6 December 1871 in London, the second son of Hugh de Fellenberg Montgomery (1844-1924), landowner and politician, of Blessingbourne, Fivemiletown, co. Tyrone, and his wife, Mary Sophia Juliana (May) (died 1928), daughter of the Revd John Charles Maude, rector of Inniskillen and son of the first Viscount Hawarden. Hugh Maude de Fellenberg Montgomery was his brother. He added the name Massingberd to his own in 1926 when his wife, Diana Massingberd (1872-1963), daughter of Edmund Langton, whom he married on 2 April 1896, inherited through her mother the Massingberd estates in Lincolnshire. 
During his education at Charterhouse School and at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, Montgomery did not prove outstanding in any activity except horsemanship, to which he had a lifelong devotion. Yet he was from a 'good' family background: tall, good-looking, charming, articulate, and persuasive. These characteristics stood him in good stead during his military career. He was commissioned into the Royal Field Artillery in November 1891 and served with it for most of the South African War of 1899-1902, though he had a staff job in Cape Town for the last few months. He was present both at the British defeat at Magersfontein and at the Boer surrender at Paardeburg. During his war service Montgomery developed a strong reputation for being resilient in the face of adversity and a good improviser. His natural charm and careful diplomacy made him especially skilled in the handling of his superiors. 
Montgomery's early war service seems to have inspired him to take a more serious, studious attitude to his profession. According to his own account it was reading, at this period in his life, the celebrated study of Stonewall Jackson by the military historian G. F. R. Henderson which inspired him to seek entry to the Staff College at Camberley. He joined that institution in January 1905. While there he formed a firm friendship with the commandant, Sir Henry Rawlinson. Rawlinson reported very favourably on Montgomery and the latter gained a series of staff appointments most beneficial to the advancement of his career. Their future careers were to be intimately connected. 
In August 1914 Montgomery was an instructor at the Staff College. Shortly after the outbreak of war he was appointed a staff officer with the 4th division. Rawlinson took over this division on 23 September 1914, the previous commander having been injured during the battle of the Marne, and by then Montgomery was acting as its principal staff officer. A partnership between commander and his chief of staff was forged which, most unusually, was carried through several levels of command and lasted from this early stage in the war virtually to its end. When Rawlinson was promoted to command the 4th corps in October 1914, he managed to have Montgomery appointed his chief of staff, and Montgomery remained Rawlinson's principal staff officer when the latter was appointed to command the newly formed Fourth Army in February 1916. The chief of staff of an army was a job which carried the rank of major-general. After being an acting major-general for nearly a year, Montgomery was made substantive in that rank in January 1917, having risen from major to major-general in two-and-a-half years. It was a rate of promotion made all the more remarkable by the fact that Montgomery never held a field command in the First World War. 
The Rawlinson-Montgomery partnership was certainly close. Montgomery, however, was generally very discreet, content to remain a grey eminence. It is rarely possible to delineate with any clarity his particular role in planning and executing Rawlinson's military operations. Fourth Army's record in the Somme campaign of 1916 considered as a whole was very mixed and no senior officer serving in that headquarters can escape a share of responsibility for the catastrophe of 1 July 1916 with which it opened. But there is evidence that Montgomery had favoured a much more limited and cautious sort of attack than that which, under pressure from Haig and general headquarters, was finally adopted. Fourth Army did not play a major role in the operations of 1917. Its heyday was the final campaign of 8 August to 11 November 1918 in which, commencing with the battle of Amiens, it won a series of stunning victories, playing a greater role than any other allied army in forcing the Germans to sign the humiliating armistice of 11 November. Montgomery wrote a detailed account of these last battles, 'The Story of the Fourth Army in the Battles of the Hundred Days' (1919), which some astute observers considered to be one of the finest works of military history to be produced in the immediate aftermath of the war. 
After the armistice Montgomery served as chief of staff with the British army of occupation on the Rhine and subsequently became deputy chief of staff to Rawlinson while the latter was commander-in-chief in India. On his return from India he successively commanded the Welsh territorial division and the 1st division at Aldershot. As a lieutenant-general, in the late 1920s, he was in charge of southern command which included the Salisbury Plain area where pioneering exercises with mechanized forces were being held. Montgomery's temperament was conservative and he was somewhat sceptical about the ambition of radical officers in the Royal Tank Corps (RTC) to effect a revolution in the army's structure. In 1928 his influence helped terminate one series of experiments, though it was a series which had in any case largely run its course. He incurred during this period the deep and lasting hostility of the influential military journalist Basil Liddell Hart. Montgomery's historical reputation has suffered massively from Liddell Hart's distinctly prejudiced, exaggerated, and unfair portrayal of him, in influential books, as an archetypal military reactionary. Montgomery, however, continued to impress his superiors. He was promoted full general in 1930 and appointed adjutant-general in March 1931, becoming an army council member. In February 1933 he became chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS) and in 1935 he was promoted field marshal. He never held a field command in war, and his role as Rawlinson's chief of staff in the Fourth Army (1916-18) was, for the most part, exercised too discreetly to enable his role in decision making to be discerned. It is, therefore, on his performance as CIGS in the critical period 1933-6 that his reputation must depend. 
Although not an early advocate of independent armoured forces, Montgomery-Massingberd seems to have become a convert by the time he became CIGS, or very shortly afterwards. At this period he enjoyed good relations with the two most important advocates of armoured formations in the RTC: George Lindsay and Percy Hobart. He took the decision, in November 1933, to establish the 1st tank brigade as a permanent formation and gave great encouragement to its work, gaining glowing praise from Hobart, its commander. He followed this up in late 1934 with a decision to form the British army's 1st armoured division (initially called the mobile division) though this decision could not be implemented until after his retirement. He played a major part in the early planning of rearmament and was a strong proponent of making the British army ready to fight alongside the French against the Germans. Montgomery-Massingberd seems to have been a Francophile and strongly advocated maintaining close relations with the French general staff. Regarded by at least one reputable observer as the best CIGS of the inter-war period at putting the general staff's case in committee, he gained the agreement of the chiefs of staff and of Stanley Baldwin's government to prepare the regular army for a continental campaign, though the Territorial Army was not so lucky. 
In a memorandum on the future organization of the British army completed on 9 September 1935, he advocated the preparation of a regular field force to be sent to the continent on the outbreak of war which would include four infantry divisions plus the mobile division, to be reinforced at intervals by rearmed divisions of the Territorial Army. The field force was to be very highly mechanized by the standards of the time, having enough lorries to lift an entire infantry division if required, as well as a large amount of armour. In addition to the mobile division, it was to have a light tank battalion attached to each infantry division for reconnaissance and screening. There were also to be army tank battalions (one per infantry division) consisting of heavily armoured tanks to assist the infantry in the assault. In the same document Montgomery-Massingberd demonstrated a good grasp of German operational methods, especially the use of airpower to facilitate deep penetration by a highly mobile land force. 
Having, in his own view, laid a foundation for the army's rearmament, Montgomery-Massingberd decided to retire early in the spring of 1936 in order to make room for a younger man to execute the programme. He had been appointed CB (1918), KCMG (1919), KCB (1925), and GCB (1934). In retirement he resided at his country house at Gunby Hall, Spilsby, Lincolnshire. During the Second World War the lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire, who was attached to the Air Ministry, asked Montgomery-Massingberd to take charge of organizing and recruiting the Home Guard in Lincolnshire, work he undertook for nine months, at the end of which the lord lieutenant returned to the county and personally took command. Montgomery-Massingberd died on 13 October 1947, at Gunby Hall, leaving no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35083


Monypenny, William Flavelle (1866-1912), journalist and biographer, came of an Ulster protestant family of Scottish extraction, which until 1898 spelt the surname Monypeny. The second son of William Monypeny, a small landowner, of Ballyworkan, co. Armagh, and of Mary Anne Flavelle, his wife, he was born probably at Dungannon, co. Tyrone, or possibly in co. Armagh, on 7 August 1866. Educated at the Royal School, Dungannon, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated with high distinction in mathematics, he proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford; but temporary ill health compelled him, after a short residence (1889-90), to leave Oxford for London, and he became a regular contributor to 'The Spectator'. In 1893 he joined the editorial staff of 'The Times', where his outstanding abilities were quickly recognized. 
Early in 1899 Monypenny was offered unexpectedly the editorship of the Johannesburg 'Star', the foremost organ of the Uitlanders, who were suffering under the oppressive rule of President Kruger. The offer was accompanied by an assurance of unhampered editorial freedom. It was specially attractive to a man 'inspired by a lofty imperial patriotism and a keen interest in practical politics' ('The Times', 9f). He accepted it, and made the journal a power in the political struggle that ensued. This was not achieved without personal risk. Threats were made against his life, and on one occasion he was assaulted in his office. When, later, he learned that a warrant for high treason had been taken out against him, he reluctantly withdrew to the sanctuary of British territory. On the outbreak of the South African War he obtained a commission in the Imperial light horse, fought in Natal, and, to the detriment of his health, endured the siege of Ladysmith. Later, under Lord Milner's high commissionership, he became director of civil supplies and a member of the committee for regulating the return of refugees after the annexation of the Transvaal. When the 'Star' was again published he resumed the editorship, and marshalled the paper behind Milner's imperial vision for South Africa in the aftermath of the war. However, he resigned from the 'Star' in 1903 from a scrupulous sense of honour, finding himself unable to countenance the importation of indentured Chinese labour. He made his way from Lake Victoria by an exhausting tramp past Wadelai and Dufile and down the White Nile to Khartoum, and thence to England, where he rejoined the staff of 'The Times'. He contributed the opening chapter, 'The imperial ideal', to the collection of essays published in 1905 as 'The Empire and the Century'. It is a statement of Monypenny's belief that by maintaining its empire, Britain could play a moderating role in world affairs, which would ensure its continued pre-eminence. In 1908 he was appointed an original director of the Times Publishing Company. 
Monypenny's great opportunity came when he was chosen by 'The Times' to write the authoritative biography of Disraeli, from the 'vast mass of papers' ('The Times') that had been bequeathed to Lord Rowton. The choice was greeted with surprise by some, who thought that Monypenny lacked the necessary experience of people and affairs. He had, though, taken a lifelong interest in the greater issues of politics, imperial and domestic, and he brought to bear a judgement of conspicuous sagacity, fortified by close observation, penetrating shrewdness, and a natural gift for separating the essential from the accidental. These qualities gave weight to a lucid style, charged with thought. 
The first volume of Monypenny's 'Life of Benjamin Disraeli' appeared, to critical acclaim, in October 1910, and the second, delayed by failing health, in November 1912. Ten days later, on 23 November, Monypenny died suddenly of heart failure in a nursing home in the New Forest, Lingford, Ringwood, Hampshire. The biography was continued, and completed in four more volumes, by George Earle Buckle, the editor under whom Monypenny had served on 'The Times'. Buckle also wrote the inscription for the memorial tablet in the parish church of Farnham Royal, Buckinghamshire, where Monypenny was buried on 27 November 1912. Monypenny never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 35084


Moody, Harold Arundel (1882-1947), physician and founder of the League of Coloured Peoples, was born on 8 October 1882 at 8 Rum Lane, in Kingston, Jamaica, the eldest of six children of Charles Ernest Moody (1861-1920) and his wife, 'nee' Christina Emmeline Ellis (died 1951), who kept a drug store. Moody, a diligent student at Wolmer's Free School, went on to study medicine at King's College, London, in 1904. 
Moody qualified MB, BS in 1912 and gained an MD in 1919. Although well qualified, he was refused a post at King's College Hospital because of his colour; eventually he was employed as medical superintendent of the Marylebone Medical Mission in London. On 10 May 1913 Moody married Olive Mabel Tranter (1889-1965), a white nurse, who worked closely with him in a long and happy marriage which produced two girls and four boys. That same year he opened a practice in Peckham, London, eventually moving to 164 Queen's Road, where he lived and worked for the rest of his life. Moody revisited Jamaica on only three occasions, in 1912, 1919, and finally in 1946-7. 
As a teenager Harold Moody became a Christian and his faith was the mainspring of his life and activities. Until the late 1920s Moody concentrated on his family, medical work, and various Christian activities mainly within the Congregational Union and as chairman of the Colonial Missionary Society. Racial prejudice was widespread and overt, and Moody sought to counter this by using his professional influence and preaching opportunities, although with few results. In 1931 he founded the League of Coloured Peoples (LCP), a multiracial organization, to press for black civil rights. Moody regarded the LCP as a Christian body pursuing a Christian purpose, and he pressed these claims in his preaching and as president of the Christian Endeavour Union (1936) and chairman of the London Missionary Society (1943). In its early years the league engaged mainly in a range of social and welfare roles, while Moody sought the support of influential people, who were invited to address its meetings and conferences. 
The Italian invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 politicized the league and gave it a sharper pan-African edge. The league lobbied on a variety of national and international issues: the treatment of black British seamen as aliens, land and labour questions in British colonial Africa, the labour and political unrest in the Caribbean in the late 1930s, and the 'colour bar' in Britain and the colonies. In these protests the LCP was often allied to other black groups, including those led by radicals, although relations were never easy: there was tension between Moody and African students in the mid-1930s over who should control a London hostel for west African students, for example. 
The wartime influx of black workers and soldiers into Britain led to increased racial animosity and helped give the LCP greater purpose and influence. Moody became a frequent visitor to government departments. Some officials regarded him as pompous and interfering but invariably he was listened to with respect. In 1943 he joined advisory bodies on the training of nurses in the colonies and on the welfare of colonial people in Britain. At the 1944 London conference of the LCP a 'charter for coloured peoples' demanded 'full self-government' for colonial peoples 'at the earliest possible opportunity' and that racial discrimination in Britain be made illegal. The charter foreshadowed some of the demands made at the Pan-African Congress in Manchester in 1945, which Moody helped to prepare but did not attend. 
Moody wrote several pamphlets on race relations, while a league committee report of 1944 advocated radical changes in school curricula in an attempt to counter racial prejudice. In the winter of 1946-7 Moody made an extended speaking and preaching tour of the West Indies in order to raise money for a colonial culture centre in London. It was a tiring and disappointing journey. Moody returned ill to his London home and died there of acute influenza on 24 April 1947; he was cremated at the South London crematorium. 
Moody was a tall, bespectacled, and imposing figure with a dominating personality. A bronze bust, executed by his brother Ronald Clive Moody in 1953, is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. The league continued until the early 1950s, faltered, and then closed; it had been Moody's personal creation, largely sustained and directed by his enthusiasm, energy, and income. 


@@@@@


doc= 35085


Moor, Sir Frederick Robert (1853-1927), politician in South Africa, was born at Pietermaritzburg, Natal, on 12 May 1853, the eldest son of Frederick William Moor ('b'. 1830), a farmer and settler under the Byrne immigration scheme of 1850, and his wife, Sarah Annabella, the daughter of Robert Ralfe. He was educated at Hermannsburg School, near Greytown, Natal. As a young man of nineteen, he was attracted to the recently discovered diamond fields at Kimberley. There he met, and in 1878 married, Charlotte Mary St Clair Moodie (died 1930), daughter of William James Dunbar Moodie and granddaughter of Donald Moodie, first colonial secretary of Natal. They had three sons and four daughters. Moor remained on the diamond fields for seven years. As the amalgamation and consolidation of claims gathered momentum, he realized that it would be increasingly difficult for the individual digger to prosper. Like many others, he sold out his claims, and in 1879 returned to Natal, where he farmed near Estcourt. 
Moor's election on two occasions to the mining board in Kimberley fostered an interest in public life. In 1886 he was elected as member of the Natal legislative council for Weenen county. He attached himself to the party which advocated responsible government for the colony and, from 1893, when this was conceded, he served two terms as minister of native affairs (1893-7 and 1899-1903), interrupted by two years in opposition. 
Moor resisted any modification of the long-standing policy of upholding customary law and the authority of local chiefs. He considered this essential -- under the supervision of white officials -- for the effective control of Natal's black majority. He consequently discouraged the granting of exemptions from customary law, disapproved of Cape Colony's non-racial franchise, opposed the acquisition of land by black people on freehold tenure, and wanted to extend governmental control over the mission reserves. 
Subsequently, as leader of the opposition, Moor criticized the ministry of C. J. Smythe (1905-6) for increasing the taxation of the black population, and particularly the ill-advised poll tax which sparked the uprising of February 1906. On succeeding Smythe as prime minister in November of that year, Moor's handling of the delicate situation created by the 1906 disturbance was unimpressive. The trial of the heir to the Zulu throne, Dinizulu ka Cetshwayo, provoked criticism in Britain and elsewhere. This tarnished Natal's image at the time of the 'closer union' negotiations. 
Moor consistently urged the necessity for some measure of unification in South Africa. He had been impressed by the enthusiasm he encountered as delegate for Natal to the inaugural ceremonies of the Australian commonwealth in 1901. He represented the colony at customs conferences in Cape Town (1898), Bloemfontein (1903), Pietermaritzburg (1906), and also in Pretoria (1908), where he wholeheartedly supported the proposal that a national convention should be held to formulate a draft South African constitution. Natal's white minority electorate favoured federation in preference to union but Moor and his colleagues were outvoted in the national convention which met at Durban in October 1908. He eventually approved the large discretionary powers granted to the union government, believing that public opinion would safeguard the interests of the provinces. His insistence that isolation would be suicidal in view of the colony's dependence upon the transit trade into the interior was persuasive, and in the referendum of June 1909 Natal accepted union. 
In General Botha's ministry of 1910, Moor assumed the portfolio of commerce and industries, but he was defeated at the first election after union. His previous experience as minister of native affairs in Natal secured him a seat in the senate which he retained for ten years (1910-20) before retiring to his farm, Greystone, near Estcourt, where he died on 18 March 1927. A funeral service was held the next day at St Matthew's Anglican church in Estcourt. 
Moor was not a popular parliamentarian, even though he was a fluent speaker with a commanding physical presence, and a keen sportsman. His deep commitment to the interests of Natal was acknowledged by his opponents and his political services were rewarded with a privy councillorship on the occasion of the Imperial Conference of 1907, which he attended as premier of a self-governing colony. He was knighted on 1 January 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 35086


Moor, Sir Ralph Denham Rayment (1860-1909), colonial official, was born on 31 July 1860 at The Lodge, Furneux Pelham, Buntingford, Hertfordshire, son of William Henry Moor ('c'.1830- 'c'.1863), surgeon, and his wife, Sarah Pears. Educated privately after his father's death, he worked in the tea trade before entering the Royal Irish Constabulary as a cadet on 26 October 1882, becoming in due course a district inspector. After involvement in a divorce case, he resigned on 9 February 1891, and undertook to raise a constabulary force of Hausa and Gold Coasters to serve in the Oil Rivers protectorate. 
Having impressed the consul-general, Sir Claude Macdonald, by his military efficiency, Moor was in 1892 transferred to political duties as vice-consul. He soon showed himself prepared to act forcefully to assert British authority, and on 1 February 1896 succeeded Macdonald as commissioner and consul-general of what was now called the Niger Coast protectorate. Moor recorded his intention of extending British influence to the interior by peaceful expeditions and collaboration with African rulers, but first saw it necessary to enforce their acknowledgement of British supremacy. Already in 1894, as Macdonald's deputy, Moor had enforced the deposition and exile of the Itsekiri chief Nana Olomu; he now resolved to take strong measures against the Edo kingdom of Benin, and encouraged his deputy, James R. Phillips, in his ill-fated mission of January 1897. Returning from leave, Moor joined the expeditionary force of Admiral H. H. Rawson which within a month avenged the deaths of Phillips's party, looted the art works of Benin city, and established British control. In May Moor was appointed KCMG. 
The British government now decided to establish unified and effective colonial administration over a wider region. In January 1900 Moor became high commissioner (under the Colonial Office) for the protectorate of Southern Nigeria. This comprised a union of the Niger Coast protectorate with the former territories of the Royal Niger Company, but not, as Moor had hoped, with the Lagos protectorate. Moor tried to create a structure for peaceful development by extending Macdonald's practice of designating warrant chiefs to form native councils and native courts. These expedients, devised with little knowledge of how these small-scale societies governed themselves, were to cause problems to his successors, but immediately they provided sufficient stability to permit rapid growth in exports. Moor remained very ready to use armed force, notably in the Aro expedition of 1901, but his commitment to economic development is acknowledged by Nigerian historians. He hoped to substitute currency transactions for barter and to encourage reluctant British traders to move inland by improving transport, but could not persuade the British government to invest in railways. The forestry department which he founded served the cause of conservation by supervising and controlling the tapping of wild rubber and the felling of hardwoods. 
On 1 October 1903 Moor retired on grounds of ill health. He had hoped for more than the minor committee appointments offered by the Colonial Office, but he became a director of Alfred Lewis Jones's African Steam Ship Company, and worked for the British Cotton Growing Association. In 1898 he had married Mrs Adrienne Burns, 'nee' Shapland ('b'. 'c'.1871), an attractive divorcee, but does not seem to have found happiness. On 14 September 1909 he was found dead at his home, The Homestead, Church Road, Barnes, having committed suicide by poison. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35087


Moore, Arthur William (1853-1909), historian and Manx scholar, born on 6 February 1853 at Cronkbourne, Douglas, Isle of Man, was the eldest of the ten children (five sons and five daughters) of William Fine Moore (1814-1895) JP, proprietor of the Tromode Sailcloth Mills and, from 1857 to 1875, a member of the House of Keys (self-elected until the reforms of 1866), and his wife and cousin, Hannah Christian (1827-1914). The Moores, of Ballakilley, Marown, a leading family of ancient and complicated lineage, were rooted in the island, and Moore claimed descent from the Christians of Milntown and the Manx patriotic hero William Christian, Illiam Dhone (1608-1663), through both his mother and his father. After Rugby School, which he entered in February 1867, he went on to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1872 and was bracketed first in the historical tripos in 1875; he graduated BA in 1877 and MA in 1880. He also distinguished himself at athletics and won his blue for rugby football. He married, on 24 February 1887, Louisa Elizabeth Wynn (1864-1937), the daughter of Dr Joshua Hughes-Games, then archdeacon of Man and later vicar of Hull. 
Following extensive travel in Europe, Asia, and the West Indies in the early 1870s Moore devoted his adult activities to the concerns of his native island. In business he followed his father in the profitable management of the Tromode Sailcloth Mills, until the competition of steamships inevitably led to their decline and eventual closure. He developed the family farms, and his interest in advancing Manx agricultural practices, particularly his attempt to introduce high quality cheesemaking, was marked by his membership and, in 1883, his presidency of the Isle of Man Agricultural Society. He was also a director of the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company and the Isle of Man Banking Company, the two most important commercial institutions in the island's resort development of the nineteenth century. 
Moore began his life in public service on his appointment as a justice of the peace at the age of twenty-four, and in 1881, at the age of twenty-eight, he was made captain of the parish of Onchan and elected a member of the House of Keys for the sheading of Middle, which he represented for the rest of his life. He served as a member of the Manx council of education, the Manx Harbour Board, and the Manx diocesan church commissioners and was appointed deputy receiver-general in 1905. An authority on the procedures and precedents of the House of Keys, in 1898 he was elected its speaker, a post he held until his death. A staunch defender of the Keys' rights and privileges against their erosion by the governor and legislative council, he guided the house's first moves in the battle for constitutional reform towards Manx home rule with ability, tenacity, and tact. He led the first Keys' deputation on that issue to the Home Office in February 1907, when his health was already in decline. 
Moore's achievements in business and political life were notable but they were overshadowed by the range and quality of his services to Manx cultural and intellectual life in a relatively short career. His rigorously professional, record-based 'History of the Isle of Man' (1900) continues at the end of the twentieth century to underpin most historical investigations, and his many works on the language, music, and social culture, published on the island and in Britain, are the foundations of modern Manx studies, the essential scholarly basis for the definition of the particular Norse and Celtic-influenced national identity of the Manx. They include 'The Surnames and Place-Names of the Isle of Man' (1890), 'Folk-Lore of the Isle of Man' (1891), 'Manx Carols' (1891), 'The Diocese of Sodor and Man' (1893), 'Manx Ballads and Music' (1896), 'Manx Worthies' (1901), 'Bishop Hildesley's Letters' (1904), 'Douglas 100 Years Ago' (1904), and 'Extracts from the Records of the Isle of Man' (1905). He edited the elegant illustrated periodical the 'Manx Notebook' (1885-7) and contributed many articles to that and other learned magazines. 
Moore learned Manx in adult life at a time when it was unfashionable and undervalued by the educated classes, and his keen interest in the language linked him with the popular, native-speaking side of the movement for Manx studies as well as the scholarly antiquarians of the Manx Society for the Publication of Historical Documents, the Fine Arts and Industrial Guild, the Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society, and the trustees of the projected Manx National Museum, all of which he actively supported. In 1899 he founded the Manx Language Society, which drew all the elements of Manx culture together. Influenced by the example of the Welsh eisteddfod, it was not confined to the pursuit of language studies, but defined in his first presidential address to the society (November 1899) as dedicated 'to the preservation of everything that is distinctively Manx, and above all to the cultivation of a national spirit'. 
In 1902 Moore was created commander in the Royal Victorian Order by Edward VII on a visit to the island and in 1905 he was enthroned as bard at Caernarfon, gratifying acknowledgements of the two sides of his life's work, in politics, and as a leader of the Manx cultural revival. He was still speaker and still working on his latest project, 'The vocabulary of the Anglo-Manx dialect', in spite of prolonged ill health, when he died at his home, Woodbourne House, Douglas, on 12 November 1909 at the age of fifty-six. He was buried at Kirk Braddan on 15 November. He left one son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 35088


Moore, Edward (1835-1916), college head and literary scholar, was born at Cardiff, where his father practised as a physician, on 28 February 1835. He was the elder son of Dr John Moore and his second wife, Charlotte Puckle. He was educated at Bromsgrove School, and at Pembroke College, Oxford (1853-7). In 1858, after obtaining four first classes (classics and mathematics) in moderations and the final schools, he was elected to an open fellowship at Queen's College. He was president of the Oxford Union Society in 1860. 
Moore was ordained in 1861, and three years later was appointed by Queen's College to the principalship of St Edmund Hall, which he held for nearly fifty years. Brought up in an evangelical home, he remained a low-churchman and maintained this aspect of the hall's tradition. Under his headship the reputation of the hall as a home of 'true religion and sound learning' was greatly increased, the numbers were more than doubled, and it was represented in almost every honours list. He lectured on Aristotle's 'Ethics' and 'Poetics', producing student handbooks on both, although his early scholarly interest was more towards mathematics. 
The university commission of 1877 prepared a new scheme for St Edmund Hall, to take effect on the retirement or death of the existing head. Moore made it his object to defeat this scheme, which would have brought the hall under the control of Queen's College and ended its separate existence. In 1903, on Moore being nominated to a canonry at Canterbury, J. R. Magrath, the provost of Queen's, carried through the university's hebdomadal council a statute which would have resulted in the absorption of the hall by the college. Moore successfully opposed the statute in congregation, and, retaining the headship with the sanction of the prime minister, A. J. Balfour, set himself to preserve the independence of the hall. After a prolonged struggle, and with the decisive assistance of Lord Curzon, the university chancellor, a statute was passed in 1913 preserving St Edmund Hall as an independent institution. He at last felt free to resign, and settled permanently at Canterbury, where he was an active member of the chapter, taking a special interest in the library. 
To the world at large Moore was best known as a Dante scholar. His interest was awakened by a visit to Italy in 1863 and developed by his friendship with H. F. Tozer. In 1876 he founded the Oxford Dante Society, thereby giving a powerful impulse to the study of Dante in Oxford and beyond. In 1886 he was appointed Barlow lecturer on Dante at University College, London, an appointment which he held in all for seventeen years; in 1895 a Dante lectureship was specially created for him at the Taylor Institution at Oxford. Two of his earliest works on Dante, 'The Time References in the 'Divina Commedia'' (1887) and 'Dante and his Early Biographers' (1890), were the outcome of the Barlow lectureship. In 1889 appeared his monumental 'Contributions to the Textual Criticism of the 'Divina Commedia''. This work, which at once placed Moore among the leading Dante scholars of his time, was the first serious attempt to deal scientifically and methodically with the complicated problems presented by the text of the 'Commedia'. In response to a proposal from the Clarendon Press for a single-volume edition of the works of Dante, Moore, in collaboration with Paget Toynbee, brought out in 1894 the 'Oxford Dante', of which a fourth edition, revised by Toynbee, appeared in 1924. It was accepted as the standard of reference throughout the world until the publication in 1921 of the critical edition sponsored by the Societa Dantesca Italiana of Florence. The 'Oxford Dante' was followed in 1896-1903 by three series of 'Studies in Dante'. A fourth series was on the eve of publication at the time of Moore's death, and carried through the press by Toynbee. A new impression of the four volumes was published in 1968-9. Especially noteworthy among the essays contained in these four volumes were: 'Scripture and classical authors in Dante', accompanied by elaborate tables, in the first volume; the closely reasoned article on the 'Quaestio de aqua et terra', which finally established the authenticity of the treatise, and the masterly vindication of the letter to Can Grande, in the second and third; and the lengthy series of studies on the textual criticism of the 'Convivio', which constitute the 'pieces justificatives' of the emended text as printed in the 'Oxford Dante', in the posthumously published fourth volume. 
Moore's close acquaintance with the whole range of Dante's writings, his attainments in the many fields covered by his subject, his acute yet cautious critical judgement, his sound scholarship, and indefatigable industry gained him a European reputation, which was recognized by his election, among other distinctions, as a corresponding member of the Accademia della Crusca in 1906 and as a fellow of the British Academy in the same year. 
Moore was twice married: first, in 1868, to Katharine Edith (died 1873), daughter of John Stogdon, solicitor, of Exeter; second, in 1878, to Annie (died 1906), daughter of Admiral John Francis Campbell Mackenzie. He had one son and two daughters from each marriage. Moore died of a stroke at Chagford, Devon, on 2 September 1916, and was buried at Canterbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 35089


Moore, George Augustus (1852-1933), writer, was born on 24 February 1852 at Moore Hall, overlooking Lough Carra, co. Mayo, in the west of Ireland, the eldest son of George Henry Moore (1810-1870) and Mary Blake Moore (1830-1895). The Moores, originally English protestants, migrated to Ireland in the seventeenth century, then through marriage turned Roman Catholic, a faith which from childhood grew more distasteful to Moore until in middle life he publicly renounced it. 
There probably never was a more unlikely candidate for literary fame than the younger George, who received little formal education aside from seven unhappy and unsatisfactory years at St Mary's College, a Roman Catholic school in Oscott, near Birmingham. The reedy lake in front of Moore Hall was the scene of many youthful excursions, and throughout his life it was never far from his mind, its beauty inspiring some of his finest descriptive writing. His father had a notable racing stable and here the impressionable youth spent many happy days, both before and after his miserable days at school, as a fascinated spectator of its bustling activities, which years later supplied the authentic background for 'Esther Waters' (1894). 
In 1868 the Moores were living in London, where George became enamoured of painting and enrolled in art classes. His family saw no future for him as an artist and so a military career was ordained, a fate from which he was spared by the unexpected death of his father in 1870. As eldest son he inherited the bulk of the Irish estates and their revenues and, when he came of age in 1873, left for Paris to continue his art studies. In the studios, behind the would-be bohemian, there always lurked the Irish landlord, but in spite of this, as he frequently proclaimed, his true education was obtained at the Nouvelle Athenes, a cafe frequented by artists and writers, where he met and became friends with many who supplied him with his artistic criteria and whose works he promoted on his return to London. 
These years in Paris were probably the most important in Moore's life, influencing much of his subsequent career. He soon realized that his artistic talent was at best mediocre and in desperation he turned to the literary scene. Art, however, remained a vital interest and throughout his life artists, rather than writers, were his closest associates, to whom he was known as GM. Moore was a man of words rather than action, so the story of his life is not so much what he did as what he wrote. Charles Morgan, his designated biographer (though never his actual one), suggested in his 'Epitaph on George Moore' that 'Twice George Moore recreated the English novel' (Morgan, 2) -- and be that as it may, Moore laboriously did re-create himself as an egocentric man of letters, which led to Oscar Wilde's frequently quoted witticism, 'George Moore has conducted his whole education in public' (F. Harris, 'Oscar Wilde', 1959, 278). 
In a constant search for perfection Moore continuously passed on to new forms of self-expression rather than repeating a successful formula as did so many of his contemporaries, leading step by step from the 'naturalism' of the early novels to the tapestry-like quality of his final works. Few authors of modern times revised to the extent that Moore did, as he habitually recast material seeking a more perfect form, which frequently resulted in some later editions being completely rewritten, producing a bibliographic jungle. Perhaps this is the reason that the works of this once-brilliant Anglo-Irish star of the English literary firmament, whose writings have been translated into a dozen foreign languages, are now almost forgotten by the general public. On the other hand, perhaps this multiplicity of texts explains the extensive scholarly interest, which has resulted in hundreds of books and articles in English and other languages, suggesting that English literature in the twentieth century would have been quite different had he not lived. 
Frequently Moore was the storm centre of literary controversies, making him the target of spiteful comments, and his unusual physical features, particularly his flaxen hair and sloping shoulders (which led Yeats to describe him as 'carved from a turnip, looking out of astonished eyes'; W. B. Yeats, 'Dramatis Personae', 1935, 24), are perhaps better known today than his books. He was a subject for several generations of artists, from Manet in Paris to his late-life contemporaries in London and Dublin, as well as a favourite model for caricaturists, particularly Max Beerbohm, who found him one of his preferred subjects. His first attempts at writing were negligible and included unproduced dramas and two volumes of verse, 'Flowers of Passion' (1878) and 'Pagan Poems' (1881), the latter including poems revised from the earlier volume, the onset of his lifelong habit of pursuing perfection. 
Due to landlord-tenant hostilities in Ireland, income from Moore's estates was greatly reduced, forcing him to return to London in 1879, where he turned to journalism and fiction to make a living. While still living in Paris, a vital factor in his decision to turn to literature had been his meeting with Emile Zola, whose 'disciple' he soon became, with the avowed intention of introducing the French writer's 'naturalism' to England. In Moore's first realistic novel, the three-volume 'A Modern Lover' (1883) -- subsequently rewritten as 'Lewis Seymour and some Women' (1917) -- he translated into an English setting the French art scene he had known so well. The book met with scant commercial success, partly due to the reluctance of the circulating libraries adequately to stock it. To circumvent such censorship, he persuaded Zola's English publisher, Henry Vizetelly, to issue his next book, 'A Mummer's Wife' (1885), in an inexpensive one-volume format. It was the first truly 'naturalistic' novel with an English background, dealing as it did with alcoholism and the tawdry side of the theatrical world. Reviews were mixed, but it was generally agreed that a new and distinctive, if somewhat abrasive, voice had arrived on the London literary scene. 
In these two early works Moore was the first English novelist to break away from the content, structure, techniques, and style of the Victorians. Other works followed, including 'A Drama in Muslin' (1886) (rewritten as 'Muslin', 1915), a story of the Dublin marriage market and of Irish life in one of the rural 'big houses' during the land war in the late 1870s and early 1880s; 'A Mere Accident' (1887), an examination of bachelorhood; and 'Parnell and his Island' (1887), a collection of critical and pugnacious denunciations of his native land. Following these was the pseudo-autobiographical novel, 'Confessions of a Young Man' (1888), in which the transplanted Anglo-Irishman set out to shock his readers. What it did in fact was to create a legend and establish Moore's reputation as a recognized authority on impressionism and symbolism, based on his first-hand knowledge of the contemporary French art and literary scene. Next came 'Spring Days' (1888), a story of pale love in suburban villas; and 'Mike Fletcher' (1889), his 'Don Juan' novel, which received hostile reviews and which its author quickly tried to forget and suppress. 
During the same period Moore emerged as a crusading journalist, in the forefront of the fight to break the power of the 'select' circulating libraries, those self-appointed literary censors who imposed strait-laced moral standards on English literature by arbitrarily banning some customary three-volume novels from their discreet shelves. Moore's spirited attacks, 'A New Censorship of Literature' in 'Pall Mall Gazette' (10 December 1884), and his influential pamphlet, 'Literature at Nurse, or, Circulating Morals' (1885), were among the earliest blows against the powerful libraries and helped prepare the way for the more liberated spirit of the period and the final break with literary Victorianism. 
The 1890s were an extremely productive period for Moore and the decade was the high point of his career as a journalist, as he continued his crusade to introduce the new French art and literature to the English public in articles published in various periodicals, some of which were collected in 'Impressions and Opinions' (1891) and 'Modern Painting' (1893), two works which increased his reputation as a significant critic. 
Moore's novel 'Vain Fortune' (1891), serialized as being by Lady Rhone, is the story of a writer who can neither write nor give up writing. It met with critical disdain and failed to satisfy its author even after three revisions, though it made a deep impression on James Joyce, who described it in his youthful 'The day of the rabblement' as a 'fine, original work'; it was later the inspiration for 'The Dead', the final story in Joyce's 'Dubliners' (1914), according to Richard Ellmann, Joyce's biographer. 
Moore's interest in the theatre led to controversial articles attacking the conventional melodramas being offered to the British public, contrasting them with the innovative drama being developed in Europe. He became one of the founders of the Independent Theatre, established in London to introduce the 'new' European drama of Ibsen, Strindberg, and others to the British play-going public. His own three-act play, 'The Strike at Arlingford', was presented for two performances and published in 1893. A one-act play, 'Journeys End in Lovers Meeting', by Moore and John Oliver Hobbes (Mrs Pearl Craigie), was used for a number of years by Ellen Terry as a curtain-raiser. Next, after partial serialization, 'Esther Waters' (1894) was published, a story which broke new ground in its presentation of its subject matter by making a servant the sympathetic title-character. This book, with its non-judgemental depiction of 'the fallen woman', is considered by many to be Moore's greatest achievement, as well as a turning point in the English novel. It was his most successful book and has not been out of print since its first publication. At the 1994 Cheltenham festival it was awarded a spoof centennial '1894 Booker prize'. 
Moore continued to restructure his material, publishing 'Celibates' (1895), a collection of three stories, one a revision of 'A Mere Accident'. For the next few years he was chiefly concerned with revising 'Esther Waters' and in writing and rewriting the story of an opera singer, 'Evelyn Innes' (1898), which, with its sequel, 'Sister Teresa' (1901), marked a change in his artistic aims. 
Due to the practical experience he had gained from his association with the Independent Theatre, Moore was enlisted in 1899 by William Butler Yeats to assist in the launching of the Irish Literary Theatre, for which he served as a stage director and playwright, turning Edward Martyn's 'The Tale of a Town' into his 'The Bending of the Bough' (1900) and collaborating with Yeats on 'Diarmuid and Grania'. In 1901, disgusted with British atrocities in the South African War (confided to him by his brother, Maurice, then serving in South Africa), plus his interest in the emerging Irish literary renaissance, he moved to Dublin. Once there he aspired to create a literature for his native land, writing a series of stories to be translated into Irish, six of which were published as 'An T-Ur-Gort' (1902). English versions of these and other stories were included in 'The Untilled Field' (1903), a book considered by some to be the progenitor of the modern Irish short story. This was followed by 'The Lake' (1905), a study of an Irish priest gaining consciousness of himself and abandoning his calling, and 'Memoirs of my Dead Life' (1906), a semi-autobiographical book of reveries which marked a new direction in Moore's writing, leading to the polished 'oral narrative' style of his later years. 
Discovering that he was not the 'messiah' of a new Irish literature he had hoped to be, Moore returned to London in 1911, settling in Ebury Street and living as a 'man of letters'. The publication of 'Ave' (1911), 'Salve' (1912), and 'Vale' (1914), the three sections of his autobiographical 'Hail and Farewell' (which includes his account of the Irish Literary Theatre), infuriated Yeats, Lady Gregory, and other of his former associates in the project, all of whom failed to be amused at the satire and frequently malicious humour of his account or to observe that he made as much fun of himself as of the others. Ironically Yeats paid him the compliment of imitating the style of the trilogy in his own account of the venture. 
In 1914 Moore travelled to the Holy Land to see at first hand the setting for his next book, 'The Brook Kerith' (1916), the story of an unrisen Christ and his dramatic meeting with Paul twenty years after the crucifixion. On its publication an attempt was made to have the book banned as blasphemous, and this, coupled with an unsuccessful libel suit when the rewritten 'A Modern Lover' of 1883 was republished in 1917 as 'Lewis Seymour and some Women', caused Moore to issue his books in expensive limited editions under the sign of the fictitious Society of Irish Folklore. The first was 'A Story-Teller's Holiday' (1918), part autobiography but primarily a retelling of Irish folk-tales and the creation of others. 
Moore's previous critical periodical writings served as the basis for sections in 'Avowals' (1919) and 'Conversations in Ebury Street' (1924). He again turned to the past as he retold the love story of 'Heloise and Abelard' (1921) and, in his final fiction, 'Aphrodite in Aulis' (1930), an imaginative tale of ancient Greece. 'In Single Strictness' (1922; partially reprinted as 'Celibate Lives', 1927) was a collection of stories, both new and revised. The celibacy theme was not autobiographical, for although Moore never married, he detailed numerous amours in many of his writings. These were once thought to be fictitious, but a number are verified in his letters. 
In spite of Moore's long interest in the theatre, he never achieved his ambition to write a truly successful play, and all were collaborations, not always revealed. Shortly after his return to London a dramatization of 'Esther Waters' (1911) and 'Elizabeth Cooper' (1913), a comedy, were produced by the Stage Society for limited runs. The latter was revised as 'The Coming of Gabrielle' and presented for three matinee performances in 1923. Two other plays were produced. 'The Making of an Immortal', an imaginative account of the authorship of Shakespeare's plays, had two performances in 1927. The second, 'The Passing of the Essenes' (a revision of 'The Apostle'; 1911 and 1923), his final attempt to dramatize 'The Brook Kerith', had a limited run in 1930. 
At the time of his death Moore was writing 'A Communication to my Friends' (1933), which was posthumously published. It was composed of recollections of his early life, which he described as being 'the story of how literature hailed me'. He died on 21 January 1933 at his home at 121 Ebury Street, Belgravia, London; his body was cremated following services at Golders Green attended by members of his family, a few of his closest friends (mostly artists), and the prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, with whom he was to have dined shortly before his death. On 27 May his ashes were buried on Castle Island in Lough Carra, co. Mayo, where he had played as a boy. Over his crypt was erected a wooden marker inscribed 'He deserted his family and friends for his art'; however, 'deserted' was softened to 'forsook' when carved on a permanent stone monument. 
Perfection was Moore's constant goal and his place in literature should eventually be secure, if for no other reason than his pioneer efforts in freeing English prose from Victorian inhibitions and the example he set of absolute devotion to his art. 


@@@@@


doc= 35090


Moore, George Edward (1873-1958), philosopher, was born on 4 November 1873 at Hastings Lodge, Upper Norwood, Surrey, the third son and fifth child of the eight children of Daniel Moore (1840-1904), physician, and his second wife, Henrietta Sturge (1839-1903). His paternal grandfather was George Moore (1803-1880); Joseph Sturge was a great-uncle. His eldest brother was Thomas Sturge Moore, the poet. G. E. Moore much disliked his forenames and during his academic career he was called just Moore, though his wife called him Bill. 
From the age of eight Moore attended Dulwich College as a day boy (1882-92); there he was educated almost exclusively in the Latin and Greek classics. His parents were Baptists, and at home his upbringing was religious. At about the age of twelve he went through a spell of evangelical enthusiasm which lasted two years. He emerged from this a convinced agnostic and later wrote: 'For my part I never did get much comfort from religion, and never felt very sorry at disbelieving: indeed I find it hard to understand how it can make much difference to most people' (letter to Desmond MacCarthy's mother, 1900, Moore MSS). 
In 1892 Moore won a scholarship to study classics at Trinity College, Cambridge, and obtained a first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1894. He then decided to combine further study of classics with the study of philosophy and in 1896 he obtained a second class in part two of the classical tripos and a first class in part two of the moral sciences tripos (which was by then primarily concerned with philosophy). 
Moore's new interest in philosophy had been stimulated by his new friends and acquaintances at Trinity, particularly Bertrand Russell and J. M. E. McTaggart. Russell later wrote concerning his time as a student at Trinity: 'In my third year I met G. E. Moore, who was then a freshman, and for some years he fulfilled my ideal of genius. He was in those days beautiful and slim, with a look almost of inspiration, and with an intellect as deeply passionate as Spinoza's. (Russell, 68)' In his autobiography Moore himself tells the story of his meeting with McTaggart, who was then a prize fellow of Trinity: 'Russell had invited me to tea in his rooms to meet McTaggart; and McTaggart, in the course of conversation had been led to express his well-known view that Time is unreal. This must have seemed to me then (as it still does) a perfectly monstrous proposition, and I did my best to argue against it. (Moore, 'Autobiography', 13-14)' Russell and McTaggart were already members of the Cambridge Conversazione Society, commonly known as the Apostles, and in 1894 Moore was elected a member. The meetings of the Apostles, which comprised short philosophical papers followed by uninhibited discussion, provided Moore with the ideal context for the development of his philosophical interests. Moore was at this time studying philosophy with, among others, Henry Sidgwick; but although Moore's early writings are much indebted to Sidgwick, Moore found him remote and rather dull, and never enjoyed a close intellectual relationship with him. Instead it was McTaggart whose influence was at first dominant, so much so that, despite his account of their first meeting, Moore's first published paper (published in 1897) is a defence of the unreality of time. 
Following his success in part two of the moral sciences tripos in 1896 Moore decided to try to follow in the footsteps of McTaggart and Russell by winning a prize fellowship at Trinity College on the basis of a dissertation. Moore's first attempt in 1897 was not successful; but in the following year he was elected to a prize fellowship which lasted until 1904. Moore preserved his two dissertations, and through them one can trace the course of his influential break with the idealist philosophy he had learned from McTaggart. Moore's main thesis in his second dissertation is the need to distinguish sharply, as idealists do not, between thought and its objects, and this distinction is the subject of his first important paper, 'The nature of judgment' (1899; 'Selected Writings', 1-19), which is in fact largely excerpted from this dissertation. Moore here also propounds a programme of conceptual analysis -- maintaining that 'A thing becomes intelligible first when it is analysed into its constituent concepts' (p. 8) and in retrospect the paper can be seen to be the starting point of the Cambridge school of analytical philosophy. 
Moore's time as a prize fellow at Trinity College (1898-1904) was the most productive period of his life. He published a series of papers critical of the dominant idealist metaphysics of the period, of which the best known is 'The refutation of idealism' (1903; 'Selected Writings', 23-44). Russell acknowledged the impact of these writings when he wrote in the preface to 'The Principles of Mathematics' (1903) that 'on fundamental questions of philosophy, my position, in all its chief features, is derived from Mr. G. E. Moore' (p. xviii). The central themes of this new philosophy are, first, that thoughts of all kinds, even simple sensations, require objects distinct from the thoughts themselves. Second, Moore vehemently denounces the idealist conception of an 'organic whole' (G. E. Moore, 'Principia ethica', 1903, 82), the conception of a whole whose parts are intrinsically dependent upon each other, and especially the claim that the world itself is such a whole. But, third, Moore carries over from his own brief idealist phase his rejection of the naturalistic thesis that everything exists in space or time. Instead, according to Moore, there are plenty of things which are not in space or time, such as numbers, meanings, and values. 
Moore's development of this new philosophy culminates in his most famous book, his ethical treatise 'Principia ethica' (1903; rev. edn, 1993). He maintains here that almost all previous philosophers have been guilty of a fallacy, the 'naturalistic fallacy' (p. 62) of treating ethical values as if they were natural properties and thereby seeking to reduce ethics to psychology, sociology, or some other science (or indeed to metaphysics). Instead, according to Moore, there are truths concerning the things that are good which are irreducibly different from all other kinds of truth. Ethical theory has its own distinctive domain, the study of goodness, which is 'simple' and 'unanalysable' (p. 72); but when its results are combined with knowledge of the potential consequences of the courses of action open to us, it should be possible to reach conclusions concerning those actions whose consequences are best, and these are the actions which we ought to perform. 
The validity of Moore's arguments in 'Principia ethica' remains much disputed. But it is beyond dispute that Moore inaugurated a new approach to ethical theory, in which an analytical concern with the structure of ethical concepts is sharply separated from debates about the substance of morality. This analytic concern within ethical theory was enormously influential during the twentieth century, though it was also much criticized. It is important to recognize, however, that Moore did also advance a substantive scheme of moral values in 'Principia ethica', for he ends the book with an emphatic affirmation of the values of friendship and art: 'by far the most valuable things which we know or can imagine, are certain states of consciousness which may be roughly described as the pleasures of human intercourse and the enjoyment of beautiful objects... it is only for the sake of these things -- in order that as much of them as possible may at some time exist -- that anyone can be justified in performing any public or private duty. (pp. 237-8)' It is easy to see here the influence of the discussions in which Moore had participated through his membership of the Apostles. Indeed throughout his time as a prize fellow Moore took a leading role in running this group, and in this context he developed friendships with several younger students which were to become central to all their lives thereafter -- with Desmond MacCarthy, Leonard Woolf, Lytton Strachey, and J. Maynard Keynes. This is, of course, the group of Cambridge friends who formed the original nucleus of the Bloomsbury Group, after moving in 1904 into Bloomsbury where the Stephen sisters Vanessa and Virginia were setting up house. Moore was never himself a member of this group; but if he took from them a profound, and perhaps exaggerated, sense of the value of friendship and art, they took from him the thought that lives dedicated to these values were indeed lives well spent. As Keynes later put it, 'Principia ethica' provided them with their 'religion' (Keynes, 436). 
In 1904, when Moore's young friends were moving to London, he too moved away from Cambridge, having failed to secure an extension to his fellowship at Trinity. He went first to live in Edinburgh with his friend A. R. Ainsworth, where he continued writing philosophy while living off some private income inherited from his mother. This situation was, naturally, a challenge to his self-confidence, and the characteristic assertiveness of his early writings was now replaced by a rather tedious determination to make himself 'absolutely' clear. Leonard Woolf's description of Moore writing his second book, 'Ethics' (1912), during a holiday in 1911 captures well his state of mind at this time: 'in another part of the garden sat Moore, a panama hat on his head, his forehead wet with perspiration, sighing from time to time over his literary constipation as he wrote 'Ethics'... Moore said that his mental constipation came from the fact that as soon as he had written down a sentence, he saw that it was just false or that it required a sentence to qualify the qualification. (Holroyd, 234)' 

By 1911 Moore's relative isolation had in fact come to an end. In 1908 he moved to London, and in the winter of 1910-11 gave an important series of public lectures in London under the title 'Some Main Problems of Philosophy' (he wrote out the lectures in full, and they were published in 1953). Finally in 1911 he was appointed to a university lectureship in moral sciences at Cambridge, though at this time the salary for a lectureship was only $50 p.a., and even when it was supplemented by further fees he still needed to draw on his private income until 1925, when he was appointed professor of mental philosophy and logic at Cambridge and elected to a fellowship at Trinity College. Moore then stayed on in Cambridge throughout his academic career, and indeed for almost all the rest of his life. In 1916 he married Dorothy Mildred Ely (1892-1977), who had been a student of moral sciences at Newnham College. They had two sons, Nicholas (1918-1986) and Timothy (1922-2003), and lived at 86 Chesterton Road, Cambridge, where for years they welcomed visitors who had come to study with Moore. Nicholas Moore was a poet; his works include 'The Glass Tower' (1944), with illustrations by Lucian Freud. Later he became a gardener and wrote a guide to garden irises. Timothy Moore became a teacher and composer of music; for many years he was head of music at Dartington School. 
Despite Moore's crabbed writing style there are many testimonies to his personal impact in philosophical discussions and lectures. Here, first, is Lytton Strachey, describing Moore's contribution to a discussion of a paper given by Karin Costelloe at a meeting of the Aristotelian Society in London in 1913: 'the excitement came with Moore... and the intellectual display [was] terrific. But display isn't the right word. Of course it was the very opposite of brilliant -- appallingly sensible, and so easy to understand that you wondered why on earth no one else had thought of it. The simplicity of genius! But the way it came out -- like some half-stifled geyser, throbbing and convulsed, and then bursting into a towering gush -- the poor fellow purple in the face, and beating his podgy hands on the table in desperation. The old spinsters in the background tittered and gasped at the 'imprevu' spectacle. (Holroyd, 279)' Second, here is I. A. Richards, who studied moral sciences at Cambridge during the years 1912-15 and 1918-19, describing Moore as a lecturer: '[Moore] was not like any other lecturer I have heard or heard of. He made sure that what was going on mattered enormously -- without your necessarily having even a dim idea as to what it could be that was going on. We were, in truth, undergoing an extraordinarily powerful influence, not one that I would suppose Moore could for a moment conceive. He was not at all interested in that. He was interested in the problem in hand: more interested in it than, I think, I have ever seen anyone interested in anything... He could take a single sentence from James Ward's 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' article on psychology and stay with it for three weeks... underlining the key words perhaps seventy times, gown flying, chalk dust rising in clouds, his intonations coruscating with apostrophes, and come out by the same door as in he went, looking up to heaven and shaking his head in despair. (Richards, 109)' Another of those who attended Moore's lectures on Ward in 1912 was Ludwig Wittgenstein, who reputedly told Moore that he should not waste his lectures on criticisms of Ward but should use them to develop his own ideas. Moore later wrote that he quickly came to feel that Wittgenstein was 'much cleverer at philosophy... but also much more profound' (Moore, 'Autobiography', 33). During this early period Moore did not in fact have much contact with Wittgenstein, although he visited Wittgenstein in Norway in 1913 and took an important dictation from him; but after Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in 1929 the two of them met regularly, and some of Wittgenstein's later writings show the importance he attached to Moore's views. This is indicative of the fact that from 1910 onwards Moore had in fact begun to develop new positions of his own in which he in effect acknowledged that the emphatic realism of his earlier 'refutation' of idealism had been too simple. One central concern of these later writings is with the structure of perception and belief: Moore seeks to show how we can accommodate the existence of illusory appearances and false beliefs within a non-illusory world which does not include objective falsehoods. Another central concern is with the issues raised by sceptical arguments: Moore maintains that scepticism is an absurd doctrine, but recognizes that he has to demonstrate that there are mistakes in sceptical arguments. 
The best way to characterize this mature philosophy is as 'the analysis of common sense'. Moore was one of the first philosophers to grasp the significance of the new logic developed by Russell, and he became an effective practitioner of that branch of applied logic that has come to be known as 'philosophical analysis'. Although it was never his view that such analysis by itself yields the resolution of philosophical problems, his writings bear witness to its effectiveness in setting the stage for further argument. At the same time he identified himself as a defender of what he called 'the Common Sense view of the world' by composing his famous paper 'A defence of common sense' (1925; 'Selected Writings', 106-33) for a collection of 'personal statements' on philosophy. This marked a change in his philosophical position -- 'Principia ethica' is certainly not a defence of common-sense ethical thought. The climax of this development comes in his most famous, and almost his last, paper, 'Proof of an external world' (1939; 'Selected Writings', 147-70). This is the text of a lecture in which Moore returns to the task of refuting idealism and finally accomplishes his 'proof' by means of a startling theatrical gesture in which he simply holds up his hands before his audience and challenges them to deny their reality. 
Moore held his professorship at Cambridge from 1925 until 1939. This was the golden period of Cambridge philosophy, when distinguished students from home and abroad came to study with him and with Wittgenstein, and then travelled afar to spread their new way of doing philosophy. Moore's influence among British philosophers of the period was unrivalled. One vehicle of this was his editorship of the philosophical journal 'Mind', of which he was editor from 1921 until 1944. But, as ever, it was in discussion that he really captured his audience, especially those of a younger generation, such as Gilbert Ryle: 'For some of us there still lives the Moore whose voice is never quite resuscitated by his printed words... He gave us courage not by making concessions, but by making no concessions to our youth or to our shyness. He would explode at our mistakes and muddles with just that genial ferocity with which he would explode at the mistakes and muddles of philosophical high-ups, and with just the genial ferocity with which he would explode at mistakes and muddles of his own. He would listen with minute attention to what we said, and then, without a trace of discourtesy or courtesy, treat our remarks simply on their merits... sometimes, without a trace of politeness or patronage, crediting them with whatever positive utility he thought they possessed. (Ryle, 270-71)' In 1939 Moore retired, and then spent the war years 1940-44 in the United States; again there are many testimonies from his time there to his impact as a teacher. Thereafter he lived quietly in Cambridge. In 1951 he was appointed to the Order of Merit. He died at the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 24 October 1958 and was buried in St Giles's cemetery. His son Nicholas wrote this epitaph for him: '
Here lies the great philosopher 

Who did not like the world to err, 

Who did not err himself, but died 

Forever not quite satisfied 

That he was not a silly, though 

His wise friends never thought him so. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 35091


Moore, Stuart Archibald (1842-1907), antiquary and barrister, was born in September 1842, the fourth son of Barlow Brass Moore of The Lawn, South Lambeth, Surrey, and his wife, Harriet Adcock. Educated at the Philological School, Marylebone Road, Marylebone, London, he became secretary to Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy, deputy keeper of the public records, and afterwards practised as a record agent. Elected FSA on 2 May 1869, he contributed in 1886 a paper -- 'The death and burial of King Edward II' -- to 'Archaeologia'. Moore's services were retained in legal disputes relating in particular to foreshore, fishery, and cognate matters. On 24 January 1880, when well established in this career, he became a student of the Inner Temple, and was called to the bar on 25 June 1884. 
Moore came to the bar at a time when the crown, through the office of woods, forests, and land revenues, and after 1866 the Board of Trade, had consistently asserted over the past fifty years a claim to presumptive ownership of the foreshore of most of the United Kingdom, excluding the duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster, putting lords of coastal manors in England and Wales, and owners of coastal baronies in Scotland, to strict proof of their alleged titles. The crown's assertion was supported in particular by Robert Gream Hall's essay 'Rights of the Crown and the Privileges of the Subject in the Sea Shore of the Realm' (1830), re-edited by Loveland in 1875. Moore accepted an invitation from its publishers to produce a third edition. He observed that on starting this task he became aware of the unfairness and bias of Hall's arguments and obtained the publisher's permission to preface the new edition with a 'brief treatise' of his own. The result, in 1888, was a single volume comprising a treatise of over 600 pages, 'A History of the Foreshore and the Law Relating Thereto', which included the text of Sir Matthew Hale's 'Touchinge the customes' and 'De jure maris' printed from the Hargrave manuscripts, together with Loveland's edition of Hall's essay with additional footnotes by Moore, mostly critical of Hall's text. The thesis of Moore's treatise, described by a reviewer as a 'crusade' ('Solicitors' Journal', 313), was that before the conquest most of the English foreshore had been granted to subjects and thereafter formed part of the waste of coastal manors; furthermore, the crown's assertion of presumptive ownership had been advanced for political reasons as late as Elizabethan times by 'title hunters', in particular Thomas Digges, and had been endorsed by compliant Stuart judges. Moore considered that not until 1849 did the crown's presumptive title acquire authority in Scotland, through statements by Anglocentric judges in the House of Lords. Moore, who described his treatise as a 'counterblast' against Digges, Hall, and government officials, and as 'a brief for the subject against the Crown' ('A History of the Foreshore and the Law Relating Thereto', xlv), sought to support his case by a wealth of citation from medieval rolls, charters, and manorial records. Moore's historical theory was not original, for in 1849 Henry Merewether had argued at length before the court of chancery that the crown's claim was unsupported by authority. This address was reproduced in Loveland's edition, but not by Moore. 
Moore's treatise was published while he was engaged as counsel to the lord of the manors of Great and Little Wakering in Essex, against whom the crown claimed ownership of the Maplin Sands. However, Moore's theory was not put to the test as the lord was able to win the case on the ground that he could prove a good title from the crown. Moore's satisfaction at his client's victory must have been tempered by the unanimous statement of the House of Lords that 'it is beyond dispute that the Crown is prima facie entitled to every part of the foreshore between high and low-water mark' ('Attorney-General v. Emerson', 1891). Moore continued a lucrative practice in foreshore disputes, defending the subject against the crown, to the extent that he was described in one obituary as 'a thorn in the side of Government officers' ('The Times', 6 July 1907). 
Moore loved yachting, and was one of the finest amateur seamen of his time; he commanded his own 80 ton fishing ketch, in which he carried the vice-commodore's flag of the Royal Cruising Club all round Great Britain and the greater part of Ireland, with little regard for weather. He was a frequent correspondent of 'The Times', chiefly on yachting and other seafaring matters. He married Isabel Kate, daughter of John Knight Higgins of Northamptonshire, and had two sons; the elder, Hubert Stuart Moore (1869-1951), followed him both into chambers and into scholarship as a writer and editor on matters of water, land drainage, and fishery law. 
Besides his treatise, Moore also published 'The Thames Estuary: its Tides, Channels, &c., a Practical Guide for Yachts' (1894) and (with Hubert Stuart Moore) 'The History and Law of Fisheries' (1903). He edited 'The Letters and Papers of J. Shillingford, 1447-50', for the Camden Society (1871), and 'Cartularium monasterii sancti Johannis Baptiste in Colecestria', for the Roxburghe Club (1897), as well as 'The Domesday Book for Northamptonshire, Extended and Translated' (1863). The library of the Inner Temple has a collection of his professional papers, including extensive notes and transcripts for his foreshore research. 
About two years before his death Moore was seized with paralysis of his lower limbs and retired to his vessel, where he continued to be a genial host. Shortly before his death he wrote two letters to 'The Times', on secret commissions (8 January 1907) and on the channel tunnel (8 February 1907). He died on 29 June 1907, on board his yacht 'Gwalia' at Southwick, near Hove, and was buried at Southwick on 2 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 35092


Moore, Temple Lushington (1856-1920), architect, the eldest son of Captain George Frederick Moore (1818-1884) and his wife, Charlotte (1826-1922), youngest daughter of John Lushington Reilly, of Scarvagh House, co. Down, was born on 7 June 1856 at Tullamore, King's county, Ireland, where his parents were then living. His early education was at Glasgow high school, where his father, now a major, had become staff officer of pensioners for the army. In 1872 the boy, whose health was delicate, was sent as a pupil to the Revd Richard Wilton of Londesborough, Yorkshire. Three years later he was articled to the architect George Gilbert Scott junior, son of Sir George Gilbert Scott. Although nominally beginning in independent practice in 1878, Moore's career remained closely bound up with Scott for several years. Scott's mental health deteriorated and he became incapable of effective work for long stretches. Moore, therefore, faithfully completed many of his master's commissions, including the major church of St Agnes, Kennington, London, and all the income from such work went to support Scott's wife, Ellen, and her family. Moore's own career began slowly, partly because of these difficulties, and partly because it took time for his style and talents to mature. 
In 1884, after a long engagement, Moore married Emma Storrs Wilton (1856-1938), elder daughter of his former tutor. Family and clerical contacts in Yorkshire remained important to Moore and explain many commissions, especially during his early career. By about 1890 his reputation was growing rapidly and over the next twenty-five years he built some forty churches which established him as England's leading ecclesiastical architect from the mid-Edwardian years. As an Anglo-Catholic himself, much of his work was for high-church clients who required beautiful settings and fine furnishings for worship. He was a very private man who lived for his family and architecture and never sought the limelight by aggressive self-promotion or involvement in architectural institutions or politics. He chose to remain based in London but much preferred working at home than doing so from his office. Gradually it became apparent that Moore's artistic destiny was not to preserve an attenuating tradition but to bring to maturity a development which otherwise would have remained incomplete. The following are the more important new churches he designed: All Saints', Peterborough (1886-1901); St Peter's, Barnsley (1891-1911); Sledmere church, Yorkshire (1893-8); St John's, Hendon, Middlesex (1895-6); Carlton in Cleveland church, Yorkshire (1896-1900); St Mark's, Mansfield (1896-7); St Cuthbert's (1897-1901) and St Columba's, Middlesbrough (1900-02); All Saints', Tooting Graveney, London (1904-6); St Wilfrid's, Lidget Green, Bradford (1904-5); St Wilfrid's, Harrogate (1904-14); St Luke's, Eltham (1906-7); St Margaret's, Leeds (1907-9); St Anne's, Royton, Lancashire (1908-9); Uplands church, Stroud, Gloucestershire (1908-10); Canwell church, Staffordshire (1910-12); St James's, Clacton-on-Sea, Essex (1912-13); and All Saints', Basingstoke (1915-17). Moore designed the Anglican cathedral at Nairobi (1917-18), the chapel at the Bishop's Hostel, Lincoln (1906-7), and the nave of Hexham Abbey (1907-8) and Pusey House, Oxford (1913-18). He also carried out numerous church restoration and furnishing schemes. 
Although primarily a church architect, Moore undertook over seventy commissions for other building types (especially during the early part of his career). Major works include South Hill Park, near Bracknell, Berkshire (1891-8), the 'Eleanor Cross' at Sledmere, Yorkshire (1896-9), and the Hostel of the Resurrection, Leeds (1907-28). He also gained great credit from his contemporaries for his restoration of Treasurer's House (1897-1901) and of St William's College (1902-11) at York. Among his miscellaneous works are some schools, parsonages, and parish halls, the court house at Helmsley, and a hospital at Woodhouse Spa. 
Moore's work, like that of the younger Scott, is important in the history of English architecture not only for its beauty but also for its development of the Gothic revival. Assuming an essential incompatibility between medieval architecture and modern life, A. W. N. Pugin, the pioneer of the Gothic revival, had striven to lead people back to medievalism; his successor, like Sir Gilbert Scott, had striven to bring medieval architecture up to date. The school identified with the name of the younger Scott and pioneered by G. F. Bodley held that both of these processes were unnecessary, that the Gothic style was still the most natural medium for the church architect to employ, and that its resumption meant not the adoption but the abandonment of a restrictive convention. Moore, even more than Bodley and Scott, seems to have thought and built in Gothic without any effort at stylism. His designs are indistinguishable in kind from those of the middle ages, and as independent of exact precedent as they. The limits of his style were the limits of his predilections: his buildings, although purely Gothic, appear to have been designed with no constraint save that of his vigilant good taste. Everything depends, not on elaborate detail and ornament, but on subtle planning, fine vistas, and what a contemporary critic called 'good proportion and sweetness of line' ('Building News', 82, 1902, 657). The church of St Wilfrid, Harrogate, and that of St Peter, Barnsley, show Moore's style at its grandest; the village churches of Carlton in Cleveland and Canwell reveal it at its most intimate and delicate. 
Moore died at his home, 46 Well Walk, Hampstead, on 30 June 1920 and was buried at St John's, Hampstead. He had intended that his only son, Richard, who had been articled to him about 1913, should take over the practice. However, Richard died in 1918 when the SS 'Leinster' was torpedoed, and the following year Moore took on his son-in-law Leslie Thomas Moore (1883-1957). The partnership was known as Temple Moore and Moore, and Leslie continued in practice, often carefully adding to and furnishing the older man's works, until the mid-1950s. Among Temple Moore's pupils was, from 1899, Giles Scott, the son of his master. 


@@@@@


doc= 35093


Moorhouse, James (1826-1915), bishop of Melbourne and bishop of Manchester, was born at Sheffield on 19 November 1826, the only son of James Moorhouse, master cutler, and his wife, Jane Frances, evangelical daughter of Captain Richard Bowman, of Whitehaven. Intended originally to follow his father, he was educated privately and at St John's College, Cambridge. After a period of doubt he underwent a mystical conversion. He was ordained priest in 1854. 
After serving curacies at St Neot's (1854-5), at Sheffield (1855-9), and at Hornsey, London (1859-61), Moorhouse was appointed perpetual curate of St John's, Fitzroy Square, London, in 1862, and vicar of St James's, Paddington, in 1868. Lord Salisbury was a parishioner at St John's and became Moorhouse's patron. A forthright, vivid preacher, by this time Moorhouse had been the first curate ever appointed select preacher to the University of Cambridge, in 1861; he was also Hulsean lecturer in 1864, and Warburton lecturer at Lincoln's Inn in 1876. In 1874 he was made chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen and prebendary of St Paul's. He married on 12 September 1861 Mary Lydia (died 1906), daughter of the Revd Thomas Sale, vicar of Sheffield. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1876 Moorhouse was consecrated bishop of Melbourne, having refused the see of Calcutta. At Melbourne his eloquence, leadership, administrative abilities, and physical strength flowered. He played the bluff Yorkshire gentleman, smoked a pipe, drank wine, walked a bulldog, attended football matches, and won deep affection. His public lectures -- historical, philosophical, and theological -- were conventional and simplistic, but they drew audiences of up to 4000 people. 
In 1878 Moorhouse started a new building for the theological faculty at Trinity College in the University of Melbourne. In the 1880s he oversaw the building of a cathedral designed by William Butterfield, costing $100,000, and in 1882 he presided over the synod which framed the constitution of the Church in Australia. As chancellor of Melbourne University from 1884 to 1886, he defended the traditional education in the classics and opposed the foundation of a women's college. He made strenuous journeys to distant parishes and out-stations for three months in each year, and he stimulated the religious life of priests and settlers. 
To the consternation of those in Melbourne, Moorhouse was called to the see of Manchester in 1886 (he was about to be offered Southwell in 1884, but Gladstone changed his mind). Besides the ordinary activities of a very extensive diocese, to which he devoted himself wholeheartedly, he continued the Victorian practice of personally visiting each of his 600 parishes, entering each church and inspecting each church school. His most notable public efforts were a sermon to the British Association in 1887, an address to the church congress at Manchester in 1888, a reply to Cardinal Vaughan's assertion of Roman Catholic claims in the Manchester diocese in 1894, and, consistent with his policy in Victoria, attempts to protect religious instruction and church schools. He retired from Manchester in 1903 and died at his home, Poundisford Park, near Taunton, on 9 April 1915. He left an estate of over $54,000. 
Moorhouse was a broad-churchman, outwardly tolerant, but invariably a fierce defender of scriptural authority and protestantism. His earliest published lectures included an attack on Baden-Powell's contribution to 'Essays and Reviews'. He read German biblical criticism in translation and reproduced ill-digested conflations of it in his sermons. Moorhouse upheld the authenticity of miracles in the apostolic age, but allowed that scientific laws obtained in the post-apostolic era. He took a mystical view of the incarnation and of atonement, and conceded that parts of the 'Old Testament' were morally indefensible. Moorhouse supported Christian working men's clubs and church missions to the urban poor, but he opposed independent working men's political and trades-union activities as threats to social order and property. He was an orthodox believer, sustained by his inner light and his will to believe. 


@@@@@


doc= 35094


Moran, Patrick Francis (1830-1911), Roman Catholic archbishop of Sydney, was born on 16 September 1830 at Leighlinbridge, co. Carlow, Ireland, youngest of the five children of Patrick Moran (died 1841/2), businessman, and his wife, Alicia, 'nee' Cullen (died 1831/2); for both parents it was their second marriage. His mother died when he was a year old, his father when he was eleven; his mother's Cullen relatives took care of him until in 1842, aged twelve, he was sent to Rome in the charge of his mother's half-brother Paul Cullen, then rector of the Irish College. Cullen was to be the decisive and continuing influence on the direction and style of his nephew's life: 'more than a father to me', said Moran. As a student in Rome, Moran gave immediate evidence of extraordinary capacity and diligence, initially in languages: by his early twenties he had mastered eight. His theological studies led to a doctorate from the Urban College of Propaganda Fide in 1852: the future Pope Leo XIII was among the examiners who acclaimed the brilliance of his work. 
Ordained priest at the age of twenty-three on 19 March 1853, Moran's position at the Irish College, of which he was made vice-rector in 1856, placed him at the hub of an Irish missionary world with a Roman bureaucratic centre. His experience there brought him close familiarity with Vatican officials and their procedures which he used on behalf of Irish interests worldwide. Moreover, his involvement in furthering Irish overseas missions fostered a personal disposition in favour of the missionary vocation. 
In Rome in 1857 Moran embarked on an academic career as professor of Hebrew in Propaganda College, where he also taught scripture; here too began his lifelong study of the early history of the Irish church. This issued in a procession of major publications which won him an international reputation in that area. His period of greatest productivity was between 1862, when he published his 'Historical sketch of the persecutions suffered by the Catholics of Ireland under the rule of Cromwell and the puritans', and 1884, when the third volume of his collection of Irish ecclesiastical documents, 'Spicilegium Ossoriense', was published. This work betokens prodigious industry and erudition and may be properly deemed scholarly, indeed pioneering, in the context of its time. But its bias was antiquarian and its general purpose that of disputing the protestant dominance then exercised over Irish history by Trinity College, Dublin. Moran made no attempt to disguise his Catholic purposes, which at times degenerated into polemic. Much later, his sole Australasian book, the enormous 'History of the Catholic Church in Australasia' (1895), represented his achievement at its worst. It was a vast compilation of more than a thousand pages, an undigested assemblage of borrowed materials presented in a spirit of triumphalist edification. Yet despite their shortcomings and apologetic bias, Moran's histories and his embracing of scholarly and cultural pursuits in general played an important role in conditioning his church towards valuing such matters, a function of particular importance in the young Australian society. 
In 1866 Moran went to Ireland as Cardinal Cullen's secretary. Since 1850 Cullen had enjoyed supreme influence over the Irish church, asserting the power of Roman-oriented religion over organization, discipline, education, public affairs, politics, and nationalism. Moran implemented Cullen's policies, first as Cullen's secretary in Ireland and then with appropriate adaptations in Australia, though not before mirroring them in Ireland itself. In 1872 he was appointed bishop of Ossory, a diocese centred on Kilkenny. From 1869 that diocese had been the centre of a celebrated and spectacular challenge to episcopal authority by Father Robert O'Keefe, which was expressed in his (unsuccessful) libel case against Cullen and Moran and which ended in 1875. Dealing with the case and the subsequent disturbance, and coping with the 'land war', a rural agitation to which Moran was initially opposed, absorbed much of his energies. Conversion to a nationalist viewpoint came too late to redeem a reputation as weak on Irish causes which was to cling to him for the rest of his life. In part it was merited, in that he remained a cautious constitutionalist, with a snobbish contempt for the underclass and its causes. Nor did his personality and demeanour attract confidence. Tall, shy, seeming to his fellow bishops colourless and of small ability, a pale shadow of his respected if disliked patron, Cullen, Moran appeared a virtual caricature of the typical Roman churchman. His popular reputation in the 1880s was that of an ecclesiastical autocrat servile to Rome, reactionary and pro-English in politics. 
Moran's appointment as archbishop of Sydney in 1884 seemed appropriate in Ireland, where Australian affairs were regarded as of very minor importance: a dull man for a distant, inconsequential job. But Australian Catholics welcomed Moran with enthusiasm, as triumphal affirmation of their Irishness: he represented victory for those who had opposed the ecclesiastical governance of the English Benedictines under archbishops Polding, between 1835 and 1877, and Vaughan, between 1877 and 1883. Nor was Moran to disappoint them. He blended Irishness with his Australian environment. His first public words were, 'Becoming today an Australian among Australians'. At fifty-four Moran showed remarkable adaptability, determined to provide his church with integrationist leadership, its Irishness and Catholicity fitting harmoniously into national life; his ideal was a great national society enriched by religion. Within, his church would be marked by clerical control and lay pursuit of respectability. In all this he took a personal lead, supporting the movement for the federation of the Australian colonies, to the extent of standing, in 1897, in the public election of delegates to the Australian constitutional convention: he was defeated but polled significantly. From the maritime strike of 1890 he showed himself sympathetic to trade unionism, and by 1901 his support for the Labor Party was evident and increasing. He minimized the importance of that party's socialism, accepted it as the party natural to his working-class flock, and saw it as the only party above religious prejudice. 
Moran's policy of community integration and harmony nevertheless conflicted with his determination to enhance the public status of Catholics and his capacity to rouse strong sectarian opposition. His frequent visits to Rome and his ambitious and energetic building programme, begun on his arrival and seen at its most grandiose in the seminary of St Patrick's College, Manly, opened in 1889, were inescapable witnesses to a Catholicism on the march -- the cause of either delight or dismay. Similarly divisive was Moran's elevation to the cardinalate on 27 July 1885. Alarmed protestant elements saw Catholicism as advancing in power and prestige in Australia. Nor was Moran, despite his calls for harmony, above provocative and sectarian point-scoring. Conflict came to a spectacular head in the citing of Moran's secretary, Mgr D. O'Haran, as co-respondent in the Coningham divorce case of 1900-01. O'Haran was acquitted but Moran's plans to make him coadjutor were frustrated. However, the major contradictions to Moran's integrationist ambitions were long-term. The greatest was the continued -- and prodigious -- building of a Catholic education system: 102 schools in 1884 and 306 in 1911, with a tripling in numbers in religious teaching orders. Moran envisaged this system as an adjunct to that of the state, the religious instruction only being Catholic, and thus as simply waiting for financing by a reasonable state. Such recognition was not forthcoming, and his passive policy generated Catholic impatience. Catholic protest was silenced by those characteristics of Moran's that also alienated protestants -- his triumphalist style, air of rectitude, and autocratic personal bearing. 
Moran ruled not only the Sydney but the Australian church, through force of personality and various centralizing initiatives. He constantly made his presence felt, visiting other centres and colonies. There were plenary councils of bishops, in 1885, 1895, and 1905, aimed at standardizing the governance of the Australasian church under Moran's reign. Major Catholic cultural initiatives, involving clergy and laity, were designed to affirm Catholic elements within national life -- the Australian Catholic conferences of 1900, 1904, and 1911. Moran's ideas and presence were central and decisive in all this activity and he also made himself available to the press on the public issues of the day: he swiftly became a well-known public person. Behind the scenes he was the key figure in the appointment of bishops and other important church personnel save in the case of a coadjutor. Unable to have O'Haran, Moran was saddled with Michael Kelly (consecrated in August 1901), for whom he had virtual contempt. 
Moran exercised power despotically, being a harsh master with an eye to unity achieved through prayer, discipline, and order, and working through emphasis on complete deference to the clergy and the organization of pious sodalities. A prayerful man, he was also tirelessly efficient in the administration which made his dominance possible. Yet despite his remarkable achievements in building -- in both fabric and stature -- he invites criticism as a mindless pragmatist, devoted to the short-term and obvious problems of his day. He seems to have been oblivious to deeper trends towards unbelief, and blind to fundamental neglects of the life of the mind. His greatness lay in attention to the immediate and to the outward show. His legacy was that style whose essentials -- conformity as against confrontation -- have underlain the major debates which have troubled Australian Catholism ever since. 
Resting at his palace at Manly after a trip to Perth in Western Australia, Moran was found dead in his room on 16 August 1911. After an enormous public funeral he was buried in the crypt of St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 35095


Morant, Geoffrey Miles (1899-1964), anthropologist and statistician, was born in Battersea, London, on 15 July 1899, the third child of Henry Morant, headmaster of an elementary school in Lambeth, and his wife, Maria Elizabeth Miles. He was educated at Battersea secondary school and, after service with the machine-gun corps in the First World War, at University College, London. He obtained a BSc in applied statistics (second-class honours, 1920), an MSc in 1922, and a DSc in 1926. He held board for scientific and industrial research and Crewdson Berington studentships and an 1851 Exhibition from 1920 to 1926. In 1932 he won the Weldon memorial prize. He married, on 31 July 1922, Geraldine Wynne ('b'. 1886/7), who died in childbirth in 1923. The child also died. In 1928 he married Mary Evelyn, daughter of Ernest Hitchcock, caterer; they had one son and one daughter. 
Morant was on the staff of the department of applied statistics at University College and was a pupil of Karl Pearson. By the late 1920s Morant was the acknowledged leader of the biometric school of physical anthropologists. Much of his early work appeared in 'Biometrika' (of which he was assistant editor). His first paper, 'On random occurrence in space and time when followed by a closed interval' (1921), was soon followed by a number of important contributions to physical anthropology setting new and critical standards. These included 'Tibetan skulls' (1923) and 'Racial history of Egypt' (1925). In 1926 he showed that the so-called Iberian inhabitants of Neolithic Britain were of Nordic not Mediterranean origin. Subsequent work confirmed Morant's views, which were unconventional at that time. Four important studies on Palaeolithic man appeared in the 'Annals of Eugenics' (1926-30). In 1935, in collaboration with Pearson, he produced a lavishly illustrated study of the 'Wilkinson' head of Oliver Cromwell. This showed the relic to be the protector's head and shed new light on his death and the disposal of the remains. This work led to the advances in forensic medicine first used in the trial of Dr Buck Ruxton (charged with murdering his wife, Isabella, and their children's nanny). 
When Hitler came to power Morant was disturbed by the manner in which his discipline was being perverted for political ends. In an article 'An attempt to estimate the variability of various populations' (1939) in 'Zeitschrift fur Rassenkunde' he destroyed the foundation of Nazi theories of pure race. This was followed in 1939 by 'The Races of Central Europe' (with a preface by J. B. S. Haldane) in which, by using blood groups and anthropometry, he showed that the Germans were racially the most heterogeneous group in Europe. In 1939 the 'Biometrika' Trust published a bibliography of Karl Pearson's work prepared by Morant from material given him by Pearson. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Morant joined the Ministry of Information. But by 1942 he was applying his anthropometric methods to help the Medical Research Council's army personnel research committee. The first report (1943), written jointly with Austin Bradford Hill, analysed the heights and weights of 1600 men in the Royal Armoured Corps; later (1945) a more detailed study of 2000 tank personnel gave the information needed to design tanks with the optimal space for the crew. From 1944 Morant worked at the physiological laboratory (the RAF Institute of Aviation Medicine) at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough. He prepared many reports for the flying personnel research committee. These covered four main topics: surveys of heights and weights of men and women recruits to the RAF with comparisons with earlier similar surveys; body measurements of aircrew to provide the information needed for improving the fit of services clothing, and for the detailed design of aircraft cockpits, seats, and their controls; statistical analyses of research projects at the establishment, such as the effects of fluoride on dental caries; and experimental studies of decompression and airsickness. Morant worked closely with those making the decisions -- the cockpit design teams and the cutters preparing the patterns for the clothing. In this way his work had an important and immediate application. 
At the end of the war Morant returned briefly to academic work at University College. This was a period of great disappointment for him. He had expected that the understandings he had had with those in authority before the war would secure him a senior appointment in the department of anthropology or anatomy. But the senior staff had died, others had moved away, and the appointment he had expected had been filled. He therefore returned to the Institute of Aviation Medicine, retiring in 1959. 
Morant had an old-world courtesy, a rather diffident manner, and a charming smile which was immediately attractive to the many much younger laboratory members with whom he worked so successfully. He was tall and handsome, with striking dark eyebrows. His modesty prevented many of his colleagues in the services realizing his eminence as an anthropologist. It also perhaps prevented him pushing earlier and harder to ensure his return to academic work at the end of the war. His kindness to many by helping to prepare publications often went unrecorded at his request. He was an eminent anthropologist who made a unique contribution to the needs of the services in the later part of his career. He was appointed OBE in 1952. He died at his home, Southbrook, Brook Street, Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire, on 3 July 1964. He was survived by his second wife. 
John C. Gilson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35096


Morant, Sir Robert Laurie (1863-1920), civil servant, was born at Well Walk, Hampstead, London, on 7 April 1863, the only son of Robert Morant (died 1873), designer of high-class furniture and silk fabrics, of Hampstead, and his wife, Helen, daughter of the Revd Henry Lea Berry, a former headmaster of Mill Hill School. Though his father died when Morant was ten his family managed to find the money to send him to be educated at Winchester College. When he went up to New College, Oxford, his financial difficulties compelled him to undertake paid tutoring work to enable him to complete his studies. He obtained a third class in classical moderations in 1882, but a first class in theology in 1885. As he decided not to go into the church but into education, the latter qualification was less useful to him than otherwise it would have been, and the undistinguished earlier performance initially excluded him from all but preparatory school teaching. He soon obtained a post at that level at Temple Grove School, East Sheen, Surrey, which he relinquished after a year, departing for Siam in 1886, and soon becoming tutor to the crown prince. 
Morant involved himself in the reconstruction of the Siamese educational system, which led him to be called the Big Teacher. He emphasized European, and especially English, educational values, concentrating on the needs of the ruling elite and of secondary education and teacher training. He also engaged in political activity in Siam, believing himself and his country to have a civilizing mission there, and he came to criticize the British legation for not being as active as he wanted in frustrating French imperial designs in Siam. He was seen by some as acting as if he was 'the Uncrowned King of Siam', and his political prominence eventually rendered his position untenable. In 1894 he returned to England where, though he pursued a career in the civil service, he was also to attract public controversy. Florence Nightingale's assessment of Morant as being 'a good genius' was how many came to see him. This was true for Beatrice Webb, who none the less believed him to be 'a strange mortal, not altogether sane' ('Diaries', 98). 
Mrs Webb wrote: 'We have known and liked Morant since he appeared as a student in the early days of the London School of Economics -- an abnormally tall and loosely knit figure, handsome in feature, shy in manner, and enigmatical in expression. At that time he was a little over thirty and at a loose end, having failed to keep an official position at the court of Siam. ('Diaries', 97)' On his return Morant took up both residence and a staff appointment at the Toynbee Hall settlement in the East End of London. During a period of poor health he was nursed by Helen Mary Cracknell, daughter of Edwin Cracknell of Wetheringsett Grange, Suffolk; they married in 1896 and had a son and a daughter. 
From his base at Toynbee Hall, Morant secured an appointment as assistant director of special inquiries and reports in August 1895 in the recently created office of special inquiries and reports at the education department of the privy council. Though the education department did not anyway recruit its equivalent of first-division officials by means of the conventional civil service open competition, the office of special inquiries and reports was even more unusual in that specialized knowledge of foreign systems of education was a requirement. Too old to begin a civil service career otherwise, Morant was fortunate not only that such a tailor-made opportunity occurred, but also that the recently appointed director, Michael Sadler, was prepared to recruit an obviously gifted man, and thus a potential rival, as his deputy. It was a decision that Sadler lived to regret. 
The office of special inquiries and reports was later described by Sadler as having been founded on the doctrine that it would 'tell the truth, disclose the strong and weak points of great educational policies, and behave with self restraint but unshakeable honesty in presenting matter to the Department of Education and in its published volumes of reports' (Sadler, 194-5). This definition overstated the independence of the office, given that Sadler had concurred when in 1895 the vice-president of the committee of council on education, Sir John Gorst, had asked that research should be concentrated on areas specified by the Department of Education. Sadler later said that 'Morant had no use for scientific impartiality' (ibid., 195); but, when assistant director of the office, Morant had produced important research studies of the French and Swiss educational systems in 1897 and 1898 respectively. 
Morant's involvement with the abortive 'Education Bill' of 1896 seemed to renew his taste for politics, and brought him to the attention of Gorst, whose private secretary he became in November 1899. From this position Morant rose to become the acting permanent secretary of the Board of Education almost exactly three years later and, in April 1903, the substantive holder of that post. 'Morant was a very able, unscrupulous 'arriviste' with a lot of educational enthusiasm, great energy, and a tongue that could be honeyed or rasping', Sadler wrote in the 1940s, adding: 'An Italian renaissance type I used to think then, but now I see in him an early arrival of the Fascist mentality' (Sadler, 195). This last observation seems excessive, born of the self-pitying bitterness of bureaucratic politics. It may be, as Sadler observed, that 'ambition, pecuniary and personal' did come to characterize Morant (ibid., 194), but, far from ruthlessly shouldering aside a much senior colleague, Morant was actually only two years younger than Sadler, and to become a permanent secretary as he did at the age of forty was not without precedent. Indeed, it could even be said to be unremarkable in circumstances in which the existing holder of the post, Sir George Kekewich, was sixty-two years old and openly opposed to government policy. As for Morant then ensuring that Sadler had no alternative to leaving the civil service in 1903, the issue between them, and between Sadler and the president of the board, Lord Londonderry, was whether Sadler could conduct independent educational research with what amounted to academic freedom. When denied this, Sadler, apparently forgetting the arrangement with Gorst eight years before, elected to resign. The main documents in this controversy were published in 1903 in a blue book entitled 'Papers Relating to the Resignation of the Director of Special Inquiries and Reports'. 
The 'Education Act' of 1902 was politically primarily the work of A. J. Balfour, who became the Conservative prime minister during its passage, although many of the ideas behind the legislation were those of the eventually discarded Gorst. Morant was very important in the role of adviser, ever eager to apply the lessons of the Swiss model to the education system of England and Wales, and in recognition of his work he was made CB in 1902. The Liberal opposition to the legislation of 1902 derived most of its emotional force from the prospect that nonconformists would have to pay local rates which could be used to subsidize Anglican schools. The religious controversy tended to obscure the fact that the act importantly widened the opportunities for secondary education in England and Wales, as well as rationalizing the provision for elementary education. The act also changed the local educational administrative arrangements when it abolished the separate school boards which had been established by the Forster 'Education Act' of 1870, making the counties and county boroughs into the local education authorities. The 1902 legislation was extended to cover London a year later, and opposition to the act elsewhere was eventually overridden. 
Morant reorganized the Board of Education into an effective central instrument for the implementation of the act, which was characterized by a balance of power between the centre and the local authorities. The board made its presence felt with a series of regulations issued in bold type in publications with differently coloured covers for each type of institution. Thus, in 1903 Morant and his principal officials issued a green-covered document called 'Regulations for the Instruction and Training of Pupil-Teachers'. In 1904 'Elementary School Code' was issued under a dark blue cover, and 'Regulations for Secondary Education' was also issued, this time under a pale blue cover. 'Regulations for Training Colleges', issued under a plain white cover, and 'Regulations for Evening Schools and Technical Institutes', under a yellow cover, soon followed. Morant's official biographer was much impressed by the array of colours involved, but what mattered was that for the first time educational objectives were clearly set down. Morant appreciated that there was not much point either in making more formal provision for education or in issuing sets of regulations unless what was being done was evaluated. He therefore gave prominence to rationalizing the arrangements relating to his majesty's inspectorate for schools. Both at the time and subsequently 'Regulations for Secondary Education' attracted most controversy for, among other things, assisting arrangements to be shaped by Treasury concerns about financial commitments, and the emphasis on general rather than vocational education proved to be a source of criticism. None the less, overall provision for secondary education increased as a result of the reforms with which Morant was associated. 
The advent of a Liberal government in 1905 seemed to threaten the recently established educational system, but it survived. For nearly six years so did the politically contentious Morant, with his being made KCB in 1907 reflecting the respect he had earned from the Liberals for his vigorous style of administration. This was evident in the implementation of the 'Provision of Meals Act' of 1906, which permissive measure led to the introduction of school meals for underprivileged children. The 'Education (Administration Provisions) Act' of 1907 marked the beginning of a system of medical inspection and treatment of schoolchildren. Morant swiftly appointed Dr George Newman as chief medical officer of the board at the head of its medical department. In 1911 Morant established a university department within the board to administer the various grants that the board made for the training of teachers and for advanced science. This was the forerunner of the university grants committee. Morant was also a member of the Haldane royal commission on London University. These links with the universities proved helpful in establishing the broadly based Teachers' Registration Council. Such was Morant's commitment to the work of the Board of Education that he had refused when Lloyd George had offered him the substantially better-paid post of chairman of the Development Commission in 1909; but, two years later, the political controversy surrounding the memorandum circulated by E. G. A. Holmes, chief inspector of elementary schools, criticizing the calibre of local authority inspectors, led to Morant's position at the board being undermined. The greatest of the many achievements of the Morant years at the Board of Education was the expansion of secondary education which, by 1911, had been made available to 60 per cent of former elementary school pupils, at least in part because of the free places regulations of 1907 which Morant had put in place. 
In November 1911 Morant resigned from the Board of Education and accepted an offer from the chancellor of the exchequer to become chairman of the National Insurance Commission for England. He had told Lloyd George that the only reason that he had taken on what the chancellor himself had described as the 'gigantic task' of implementing the 'National Insurance Act' was the opportunity it gave him of working towards the unification of the nation's health services, which had been his ambition ever since Newman and he had issued their first circular on the medical inspection of schoolchildren. The most immediate task was to ensure that the administrative arrangements were in place to ensure that by the set date of 15 July 1912 there was machinery to collect the contributions of 12 million people and their employers. At first Lloyd George supported Treasury objections to more than minimal staffing of the commission, but Morant told him forcefully that the legislation would fail unless he was given a free hand to recruit the people he needed, and the chancellor gave way. Government departments were more eager to get rid of their troublemakers than their most gifted administrators; but, however random the selection, this trawl for talent was the first time that the first division of the civil service had been treated as other than a collection of departmental elites, and among the men who came to work with Morant were future stars of the higher civil service of the order of Warren Fisher, John Anderson, and Arthur Salter. The deadline for establishing the contributions machinery was met on time, but that still left another deadline, that which loomed on 15 January 1913, the date set for the introduction of the general practitioner service. The opposition of the medical profession was overcome, and this deadline was also met. Later in 1913 Morant made use of a provision in the act for the establishment of a fund for promoting medical research and the Medical Research Committee was established, which proved to be the forerunner of the Medical Research Council. Morant was the effective author of the 'National Insurance Act' of 1913, which eliminated various flaws experienced in the working of the earlier legislation. 
The coming of the First World War witnessed Morant being generous in releasing staff to other departments, but he was himself in little demand for other work, although he was an important member of the Haldane committee on the machinery of government of 1917-18. When the Ministry of Health was created in June 1919, from a merger of the Local Government Board and the Insurance Commission, Morant became its first permanent secretary, having earlier acted as additional secretary to the former department. Morant set to work with what seemed to be his usual vigour, and soon introduced the reform that led to the registration of nurses and the establishment of the General Nursing Council, and began to devote himself to the subject of housing. However, years of overwork had undermined Morant's constitution, and an attack of pneumonia caused his death at his home, 17 Thurloe Square, London, on 13 March 1920. His wife survived him. 
In 1917 Beatrice Webb observed: 'Morant is the one man of genius in the Civil Service, but he excites violent dislike in some men and much suspicion in many men. He is public spirited in his ends but devious in his methods... He certainly does not want social democracy -- he is an aristocrat by instinct and conviction... but in spite of his malicious tongue and somewhat tortuous ways, he has done more to improve English administration than any other man. ('Diaries', 98)' The passage of time has done nothing to undermine this assessment. 


@@@@@


doc= 35097


Molyneux, Sir Robert Henry More- (1838-1904), naval officer, born on 7 August 1838, was the third and youngest son of James More-Molyneux of Loseley Park, Guildford, and his wife, Caroline Isabella, the eldest daughter of William F. Lowndes-Stone of Brightwell Park, Oxfordshire. After being educated at private schools he entered the navy in 1852. As a cadet and midshipman of the 'Sans Pareil' he served in the Black Sea during the campaign of 1854, when he was at the bombardment of Odessa and the attack on Sevastopol on 17 October, and as a midshipman of the 'Russell' he took part in the Baltic expedition of 1855. In 1859 he was a mate of the 'Vesuvius', employed on the west coast of Africa in the suppression of the slave trade, and was mentioned in dispatches for services in a colonial gunboat up the Great Scarcies River; in the same year, with two boats, he captured an armed slaver brig off the Congo, and for this was promoted lieutenant (28 June 1859). He served from January 1860 to 1865 on the Mediterranean station, first in the 'St Jean d'Acre', afterwards in the flagship 'Edgar', and on 18 December 1865 was promoted commander. 
In June 1866 More-Molyneux was appointed executive officer of the frigate 'Doris' on the North America and West Indies station, and while serving in her received the thanks of the Admiralty and of the French government for valuable services rendered to the transport 'Gironde', wrecked off Jamaica; he was also recognized by the Admiralty for services after the great hurricane at St Thomas in 1867. In July 1869 he was appointed to command the 'St Vincent', a training ship for boys, and on 6 February 1872 was promoted captain. More-Molyneux married in 1874 Annie Mary Carew, the daughter of Captain Matthew Charles Forster RN. She died in 1898, leaving a daughter, Gwendolen. 
In May 1877 More-Molyneux was appointed to command the 'Ruby', in which he served in the Levant during the Russo-Turkish War (1877-8) and then in Burma. He was captain of the 'Invincible', the flagship of Vice Admiral Sir Frederick Seymour, at the bombardment of Alexandria, and afterwards during the war, and was awarded the Osmanie (third class) and the CB. In May 1884 he was appointed commodore commanding the ships in the Red Sea, and protected Suakin until the arrival of Sir Gerald Graham's expedition in 1885. He was mentioned in dispatches and was advanced to the KCB. He next served as captain-superintendent of Sheerness Dockyard until promoted to his flag on 1 May 1888. He was an aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria from 1885 to 1888. 
More-Molyneux's further service was administrative and advisory. In 1889 he was one of the British representatives at the International Marine Conference at Washington, and from August 1891 to August 1894 he was admiral-superintendent at Devonport. On 28 May 1894 he became vice-admiral, and on 13 July 1899 admiral. From October 1900 until his retirement in August 1903 he was president of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich, and he was promoted GCB in November 1902. He died at Cairo on 29 February 1904. His body was embalmed, sent home, and buried at St Nicholas's Church, Guildford. 


@@@@@


doc= 35098


Moresby, John (1830-1922), naval officer and explorer, was born at Allerton, Somerset, on 15 March 1830, the second son of Admiral of the Fleet Sir Fairfax Moresby (1786/7-1877) and his wife, Eliza Louisa, the youngest daughter of John Williams, of Bakewell, Derbyshire. He was educated at a private school until the age of twelve, when he joined the Royal Navy in the 'Caledonia', then the port flagship at Devonport. In 1845 he sailed as a midshipman in the frigate 'America' for the Pacific via Cape Horn. The 'America' returned to England the following year, and Moresby next served with the Channel Fleet. He was in the paddle frigate 'Odin' at Palermo during the 1848 rising. In 1849 he joined the 'Excellent' for gunnery instruction, and was then appointed gunnery mate of the frigate 'Amphitrite'. In 1850 he sailed for the west coast of South America. Shortly afterwards he was transferred to the frigate 'Thetis' as gunnery lieutenant, and in 1853 commanded a punitive expedition against the natives of Vancouver Island. After returning home on promotion, Moresby joined the paddle sloop 'Driver' as first lieutenant in 1854, on the eve of war with Russia. For two summers he was on reconnaissance work in the Baltic, and participated in the taking of the Bomarsund forts and the abortive attack on Riga. 
On the conclusion of peace with Russia, Moresby was appointed flag lieutenant to the admiral in command of the Irish station and was given leave to accompany his father to Austria when Sir Fairfax Moresby represented the British navy at the centenary of the order of Maria Theresa. 
In 1858 Moresby became commander. The following year he married Jane Willis (died 1876), the eldest daughter of Philip Scott JP, of Queenstown (later Cobh), Ireland; they had one son and four daughters. In 1861 he was appointed to command the gun vessel 'Snake' on the China station, where he took part in the suppression of the Taiping uprising and saw action at Shanghai. The 'Snake' was later engaged in suppressing piracy on the coasts of southern China and in safeguarding the rights of British ships trading in opium. In the sloop 'Argus', of which he took command in 1863, Moresby went to Japan and took part in the international attack on the Shimonoseki forts in 1864 and in the subsequent naval demonstration in Japanese waters. 
In 1865 Moresby was promoted captain and went on half pay until 1871, when he was given command of the paddle sloop 'Basilisk' for service on the Australian station. The 'Basilisk' was not a surveying vessel and carried no officers specially trained for such work, but the opportunities for exploration in her cruising area led Moresby to apply for a small outfit of surveying instruments. Between 1872 and 1874, except for two cruises to New Zealand and among the south sea islands respectively, the ship was in Torres Strait and along the coasts of New Guinea. Although primarily concerned with the suppression of the kidnapping of native labour, she carried out a series of important explorations, charting much coastline hitherto very imperfectly known. 
In the last year of Moresby's work the hydrographer sent him a surveying officer, but otherwise he received scant encouragement until, at the end of her commission, the 'Basilisk' was ordered to return home round to the north of New Guinea in order that the survey work might be continued. The south-east coast of New Guinea was then scarcely known. (The work of Luis Vaes de Torres in 1606 at the eastern end of the island was revealed only in 1878 by the discovery of his map in Madrid.) Moresby surveyed, on the south coast, Hall Sound and Redscar Bay, and discovered Port Moresby, Fairfax harbour (which he named after his father), and Discovery Bay, as well as charting their approaches and various islets and reefs in Torres Strait. By Hilda and Ethel rivers he tried to penetrate the unknown interior. He next surveyed at the east end Hayter, Basilisk, and Moresby islands and China and Fortescue Strait, and took possession of the islands in the name of Queen Victoria (1873). Of the eastern part of the north coast nothing was known at the time except a few vague landfalls of J. A. B. d'Entrecasteaux in 1793. Moresby charted the whole coast westward to Astrolabe Bay as well as the islands of the d'Entrecasteaux group -- Normanby, Ferguson, and Goodenough. In all, his surveys covered 1200 miles of unknown coastline and about a hundred islands. 
Moresby returned home at the end of 1874 to find that, while geographers realized the value of his work, the hydrographer had become strangely indifferent and the government of the day had no anxiety to establish a British claim to eastern New Guinea. It was not until 1884 that the hand of the government was forced by the action of Queensland, and a British protectorate, with its capital at Port Moresby, was proclaimed in the south-east of the island. The greater part of Moresby's discoveries eventually fell into German hands, but on 17 September 1914 Kaiser Wilhelm Land, as the territory had been called, surrendered to an Australian force; it was administered by Australia from 1920 until it gained independence as a part of Papua New Guinea in 1975. 
After a short spell in charge of the coastguards between Cromer and St Abb's Head, Moresby was senior naval officer in charge of the Bermuda Dockyard from 1878 to 1881; there he effected many improvements. In 1881 he became rear-admiral and was appointed assessor to the Board of Trade. He retired in 1888 with the rank of vice-admiral and became admiral on the retired list in 1893. In 1909 he published an autobiography, 'Two Admirals', which included an account of his father's career. In recognition of his discoveries in New Guinea he enjoyed the distinction of having his name bestowed on a destroyer built in 1916. He died at 9 Lindon Grove, Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 12 July 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 35099


Morfill, William Richard (1834-1909), Slavonic languages scholar, was born on 17 November 1834 at Maidstone, Kent, the second of the three children of William Morfill (1807- 'c'.1870), a professional musician, and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1816-1836), 'nee' Couchman. The Morfills are thought to have been of Huguenot origin, but William was baptized into the Church of England, together with his sister and younger brother, at All Saints' Church, Maidstone, on 26 October 1838. He was educated at Maidstone grammar school and (from 1848) at Tonbridge School. On 28 May 1853, with a scholarship from his school, he entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a commoner, but migrated on 5 December of that year to Oriel College on election to an open classical scholarship there. In Michaelmas term 1855 he was placed in the first class in classical moderations, but during finals ('literae humaniores') in 1857 he was taken seriously ill, had to retire from the examination, and was awarded only a pass degree. This seemed to be the end of his aspirations for an academic career, but he stayed on in Oxford, supporting himself by giving private tuition from his rooms in Oriel Street. On 6 September 1860, in the parish church of St Martin, Welton, Northamptonshire, he was married to Charlotte Maria (died 1881), the daughter of Thomas Lee of Welton, a grazier. They had no children. By 1863 he was living with his wife at 4 Clarendon Villas, Park Town, Oxford, and from 1865 to 1869 he was a lecturer in philosophy and modern history at Charsley's Hall (one of the Oxford private halls). 
A precocious interest in exotic languages and the gift of a Russian grammar from one of his teachers at Tonbridge led Morfill to apply himself seriously to the study of Russian. His first published translations from that language date from 1860, and in 1870 he made the first of many visits to Russia. He also learned other Slavonic languages and travelled to the countries where they were spoken; his first visit to Prague took place in 1871. He soon acquired a reputation as an expert in Slavonic languages, a subject which until 1870 was not represented at any British university. On 8 June that year he was appointed by the University of Oxford to give the first series of lectures in accordance with the provisions of the newly endowed Ilchester Foundation for the encouragement of the study of Slavonic languages. He still had no permanent appointment, but he was engaged to give further Ilchester lectures in 1873 and 1883. The substance of some of these lectures was published in his 'Dawn of European Literature: Slavonic Literature' (1883). 
His wife's early death in 1881 was a blow from which Morfill never fully recovered, but he sought solace in his work. About this time regular gatherings of his friends began to take place on Sunday afternoons at his house in Clarendon Villas for learned and literary conversation. The 1880s saw the appearance of Morfill's grammars of Polish (1884), Serbian (1887), and Russian (1889), though his command of languages extended beyond the Slavonic field. He also turned his attention to Georgian and, following a visit to Georgia in 1888, he wrote a well-informed article on Georgian literature for 'The Academy' (21 July 1888). Official recognition came late. It was only in December 1889 that the university appointed him reader in Russian and the other Slavonic languages, and it was not until 1900, when he was sixty-six years old, that he was promoted to professor. He had meanwhile added to his publications a history of Russia (1890), a history of Poland (1893), and grammars of Bulgarian (1897) and Czech (1899). From 1890 he was a corresponding member of the Kralovska Ceska Spolecnost nauk ('Royal Czech Society of Sciences') and, from 1905, of the Ceska akademie cisare Frantiska Josefa pro Vedy, slovesnost a Umeni ('Francis Joseph Czech Academy for Sciences, Literature, and Arts'). He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1903 and in July 1908 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Charles University, Prague. 
Believing that the account of the Slavs fed to the British public was tainted by German prejudice, Morfill saw himself as an enlightener, but, though he claimed that his own work was without bias, he had a distinctly Russian view of Slavonic brotherhood. In 1904 Russian became a full degree subject at Oxford. The university's approval of the languages he had cultivated while they lay outside the curriculum is Morfill's most enduring achievement. He had a genial personality and was renowned for the charm of his conversation. Even while he was an undergraduate 'the epigrammatic vigour of his sentences' (Murray, 369) was noted. He was good-looking but had a squint, which he endeavoured to hide, when drawn or photographed, by appearing in profile. Before he reached his sixtieth birthday he was bald on top and had grown a full beard to replace the whiskers he had worn as a young man. He died of old age and a weak heart at 4 Clarendon Villas, Park Town, on 9 November 1909. The first part of the funeral service was held at the church of St Philip and St James, Oxford, and he was buried in the same grave as his wife in St Sepulchre's cemetery, Walton Street, Oxford, on 13 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 35100


Morgan, Charles Langbridge (1894-1958), novelist and journalist, was born on 22 January 1894 at Warreston, Rodway Road, Bromley, Kent, the youngest of four children of Sir Charles Langbridge Morgan (1855-1940), civil engineer, and Mary (died 1906/7), daughter of William Watkins. Both Charles and Mary Morgan spent their youth in Australia, but later returned to England, where Charles Morgan senior had a distinguished career, becoming president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1923-4. The young Charles Morgan entered the Royal Navy in 1907 and received his education at Osborne and Dartmouth, where he was cadet captain, and served as midshipman in the Atlantic Fleet and on the China station. Morgan experienced the ill treatment then common in the Royal Navy while serving in the 'Good Hope', but found encouragement for his literary aspirations in his immediate superior in the 'Monmouth', Commander Christopher Arnold-Forster, great-grandson of Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby, and lifelong friend. 
With the support of his father, Morgan resigned from the navy to follow a literary career, and was to have gone up to Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1914, but on the outbreak of war, he rejoined the Royal Navy and was involved in the Antwerp expedition with the naval brigade of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. After the fall of Antwerp, Morgan crossed into the Netherlands, where he remained interned until 1917. After a period of imprisonment Morgan was given parole and lived on the Rosendaal estate belonging to the De Pallandt family in Guelderland. It was among this family that he was introduced to the French language and culture which would become a lifelong influence. During this period Morgan had the opportunity to begin his apprenticeship as a novelist with a first novel, 'The Gunroom' (1919), recounting his experiences as a young midshipman in the pre-war Royal Navy. 
In 1919 Morgan was able to take his place at Oxford where he read history at Brasenose (1919-21), and became president of the Oxford University dramatic society. Through the good offices of A. B. Walkley, francophile drama critic of 'The Times', Morgan joined the editorial staff of the paper, and on Walkley's death in 1926 he took over as principal theatre critic until 1939. Journalism was to provide the financial security he needed to begin writing novels. 
On 6 June 1923 Morgan married fellow novelist Hilda Campbell Vaughan (1892-1985), daughter of Hugh Vaughan Vaughan of Builth, Brecknockshire, and Morgan's letters to her reveal how important she was in helping him to develop as a writer. Their two London homes were first at More's Garden in Chelsea and then from 1933 16 Campden Hill Square. They had two children, Elizabeth Shirley born in 1924, who married the seventh marquess of Anglesey in 1948, and Roger, born in 1926. 
In 1925 Morgan published another apprentice work, 'My Name is Legion', but in 1929 he had greater success with 'Portrait in a Mirror', which won the Femina Vie Heureuse prize (1930). This was followed in 1932 by 'The Fountain', which drew on his wartime experience in the Netherlands and proved very popular in both England and America, winning the Hawthornden prize (1933). Another ambitious novel, 'Sparkenbroke', appeared in 1936, and 'The Voyage' (1940), set in France in the late nineteenth century, came out just at the beginning of the Second World War and was awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize. In 1935 he published an essay, 'Epitaph on George Moore', in place of the biography of the novelist that Moore had wished him to write, and in 1938 his play 'The Flashing Stream' was produced in London. 
During the Second World War, Morgan worked for naval intelligence and made a lecture tour of the United States for the Institute of International Education. He still found time to write: he brought out a short novel, 'The Empty Room', in 1941 and in 1942 he began a series of weekly articles for the 'Times Literary Supplement' under the title 'Menander's mirror', republished in two volumes as 'Reflections in a Mirror' (1944-6). His love of France and its culture led him to become involved with the Free French in London, and a 'Spectator' article translated as 'Du genie francais' was published by Editions de Minuit in 1943. He also wrote an 'Ode to France' (1942) which was read in September 1944 at the reopening of the Comedie Francaise in Paris. 
After the war Morgan returned to novel writing and produced an allegorical fable of good and evil, 'The Judge's Story' (1947), and a tale of the resistance, 'The River Line' (1949), which was turned into a play in 1952. A dark note, caused by his fears concerning the power of modern science, entered into his book of essays 'Liberties of the Mind' (1951) and into his last play, 'The Burning Glass' (1953). A long novel dealing with a similar theme was never completed and his two final novels, 'A Breeze of Morning' (1951) and 'Challenge to Venus' (1957), returned to lighter subjects. 
During his career Morgan received honorary degrees from Scottish and French universities and was made an officer of the French Legion d'honneur (1936). He took great satisfaction in 1949 when the Institut de France made him one of its members. From 1953 to 1956 he held the presidency of International PEN. 
Although Morgan never sought a wide audience for his novels, they did achieve some degree of popularity during the 1930s, with 'The Fountain' reaching a printing of 144,000. He claimed the seventeenth-century Neoplatonist Henry Vaughan and the Romantic poets as his literary antecedents, although his contemporaries compared him more with Walter Pater and George Moore. After the Second World War his abstract, almost allegorical stories and careful attention to style failed to reach wide audiences when social realism and satire proved more popular. His work was never taken seriously among literary critics in Britain, but in France his novels aroused some academic interest. Marius-Francois Guyard explained this by the French discovering in the novels their own idea of England, and pointed out that critics as varied as Paul Valery and Francois Mauriac took notice of Morgan's work (Guyard, 77-9). Morgan died on 6 February 1958 at his home, 16 Campden Hill Square, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35101


Morgan, Conwy Lloyd (1852-1936), comparative psychologist and philosopher, was born in London on 6 February 1852, the second son of James Arthur Morgan, solicitor, and his wife, Mary Anderson. He received his early education at Brenchley, Kent, and at the Royal Grammar School, Guildford, his parents having moved to Weybridge a few years after his birth. The focus at the latter school was mainly on classics, with some mathematics but no science. Lloyd Morgan was, however, early attracted to scientific studies, and his father had concerns in several mining companies. Consequently, at the age of seventeen, he entered the School of Mines in London, where he was duke of Cornwall scholar, with the intention of becoming a mining engineer. Although he excelled in his studies, achieving both the Murchison and the de la Beche medals, he became increasingly interested in the pursuit of pure science. On obtaining his diploma as associate in mining and metallurgy, he accepted a post as private tutor to a wealthy Chicago family which gave him the opportunity of extensive travel in North and South America. On his return he resumed his scientific studies at the Royal College of Science, where he worked, among other teachers, under T. H. Huxley, whose influence upon him was profound. 
During this later period as a student Lloyd Morgan acted as an assayer for a mining company in Cornwall. In addition he was a lecturer at Weybridge School and, later, visiting master at Chatham School, Ramsgate. But his first regular professional post was in South Africa at the Diocesan College at Rondebosch, where he was appointed in 1878 to teach not only the physical sciences in general, but also English literature and, for a time, constitutional history. On 12 June of the same year he married Emily Charlotte Maddock ('b'. 1850/51), daughter of the Revd Henry William Maddock, vicar of All Saints, St John's Wood, London. They had two sons, the elder of whom predeceased Lloyd Morgan. 
In 1884 Lloyd Morgan returned to England to succeed W. J. Sollas in the chair of geology and zoology at University College, Bristol, where he was destined to pass the rest of his professional career. Three years later he was elected principal of the college, a post which in the early days of the university colleges was regarded as compatible with the continued tenure of a chair. But as the college developed the administrative work grew with it, and when in 1910 the university charter was granted Lloyd Morgan accepted the vice-chancellorship of the new university only in order to give it a start. After a tenure of about three months he resigned and resumed the work of his chair, by then renamed the chair of psychology and ethics, from which he retired in 1919. He lived on in Clifton until 1926, and even on one or two occasions returned to the university to give temporary assistance in the department of philosophy, as it had by then become. 
As principal Lloyd Morgan's impressive appearance, his upright and kindly personality, and his intellectual eminence commanded universal respect and liking, particularly among those most closely associated with him, but he had little taste for administration and was not particularly well equipped to handle some of the more assertive academic politicians of the time. On the other hand there can be no reservations about the value of his services to learning. A self-proclaimed sufferer from 'cacoethes scribendi', he was an exceptionally prolific author. Between 1876 and 1934, only one year (1918) passed without a publication from Lloyd Morgan. Following his 'Water and its Teachings' (1882) and 'Facts around Us' (1884) with approximately a dozen papers on Palaeozoic rocks of the Bristol area, his main interest in the early days of his tenure of the chair at Bristol was on the side of geology. But that soon gave place to what for many years occupied the centre of his attention, the study of animal and comparative psychology. As literary executor to George J. Romanes, Lloyd Morgan assumed the reputation of one of the foremost researchers in the field of mental evolution. Indeed, it would not be too much to say that, in the English-speaking world at any rate, he was one of the chief founders of the scientific study of animal psychology. He was among the first to apply systematically the methods of experiment to the subject. The results of his investigations appeared in a long series of publications of which the most important are 'Animal Life and Intelligence' (1890-91), 'Habit and Instinct' (1896), 'Animal Behaviour' (1900), and 'Instinct and Experience' (1912). 
Lloyd Morgan is perhaps best known for his statement about assessing the relative roles of instinct, intelligence, and reason in the experimental study of animal behaviour. First presented at the International Congress of Experimental Psychology, held in London in 1892, and subsequently published in his 'An Introduction to Comparative Psychology' (1894), this later became known as Lloyd Morgan's canon. Stating that in no case is 'an animal activity to be interpreted as the outcome of the exercise of a higher psychical faculty, if it can be fairly interpreted as the outcome of one which stands lower on the psychological scale', the canon was designed to bring scientific rigour and evolutionary continuity to the anthropomorphic psychological approach to animals. Arguably its misinterpretation had a profound impact on the development of behaviourism. 
With J. M. Baldwin, H. F. Osborn, and E. B. Poulton, Lloyd Morgan arrived independently at the theory of organic selection, or the Baldwin effect, in the early 1890s. This theory explained apparently Lamarckian evolution in neo-Darwinian terms. According to this theory an organism exposed to a new environment might initially survive through adaptation borne of learned habits. Among these successful organisms spontaneously generated hereditary adaptations that are identical to the previously learned habits might arise. Although generated through the random action of natural selection, successful behavioural attributes may, therefore, appear to be the result of use inheritance. 
Influenced by the writings of George Berkeley from an early age Lloyd Morgan grappled with the problem of mind-body dualism. His proposed solution was shaped by his combined interests in metaphysics and experimental evolutionary psychology. Committed to a monism of 'mind stuff' throughout most of his active career in comparative psychology, Lloyd Morgan accorded mentality a positive role in evolution. In his later years, however, his interest turned more exclusively to the metaphysical underpinnings of his monism. In this field he developed and gave his own interpretation to the idea of the emergence of novelty which was being discussed by Samuel Alexander and others at that period. His most important works in this field of investigation are his two courses of Gifford lectures delivered at St Andrews University in 1922 and 1923 and published as 'Emergent Evolution' (1923) and 'Life, Mind and Spirit' (1926). Although he rejected religious orthodoxy he detected a divine plan at work in emergent evolution, which denied materialist reductionism in evolutionary explanations of the natural world. In short, evolution generated novel products that could not be explained strictly on the basis of component elements or causes. Undoubtedly his explications of emergent evolution contributed to his election as president of the Aristotelian Society in 1926. 
Lloyd Morgan's pre-eminence in his chosen field was rewarded with numerous honours. He was elected FRS in 1899, being the first fellow to be elected for psychological work, and he was elected first president of the psychological section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1921. He received honorary degrees from the University of Aberdeen (1903), the University of Wisconsin, Madison (1904), and Bristol University (1910). On two occasions (1895/6, 1904), he was selected to deliver a course of Lowell lectures at Harvard. 
Throughout his life Lloyd Morgan seemed intent on being the living embodiment of his emergent monism. In 'Mind at the Crossways' (1929) he argued that art and science represented emergent attitudes towards beauty and truth respectively. Both the contemplative and the emotional constituted the emergent level. Determined to balance his science with art, Lloyd Morgan was an integral part of the various facets of Bristol community life: he was president of the Bristol Cambrian Society; vice-president of the British Empire Shakespeare Society; member of the committee controlling Leigh Woods; and president of the Clifton High School for Girls. He was also an active participant in university extension work in Bristol and the surrounding region. Contemporaries remembered him as 'tall and spare of figure, with humorous eyes' ('The Times', 9 March 1936, 8a). 'In the town he was a familiar and respected figure, who could be seen every day cycling to work, to golf, or to Church, with no overcoat in any weather, and his long beard resting on the handlebars, or blowing wildly over his shoulder' (Grindley, 1). In 1926 Lloyd Morgan finally retired to Hastings, where he died at his home, 23 Elphinstone Road, on 6 March 1936. He was buried at the borough cemetery, Hastings. 


@@@@@


doc= 35102


Morgan, Edward Delmar (1840-1909), linguist and traveller, born at Stratford, Essex, on 19 April 1840, was the only son of Edward John Morgan, an officer in the Madras artillery and later a member of the English factory or merchants' company in St Petersburg, and his wife, Mary Anne Parland. Educated at Eton College (1854-7), he showed a talent for languages from an early age. After leaving school he lived with his parents in St Petersburg, and learnt Russian. 
In 1872 Morgan travelled first in Asia, making a journey in Persia with Sir John Underwood Bateman-Champain, a director of the Indo-European Telegraph Company. Morgan subsequently visited Kulja and the neighbouring parts of central Asia. In 1876 he translated from the Russian the central Asian explorer Colonel Nikolay Przhevalsky's 'Mongolia, the Tangut Country and the Solitudes of Northern Tibet' (2 vols., 1876, with an introduction and notes by Henry Yule). Przhevalsky was one of the most successful Russian explorers in central Asia and winner of the Royal Geographical Society's founder's medal for his exploits. Morgan's translation made accessible his discoveries to an English audience keenly interested in, and deeply suspicious of, Russian activity in central Asia. With Sir Thomas Douglas Forsyth, Morgan translated the same author's 'From Kulja across the Tien Shan (Tianshan) to Lobnor' (1879). Morgan made later expeditions to Ukraine, being familiar with its language and literature; to the lower part of the Congo (1883), which gave him a keen interest in the affairs of the Free State; to east Africa; and to the Baku oil region of Caucasia. 
Morgan, who was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society for forty years and served on its council, contributed much to its 'Journal'. He was also honorary secretary of the Hakluyt Society (1886-92), and collaborated with C. H. Coote in editing for it (1886) the 'Early Voyages and Travels to Russia and Persia, by Anthony Jenkinson and other Englishmen'. He was honorary treasurer for the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists (1892), in London, under Max Muller's presidency, and edited its transactions (1893). He, with two other fellows, successfully persuaded the Royal Geographical Society to organize the Sixth International Geographical Congress in 1895. 
Morgan married on 25 September 1873 Bertha Jardine, daughter of Richard Thomas and his wife, Louisa de Visme. They had four sons and three daughters; the eldest son, Edward Louis Delmar Morgan, lieutenant RN, died in 1900. Morgan died at 15 Roland Gardens, South Kensington, London, on 18 May 1909, and was buried at Copthorne, Sussex, his main home in his later years. 


@@@@@


doc= 35103


Morgan, Sir Frederick Edgworth (1894-1967), army officer, was born in Paddock Wood, near Tonbridge, Kent, on 5 February 1894, the eldest son in a family of nine children of Frederick Beverley Morgan (died 1934), a timber importer and merchant from a line of timber merchants, of Mascalls, Paddock Wood, and West Pallant House, Chichester, and his wife, Clara Elizabeth, daughter of Edgworth Horrocks, squire of Paddock Wood, Kent. Morgan was educated at Hurstleigh private school, Tunbridge Wells (1902-7), Clifton College (1907-11) -- where he was a successful cricketer and cadet commander of the Officers' Training Corps -- and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1912-13), before being commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Field Artillery, on 17 July 1913. He returned from India with the Lahore divisional artillery in 1914 and served in France and Belgium throughout the war, taking part in most of the major battles and being twice mentioned in dispatches and promoted captain in 1916. Early in the war he was blown up and suffered severe shell-shock, but he returned later to serve on the staff of the Canadian Corps. On 15 August 1917 he married Marjorie Cecile, daughter of Colonel Thomas du Bedat Whaite, of the Army Medical Service; they had a son and two daughters. 
From 1919 to early 1935 Morgan served with his regiment in India (major 1932, brevet lieutenant-colonel 1934), where he did much pigsticking and was a keen cricketer. He attended the Staff College, Quetta, in 1927-8, and held staff appointments in India and at the War Office (general staff officer, grade 2 (GSO 2), Royal Artillery, India, 1931-4; GSO 2, War Office, 1936-8). He later described his term at Whitehall as a nightmare as there was so little sense of urgency to prepare for the impending war. 
Promoted colonel in 1938 and temporary brigadier in 1939, Morgan was for a short period GSO 1 to the 3rd division (1938-9); but he was then given command of the support group of the 1st armoured division, with which he went to France in 1940. During the retreat of the British expeditionary force he took part in the fighting south of the Somme, and escaped from Brest. Between 1940 and 1943 he held appointments at home culminating in the command of 1st corps (1942-3), and in 1942 he was promoted acting lieutenant-general. In March 1943 he was appointed COSSAC (chief of staff to the supreme allied commander [designate]). He was faced with the gigantic task of planning the invasion of north-west Europe and a follow-up attack into the heart of Germany with an eventual force of 100 divisions, and also a deception scheme (Cockade) to keep the Germans alert for landings in 1943. He set up his headquarters at Norfolk House in St James's Square where he assembled an Anglo-American staff of all three services. Although a number of studies for a landing on the coast of Normandy had already been made, Morgan and his team faced enormous difficulties. The chief of the Imperial General Staff, Sir Alan Brooke, after outlining the problem is alleged to have remarked 'Well, there it is. It won't work, but you must bloody well make it.' If in the end Morgan failed to provide a plan which satisfied the eventual executants, they could not have managed without it. He devoted himself tirelessly to the task, working seven days a week and sleeping beside his desk. The happy relations he fostered in his inter-allied staff was a remarkable achievement in view of the misunderstandings and differences of opinion sometimes prevalent between the allies on a higher level. 
The inadequacies of COSSAC's planning in 1943 and early 1944 were principally due to two factors: the absence of a supreme commander and the shortage of means then available. Despite the representations made by Churchill and the British chiefs of staff at the Quebec conference in August 1943, it was not until after the appointment of General Eisenhower and his deputy commanders at the end of 1943 that the Americans fully grasped the size of the problem and began to make provision for it. The planners' most acute difficulty was undoubtedly the lack of a sufficient number of landing-craft (the Pacific theatre and to some extent the Mediterranean then enjoyed a higher priority), but there were many other serious deficiencies, including ships and aircraft for lifting airborne troops. When Churchill showed General Montgomery a draft of COSSAC's plan at Marrakesh at the end of December 1943, the latter submitted a trenchant memorandum arguing that in its present form it was impracticable. In particular Montgomery pointed out that the allocation of only three infantry divisions for the initial landing would entail far too narrow a front: 'By D + 12 a total of 16 divisions have been landed on the same beaches as were used for the initial landings. This would lead to the most appalling confusion on the beaches, and the smooth development of the land battle would be made extremely difficult -- if not impossible.' Montgomery significantly extended the scope of the landings and also strengthened the command structure; his plan called for an attack by two armies side by side, British Second Army on the left with three divisions in line, and US First Army on the right with two divisions. Montgomery himself held the executive command of the twenty-first army group, under Eisenhower's supreme direction, until after the break-out was achieved. 
Nevertheless the great expansion of the forces available for Overlord and the consequent modifications of the plan in the first five months of 1944 should not obscure the fact that COSSAC and his staff had laid the essential foundations for the greatest amphibious operation ever undertaken. Among the many novel features of Morgan's plan perhaps the most remarkable and successful was the provision for large-scale maintenance from artificial harbours (Mulberries). Montgomery later wrote that Morgan 'did a good job... and produced an outline plan for OVERLORD which served as a basis for future planning' (Montgomery, 219). Eisenhower later wrote that Morgan made D-day possible. 
When, early in 1944, Morgan was relieved on the arrival of the British and American commanders with their own chiefs of staff, he was appointed deputy chief of staff at Eisenhower's headquarters (SHAEF). His advice to the supreme commander frequently conflicted with the views of Montgomery, who later wrote of Morgan in his 'Memoirs' that 'He considered Eisenhower was a god; since I had discarded many of his plans, he placed me at the other end of the celestial ladder' (Montgomery, 256). 
In September 1945 Morgan took on probably the most difficult and ultimately most unhappy assignment of his career as chief of operations in Germany to the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA). During the next year he applied his qualities of drive, intelligence, and sympathy to the desperate problems presented by at least a million displaced persons. Although remarkably successful in some aspects of his work, he soon became disillusioned with UNRRA, which he believed was being exploited by sinister organizations. In January 1946 he created a furore by asserting at a press conference that a secret organization existed to further a mass movement of Jews out of Europe. Although his suspicion was possibly well founded, critics held that he should not have made a public statement while officially concerned with provision for numerous Jewish refugees. Six months later he was dismissed after alleging that UNRRA organizations were being used as a cover for Soviet agents who were fomenting trouble among displaced persons. This episode is related in full and strikes an uncharacteristically bitter note in Morgan's autobiography. 
Freddie Morgan was a tall, cheerful soldier with a fresh complexion and blue eyes. Behind a somewhat untidy appearance and a droll sense of humour he concealed one of the sharpest minds of his generation in the army. His charm and courtesy were invaluable assets in a senior staff officer, yet he also had a strong personality and great courage in voicing unpopular views. Throughout his career he displayed ability and competence well above the average. 
In 1946 Morgan retired from the army with the honorary rank of lieutenant-general. In 1951 he succeeded Lord Portal of Hungerford as controller of atomic energy, and witnessed Britain's first atomic tests at the Monte Bello Islands in October 1952; and in 1954-6 he was controller of atomic weapons under the Atomic Energy Authority. He published his account of the work of the COSSAC team, 'Overture to Overlord' (1950), and his autobiography 'Peace and War, a Soldier's Life' (1961). 
He was appointed CB in 1943 and promoted KCB in 1944, and received US and French honours. He was a colonel-commandant, Royal Artillery, from 1948 to 1958. Morgan died at Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex, on 19 March 1967. 
Brian Bond', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35104


Morgan, Sir Gilbert Thomas (1870-1940), chemist, was born at Essendon, Hertfordshire, on 20 October 1870, the son of Thomas Morgan, a butler, and his wife, Marie Louise Corday, a ladies' maid of French-Swiss nationality. After education at the local school he attended the Central Foundation School, Cowper Street, London, and in 1886 enrolled at Finsbury Technical College as a certified student. Influenced by S. P. Thompson, John Perry, and Raphael Meldola, by the time he left three years later he had prepared a series of new derivatives of benzeneazo-greekLetterbeta-naphthol and assisted in the extraction of ceria from cerite. The widely differing natures of his early ventures in research were afterwards to have a far-reaching effect, since he never specialized in any one branch of chemistry, but was at home in its organic, inorganic, and physical branches. 
Morgan left Finsbury in 1889 and was employed as assistant chemist for five years in the firm of Read Holliday & Co., dye manufacturers, at Huddersfield (later British Dyes, Ltd). In 1894 he decided to give up his industrial career and resume his scientific education; he was awarded a royal scholarship and became a mature student at the Royal College of Science. He soon began assisting Professor W. A. Tilden with various research projects, and graduated BSc with first-class honours in 1896. He then became successively demonstrator, lecturer, and assistant professor at the Royal College. 
In 1912 Morgan married Kathleen Nembhard (died 1944), daughter of George Desborough. They had no children. In the same year he was appointed professor of chemistry at the Royal College of Science in Dublin; in 1916 he returned to Finsbury as professor in succession to Meldola, and in 1919 he was elected Mason professor of chemistry at Birmingham University. Six years later he crowned his career as the first director of the Chemical Research Laboratory which at the instance of Sir Richard Threlfall had been set up at Teddington. In 1937 he retired, but not into inactivity, for he had become chairman of the research fund committee of the Institute of Brewing, and entered actively into a new and large field of research. 
Morgan's experimental work had an important impact in two areas: chemical reactions under high pressures and synthetic resins. The first of these arose from his use of the autoclave at Huddersfield, where he produced the dyestuff titan como blue which enjoyed a brief period of high popularity. The second also made its appearance towards the end of his period as a commercial chemist, for he made an observation which in other hands assumed unusual importance. By the condensation of phenol with formaldehyde he obtained a clear amber resin, possessing unexpected physical properties but useless as a source of dyes; the experiment was therefore laid aside and forgotten, until in 1906 the first of the Baekeland patents for the manufacture of synthetic plastics showed how narrowly Morgan had missed a fortune. 
Research into colours and the improvement of autoclaves together with co-ordinated compounds were Morgan's chief areas of study at Dublin and Birmingham; it was Morgan who introduced the term 'chelate', which became widely used for rings containing co-ordinated links (bidentate ligands). At Finsbury during the First World War he devoted his time to investigations carried out for the Chemical Warfare Committee. He constructed autoclaves out of military and naval shell, and used them in making organic arsenicals and antimonials that could be applicable to chemical warfare and also in the preparation of colour intermediates. His former experiences as a colour chemist were of great importance, since materials previously imported from Germany now had to be made in Britain, and Morgan helped to reconstruct the industry. 
When Morgan took up his post at Teddington his university research topics, together with the examination of low-temperature tars, became its basic studies. Later he directed investigations into a wide range of microbiological problems, including those relating to chemotherapy, water pollution, and the chemical constituents of woodsmoke. 
Morgan's publications were regarded as authoritative in their day, and included 'Achievements of the British Chemical Industry in the Last Twenty-Five Years' (1939), 'British Chemical Industry: its Rise and Development' (1938), 'Inorganic Chemistry: a Survey of Modern Development' (1936), and 'Organic Compounds of Arsenic and Antimony' (1918). He also contributed alone or in collaboration over 350 original scientific papers, always being careful to acknowledge the work of others, and from 1903 to 1906 he was editor of the 'Journal of the Chemical Society'. 
Many honours were bestowed upon Morgan: he was appointed OBE in 1920 and knighted in 1936; he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1915, and he received honorary degrees from the universities of Dublin, St Andrews, and Birmingham. In 1921 he was awarded the gold medal of the Dyers' Company; in 1931 he was president of the Society of Chemical Industry, which in 1939 awarded him its medal, and in 1933 he was president of the Chemical Society. 
Morgan possessed an extraordinarily retentive memory and his love of work was matched by his energy, thoroughness, and efficiency. He died of uraemia at the Royal Hospital, Richmond, Surrey, on 1 February 1940, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 6 February. As a legacy to his interest and competence in all branches of chemistry, he left a bequest to the Chemical Society to fund the Corday-Morgan medal and prize, and established the Corday-Morgan memorial fund, which was to be used 'to assist in the unification of the chemical profession'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35105


Morgan, John Hartman (1876-1955), lawyer, was born on 20 March 1876, the son of the Revd David Morgan, Congregationalist minister of Ystradfellte, Glamorgan, and his wife, Julia, daughter of Felix Wethli, of Zurich. From Caterham School he went with a scholarship to the University College of South Wales where he obtained his London MA in 1896, and with another scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, where in 1900 he was placed in the second class of the honour school of modern history. He made his mark at the Oxford Union, and developed a strong interest in diplomatic history. When he left Oxford he joined the Inner Temple, and began to read for the bar (to which he was called in 1915), and joined in 1901 the literary staff of the 'Daily Chronicle' (where he stayed until 1903). But at the same time he continued his postgraduate studies at the London School of Economics under W. A. S. Hewins. He gained a research studentship with which he studied for a time at the University of Berlin. Shortly after his return to England he became a leader writer for the 'Manchester Guardian' (1904-5). In addition, he had political ambitions, standing unsuccessfully in 1910 as a Liberal candidate for the Edgbaston division of Birmingham in January and West Edinburgh in December. In 1905 he married Clara Maud (died 1967), daughter of Henry Anthony Hertz; she was an actress known under the name Margaret Halstan. The marriage did not last. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914, Morgan volunteered for combatant service, but his special qualifications were responsible for his appointment to the adjutant-general's staff as Home Office representative with the British expeditionary force, to inquire into the conduct of the Germans in the field. His report was published by the parliamentary recruiting committee. In 1919 he attended the peace conference as assistant adjutant-general, and was later sent to Cologne to report on the British occupation of the Rhineland, becoming British military representative on the prisoners of war commission. Later still, he was for some years in Germany as a member of the subcommission on disarmament of the Inter-Allied Control Commission for Germany, finally retiring from the army in 1923 with the rank of brigadier-general. Morgan was convinced from the outset of his work with the control commission that Germany had no intention of disarming, and after his return he attempted by letters and articles to show that Germany was preparing for another war. But his efforts evoked little response, until, at the conclusion of the Second World War, his book, 'Assize of Arms' (1945), gathered together the record of his experiences into a formidable indictment. 
In 1916 Morgan appeared as counsel for the defence in the trial of Sir Roger Casement and it was at Morgan's suggestion that, on appeal, it was strenuously argued on Casement's behalf that seeking to seduce troops from their allegiance while prisoners of war in Germany was not within the 'Statute of Treason' of 1351. Morgan had given some lectures on constitutional law as early as 1908, and in 1915 had been appointed professor of constitutional law at University College, London. During his absence, Dr Thomas Baty deputized for him, but in 1923 Morgan returned to active teaching and until his retirement in 1941 his lectures, with their forceful expression of clear-cut opinions upon constitutional developments, never failed to attract large audiences. In addition, from 1926 to 1936 he was reader in constitutional law to the inns of court. He took silk in 1926 and his authority in the field of constitutional law was recognized by his appointment, first to advise the Indian chamber of princes on constitutional changes in India from 1934 to 1937, then to advise Western Australia at the hearing before parliament of the secession petition of that state in 1935. 
To the end of his life Morgan remained actively opposed to German rearmament, and he appeared in person at Nuremberg at the trial of the major war criminals, most of whom he had himself interrogated, and his last official duty was to act as legal adviser to the American war crimes commission from 1947 to 1949. 
Morgan wrote freely, and with the same force which he displayed in court and in lecturing, and he enjoyed controversy. Among his principal publications were 'The House of Lords and the Constitution' (1910); a translation entitled 'The German War Book' (1915); 'War, its Conduct and Legal Results' (with T. Baty, 1915); 'Leaves from a Field Note-Book' (1916); 'Gentlemen at Arms' (1918); 'The Present State of Germany' (1924); 'Viscount Morley, an Appreciation' (1924); 'Remedies Against the Crown' (1925); 'The Great Assize' (1948); and many contributions to legal and other periodicals. Morgan died at 46 Wood Street, Wootton Bassett, Wiltshire, on 8 April 1955. 
G. W. Keeton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35106


Moriarty, Henry Augustus (1815-1906), naval officer, the second son of Commander James Moriarty RN, and his wife, Catherine Webb, was born on 19 May 1815 in the signal tower on Valentia Island, co. Cork, Ireland. He was educated by the Revd J. Neave at Portsmouth, and entered the navy on 18 December 1829 on board the frigate 'North Star'. In 1837 he was promoted second master and appointed to the flagship 'Caledonia' in the Mediterranean, and during the war on the coast of Syria in 1840 served on board the 'Ganges' (84 guns). He was promoted master in June 1844, and in 1848, while master of the flagship 'Penelope' on the west coast of Africa, commanded a paddle-box boat in an expedition to destroy the slave barracoons on the River Gallinas. In the Crimean War he was master of the 'Duke of Wellington', the flagship of Sir Charles Napier, in the Baltic; he was mentioned in dispatches for surveying work done under fire, and was employed under Captain Bartholomew J. Sulivan in placing the mortar vessels preparatory to the bombardment of Sveaborg on 9 August 1855. 
In 1857 and in 1858 Moriarty was appointed to navigate the battleship 'Agamemnon', lent by the Admiralty to lay the first Atlantic telegraph cable. In June 1863 he was promoted staff commander, and in August was appointed to the flagship 'Marlborough' (121 guns) in the Mediterranean. 
In 1865 and 1866 Moriarty navigated the 'Great Eastern' when she was employed in laying the second and third transatlantic cables, and, when the cable broke in mid-ocean in 1865, he fixed the position so accurately as to ensure the subsequent recovery of the broken end. In 1866 he was created CB for this success, and received a valuable testimonial from his brother officers. In December 1867 he was promoted staff captain and was appointed to Portsmouth Dockyard as assistant master attendant; in November 1869 he became master attendant and queen's harbour master. He held this post until 3 December 1874, when he was placed on the retired list with the rank of captain. 
After his retirement Moriarty was occasionally employed as nautical assessor to the judicial committee of the privy council, and frequently as nautical expert before parliamentary committees, including those on Barry docks, the Tay Bridge, the Forth Bridge, and Tower Bridge. His chief publications were four volumes of sailing directions (1887-93) compiled for the Admiralty, and the articles on seamanship and navigation in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn). 
Moriarty married first, on 30 July 1852, Lavinia Charlotte (died September 1874), the daughter of William Page Foster; they had two sons and two daughters. His second wife, whom he married in 1875, was Harriet Elizabeth, the daughter of Robert Avent of St Budeaux, Devon, who died childless in March 1892. Moriarty died at his home, 35 Manor Park, Lee, Kent, on 18 August 1906, and was buried in the cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 35107


Morison, Stanley Arthur (1889-1967), typographer, was born at Kent Villa, Tavistock Road, Wanstead, Essex, on 6 May 1889, the only son and second of the three children of Arthur Andrew Morison (1856-1932) and his wife, Alice Louisa (1863-1951), daughter of Charles Cole, clerk, of Hackney, London. His father, an unsuccessful and intemperate commercial traveller, deserted the family when Morison was fourteen, causing him to leave Owen's School, Islington, in 1903 and to find paid work. After a phase of sharing his mother's agnosticism, he was received into the Roman Catholic church in December 1908. Unhappy as a clerk with the London City Mission (1905-12), he spent his spare time in museums and public libraries. The 'Times' printing supplement of 10 September 1912 concentrated his mind on the study of letter-forms, printed and written, and early in the following year he was fortunate in securing a post as assistant in the office of 'The Imprint', a new monthly periodical devoted to design in printing. When 'The Imprint' seemed likely to fail in the following year, the editor recommended Morison to Wilfrid Meynell, husband of Alice Meynell and managing director of Burns and Oates, Roman Catholic publishers, who took him on his staff. Morison afterwards felt deeply grateful to the Meynell family for their help and encouragement. 
In 1916 Morison made known his conscientious objection to war service. His appeal against conscription on religious and moral grounds was dismissed, and on 7 May 1916 he was arrested. Eventually he accepted alternative employment, and by the time the war ended he was engaged in farm work. Meanwhile, on 18 March 1916 he had married Mabel Williamson (1872-1961), a schoolteacher. Not until many years later did Morison learn that she was not seven but seventeen years older than himself. Morison never spoke of his marriage: late in 1926 he made a settlement on his wife and they separated. He had formed a close relationship, undoubtedly amorous but as certainly chaste, with the American historian of typography and publicist Mrs Beatrice Lamberton Warde. They remained attached until he died. 
After the war Wilfrid and his son, Francis Meynell, found Morison temporary employment until, in June 1921, he went as typographer to the Cloister Press near Manchester. The press was liquidated in July 1922 and Morison was never again employed full-time. At various times he acted as freelance consultant to several publishers including Benn, Gollancz, Cape, and Heinemann, but his position as Britain's greatest authority on letter-design was won by his career with the Lanston Monotype Corporation, for which he acted as typographical adviser from 1922 until 1954. A dozen typefaces made to his specifications, some rendering old designs, others drawn by living artists including Eric Gill and Berthold Wolpe, became those most commonly used for printing in Great Britain and to a large extent abroad. 
Morison's writings, over two hundred books, articles, collections of specimens, reviews, and prefaces, strongly affected the taste and enlarged the knowledge of experts and amateurs concerned with book production. A succession of learned essays in the annual 'The Fleuron' (1923-30), founded in conjunction with Oliver Simon, discovered much that was of value in the history of type and its relation to the work of scribes and writing masters. The final one, 'First principles of typography', was frequently reprinted, and was translated into six languages during Morison's lifetime. On weekly visits to Cambridge, where from 1925 he was part-time typographical adviser to the university press, he was the perfect collaborator for its printer, Walter Lewis, until 1945 and for his successor, Brooke Crutchley, until 1959. 
Morison's great service to 'The Times' over thirty years made him known to a wider public, though in this, and in most of his work for other organizations, he believed that the authority of joint responsibility depended on anonymity. His appointment as typographical adviser was the result of his caustic comments on the paper's drab and old-fashioned look made in 1929. His views, reported to the manager, led eventually to his being asked to submit proposals. Through 1930 and 1931 he advocated typographical changes, including the abandonment of the ornamental gothic for the title. As a consequence a new typeface was cut, and when 'The Times' first appeared in Times New Roman on 3 October 1932 almost all correspondents found it a relief to their eyes. Morison's position at 'The Times' developed into something much more than adviser on printing. He edited and largely wrote the four-volume 'History of 'The Times'' (1935-52) and was for two years, 1945-7, editor of the 'Times Literary Supplement'. He was consulted about organization and appointments of personnel, and even for a time about editorial policy. He retired from 'The Times' in 1960. 
Morison's researches in newspaper history, first presented at length in his Sandars lectures, published as 'The English Newspaper', at Cambridge in 1932, led to a fascination with the power of the press. He relished the friendship of Lord Beaverbrook, who entertained him in the years 1948-63 to holidays in the Bahamas and on the Riviera. 
Morison's involvement with the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' began in 1949, when he met the publisher William Benton; in 1961 he was added to the editorial board. In this connection he made periodic visits to Chicago (the city that came nearest to rivalling London in his affections: he disliked country living) and enjoyed Mediterranean cruises in Senator Benton's yacht. 
Morison far excelled other typographers of his day in point of erudition; and his choice of type-designs, prompted by a fastidious mind and a sensitive eye, was enduring. His capacity for gaining the confidence of managements and commanding the skill of technicians made him a leader in his profession. Consequently, his influence on book printing was powerful, and he exerted it in favour of an austere and traditional style, with an improved repertory of type. As a scholar he was quick to grasp essentials but could be inaccurate in details. In his ambitiously conceived Lyell lectures at Oxford in 1957 (published in 1972 as 'Politics and script: aspects of authority and freedom in the development of Graeco-Latin script', edited by Nicolas Barker) he drew especially on almost thirty years' advice and friendship of the palaeographer E. A. Lowe. His work on the history of the Fell types at Oxford University Press, a project with a similarly long history, relied in its last stages principally on Harry Carter. These two works preoccupied him in the last years of his life, and offer a summation of his scholarly interests. 
Cambridge University honoured Morison with the degree of LittD in 1950, and he held honorary doctorates also from Birmingham and Marquette (Wisconsin). He was elected FBA in 1954 and appointed royal designer for industry in 1960; but he declined three offers of knighthood, one shortly after playing a pivotal part in the acquisition by the British Museum of the 'Codex Sinaiticus' in 1934. 
Morison was of spare build; wore spectacles (steel-rimmed) from his youth up, the lenses thickening as he aged. Dressed invariably in a black suit with a white shirt and black tie, outdoors with a rather small black hat, he struck strangers as looking like a Jesuit. He was vigorous and did not spare himself; in middle life he travelled a great deal in search of information. His talk was pugnacious in a humorous way. Victorian in morals, on other subjects he would differ without bitterness, although he had no doubts about his own opinions. In politics he was radical; he spoke contemptuously of the Roman curia, resented monarchy, and thought capitalism was wrong but invincible. Communist friends dissuaded him in 1921 from applying for membership of their party. Apart from the breviary, which he always carried, he read only for information, increasingly about liturgy and ecclesiology; in music he eventually cared only for plainchant. His fine collection of books was presented by Sir Allen Lane to Cambridge University Library, where it is kept in the Morison Room. 
Given handsome parting presents from 'The Times' and the Monotype Corporation, and a generous subsidy from Senator Benton, Morison lived his declining years in comfort in a double suite of rooms at 2 Whitehall Court, Westminster, and indulged a discriminating taste in food and wines. He visited Chicago in 1966, but by May 1967 he had taken to a wheelchair because of spinal weakness, and he could hardly see. He died of heart failure at home, on 11 October 1967. Following a requiem mass in Westminster Cathedral he was buried at Paddington new cemetery, Mill Hill, on 18 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 35108


Morison, Sir Theodore (1863-1936), educationist and writer, was born in Malta on 9 May 1863, the only son of the author James Augustus Cotter Morison (1832-1888) and his wife, Frances Adelaide (died 1878), daughter of George Virtue, the publisher ['see under 'Virtue, James Sprent]. Educated at Westminster School (1876-82), he was Westminster scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge (1882-5), where he took a second class in the classical tripos. 
Morison went to India in 1886 as tutor to the young maharajas of Chhaturpur and Charkhari. In 1889 he was appointed professor of English at the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, founded by Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan to provide a western education for Muslims within the context of Islamic culture and religion. He succeeded Theodore Beck as principal of the college in 1899, the year in which he published 'Imperial Rule in India'. He regarded Khan as 'the most remarkable man [he] had ever met' but himself played an important part in making the Aligarh college a success. During his principalship student numbers almost doubled, discipline improved through the introduction of a proctorial system, and the finances recovered. Known as Soldier Morison on account of his fondness for riding and shooting, he mixed freely with the students and maintained good relations between the Indian managers of the college and their European staff of teachers, though his wife, Margaret (died 1931), daughter of Arthur Cohen, whom he married in 1895, was regarded by the students as rather aloof. Gertrude Bell, who visited them in January 1903, found Morison 'an enchanting person' and his wife 'a bit of a prig, but I got to like her' (Bell MSS). Morison encouraged extra-curricular activities, particularly physical exercise, though he maintained his predecessor's policy of discouraging students' involvement in politics. He was a leading supporter of the movement to raise the Aligarh college to the status of a residential, denominational university for Indian Muslims, and at the Muhammadan Educational Conference at Lahore in December 1898 he moved a resolution in favour of creating a Muslim university. Although the movement was delayed by the decision in 1904 of Curzon, the viceroy, to halt the creation of further universities, the college finally achieved university status in 1920. 
In 1905 Morison returned to England for family reasons, published his 'The Industrial Organisation of an Indian Province' in 1906, and was exceptionally appointed to the Council of India that year by his old friend John (later Viscount) Morley, the secretary of state. He held the position until 1916, and was appointed KCIE in 1910 and KCSI in 1917. His unrelenting advocacy of Muslim claims to representation in government matters led Morley in 1909 to understand the pressures which had led Oliver Cromwell to 'send his counsellors packing' (J. Morley, 'Recollections', 2 vols., 1917, 2.315). In 1911 Morison produced a third book, 'The Economic Transition in India', and in 1913 Lord Crewe appointed him to the royal commission on the Indian public services under the chairmanship of Lord Islington. In 1915, however, he excused himself and despite his age went on active service, becoming attached to the east African expeditionary force at the request of General Smuts and to the Belgian forces in May 1917, in which year he later became senior political officer in charge of the southern area of German East Africa. When the army's educational department was established in 1918 he was put in charge of one of its sub-departments. 
After demobilization Morison became principal of Armstrong College, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1919; from 1924 to 1926 he was vice-chancellor of Durham University. He carried the main burden of reorganizing the college, which had such serious financial difficulties that its closure was contemplated in 1921, although it had then more than half the full-time students of the University of Durham. His exceptional energy and enthusiasm brought about not only the college's survival, but also the creation of among other things a new library and a mining department in his time. His last annual report characteristically referred to the possibilities of development, to further co-operation between the scientific departments and local industries, to the establishment of a department of social science, and to closer association with the local Society of Antiquaries to further Roman studies. His last official act was to press upon the council of the university the need for a hall of residence for male students. He retired a year early on medical advice in 1929, and went to live at Weybridge. His close friend and successor as principal of Armstrong College, the former Indian civil servant Sir William Marris, later paid tribute to his kindness and generosity, though an obituarist in 'The Times' remarked that he 'had no use for extremists and freaks, and did not hesitate to let them know it' (15 Feb 1936). 
Morison's only daughter died in 1928 and his wife in 1931, leaving him with just a son, but he was not one to give way to sorrow or to be inactive for long. In 1933 he became director of the British Institute in Paris, appropriately, for he had spent part of his youth there and had a special affection for the French and for French literature. He was made an officer of the Legion d'honneur and of the Belgian order of Leopold, and in 1920 he received the honorary degree of DCL from Durham. He worked hard in Paris but his health was failing; he died at his home there, 4 Cite Vaneau, on 14 February 1936 and was cremated in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 35109


Morland, Sir Thomas Lethbridge Napier (1865-1925), army officer, was born on 9 August 1865 at Montreal, Canada, the eldest son of Thomas Morland, a manufacturing engineer, who, after emigrating to Canada as a young man, played an important part in the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway, and his wife, Helen Elizabeth, daughter of General Henry Servante. On losing both his parents when still a child, Morland was brought to England to be educated, and sent to Charterhouse School (1878-83) and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1883-4). He was gazetted into the King's Royal Rifle Corps in August 1884. While still a subaltern he attended the Staff College, Camberley (1890-92). On 18 February 1890 he married Mabel Elinor Rowena (died 1901), daughter of Admiral Henry Craven St John; they had two daughters. After being promoted captain in April 1893 Morland was appointed aide-de-camp to General Sir A. J. Lyon Fremantle, commander-in-chief in Malta, in February 1895. 
Being of an adventurous disposition, and a good horseman, Morland desired more active employment. This he found in Nigeria. In February 1898 he joined the West African Frontier Force in time to take part in the operations which were then in progress in the River Niger valley and hinterland. This was the first of six minor campaigns in those regions in which he participated with credit. Morland was rewarded with a brevet majority in July 1899 and given command of the 1st battalion, West African Frontier Force, with the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel. Early in 1900 he commanded the little column engaged in the Kaduna expedition in Northern Nigeria; later in the same year he took part in the Asante operations, after which he obtained the brevet of lieutenant-colonel. In 1901 he conducted the operations against the emir of Yola, during which he was slightly wounded, and subsequently he received the DSO (1902). In the latter year he was given the command of the small Bornu expedition. Finally, in 1903, he was engaged in the campaign against the rulers of Kano and Sokoto. In the following March (1904) he was created CB. After a spell of leave Morland was promoted colonel in September 1905 and returned to Africa as inspector-general of the West African Frontier Force with the temporary rank of brigadier-general. He was engaged in no more fighting, and returned home in 1909. 
Morland remained unemployed until June 1910 when he became general officer commanding (GOC), 2nd infantry brigade, at Aldershot. He held this command for three years, winning the good opinion of Sir Douglas Haig, who later described him as 'one of our best brigadiers' (Blake, 155). Morland spent the last year of peace on half pay owing to ill health, an occupational hazard of service in west Africa. Nevertheless after the outbreak of the First World War he was appointed (August 1914) to the command of the 47th (2nd London) division of the Territorial Force; soon afterwards he was transferred to the command of the newly created 14th division of the New Armies, and two months after that he was transferred to the vacant command of the 5th division. After arriving in Flanders on 18 October he led part of his new command at La Bassee during the first battle of Ypres. In July 1915 he was promoted GOC, 10th corps, with the temporary rank of lieutenant-general, and was created KCB; 10th corps was then in process of formation, and so did not participate in any important engagement until it was allotted to the Fourth Army before the opening of the battle of the Somme (1 July 1916). 
Morland's performance on the Somme won him some notoriety, especially during the first day when he insisted on positioning himself on an observation platform in a tree 2 miles from his headquarters. He saw nothing to cheer him from this vantage point; the 10th corps's attack against the Thiepval heights on 1 July was a complete failure and follow-up attacks were equally barren. General Sir Hubert Gough, then GOC, Reserve Army, expressed a lack of confidence in Morland to Haig on 23 July and at the end of the month the 10th corps was withdrawn to the Fourth Army reserve. On 17 August, however, Morland took over temporary command of the 14th corps. During his three-week stay the corps eventually managed to capture Guillemont and Ginchy after several reverses. Morland returned to the 10th corps on 10 September. 
The 10th corps was transferred to the Second Army at Ypres in October 1916 and the following year participated in two of General Plumer's greatest successes. At Messines (7 June 1917) the corps captured Hill 60 and Mount Sorrel, weakening the German position east of Ypres. At the Menin Road ridge (20 September) it spearheaded the attack on the important tactical position of Gheluvelt, clearing the wooded area which had held up the British advance for two months. Later attacks across the Menin Road failed to repeat this success. Morland was knighted (KCMG) at the end of the year. 
During the winter of 1917-18 Morland and his staff were withdrawn into reserve, and 10th corps remained there throughout the German spring offensive (March-April 1918). On 12 April Morland was transferred to the command of the 13th corps in the First Army reserve. He spent the summer cautiously advancing across the Lys plain. In September, 13th corps was transferred again, this time to the Fourth Army for the attack on the Hindenburg line; 13th corps' assault, on 5 October, was a great success, capturing a large section of the Hindenburg defences known as the Beaurevoir line. Morland pursued the retreating Germans, advancing 11 miles in four days. On 5 November 13th corps crossed the Sambre. In the last few days of the war it advanced 18 miles in six days, entering Belgium shortly before the armistice. 
Morland was promoted substantive lieutenant-general in January 1919. But he was then struck down by the pandemic influenza and never really recovered good health. In March 1919 he returned to the command of his former troops, the reconstituted 10th corps, in the army of occupation at Cologne. A year later he succeeded Sir William Robertson as commander-in-chief of that army, and became temporary general. In March 1922 he returned home in order to assume the chief command at Aldershot in succession to Lord Cavan, and in November of that year he was promoted full general. Owing, however, to his impaired health he vacated his appointment at the end of February 1923. He never obtained further employment, and died rather suddenly at Villeneuve, Montreux, Switzerland, on 21 May 1925; he was buried in the English cemetery at Villeneuve. He had been appointed colonel of the Suffolk regiment in 1919, and an aide-de-camp general to George V in 1922. 
Morland's record as a corps commander was patchy. In many ways it reflects that of the British expeditionary force as a whole. In 1916 he experienced more failures than successes, but in 1917, especially under Plumer, he performed well in limited set-piece operations. During the final advance, in the autumn of 1918, he also did well. He made no reputation as an innovative tactician and left little impression on the men he commanded. Morland was in appearance and manner an old-fashioned English officer and gentleman, calm, courteous, unselfish, and loyal. Towards the end of the war his health -- weakened by service in west Africa -- began to fail and he developed indolent habits which concerned his staff. 


@@@@@


doc= 35110


Morley, John, Viscount Morley of Blackburn (1838-1923), politician and writer, was born on 24 December 1838 in Blackburn, Lancashire, the second of the four children of Jonathan Morley (died 1862), surgeon, and Priscilla Mary Donkin (died 1870). Jonathan was the son of a manufacturer of woollen cards and cotton who lived at Mytholmroyd in the Calder valley, Yorkshire. Morley's mother came from a North Shields shipowning family. Both were Wesleyans. They met in North Shields where Jonathan was apprenticed as a medical student. 
John Morley was educated at the Queen Elizabeth Grammar School in Blackburn and at Hoole's Academy. He appears to have been a very bookish student who learned to commit large sections of scripture to memory. In later life Morley liked to learn by heart poems and classical texts. In 1852 his father sent him to University College School, London. From February 1855 to December 1856 he attended Cheltenham College where he did well as a scholar. 
Morley won an open scholarship to Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1856 and was assigned rooms once occupied by John Wesley. Morley later expressed contempt for the rector and most of the fellows, apart from Mark Pattison. He occasionally spoke at the Oxford Union. But he seems to have made little impact at Oxford and it made little impact on him. In 1896, when he was awarded the degree of DCL by Oxford University, he described himself as 'one whose opinions, whether in politics or deeper things than politics, Oxford does not favour' (Morley, 2.102). He later (1903) became an honorary fellow of All Souls. 
Morley's father, now an Anglican communicant, wanted him to enter holy orders. But at Oxford, Morley lost his faith and a serious quarrel developed. His allowance was cut off and he had to leave Oxford in 1859 with only a pass degree. That this was a traumatic experience is shown by numerous echoes of it when as biographer he examined similar crises in the lives of others. He became friendly with contemporaries such as Leslie Stephen and Frederic Harrison who had undergone a similar experience, and concluded that an inevitable aspect of 'an epoch of transition in the very foundations of belief and conduct' was that the opinions of fathers and sons should diverge in this traumatic way (Hamer, 2). He remained to the end of his life a freethinker and something of a stoic with a particular attraction to the philosophical stance of Marcus Aurelius. 
Morley's parents went to live at Lytham, where his father died in 1862 and his mother in 1870. Morley was particularly close to his sister Grace, two years younger than himself. He often wrote to her, and she gave him constant encouragement. One of his two brothers, William, died in India, leaving a son, Guy, whom Morley adopted in 1877. 
Morley's move to London in 1860 marked the beginning of the critical phase in his intellectual development. Being not at all well off, he took lodgings first at a lawyers' inn in Holborn, where he saw something of London poverty, then in King's Bench Walk at the Temple. He found employment teaching and tutoring, and undertook a range of miscellaneous literary and journalistic work. His first editorial responsibility was on the short-lived 'Literary Gazette' (1858-62); Morley was the fourth of five editors, probably in 1861. He may also have worked on 'The Leader', which expired at about this time. In 1863 he joined the staff of the 'Saturday Review', for which he was required to write anonymously -- a practice which he strongly opposed thereafter. His 'Saturday Review' 'middles' were published in 'Modern Characteristics' (1865) and 'Studies in Conduct' (1867), the latter of which he withdrew from sale shortly after it was published. He later ignored these works in reviewing his literary achievements. Although he read for the bar and was called (Lincoln's Inn, 1873), economic circumstances left him with no real alternative to a career in journalism. He later described his stillborn legal career as 'my long enduring regret' (Morley, 1.32). In 1893 he was elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn, where he often dined. 
During this period Morley widened his circle of acquaintances and secured an entree into London's literary world. A new friend who made a particular impact was the novelist George Meredith. In 1867, with the aim of gaining 'freedom from journalistic urgencies' (Hirst, 1.59) by finding alternative sources of income, he became a reader for the publishing house Macmillans. He later described Alexander Macmillan as his earliest and greatest benefactor. One of his tasks was to report on some early writings by Thomas Hardy; his adverse comments have long been held against him, although he did acknowledge Hardy's potential. A significant part of his work in the 1870s consisted of literary criticism. This has a wider range and a good deal more sympathy with the avant-garde than an often cited puritanical review of Swinburne might indicate. 
Morley visited the United States in 1867. An intended book on the 'dominant social ideas' of that country was never completed. The visit was important for its effect on his views about the Irish question, particularly because of what he discovered about the depth of feeling concerning British rule in Ireland among Irish immigrants. After his return, on 28 May 1868, he gave an address at Blackburn on 'Ireland's rights and England's duties' which marked a significant development in his interest in issues which dominated much of his political career. 
There has long been considerable mystery about Morley's marriage with Rose Mary Ayling (1840-1923). Some uncertainties may never be cleared up, given the shortage of documentary information on some crucial aspects and Morley's own reticence on the subject. They lived together, it seems, for a period, possibly from 1867, before marrying on 28 May 1870. Lord Rosebery later referred to Morley as unsuitable for the foreign secretaryship because he had anticipated the ceremony of marriage. Hirst described Rose as 'slim, but not tall, with flaxen hair and light blue eyes, a good walker and afterwards an ardent cyclist, fond of the country, of trees and plants and birds'. He also says that she 'never cared much for politics, books, or society; seldom visited, or dined out' (Hirst, 1.60), which meant that there was a large part of her husband's life that she did not share. Rose already had two children of uncertain paternity. In November 1907 one of them, John, was sentenced to ten years' penal servitude in Scotland. He had forged Morley's signature on letters which sought money in return for promises of political influence. At a time when he believed himself to be held in high general regard, this came as a grievous blow to Morley. He wanted to retire from public life but was persuaded not to by Asquith. In 1870 Morley moved to Surrey, always his favourite county, where he liked to walk on the heaths. He rented a series of houses. In 1873 Mrs Morley fell ill and the doctors recommended that they move to Tunbridge Wells. Continuing concern about her health led to a move to Brighton in 1875. Although he missed Surrey greatly and was not very fond of the sea, Morley came to like Brighton. In 1879, finding it too far from his work, he moved to Wimbledon, to a large house called Berkeley Lodge, near Putney Heath. From the later 1880s he lived at Elm Park Gardens, South Kensington. In later years he lived at a house called Flowermead in Wimbledon, where he died. 
In 1867 Morley was appointed to succeed G. H. Lewes as editor of the 'Fortnightly Review' (founded in 1865 and by this time a monthly). He also edited the 'Morning Star' from June 1869 until its final issue on 13 October. By 1872 he had increased the circulation of the 'Fortnightly' from 1400 to 2500. It became a leading journal of opinion, carrying a wide range of essays on topics of current interest. Morley wrote about one-eighth (some 200) of the articles which appeared during his editorship. One of the best-known stories about his spell as editor is that he allowed the word 'god' to be printed without a capital. The secret of his success lay in his ability to develop the 'Fortnightly' as a participant in and reflection of the major currents of thought in an age of exceptional intellectual ferment. If possible, every controversial contribution received its response from someone with an alternative and thoughtful point of view. He insisted that all articles should be signed so that there should not appear to be any ''auto- ' 'Fortnightly'' or 'universal essence and absolute 'idea' of 'Fortnightly''. 
Morley was initially very optimistic about political prospects after 1867. He hoped to see an alliance of 'brains and numbers' (Hamer, 71) and looked forward to a new 'party' 'out of doors', working on public opinion and ultimately replacing the Liberals as the 'party of progress' (Hamer, 103). He saw his role as preparing ideas and policies for the time when the masses awakened to a realization of their new political power. He placed particular weight on the development of a relationship between practical politicians and intellectuals such as himself. Such a partnership was essential to steer the nation through the perils of the new democratic era. 
At this time Morley was closely associated with the positivists, the English disciples of the French sociologist Auguste Comte. The appeal of this self-confident group, who claimed to have found the key to understanding the evolution of human society as well as a substitute for religious faith, was strong. Morley's interest in positivism was a double search: for a new faith relevant to the modern age which would replace outworn Christian shibboleths but also for a faith whose adoption would give less pain to adherents of the old faith -- such as parents -- than straight adoption of a freethinking or agnostic position. Positivism provided a view of order in history and, while being strongly evolutionary in structure, was considerably more moral than Darwinism, about which Morley showed much less enthusiasm. 
John Stuart Mill's 'On Liberty' (1859) profoundly affected Morley. Impressed by an essay which Morley wrote for the 'Saturday Review' in 1865, Mill wrote asking to make his acquaintance, and subsequently introduced Morley to an alternative circle of non- or anti-positivist intellectuals. A close friendship developed. Mill saw in the young journalist a disciple who would propagate the Millite creed very effectively. Mill, who had been interested in Comtism but had rejected it as a system, influenced Morley away from a doctrinaire positivist position. Morley came to prefer 'the critical, individualist, scheme of things, wh[ich] my protestant upbringing and the influence of Mill have made congenial to me' (letter to Richard Congreve, 8 January 1874, BL, Add MS 46241, fols. 61-2; Hamer, 28). To the positivists' great disappointment, Morley moved the 'Fortnightly' in a Millite direction, developing it as a forum for 'the unbiased expression of many and various minds'. 
Writing did not come particularly easily to Morley, but, when it did, it was invariably highly polished. He was well known for the neatness of his manuscripts. He hated untidiness and liked to write with a clean shirt and a clean desk. His style was at first somewhat overwrought, but he became a powerful stylist, capable of writing prose of great force and lucidity. He was a master -- in both conversation and writing -- of appropriate allusion to an immense range of literature. He was not a particularly effective parliamentary debater, his style being at its best when there had been time for polishing. Nor did he enjoy addressing large audiences out of doors, though he could be very effective on the public platform, especially when well prepared. 
Contemporaries found Morley a fascinating companion and conversationalist. Although customarily gracious and urbane ('exquisitely polite', according to J. A. Spender; (Spender, 116), he was well known for his prickliness and sensitivity about imagined slights. He was capable of great friendship but as a friend could be very demanding. Many of his friendships were punctuated by episodes of strain and divergence which, however, were usually amicably settled. Lord Samuel thus described him at the age of sixty: 'a man of slight build, not tall; with keen twinkling eyes; the nose strong, the chin somewhat receding; he had a voice that was clear and friendly, his manner was kindly and gentle' (Robertson Scott, 46). 
Morley was interested in a political career from an early stage. Although highly talented as a writer and very successful as biographer, critic, and essayist, he was constantly beset by a craving for a life of action. He once remarked that the 'bane' of his life had been a continual conflict between the claims of literature and of politics. When he came to write his 'Recollections' he feared that his career would seem to lack coherence, disorganized as it had been by the oscillation of interest between his 'two trades -- letters and politics' (Hamer, 59). He was ambitious but lacked the political skills needed to fulfil his ambitions. His fondness for intrigue sometimes got the better of him, as in the succession crisis of 1894 when he tried to execute devious plans with an excess of calculation. He tried to avoid having to settle definitively for one career or the other. Literary work continued throughout his time in politics. The result was that he had careers of almost equal distinction in both spheres running in parallel over almost half a century. 
Morley stood unsuccessfully for parliament at a by-election at Blackburn in 1869 and for Mill's old constituency, Westminster, in 1880. Shortly after the general election of 1880 he failed to get the Liberal nomination for the Nottingham by-election. His financial position and his reputation as a freethinker were obstacles to winning a seat. 
Morley's essays and other miscellaneous pieces were published in two series of 'Critical Miscellanies' (1871 and 1877). In 1867 he published 'Edmund Burke: an Historical Study'. He later (1879) wrote a study of 'Burke' for his 'English Men of Letters' series. He greatly admired Burke, especially for rejecting the idea of basing politics on abstract doctrine. French topics engaged much of his attention in the 1870s. Morley wrote a series of studies, varying from short essays to full-scale biographies, of French intellectuals of the eighteenth century: Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, Vauvernargues, Holbach, Turgot, Condorcet. He prided himself on being prepared to study and take seriously individuals such as de Maistre and Rousseau who had political outlooks and personal traits very different from his own. The major works were 'Voltaire' (1872), 'Rousseau' (1873), and 'Diderot and the Encyclopaedists' (1878). Although Morley's work appeared rather miscellaneous in focus, a systematic purpose eventually emerged. He intended that his writings should culminate in a history of the French Revolution. The general theme was a 'survey of the intellectual preparation of the French Revolution' (Hamer, 39). The only study of the revolution itself which he published was an essay on Robespierre in 1876. In it is plainly evident an intention to study how the French proceeded to 'translate the word' of the 'philosophes' into 'social action'. When Morley was ill in 1877 Joseph Chamberlain advised him to abandon thoughts of a parliamentary career and lent him money to help him write the history. He did not complete it, turning his attention instead to the biography of Richard Cobden, published in 1881. This important work (dedicated to John Bright) set a new benchmark for documentation and analysis in political biography, and provided a vital exposition of the character of Cobdenite radicalism: the issue-by-issue approach to reform politics which Morley -- at least initially -- sought to emulate. The book also sold very well, especially in the north of England, where Cobden was most widely revered. Morley studied de Maistre as well as Voltaire, Burke as well as Rousseau, and manifestly had little sympathy for the French revolutionaries. He was sometimes accused of being too sympathetic to French atheism and communism because of his strong interest in French literature and political thought. Yet he distrusted the French and was strongly Germanophile -- even though he frequently visited France and seldom visited Germany or wrote about German culture. Positivism, despite the influence of Mill, was an obvious influence, and Morley owed much to discussions with the French positivist Pierre Lafitte. 
Morley's radicalism was characteristic of an era when radicalism was associated particularly with views on the role of the church in national life. Strongly anti-clerical, he supported disestablishing the Church of England. He was drawn into political controversy by the nonconformist reaction to the 'Education Act' (1870). Although a freethinker himself, he sought to identify himself with nonconformity. When attending a conference of a nonconformist pressure group, the National Education League, in 1873, he met Joseph Chamberlain, the radical mayor of Birmingham (1873-6). Sensing his great potential as a radical leader, Morley cultivated him, working to establish a partnership between this man of action and himself as the supplier of ideas. A close personal friendship developed. Morley saw the relationship as complementary, each compensating for qualities lacking in the other. Chamberlain was impressed by Morley's knowledge and learning, while Morley gained vicarious satisfaction from Chamberlain's political advancement, especially after he entered parliament in 1876. In 1873 Morley invited Chamberlain to launch a new political movement with a manifesto in the 'Fortnightly'. He himself assisted the cause by a series of articles on the education issue. These were published as 'The Struggle for National Education' (1873). But he soon turned away from 'national education', regarding it as too narrow; he had no interest in enlarging it into a campaign for more general educational reform. He turned to disestablishment as a rallying cause for Liberals concerned to destroy the regime of 'privilege'. He assisted the Liberation Society to prepare a scheme of disendowment. By 1876 he was losing his enthusiasm for this issue, seeing it as too narrowly nonconformist to secure the support of working men and 'secular Liberals'. 
Morley's health gave concern at various times in the 1870s. The basic problem appeared to be overwork and stress. His financial situation threatened to limit his ability to fulfil his political ambitions. His attempts to enter the house in 1868-9 left him financially drained and bitter at the advantage that wealth conferred in politics. In 1873 he referred to himself as 'a poor man who lives up to his income' (Hamer, 123). As editor of the 'Fortnightly' he earned about $800 per annum, adding some $500 more through royalties and other employment. Chapman paid him $500 for 'Rousseau'. His finances were also strained by his frequent moves. He was very careful about money matters, a habit which he learned in his early years in London. For instance, he ensured that he had good life insurance cover. As editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' he earned $2000 a year; he left a personal estate of nearly $60,000. 
One of Morley's most influential books was 'On Compromise' (1874), a study in political ethics and one of his few pieces of extended non-biographical writing. Through it he transmitted into later nineteenth-century liberalism some of the key Millite messages. It was wrong, he insisted, to see error as having a social utility. Adherence to error involves hypocrisy and damages prospects of social progress. He believed in rule by an educated, progressive elite and devoted himself in 'On Compromise' to advising those who aspired to form that elite on how to conduct themselves in public life, explaining, for example, when it was justifiable to compromise one's principles. He preached the duty of the 'well-instructed' to involve themselves in political life. This aspect of the book made a strong impression on younger Liberals in the 1880s and 1890s. 
Morley edited the 'Pall Mall Gazette' from 1880 to 1883. This marked a further step towards direct involvement in practical politics, as it was a form of journalism that required responses to events as they arose. Numerous able young journalists worked for him, including W. T. Stead, E. T. Cook, and Alfred Milner. Morley entrusted a good deal to Stead as assistant editor, especially when he was researching and writing the 'Life of Cobden'. In Stead's opinion, Morley, because he lacked interest in most of the matters that concerned the general reader, was not suited to the life of a journalist. He 'had no eye for news, and he was totally devoid of the journalistic instinct. To him a newspaper was simply a pulpit from which he could preach' (F. Whyte, 'The Life of W. T. Stead', 1925, 7.79). Morley retired from editing the 'Fortnightly' in October 1882, lamenting the absence of system in political thinking and acknowledging the deficiencies in remedying this state of affairs of a journal committed to 'open-sidedness'. In order to have an income to support his political career, he edited 'Macmillan's Magazine' from May 1883 until summer 1885. 
The Newcastle Liberals had been interested in Morley as a candidate for some time. The problem was the need to discover the right sort of relationship to establish with Joseph Cowen, the maverick independent radical member who had a substantial local following. Morley was anxious not to stand directly against Cowen. This problem was avoided when a by-election became necessary in 1883 following the death of the second member for Newcastle. But Morley soon found Cowen an impossible colleague. Morley had in effect become the 'caucus' candidate and member, his position being contrasted by Ostrogorski and other critics of the caucus system with the independent anti-caucus position of Cowen. Morley accepted the necessity of party politics and the caucus, reminding himself that Mill had been a good party man in the house. He tried to reconcile the two spheres of his life, telling Chamberlain that 'it is exactly because I hope to become a thoroughly useful political writer that I lean to parliament' (Hamer, 126) and by analysing in his book on Burke how Burke had made a very similar career move and locked away 'the fragments of [a] History' on which he had been engaged (ibid.). Not being a local man and maintaining his residence and journalistic interests in London, Morley became dependent on the Newcastle Liberal machine and its leader, Robert Spence Watson, for his hold on the seat. In 1885, when he had a 'safe seat free of expense pressed upon me' at Leeds, he said that 'I feel bound to stick to my friends on the Tyne, as long as they stick to me' (Hirst, 2.223). 
Meanwhile Morley's alliance with Chamberlain was coming under increasing strain. From 1880 Chamberlain was a member of the Gladstone cabinet whose Irish and imperial policies Morley criticized. Because of their close relationship Chamberlain was suspected of using Morley to advance his own causes. Morley gained notoriety when W. E. Forster resigned the Irish secretaryship in 1882 after a sustained campaign against his policies in the 'Pall Mall'. In 1883-4 Morley was prominent in the campaign for parliamentary reform and advocated 'mending or ending' the House of Lords. 
Morley reacted unenthusiastically to Chamberlain's 'unauthorised programme' (1885), partly because of antagonism to programmes and partly through concern at Chamberlain's use of the rhetoric of 'natural rights' in relation to land reform, an issue which concerned property rights. To Morley such talk was dangerously close to French Jacobinism. This was not ground on to which he wished to see English radicalism venturing. He came to see Chamberlain as having allowed dangerous 'socialist doctrine' to seep through into radical policy. Chamberlain, for his part, found Morley 'dreadfully timid' (Hamer, 157). Although he contributed a chapter on religious equality to the 'Radical Programme' of 1885, Morley became increasingly detached from the development of radical strategy. He did not approve of Chamberlain's plan for refusing to join any Liberal government which did not adopt the programme. 
By 1885 Morley was convinced that home rule was the only answer to the Irish crisis. He decided that it must be given principal place among policies because no other reforms could be attended to until the obstructive presence of the Irish question -- and in particular of the Irish nationalist members of parliament -- was removed. After the 1885 election, which left the Parnellites holding the balance of power, he opposed leaving the Conservatives in office. He decided to support Gladstone's leadership, seeing him as the indispensable leader to guide the country through this crisis, while Gladstone came to regard Morley as 'about the best stay I have', and 'a main prop to me' (Hamer, 181). He was one of the few prominent Liberals to declare approval of Gladstone's alleged intentions with regard to Irish policy. He offered to write editorials for the 'Daily News' 'turning' it in the direction of support for Gladstone if the latter would tell him what was in his mind. According to Morley, Gladstone did so, and he had already written three of the editorials and had embarked on the fourth when Gladstone invited him to call and on 31 January 1886 offered him the post of Irish secretary. This was interpreted as a signal of Gladstone's intention to proceed with the preparation of a Home Rule Bill. Morley's acceptance effectively ended his alliance with Chamberlain, though the latter also joined the government, resigning two months later. 
Morley was one of the principal architects in 1886 of the 'Home Rule Bill'. He stood out from other Liberals as largely untrammelled by earlier statements on the Irish question which could be used to allege an opportunistic reversal of position to win Irish support. Leading Conservatives acknowledged that he was a 'Home-Ruler by conviction' (Hamer, 210). He thus held a unique position in the leadership of the party now that it was committed to home rule. But Morley was always aware that his position was fragile, dependent as it was on the continuation of that commitment and especially on the maintenance of Gladstone's leadership. Some thought he harmed his prospects for future leadership by concentrating so exclusively on Ireland. 
Morley saw great advantage for the Liberal Party in being preoccupied with the Irish question. Although reduced in size and out of power, it was now much more disciplined and focused. He was one of the most hostile of the Liberal leaders to the compromises that would have been required for Liberal reunion, as discussed with Chamberlain at the round table conference early in 1887. He saw home rule as an 'unselfish', moral issue untainted by distinctions of class, and tried to use it to redevelop a distinction between traditional Liberalism and reactionary toryism, as manifested in Balfour's coercionist regime in the late 1880s. Thus he placed home rule in the tradition of the great reforms that Liberals had promoted in the past. He strongly favoured excluding the Irish members from the British parliament once Ireland had its own parliament. 
Morley was never comfortable with social and economic questions, and, though he also knew that they ought not to be evaded, welcomed the opportunity which the Irish preoccupation afforded for going slow in this area of policy. But he took more interest in social problems than did many of his political contemporaries: it seems that the memories of the poverty he had seen when he first came to London in 1860 never left him. He had long believed that Liberals needed to rethink the role of the state with regard to social questions. It was an issue to which he kept returning without being able to define clear principles to guide safe action in this area. He came under increasing pressure from radicals and socialists in Newcastle to define where he stood on social and labour questions. They were less and less ready to accept the Irish 'obstruction' as an excuse for non-commitment. Local government and temperance reform attracted his attention. In December 1888 he outlined at Clerkenwell a programme which he thought appropriate to the social problems of London. He became associated with a group of younger Liberals, of whom R. B. Haldane, H. H. Asquith, and Edward Grey were the most prominent, who sought to prevent 'dangerous' radicals such as Henry Labouchere from filling what they perceived as a vacuum in domestic policy. They had admired Morley's 'On Compromise' and looked to him now to be a guide to right political conduct in these challenging circumstances. In November 1889 he gave an important speech at the Eighty Club on Liberalism and social reform. Morley did his best to help these young men gain political promotion. Later he and they fell out when their policies moved towards 'Liberal Imperialism' which was completely against Morley's Cobdenite and 'Little England' principles. 
The issue which most seriously damaged Morley's efforts to bring Liberalism into the social area was the proposal, which he opposed, legally to enforce a maximum working day of eight hours. This proved to be a major turning point for Morley's reputation and career. As the issues on which his reputation as a radical had been made faded, notably those associated with the role of the church, and as social questions came to the fore, he began to be regarded as a conservative, even reactionary, influence in the Liberal Party. He saw the 'eight hours' issue as a test case and his stand as one of principle against 'socialism'. His outspokenness concentrated on himself the enmity of socialists who sought an issue that might cause working men to rebel against the Liberal Party. In the general election of 1892 Morley came second in the two-member constituency of Newcastle, behind the tory candidate for whom the socialists had urged working men to vote. When he faced the voters again, following appointment as a minister, a strong rally to him by Irish voters enabled him to win comfortably. Afterwards he abandoned any serious effort to come to terms with the 'new Liberalism' and adhered to a fairly strict Cobdenism in social and economic policy. 
Morley's literary work did not altogether cease. He edited the 'Twelve English Statesmen' series for Macmillan and contributed 'Walpole' (1889). In 1891 a collection of his miscellaneous writings appeared as 'Studies in Literature'. A biography of Oliver Cromwell was published in 1900. 
The Parnell divorce crisis of 1890-91 was a severe blow, but Morley remained resolutely in favour of home rule. He gave lukewarm support to the attempt to widen the Liberals' appeal via the Newcastle programme of 1891. He was again chief secretary for Ireland from 1892 to 1895, first in Gladstone's government and then from March 1894 under Rosebery. He frequently visited Ireland to witness conditions at first hand. His particular role since 1886 had been to maintain contact with the Irish party and act as a go-between in negotiations. Following the Parnellite split of 1891 he had to hold the ring between contesting nationalist factions. This was difficult for one who believed that the Irish should be administering their own affairs. The requirement that he administer the law and even on occasions sanction action against unrest resulted in strained relations with the Irish nationalists. He tried to give Irish administration a home rule flavour, and reduced the predominance of protestants in local administration from a ratio of 3 or 4 to 1 to one of approximately 2 to 1. 
Morley played a key role in the determination of who would succeed Gladstone as prime minister in 1894. He threw his weight behind Rosebery against Harcourt, with whom he had had substantial disagreements over the home rule policy. Morley feared Harcourt's 'opportunism' whereas Rosebery appealed as someone who could be relied on to keep the Liberal Party 'on the high level of principle on which Mr. Gladstone has always spoken for it' (Morley, 1.313). Morley was very interested in securing either the exchequer or the Foreign Office, and his moves were made partly with these posts in view. He had come to believe that, if Rosebery were premier, the foreign secretary would have to be in the Commons, and was very indignant when Rosebery gave the post to Lord Kimberley. He bitterly accepted continuation in what he called the Irish 'back-kitchen' (Hamer, 297). 
Morley lost his Newcastle seat at the general election of 1895, but was returned at a by-election for Montrose Burghs in 1896. His defeat was largely attributable to the Labour campaign against him and the desertion of hitherto staunch Irish voters. His relationship with his constituents at Montrose Burghs was very detached: he attributed his election to 'the zeal of the local leaders and... the aid of Scottish members who came to speak on my behalf' (Morley, 2.47). His role in politics now seemed rather peripheral and he contemplated retirement. In 1899 he told F. W. Hirst that, although Ireland remained the one subject that really interested him, 'I shall be dead before it comes up again'. Two years later he even complained (to Campbell-Bannerman) of having 'wasted ten years on Ireland' (Hamer, 320). On 14 December 1898, when Harcourt resigned the Liberal leadership in the Commons, he and Morley exchanged letters in which Morley appeared to indicate that he no longer wished to be considered part of the front bench. He confirmed this in a speech six weeks later. 
At Gladstone's suggestion Morley had set about compiling a history of the Irish question between 1885 and 1895. Although never published, this contributed substantially to his 'Life of Gladstone', which was commissioned by the family and published in 1903. The family gave him $10,000 for it and an additional $3000-$4000 later. Although it absorbed most of his energies during these years, he claimed that it was not an alternative to political activity. Indeed, he said in 1898: 'I really do not know that I can perform a better service to the party' (Hamer, 325). The Gladstone biography, based on extensive use of Gladstone's papers, was widely acclaimed. Morley believed that biography should be a 'means of edification' (ibid., 43), and he disliked those which provided too much detail about the personal lives and foibles of great personalities. The 'Life of Gladstone' fitted that mould, and established Morley as the custodian of the Gladstonian legacy and conscience. This made him indispensable as a member of the next Liberal government. 
Since the mid-1890s Morley had been a severe critic of imperial adventures. He played a significant although intermittent part in the 'pro-Boer' campaign against the South African War. The high point was a speech at Manchester on 15 September 1899 when he effectively reiterated the message that the war was 'wrong'. But other anti-war radicals were disillusioned by his inability to take the lead and commit himself to a substantial course of action. 
Morley was rather at a loss about what to do after the Gladstone biography. He collected material towards a life of Cavour to complete a trilogy of studies of great nineteenth-century Liberal statesmen, 'brushed up my Italian, and was soon diligently at work' (Morley, 2.135). As late as October 1905 he was threatening to announce his 'final' exit from politics because 'I have another calling that I do better and like better' (Hamer, 337). Yet two months later he accepted appointment as secretary of state for India in the Campbell-Bannerman government, becoming the first 'humble man of letters', he proudly claimed, to have been made a secretary of state since Addison. 
Even so Morley would have preferred to be appointed chancellor of the exchequer. At first he was inclined to regard the India Office as another 'back-kitchen'. But gradually he became absorbed in Indian issues and developed confidence in handling them. In Indian policy he found numerous testing grounds for Liberal principles. He was extremely anxious to maintain continuity and consistency between his past and present practice as a Liberal. The past loomed large in the judgements and expectations of colleagues, critics, and in those of his many admirers in India, who referred to their hopes of the Morley of 'On Compromise'. Sir Edward Grey believed that one of the government's greatest assets for warding off criticism from the left of its Indian policies was the fact that India was in the charge of someone with so 'unimpeachable' a record who was known to regard 'the Jingo' as 'the devil incarnate' (Hamer, 346). Morley was very sensitive to criticisms that he was betraying the principles of a lifetime and went to considerable lengths to prove that he was not. But it was Ireland over again. The law had to be enforced and he was bound to approve actions which were unacceptable to opponents of British rule in India. When rioting occurred in the Punjab and Bengal in 1907, Morley invoked a regulation of 1818 to have the ringleaders arrested and deported. 
Morley had much less sympathy for the Indian than for the Irish demand for home rule. The 'Indian Councils Act' (1909) enlarged the provincial councils in India and doubled Indian membership on them. It allowed the members to debate budgetary matters. Official majorities were done away with on the provincial councils, although not on the Indian council. The crucial question was whether a native member should be appointed to the viceroy's council. On 10 March 1909 Morley proposed P. S. Sinha as the legal member of the council, and cabinet approved without dissent. To check Conservative criticism, he saw that Lord Minto, the viceroy, an appointee of the Balfour tory government, received much of the credit for what became known as the Morley-Minto reforms. His view was that that the British were in India 'to implant... those ideas of justice, law, humanity, which are the foundations of our own civilisation' (Koss, 128). His strategy was to encourage 'moderate' Indian nationalists and detach them from the extremists. It was a strategy several steps back from the one he had adopted in regard to Ireland. He had no long-term goals and did not believe that self-government would come in his own lifetime. He did not see himself as preparing the way for Indian self-rule; nor did he see what he was doing as staving off that development, though he doubted whether British rule would last. One of his main concerns was to achieve a practical reform -- something which had eluded him in the case of Ireland and which mattered a great deal to someone so sensitive to accusations of being 'literary' and unpractical. 
Morley himself knew little about India, which he never visited, and manifested little sustained interest in Indian history and culture. His main concerns were with the health of British parliamentary government faced with the responsibility of the government of a vast and turbulent empire consisting of hundreds of millions of people who had no wish to be governed by a foreign power. He lectured Minto on the basics of the British parliamentary system and the limits of its readiness to tolerate arbitrary government in India. The problem, he knew, lay in influencing Indian government at such a distance. He insisted on the primacy of the British parliament and refused to allow unfettered discretion to the viceroy and the men on the spot. In practice he found it very difficult to enforce this principle. 
Morley was a very trying colleague, constantly threatening to resign. Campbell-Bannerman referred to him as 'that old-maidish Priscilla' (Hamer, 57). Yet he still wanted to be involved in political business, and the leaders of the government were anxious to retain him. As a symbol of the 'old' Liberalism he had a role to play in retaining the party's traditional supporters at a time of major new initiatives in social and fiscal policy. But he showed little interest in or sympathy for the social policies of Churchill and Lloyd George. His health and energies were declining and it was as much as he could do to keep abreast of the vast and complex issues associated with the Indian portfolio. In December 1906, much to his chagrin, he found himself at the head of a list of ministerial non-attenders for Commons divisions. 
On 2 May 1908 Morley was created Viscount Morley of Blackburn. He was the first peer to refuse a coat of arms. According to the earl of Midleton, he seldom attended the House of Lords, other than when Indian matters were under discussion. In November 1910 he offered his resignation as secretary of state for India, pleading tiredness, the need for a new secretary to work with Minto's replacement as viceroy, and his desire for a last chance at 'literary self-collection' (Morley, 2.343). To his surprise Asquith at last accepted one of his resignations. But Asquith retained him in cabinet in the undemanding position of lord president of the council. He returned to the India Office from March to May 1911 when his successor, Lord Crewe, fell ill. Before leaving office, he had successfully resisted the selection of Lord Kitchener as Minto's successor as viceroy. 
In the Parliament Bill crisis of 1911 Morley read out to the peers the statement that should they veto the bill the king would create as many new peers as were needed to ensure its passage. A marginal player when the home rule issue reappeared on the government's agenda, he strongly opposed excluding Ulster from a home rule Ireland. On the other hand, he was very nervous about the prospect that Ulster would have to be coerced into such a settlement. During the uprising on the Curragh in 1914 Morley was the only cabinet minister to see and approve the paragraphs that the secretary of state for war, Seely, added to the memorandum assuring officers from Ulster that they would not be required to participate in its coercion. 
Morley resigned from cabinet on the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914. He wrote a 'Memorandum on Resignation', describing the events of July-August 1914, but it was not published until 1928 -- after his death. Long-standing pro-German sympathies and antipathy to Russia and 'Slav aspirations' reasserted themselves: he feared that the defeat of Germany would lead to Russian pre-eminence in Europe. He opposed entry into the war and did not even find a 'casus belli' in German aggression against Belgium. The prospect of being a member of a war cabinet he found abhorrent. 
In 1917 Morley published two volumes of 'Recollections'. These consist mainly of extracts from his diaries and letters, which are now of particular value, as some of the original material has since disappeared. But it is a rather miscellaneous assortment of items with disappointingly little sustained reflection. Parts of it -- for example the 'Easter digression' on Lucretius -- read like a collection of unpublished papers taken from a drawer where they had been left. He wanted no biography written of him. In his will he ordered that his papers be destroyed, and it seems that his nephew Guy largely kept his wish with the notable exception of his diaries. The 'Recollections' have very little to say about his early life. Fortunately, F. W. Hirst found a source about which Morley had apparently forgotten: his letters to his sister Grace. She was beginning to burn them -- not because of any instruction from Morley, but because of the personal character of some of them -- when Hirst intervened and persuaded her to let him use them for his 'Early Life and Letters'. 
Morley was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1902. A supporter of university extension and a promoter of English literature as a degree subject, he was, from 1908, chancellor of the University of Manchester, to which he left his enormous library, now housed at Ashburne Hall. In 1921 he made a last appearance in the House of Lords, to speak of the 'ugly failure' of the renewed coercion in Ireland and to declare that only through ending this resort to force could Britain again have 'a good conscience' (Hamer, 375). 
John Morley died at Flowermead, his home in Princes Road, Wimbledon, on 23 September 1923. He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes were interred at Putney Vale cemetery on 29 September. His wife died a few weeks later on 28 November. They were childless, and the viscountcy became extinct. 
Morley had long since become deeply alienated from the world around him. His reputation as the last of the great nineteenth-century Liberals was secure, despite a comparatively slender record of practical political achievement -- partly attributable to his having spent many of his prime years in opposition -- but the twentieth-century decline of the Liberal Party pushed Morley, together with many Liberal intellectuals, somewhat into the shade. In 1944, regretting this development, Hayek thought it 'scarcely an exaggeration to say that the more typically English a writer on political or social problems then appeared to the world, the more is he to-day forgotten in his own country'; among the forgotten he instanced Morley with Dicey, Henry Sidgwick, and Lord Acton as 'to the present generation largely obsolete Victorians' (Hayek, 136). The aspects of Morley's life and work which attracted most twentieth-century attention were his notable editorship of the 'Fortnightly Review', his friendships with and influence on so many of the leading Liberal political personalities of the era from 1870 to 1914, and the ways in which his Cobdenite and Gladstonian Liberal principles responded to the challenges of that era in Irish, Indian, and domestic social policy. 


