@@@@@


doc= 35111


Morrell, Lady Ottoline Violet Anne (1873-1938), literary hostess, was born at 5 Portman Square, London, on 16 June 1873, the youngest child and only daughter of Lieutenant-General Arthur Cavendish-Bentinck (1819-1877) and his second wife, Augusta Mary Elizabeth Browne (1834-1893). Her mother was the younger daughter of Catherine de Montmorency and Henry Montague Browne, dean of Lismore. In 1879 Ottoline's brother Arthur inherited the title and estates of their wealthy and somewhat mysterious relative the fifth duke of Portland. Mrs Bentinck was created Baroness Bolsover in 1880, while her own children, Henry, William, Charles, and Ottoline, were given the titles and precedence of the children of a duke. 
Following this change of circumstances, the family moved from East Court, a pleasant manor house in Berkshire, to the few habitable rooms of Welbeck Abbey, a more handsome but forbidding edifice in north Nottinghamshire. Spread below it and connected to the house by a labyrinth of tunnels under the park was the subterranean kingdom created by their reclusive relative, who had stored his possessions away and allowed the house to become derelict. 
Ottoline was educated at home by a kind and highly religious governess. Her romantic love of history was stimulated by helping her mother to unpack the Welbeck treasures; these included a magnificent set of Gobelin tapestries and paintings which were stacked, without frames, three deep around the walls of the empty staterooms when they arrived. Here, as she looked at portraits of courtiers 'with pearls in their ears and long trailing lovelocks of golden hair hanging over their collars, and of ladies whom they loved, with very low-cut dresses, showing pearly breasts, and embroidered skirts and exquisite shoes' ('Ottoline: the Early Memoirs', 76), Ottoline's enduring love affair with the costumes of the past began. She took inspiration both from her eccentric Stuart ancestor Margaret, duchess of Newcastle, and from the Venetian red and sea-green colouring which she saw in the deserted rooms of Bolsover Castle, a ruined keep which formed part of her half-brother's vast inheritance. The duchess of Newcastle offered her an image of courage, individuality, culture, and simplicity to which she would aspire; Bolsover, 'my darling castle', was both the home she longed to inhabit and a mirror for her own proud reclusiveness. 'High, tall, fair and proud it stood' (Seymour, 35), she wrote in retrospect, but the gift was never made and the castle remained uninhabited. 
Baroness Bolsover left Welbeck as a querulous and dependent invalid shortly after her son's marriage in 1889. Ottoline accompanied her, to Chertsey and then to stay with relatives at the Villa Capponi in Italy, before nursing her mother through the final months of illness that ended in her death in 1893. Forced to return to Welbeck at the age of nineteen, she felt herself to be an outsider. The young duchess mocked her attempts to benefit the estate workers by organizing carving classes and offering religious instruction, but Welbeck's new librarian, Arthur Strong, and his wife, the classicist Eugenie Sellers, became her welcome allies. The more worldly affection of William Maclagan, archbishop of York, marked the beginning of a series of troubled relationships with men who were intrigued by Ottoline's unusual beauty (she was almost 6 feet tall, with red-gold hair and turquoise eyes) and by her ardent desire to do good. Other important friendships at this time were with Mother Julian, the aristocratic head of a Cornish sisterhood which Ottoline often visited, and with the author George Macdonald. 
In 1896 Ottoline returned to Italy with a chaperone and a distant cousin, with whom she went to St Andrews the following year to study logic for two terms. An invitation from Axel Munthe, the Swedish-born doctor and writer, on her return to London resulted in a visit to his home in Capri with her cousin Hilda Douglas Pennant. The relationship with Munthe was intense but short-lived. Back in England in 1899, Ottoline began studying political economy and Roman history as an out-student at Somerville College, Oxford, probably on the advice of her new admirer, the married Herbert Asquith. 
The Morrell family, connected to both the law and brewing, owned a fine collection of Italian paintings at Black Hall, their family home in Oxford. Ottoline visited the house to inspect the pictures and returned, dazzling in black satin and pearls, to dine. Philip Edward Morrell (1870-1943), a young solicitor with dreams of being an architect or a Liberal politician, was rapidly enamoured. Encouraged by his socially ambitious mother, he proposed to a woman they wrongly assumed to be an heiress (Ottoline's mother had cut her out of her will). They were married in February 1902, and settled at 39 Grosvenor Road by the Embankment in a house which Ottoline began brightening with the rich but subtle colours she loved. In 1903 she vigorously supported Philip Morrell's campaign for a Liberal seat in Oxfordshire and they rented Little House in the village of Clifton Hampden in order to give him a local address. Ottoline is credited with having restored and designed the garden of that house. Philip Morrell's first illegitimate child, a daughter, was born in 1904. 
Philip Morrell won his Oxfordshire seat in 1906, in which year the Morrells moved across London to 44 Bedford Square, the handsome Bloomsbury house which became famous for its owner's bohemian gatherings. There, on 18 May 1906, Ottoline gave birth to twins, a sickly girl and a healthy boy. The boy, named Hugh after Philip's dead brother who had committed suicide in 1897, died within a few days; the girl, who survived, was named Julian in memory of her mother's old friend in Cornwall. Hospitalized shortly after the death of her baby son, Ottoline was told that an operation had ended any chance of her having further children. The child was buried at Clifton Hampden and was in due course (in 1908) joined by his grandfather Frederick Parker Morrell. Ottoline continued to visit the graveyard until her own death, when Julian took on the task of tending her twin brother's grave. 
In 1907 the Morrells rented a second home, Peppard Cottage, not far from her childhood home in Berkshire. This was the period during which Ottoline began to be portrayed by a wide variety of painters, from James Pryde to Augustus John, Henry Lamb, and Roger Fry. Some became her lovers; few were able to resist her combination of innocence, aristocracy, and the singularity of a true eccentric. Her style, as they admiringly noted, was all her own, as original and confident as her sense of colour. She created it, on a shoestring budget, by paying her friendly dressmaker Miss Brenton ('Brenty') to copy costumes from masterpieces which she saw in galleries (Velazquez was a striking inspiration) and to make use of velvets and brocades in startling colours. Encouraged by Miss Brenton, she became increasingly bold. Her high-heeled shoes, often scarlet, had 'elevators' in the soles; her velvet hats were sometimes the size of a small cartwheel. This was the arresting and easily mocked figure who, in 1907, began holding weekly parties at Bedford Square for the artists and writers she met and whom she hoped to help by offering introductions to rich patrons. Henry James was among those who feared that her generosity would be abused. He was right. 
Ottoline's efforts were often successful. She assisted the careers of Mark Gertler, Jacob Epstein, the Spencer brothers, and Henry Lamb among many others. She was, however, easily ridiculed. Her shyness made it difficult for strangers to discover her sense of humour (she loved going to music halls and singing ditties), and she could appear overbearing and intense. Her religious faith, in an age of atheism, was mocked and distrusted. Virginia Woolf, Vanessa Bell, and Lytton Strachey seldom resisted the temptation to jeer behind her back; Duncan Grant, Maynard Keynes, Augustus John, and the Spencers were among her defenders. In 1909 Roger Fry invited her to join the newly formed Contemporary Art Society, designed to help young artists and to make their work accessible to provincial galleries. Ottoline bought paintings for the new society and provided her cousin, Lord Howard de Walden, as its first president, while her art-loving brother Lord Henry Bentinck became its chairman. In 1910 she became an enthusiastic supporter of the notorious 'Manet and the post-impressionists' exhibition. 

Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), Ottoline's lover and lifelong friend, became aware of her while helping Philip Morrell's political campaign in 1909. In 1911, disenchanted by his first wife, Alys Pearsall Smith, Russell turned to Ottoline and was, for a time, inspired by her, although he could not sympathize with her Christian beliefs. Their relationship was fought over and celebrated in a remarkable correspondence, often amounting to four letters a day. Ottoline's sexual coldness and Russell's possessiveness caused difficulties which prompted suicide threats on both sides; Philip Morrell, engaged in his own busy extramarital love life, was able to take a fairly detached view of the situation. 
Ottoline's relationship with Russell had already begun to wane in 1915, when she and Philip moved to their most celebrated home, Garsington Manor in Oxfordshire. The house and the making of its colourful Italianate garden became Ottoline's recreation, while Philip Morrell used his considerable architectural skill to improve the layout of the lower floors of the house and to embellish the exterior with a loggia. Here, as the Morrells provided a refuge for conscientious objectors during the war years, the low, dark rooms were decorated by visitors, though always to Ottoline's taste. The conversations and daily life of Garsington were recorded, sometimes with the malice of unease (Lytton Strachey, Dora Carrington, Clive and Vanessa Bell), sometimes with amusement (Aldous Huxley), and occasionally, with a lyricism which suggests that the house came to represent the passing of a lost world of elegance and civilization which would not easily be recovered (Juliette Baillot, D. H. Lawrence, Siegfried Sassoon). Garsington and its hostess featured in the work of contemporary novelists, with Bertrand Russell often in a leading role. Huxley and Lawrence were among those who drew on Ottoline's unconventional country court for their fictions. Her manner, her beliefs, and her appearance were exhibited and parodied, a form of betrayal which hurt her less than the revelation (the truth being exposed to her by Mark Gertler) that she was despised and disliked by many of the people to whom she had given her support. 'I am known as a dangerous and designing woman, immoral and unclean' (Seymour, 397), she wrote in her private journal (January 1918) after this distressing conversation. 
Affection mattered to Ottoline too much for her own happiness. (One of her many doctors, a Dr Combe, told Bertrand Russell in confidence in 1912 that her 'nervosite' was the only illness he had no hope of curing.) Constantly betrayed by her husband and let down by Russell, she found unexpected comfort in a late relationship with Lionel Gomme, a young bisexual stonemason who died, tragically, of a brain haemorrhage in 1922. 
In 1927 Ottoline began writing the memoirs which were published, following some manipulative editing by her husband and, to a lesser extent, by her literary executor, Robert Gathorne-Hardy, after her death. Financial difficulties led to the sale of Garsington in 1928. Ottoline's last ten years were spent with Philip at a modest London home, 10 Gower Street, which survives as part of London University. There, while she became increasingly deaf and troubled by illness, she continued to entertain a remarkable circle of people including W. B. Yeats, T. S. Eliot, and the Huxley brothers. Dame Ethel Smyth was a new friend, but many of those who had mocked her in the past, like Virginia Woolf, returned now to honour Ottoline's courage in adversity. Philip's peculiarities and his philandering had become common knowledge; Ottoline herself still hungered for relationships of spiritual affinity. Charlotte Mew, Dilys Powell, and Elizabeth Bowen were among the many intelligent younger women she sought out in the hope, sometimes rewarded, of forming a substantial friendship. A whole generation of young men became the willing and occasionally disrespectful court to this intense, demanding, and unpredictable old lady. Reconciled with D. H. Lawrence shortly before his death, she was touched to be told that there was none other like her: 'there is only one Ottoline' (Seymour, 362). Frieda Lawrence also came to Gower Street for a reconciliation before leaving for New Mexico. 
T. S. Eliot, her regular companion to the music-halls which they both enjoyed, helped Virginia Woolf to draft a memorial tablet after Ottoline's death in 1938. Hinting at her rejection by Philip, its last lines honoured '
A brave spirit, unbroken 

Delighting in beauty and goodness 

And the love of her friends. 
(Seymour, 361)' Eliot's own gratitude was partly inspired by Ottoline's unfailing consideration for his wife, Vivien, at a time when her troubled mental state had cut her off from many of their friends. 
Ottoline's flaws remain more immediately apparent than her virtues. She was a demanding and oppressive mother, she could be tyrannical in her desire to control the lives of her friends, and she was reckless in her gossip about other people's private opinions. Her craving for affection could seem discomforting. Her clothes, acknowledged now as pioneering in their imaginative presentation, often provoked mockery and even disgust. One young visitor to Garsington never forgot the horror of seeing her hostess's skirts, a mass of net under which flies swarmed and pressed, as Ottoline stooped to embrace her. 
Yet Ottoline Morrell's merits were outstanding. Courageous in her friendships, in her readiness to stand by her beliefs and to support work in which she had faith, she was a trailblazer in fashion, the bohemian ancestor of all that is most adventurous in modern design. As a friend, she was matchless. Henry Yorke (the novelist Henry Green) spoke for many when he wrote to Philip after her death that she had been someone who did good: 'to literally hundreds of young men like myself who were not worth her little finger, but she took trouble over them and they went out into the world very different from what they would have been if they had not known her. (Seymour, 556)' This was Ottoline's greatest gift, the ability to inspire and encourage, to create the idea of an achievable good. 'It is very difficult to think of anyone who meant so much to me' (ibid., 518) wrote T. S. Eliot. Aldous Huxley remembered that she had given him a 'complete mental reorientation' (ibid., 12); Lord David Cecil romantically hailed 'a princess of the Renaissance risen to shame our drab age' (ibid.). Duncan Grant honoured her singular moral and physical courage (ibid.). Augustus John paid tribute to her 'most noble and generous soul... there is no one to be compared to her' (ibid.). 
Laid low by a mysterious illness, Ottoline Morrell received treatment at Sherwood Park, a clinic in Tunbridge Wells run by Dr A. J. Cameron. She died there on 21 April 1938 after being injected with Prontosil, an untested new drug about which there were serious misgivings in the medical world. Cameron, a doctor who freely encouraged the drug's injection at his clinic, had committed suicide on 19 April, possibly after realizing the irresponsibility of his actions. His records were subsequently destroyed. His former patient was buried with her Bentinck relatives on the Welbeck estate. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 April. Her obituary in 'The Times' was written by Virginia Woolf. 
Philip Morrell died five years later, in 1943. Their daughter, Julian, who had married Victor Goodman in 1928, returned to her earlier love, Igor Vinogradoff, after her mother's death. She had two sons and a daughter from her first marriage. She met her illegitimate half-brothers for the first time at the funeral for Philip Morrell. 


@@@@@


doc= 35112


Morris, Edward Patrick, first Baron Morris (1859-1935), politician in Newfoundland, was born at St John's on 8 May 1859, the third son of Edward Morris, originally of Waterford, Ireland, and his wife, Catherine Fitzgerald. His father was a cooper and later keeper of the St John's poorhouse. Morris received as good an education as the colony could offer, at St Bonaventure's College. He taught at Oderin, Placentia Bay, from 1874 to 1878, and then spent a year at the high school attached to the University of Ottawa. On his return he studied law, and was called to the bar in 1885. He started a law firm with his brother soon afterwards. 
In 1885 Morris was also elected to the house of assembly as an independent member for the largely working-class and Roman Catholic district of St John's West. He promoted himself as a champion of working people, and adopted the then novel tactic of door-to-door canvassing. He proved to be a consummate local politician, and became enormously popular among his constituents. Re-elected nine times, he represented the district to the end of his political career in 1917. He became so influential in the town of St John's as a whole that by 1890 some newspapers were referring to him as 'Boss Morris'. 
In the assembly Morris championed social legislation such as workmen's compensation and safety standards on fishing vessels. He also supported electoral and local government reform, particularly in St John's. In 1889 he joined the Liberal Party, led by Sir William Whiteway, who appointed him to the cabinet (without portfolio) after his election victory that year. Morris's appointment recognized his influence in St John's and bolstered Roman Catholic representation in the government. He deputized for Whiteway in the attorney-general's office and handled a significant number of law bills, besides steering important legislation dealing with higher education. He was not closely involved in the major controversies with which the government had to deal, however, and did not achieve real prominence until the late 1890s, in which decade he also edited the 'Newfoundland Law Reports'. 
In December 1894 the two local banks suspended payment, creating financial chaos and a real possibility of colonial bankruptcy. Morris was a member of a delegation, led by Robert Bond, which went to Ottawa in 1895 to discuss confederation. The draft terms were ungenerous, depended on British financial aid (which was refused), and, had they been accepted, would almost certainly have pitted Morris against his constituency, since most Newfoundland Roman Catholics were committed anti-confederates. In the end the colony survived by floating a loan. 
In 1898 Morris dramatically broke away from the Liberal Party, then in opposition and led by Bond, over the tory government's decision to transfer the operation and ownership of the colony's railway and telegraph systems, as well as other franchises and much land, to Robert G. Reid of Montreal (who had built most of the railway). Morris, who was close to the Reid family, thought the deal promised economic development at little risk to the colony, while Bond considered it an immoral sell-out. As it also envisaged a considerable number of jobs in St John's West, Morris and a small number of supporters voted in favour of the deal, and sat thereafter as independent Liberals. In 1901 Morris married Isobel Langrishe (died 1934), the daughter of the Revd William Le Gallais and the widow of James P. Fox. 
By early 1900 the tory government was on the verge of collapse. Morris saw that if the fiercely anti-contract Bond became premier, the Reid deal and its supporters might well be sent into oblivion. Morris therefore astutely joined Bond in defeating the government, thereby safeguarding his political future, and enabling him to salvage the essence of the Reid contract. He joined the cabinet, becoming minister of justice in 1902, and pressured Bond into modifying rather than repealing the contract. He was knighted in 1904. 
Morris remained in the Bond government until 1907, when he suddenly resigned his portfolio and from the party. It was the first step in a carefully planned strategy. Bond had made himself unpopular with the imperial government by his anti-American fisheries policy, with the Canadian government by raising the question of American fishing rights at all, and with the Reid family by continued hostility to their ambitions. Since the tory party was weak, Morris was seen as the only politician who could challenge Bond's dominance. With substantial financial backing from the Reids, and winks and nods from other influential allies, he launched the People's Party in 1908. The election that autumn resulted in a tie. Bond mishandled the crisis, giving Morris (who had the sympathetic ear of the governor) the opportunity to form a government in March 1909. He was speedily granted a dissolution and confirmed in office with a comfortable majority. 
The record of the Morris government was mixed. It was relatively free-spending, it launched into an overly expensive and arguably unwise programme of building branch railways, and there is evidence that some of its members were involved in speculation in timber lands. Against this must be set the competent handling of the arbitration at the Hague tribunal on American fishing rights under the 1818 convention (Morris appeared for the colony), the introduction of old-age pensions, and needed investment in education and agricultural development. Aided by a buoyant economy and a disorganized opposition, the government was re-elected in 1913, but by this time it was under sustained criticism from the Fishermen's Protective Union, which had elected eight members to the assembly. Morris's attempts to respond to some Union demands upset his mercantile and Roman Catholic supporters, and for the first time cracks in the party began to appear. They were temporarily papered over, however, by the outbreak of war. 
The government's unusual method of handling the colony's war effort was in part the result of energetic intervention by the governor, Sir Walter Davidson. Without convening the legislature, the government expanded the local Royal Naval Reserve and created a 500 man regiment. Morris and Davidson organized the Newfoundland Patriotic Association, a politically neutral body involving both citizens and politicians, to supervise the war effort. This unique arrangement lasted until 1917. Morris represented the colony in the imperial war cabinet (1916-17) and attended the imperial war conference in 1917. By this time his government was becoming unpopular, mainly because it seemed incapable of curbing profiteering and controlling inflation. The regiment had suffered heavy losses, and conscription seemed a real and much-resented possibility. Morris proposed a coalition government, making it clear that he would postpone the election scheduled for the autumn of 1917. The resultant National Government, nominally headed by Morris, took office in July. A legislative session soon afterwards wound up the Patriotic Association, which had outlived its usefulness, created a department of militia, and increased direct taxation. 
Morris had agreed, before the formation of the National Government, that he would resign as prime minister before the end of the year if appointed Newfoundland's high commissioner in London, but on the recommendation of Davidson, who was ending his term as governor, he received a peerage for his services to the war effort (1 January 1918). It was a rare honour for any colonial politician, and the only case in Newfoundland's history. Morris moved to London and spent the rest of his life in England, and, though he returned to Newfoundland infrequently, championed the colony's interests whenever possible. He held a number of directorships, and served as vice-chairman of the Imperial Mineral Resources Bureau. He was also on the governing bodies of the Royal Empire Society, Imperial College, Cardinal Vaughan's School, and the Hospital for Diseases of the Skin. He died of bronchopneumonia at his home, 4 Onslow Square, London, on 24 October 1935, and was succeeded as second baron by his only child, Michael William Morris. 
Eloquent, witty, and politically shrewd, Morris climbed the greasy pole without difficulty and remained at or near the top for some thirty years. Though a man of real abilities, he never became a truly dominant figure, relying on alliances with, for example, Robert Reid and Governor Davidson, who did much to influence his policies. He was a survivor and compromiser rather than a visionary, but his premiership nevertheless made a permanent mark on Newfoundland's history, largely as a result of his controversial (and expensive) handling of the war effort. 


@@@@@


doc= 35113


Morris, Sir Harold Spencer (1876-1967), barrister and industrial arbitrator, was born at 21 Compton Terrace, Highbury, London, on 21 December 1876, the second son of Sir Malcolm Alexander Morris FRCS (Edinburgh) (1849-1924) and his wife, Fanny Cox of Dorchester-on-Thames. Malcolm Morris had a distinguished career as a consulting surgeon and as a specialist in skin diseases, practising from 8 Harley Street, London, where he moved with his family in September 1887 from their former home at 63 Montagu Square. 
Harold Morris was educated at Westminster School, Clifton College, and from 1894 at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he read law, graduating in 1897 with a fourth-class degree. Having joined the Inner Temple he was called to the bar on 26 January 1899. Among those called the same night there were three others who, like him, later became benchers; in 1949 on the fiftieth anniversary of their call to the bar (as indeed on some later anniversaries) the four dined together in hall in company with and to the delight of their fellow benchers. The other three were John Simon, who to his other high offices added that of lord chancellor from 1940 to 1945, Rayner Goddard, who was appointed lord chief justice of England in 1946, and the Hon. Victor Alexander Russell, a popular and respected practitioner in the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division. 
Morris practised at the common-law bar and was a member of the south-eastern circuit. For anyone who had been building up a practice in the years after 1899, and especially for someone with a young family, the outbreak of war in 1914 threatened grievous professional upset. In 1904 Morris had married Olga, the daughter of Emil Teichman, of Chislehurst. It was a happy marriage. They had four daughters and one son, Malcolm John Morris, who followed his father into the legal profession. Malcolm Morris was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1937, became QC in 1959 and a bencher (in his father's lifetime) in 1965; he held various recorderships and then became a judge at the central criminal court where he sat until his untimely death in 1972. 
Anxious to serve in the war, Morris was commissioned in the Coldstream Guards on 2 June 1916. In June 1918 he was transferred to the Royal Flying Corps as deputy assistant adjutant-general; he was appointed a court-martial officer with the rank of major, was mentioned in dispatches, and in 1919 was appointed MBE. After demobilization in February 1919, Morris returned to the bar where he successfully re-established himself and took silk in 1921. As an advocate he was competent; as a speaker either in court or on social occasions he was pleasing, lively, and interesting. He possessed a natural buoyancy and gaiety and courtesy; he had good looks. The combination of all these qualities seemed to augur for him a legal career of promise which could lead to a thriving practice with prospects of elevation to the High Court bench. He was appointed recorder of Folkestone in 1921 and held the post until 1926. In November 1922 he entered parliament as National Liberal member for East Bristol but in the general election of the following year he lost the seat. 
In 1925 Morris was asked to chair a court of investigation to consider a dispute in the woollen industry. His success in that capacity doubtless led to his being invited (as he was in 1925) to succeed Sir William Warrender MacKenzie as chairman of the railways national wages board and to his being appointed in the following year (1926) to succeed Sir William as president of the industrial court -- a position which he continued to hold until 1945. He was knighted in 1927. 
In the period before Morris accepted these positions his health was for a time not good. In such situations a secure position freed from the stresses and strains of life at the bar holds attractions, and Morris was probably so influenced. Though his appointment as president of the industrial court was to a position of great national importance and prestige, it meant that after only four or five years in silk Morris would have to abandon any prospects of building up a large practice and of being appointed to the High Court bench. 
Wise and impartial, Morris had the qualities which fitted him to be an admirable president of the industrial court. Assuredly his tenure of the presidency during years of economic difficulties and anxieties gave satisfaction and inspired confidence. For a short time (from 1930 to 1935), he added to his work by chairing the coal wages board after the passing of the 'Coal Mines Act' of 1930. 
Even after retiring in 1945 he continued to render public service: very acceptably, he sat judicially from time to time at Middlesex quarter sessions, at the central criminal court, and in other courts. 
Morris's happy appreciation and understanding of life at the bar inspired him to write in 1930 an entertaining book, 'The Barrister'. Years later, in 1960, came an autobiographical volume of much interest, 'Back View'. He died at his home, 21 Lichfield Road, Kew, Surrey, on 11 November 1967. 
Morris of Borth-y-Gest', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35114


Morris, Sir Lewis (1833-1907), poet and educationist, was born on 23 January 1833 in Spilman Street, Carmarthen, the second of the five sons of Lewis Edward William Morris (died 1872), a prosperous solicitor, and Sophia, the daughter of John Hughes, shipowner and merchant of the same town who had made a fortune as a drysalter. His great-grandfather was Lewis Morris (1701-1765) of Anglesey, a celebrated antiquary and, in 1751, one of the founders of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion. Despite his distinguished ancestry, a fervent 'British/Welsh' patriotism typical of his time, and a gift for languages, Morris had very little knowledge of Welsh, for social class and a wholly English education had insulated him from the richly Welsh-speaking culture of Carmarthen town and county. 
Lewis Morris was educated at the Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Carmarthen (1841-7), at Cowbridge School (1847-50), and at Sherborne (1850-51). He graduated from Jesus College, Oxford, in 1856, and was the first student in thirty years to gain first-class honours in both classical moderations and Greats; two years later he was awarded the chancellor's prize for an English essay entitled 'The greatness and decline of Venice'. Morris was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 21 November 1856 and called to the bar on 18 November 1861, practising mainly as an equity draftsman and conveyancing counsel in London until 1880. The work, although financially rewarding, was not demanding and, for Morris, it had the advantage of allowing him time to write. 
In 1868, according to early accounts of Morris's life, he married Florence Julia Pollard (1847-1927), the 21-year-old widow of Franklyn C. Pollard of New York, but no record of the marriage has been found. It seems, rather, that during the late 1860s, while living in Hampstead, he employed Florence as a housekeeper and that, shortly afterwards, they began living together as man and wife. By 1873 they had three children, but managed to conceal their liaison from the world, not announcing their marriage until 1902. Apart from the possibility of parental disapproval, it is not known why the relationship was kept a secret for so long, but Morris may have felt that Florence's Roman Catholicism would have prejudiced his chances of a political career. It almost certainly cost him the poet laureateship, as a result of Queen Victoria's disapproval on learning that he had a common-law wife and three children. Shortly after the appointment of Alfred Austin as poet laureate in January 1896, Morris (according to one of his descendants) married Florence Pollard and 'went to considerable pains to legitimise his children -- which was successfully achieved'. 
Almost from the outset Morris enjoyed immense popularity as a poet and became a well-known figure in London literary circles and in Wales. Although his first book of lyrical verse, 'Songs of Two Worlds' (three series, 1872, 1874, 1875; new edn in one vol., 1878), was published anonymously, with the appearance of 'The Epic of Hades' in 1877 he won immediate and widespread fame. Written, he claimed, while he was commuting to work on the London Underground, this long poem in blank verse describes a visit to the classical underworld in a series of episodes in which characters such as Tantalus, Orpheus, and Aphrodite tell their tales and the author adds comment of a moralistic nature. The book lacks vitality, its effect amounting to little more than a vague sense of moral uplift, but it ran to twenty editions (more than 50,000 copies) during the poet's lifetime and is now generally considered to be his finest work. 
Morris earned his vogue as a poet by his ability to express simple truths in lucid language and traditional metre. He dispensed a cheerful optimism about this world and the next which appealed, in particular, to the morality of middle-class Victorian England. In the anonymously published 'Gwen' (1879), which owes something to Tennyson's 'Maud', he traced the course of a secret marriage in a rural setting and extolled the landscape of his native county. The first book of his to appear under his own name was 'Songs Unsung' (1883). By the year of its publication the Morris menage was settled at Penbryn (formerly Mount Pleasant), a small mansion which the poet inherited from his father, and renamed after his illustrious forebear's old home, above the village of Pen-sarn, in the parish of Llangunnor, about a mile from Carmarthen. There he was to spend the rest of his life in comfortable circumstances and enjoying a patriarchal relationship with local people. He was, by all accounts, a tall, handsome, bearded, powerfully built man with little trace of a Welsh accent; he dressed in Welsh tweeds and had a reserved, courteous, rather patrician manner which reflected what was thought to be his shy character. Some of his critics thought him a volatile man, lacking stability and patience, especially in his professional dealings, and tending to see intrigue where none existed. 
It was only in his fifties that Morris began to take an interest in the language, literature, and history of Wales. His volume 'Songs of Britain' (1887) contains some patriotic odes such as that on the jubilee of Queen Victoria and three long poems based on Welsh legends. But for the most part he went on writing poems on classical themes, many of which are vapid outpourings remarkable more for their length and fluency than for any literary quality. His last poem of any note, 'A Vision of Saints' (1890), which he intended to be the Christian counterpart of the pagan 'Epic of Hades', consists of a series of nineteen monologues by people such as Elizabeth Fry and Father Damien whom he had selected for their 'saintly' qualities. His other books were 'Songs without Notes' (1894), 'Idylls and Lyrics' (1896), 'Harvest Tide' (1901), and 'The Life and Death of Leo the Armenian: a Tragedy in Five Acts'. A volume of his 'Selected Poems' appeared in 1905, and the last edition of his 'Collected Poems' (comprising some 840 double-columned pages) in the year of his death. A selection of his prose writings, mainly essays and speeches, in which he discussed his ideals as a poet, answered some of his severest critics, and expressed his progressive views of society, appeared under the title 'The New Rambler' in 1905. 
Many of the articles in 'The New Rambler' deal with education and other aspects of the cultural life of Wales, which became -- albeit somewhat belatedly -- the second great passion to which Morris devoted his energies. In 1878, encouraged by Hugh Owen, he had been appointed joint honorary secretary of the recently established University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. He threw himself into all aspects of the college's work, drafting various appeals and constitutions on its behalf, and serving as its joint treasurer from 1889 to 1896, and thereafter, until his death, as one of its two vice-presidents. He was a dedicated member of a committee appointed in 1880 to look into the state of intermediate and secondary education in Wales, which recommended the establishment of two new university colleges at Cardiff and Bangor and the passing of the vital 'Intermediate Education (Wales) Act' of 1889. He was particularly interested in the higher education of women, whom he believed to have a moral sensibility superior to that of men. After the establishment of the federal University of Wales in 1893 he became its junior deputy chancellor (1901-3). He was a prominent member of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion and served as chairman of the council of the National Eisteddfod Association after that body had been reformed by Sir Hugh Owen in 1880. 
Morris was knighted in 1895 and received the honorary degree of DLitt from the University of Wales in the year before his death. Political success eluded him, however. He was a Gladstonian Liberal in favour of home rule and the disestablishment of the Church in Wales, but he suffered from a shyness often mistaken for hauteur and was never a popular public speaker. He stood as Liberal candidate in the Pembroke Boroughs in 1886 but lost the candidature at Carmarthen in 1892 when another Liberal was appointed as the official candidate. Although he failed to achieve his ambition to enter parliament, Morris remained an active Liberal and was a member of the political committee of the Reform Club and, for several years, its vice-chairman. 
Morris died at Penbryn on 12 November 1907 and was buried in the family grave in the hilltop churchyard at Llangunnor four days later. His widow died on new year's eve 1927; in her obituary no personal detail was given. During his lifetime the literary reputation of Sir Lewis Morris was second only to that of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, but soon after his death it went into rapid decline. George Saintsbury in 'The Cambridge History of English Literature' (1916) wrote: 'He had, sometimes, a faculty -- which in a satirist, would have been admirable -- of writing things which looked like poetry till one began to think of them a little.' Although Morris had several virtues both as man and poet, from the obloquy of this harsh judgment posterity has so far resolutely declined to rescue him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35115


Morris, Michael, first Baron Killanin (1827-1901), judge, was born at Spiddal, co. Galway, Ireland, on 14 November 1827, the eldest son of Martin Morris JP (1784-1862) and Julia Blake, the daughter of Dr Charles Blake of Galway. His father was the first Catholic since 1690 to hold the office of high sheriff of Galway. His mother died of cholera in 1837, and his younger brother, George (1833-1912), grew up to be high sheriff of Galway (1860-61), MP for Galway City (1867-8 and 1874-80), and a member of the Irish Local Government Board (1880-98), and was knighted in 1898. Morris was educated at Erasmus Smith School in Galway, and at Trinity College, Dublin, where he matriculated as an exhibitioner on 2 July 1842. As a Roman Catholic he was disqualified from competing for a scholarship, but in 1846 or 1847 he graduated as first senior moderator in ethics and logic and won a gold medal. As well as working hard as an undergraduate, he developed a passion for tennis. 
Morris entered as a student of Lincoln's Inn, London, on 3 May 1847. After a year's foreign travel he was called to the Irish bar, in Trinity term 1849, and joined the Connaught circuit. He rose quickly in his profession and, like his father, became high sheriff of Galway (1849-50). From 1857 to 1865 he held the post of recorder of Galway, and in February 1863 he took silk. On 18 September 1860 he married Anna Hughes (died 17 Oct 1906); they had four sons and six daughters. 
Such was Morris's popularity in Galway that although he identified himself with no political party and gave no electioneering address he was returned as MP for Galway in July 1865 with 90 per cent of the vote. Once in the House of Commons he sat with the Conservative Party since, though he was scornful of party ideologies, he was mistrustful of any further widening of the franchise and was opposed to home rule for Ireland, being firmly unionist in his sympathies. In July 1866 he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland by Lord Derby, being the first Roman Catholic to hold that office under a Conservative administration. He was re-elected unopposed by his constituents. In November 1866 he was promoted to the attorney-generalship; also in 1866 he was sworn of the Irish privy council, where his knowledge of local politics helped him to undertake useful judicial work. 
In 1867 Morris was raised to the Irish bench as puisne judge of the court of common pleas, being succeeded in Galway by his brother George. He became chief of his court in 1876, and lord chief justice of Ireland in 1887. He was said to have managed juries with an appealing bonhomie and, even at the height of the emotive land league agitation (1880-83), to have been measured and just in his judgments. 
Morris was created a baronet on 14 September 1885, and on 25 November 1889 he was promoted to the judicial committee of the English privy council; he received a life peerage on 5 December 1889 as Baron Morris of Spiddal. Although his new duties forced him to move to London, his permanent residence and interests remained in Ireland. As appellate judge of the privy council his good humour again helped him to retain his popularity. He often dissented from the majority of the committee, but held his own in argument with his colleagues. His best-known judgment was that delivered in 'McLeod v. St Aubyn' (1899), a case dealing with contempt of court. Although both an Irishman and a Catholic, Morris was well liked in English society and he integrated easily. He became a member of Grillion's Club, and in 1890 he received the unprecedented honour of being elected a bencher of Lincoln's Inn, though he had never been called to the English bar. 
Morris took a keen interest in the topical question of Irish education. From 1868 to 1870 he was a member of the royal commission on Irish primary education; in 1868 he became a commissioner of national education, and later he was chairman of the board. On the foundation of the Royal University in 1880 he was appointed a senator, and in 1899 he was elected vice-chancellor. He was a visitor of Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1887 received the honorary degree of LLD from his old university. 
Morris retired from the privy council in 1900, when he accepted the hereditary barony of Killanin in the peerage of the United Kingdom; he became known as Lord Morris and Killanin. He died at Spiddal on 8 September 1901. His wife, two sons, and five daughters survived him, and he was succeeded in the barony of Killanin by his eldest son, Martin Henry Fitzpatrick, who had been elected as a Conservative MP for Galway in 1900 despite the opposition of 'home rulers' and with his father's considerable help. 
Morris's judicial decisions were of a kind which often warmed the public, being concerned with the spirit rather than the letter of the law, scorning precedent and being without pretence to legal erudition. His popularity with middle-class Irish opinion, and with his loyal Galway tenantry, was unrivalled. Although implacably opposed to the nationalist dream of an independent Ireland, his ability to make jests in Irish, and to be immune from the charge of racism or anti-Catholic feeling, helped to make his position more palatable and to keep him from being hated personally. Even during attempted Fenian insurrections and the Land League movement, he never received a threatening letter, and he used to joke that Ireland's troubles could be blamed on a wet climate and a lack of coal. He also agreed with the nationalists that financial relations between Ireland and England were unjust, speaking up for Ireland in the House of Lords on 23 March 1894. He detested developments which laid further financial burdens on Irish tenants, and he could be caustic on the subject of English ineptitude in the governing of Ireland. It was he who came up with the neat epigram, quoted by Randolph Churchill in the debate on home rule of 17 April 1893, that Ireland was 'a quick-witted nation... being governed against its will by a stupid people' (Lucy, 108). 


@@@@@


doc= 35116


Morris, Philip Richard (1836-1902), genre and marine painter, was born in Devonport, Devon, on 4 December 1836, the son of John Simmons Morris, an iron-founder, and his wife, Anne Saunders. His father took him to London in 1850 to train for the family business, but, fascinated by plates he saw in periodicals, Morris became more and more interested in art. With the encouragement of Holman Hunt, who intervened on his behalf with his father, he began to study art, first drawing in the evenings at the British Museum, and then, in 1855, in the Royal Academy Schools. He did well there, winning silver medals for drawing, painting, and portraiture. In 1858 he was awarded the gold medal and a travelling studentship for 'The Good Samaritan'; he used this to visit Italy and France, where he stayed until 1864. It was also in 1858 that he submitted two paintings to the Royal Academy exhibition, and, with only a few breaks, he exhibited there until 1901; he also exhibited regularly at the Society of British Artists and, between 1877 and 1888, at the Grosvenor Gallery. 
Of Morris's early paintings the best known are his seashore subjects, for example, 'Voices from the Sea' (1860), based on verses by Tennyson, 'Drift Wreck from the Armada' (1867), and 'The Sailor's Wedding' (1876). He painted several allegorical scenes of country life, such as 'The Mowers' (1875), 'The Reaper and the Flowers' (exh. Grosvenor Gallery 1877), 'Death and the Woodman' (1879), and 'Garland Day, Dorsetshire Coast' (1893). Under the influence of Hunt, Morris painted a number of religious subjects, most notably 'Golgotha, or, Where they Crucified him' (1862; Sunderland Museum) and 'The Summit of Calvary' (1871), engraved by Paul Jonnard. But the most popular of his works was 'Sons of the Brave' (1880), which showed the orphaned boys of soldiers of the Chelsea Hospital, emerging into the street as a musical band, a painting noted by a contemporary critic as full of character and ability. His later career was dominated by portraiture, and his sitters included Daniel Adamson, the chairman of the Manchester ship canal (1884), Colonel Edis (1889), and Sir Robert Rawlinson KCB (1892). 
Morris was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1877, but gradually his powers as an artist were seen even by sympathetic contemporaries to be on the wane, and he began to suffer from ill health. In 1900 he resigned his associateship. He died on 22 April 1902 at his home, 92 Clifton Hill, Maida Vale, London, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He was married to a widow, Mrs Sargeantson, the daughter of J. Evans of Llangollen, and had two sons and three daughters. Paintings by Morris are in the collections of Blackburn Art Gallery, Leeds City Art Gallery, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, Manchester City Galleries, and Sunderland Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 35117


Morris, Thomas (1821-1908), golfer, second son of John Morris, a postman in St Andrews, Fife, who later became a caddie, and Jean Bruce, who came from Anstruther, was born in North Street, St Andrews, on 16 June 1821. After a sound elementary education at Madras College in the town he was expected to train as a general carpenter but was apprenticed instead to a St Andrews golf club maker, Allan Robertson, for whom he worked for nine years, the last four as a journeyman. Like most boys in his situation he also caddied and played golf intermittently and his involvement in the sport became more serious as he began to partner Robertson in local exhibition matches. These often attracted considerable prize and betting money from local gamblers, the most notable example being a stake of $400 placed on them to defeat a similar pair. 
The partnership ended in 1851 following Morris's marriage to a coachman's daughter, Nancy Bayne, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. He moved to Prestwick, Ayrshire, where he combined keeping the new golf links with making clubs and balls and playing exhibition matches for cash prizes. It is said that after he defeated Robertson in one such match in 1853 the latter refused to play him again because Morris had forsaken the old feather balls for the new 'gutties', stuffed with gutta-percha and offering a longer range. Morris's subsequent adversary was Willie Park of Musselburgh, whose flair and strength were matched by Morris's careful and unflustered skills. Over the next twenty years the two men dominated matches in Scotland, each winning as often as the other and together doing a great deal to popularize the game at home and among English holiday visitors. 
From its institution in 1860 until 1896 Morris played the open championship every time it was staged. He won four times: in 1861, 1862, 1864, and 1866. In 1863 he was persuaded to return to St Andrews, as greenkeeper to the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, a job which he combined with running a flourishing manufacturing and retail business. His presence at the Royal and Ancient did much to extend the game; he provided advice on developing new links, supplied the implements of play, and, above all, became the epitome of the canny Scottish golfer. He was a key figure in the series of booms which transformed golf from 'Scottish croquet' into a game played internationally. His personal style helped to ensure the continuation of Scottish moral hegemony through all the changes. Just as the club which employed him eventually became the official arbiter of golfing etiquette, so Morris's advice was frequently and urgently sought on many issues. By the 1890s he was regarded widely as 'the veritable Nestor' of the game, a wise peacemaker in many disputes. 
Although he owed much of his initial fame to playing in wagered matches, Morris held strong religious beliefs, deeply rooted in Scottish Presbyterianism. He took his turn as an elder in St Andrews parish church, served briefly on the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, and opposed Sunday play (on the grounds that the links needed a rest as much as did the players and staff). A sturdy, black-bearded figure -- in his later years gradually whitening ('DNB') -- he enjoyed robust good health, swam daily in the sea, and was an enthusiast for fresh air. His strength and skill into old age provided another reason for golf's growing popularity, as a life-extending activity for middle-aged businessmen. 
Morris's longevity was tragically not matched by that of his eldest son, 
Despite his son's death, Old Tom continued to play, and recovered some form in the later 1870s, when he won professional matches both in England and in Scotland. Although he was eventually given a handicap, to reflect the slow decline brought about by age, he still stayed among the leaders until he reached his seventies. At the age of seventy-two he won the annual St Andrews competition held between his own employees and those of his commercial rival, the club maker Robert Forgan; despite his handicap of five, he finished well ahead of the younger men. 
By this time Morris was almost as much a tourist attraction in St Andrews as the old course itself, and he clearly enjoyed this and the deference shown by both visitors and fellow townsmen. The members of the Royal and Ancient commissioned a portrait of him from Sir George Reid in 1903 and he retired from their paid employment the following year, although he continued to occupy an emeritus position. Old Tom died after a fall on the stairs of the New Golf Club in St Andrews on 24 May 1908. 
With Morris's death golf's first era of great expansion ended. A club and tournament professional and a successful businessman, Old Tom epitomized the uncertain social position of an outstanding 'artisan' player who depended on amateurs for patronage and employment. He offered a model for many ambitious young Scotsmen who staffed the links of England and North America, usually with far less prestige. He became golf's greatest icon, and was represented subsequently in photographs, paintings, cigarette cards, Staffordshire ware pottery, and hundreds of different souvenirs. His death symbolized the apparent end of an age of supposed innocence for a game that he had done so much to popularize and which in the course of his career had become far more sophisticated. 


@@@@@


doc= 35118


Morris, William O'Connor (1824-1904), judge and historian, was born in Kilkenny city, Ireland, on 26 November 1824, the son of Benjamin Morris (died 1846), sometime rector of Rincurran in the diocese of Cork and Cloyne, and Elizabeth, youngest daughter and coheir of Maurice Nugent O'Connor of Gartnamona, near Tullamore, King's county. Morris was educated at a private school at Epsom (1837-41) and under the rector of Laugharne in south Wales (1841-3). On 15 June 1843 he matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, and in 1844 he was elected a scholar. He left university for a year and a half because of financial difficulties at home during the height of the great famine (1846-7), but resumed his studies in 1847 and graduated BA in 1848. His father had died in 1846. 
Despite early thoughts of a military career, Morris entered the King's Inns, Dublin, as a law student in 1851. On 30 April 1852 he was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn, London, and was called to the Irish bar in early spring 1854. He chose the home circuit and by 1862 had been elected a professor of common and criminal law at King's Inns. The following year he was appointed a commissioner to investigate the rights of owners of fixed nets for salmon in Ireland. However, owing to a difference of opinion with Robert Peel, then chief secretary, he was compelled to resign. Meanwhile, on 16 March 1858, Morris married Georgina Lindsay (died 1910), and he established himself at Blackrock, co. Dublin, having also inherited, through his advantageous marriage, the property of Gartnamona. They had five daughters and one son. 
Morris began to contribute articles on historical, legal, social, and political subjects to the 'Edinburgh Review', whose editor, Henry Reeve, had become a friend. He also reviewed books, mainly on his favourite subject, military history, for 'The Times'. As a landlord Morris paid close attention to the conditions of land tenure in Ireland, and he was asked by John Thadeus Delane, the editor of 'The Times', to contribute a special series of articles on the land question, which had been made topical by Gladstone's determination to engage with Irish problems. Morris's letters to 'The Times', which advocated the legal recognition of tenant right in Ulster, attracted attention, and the 'Land Act' of 1870, though not entirely to his satisfaction, drew upon many of his ideas. 
In 1869-70 Morris served on a commission to inquire into the corrupt practices surrounding the election of freemen of the city of Dublin, and in 1872 he was appointed county court judge for the county of Louth. Six years later he was transferred to co. Kerry. Morris found co. Kerry much less agreeable than Louth, since he was utterly opposed to the home rule movement there, which was accompanied by rural violence. He disapproved of the 'Land Act' of 1881, which he administered, and never lost an opportunity of denouncing it. He reduced rents by 15 to 20 per cent on well-managed estates and by 30 to 40 per cent on badly managed ones, but he refused to submit to local opinion. In 1880 he moved with his family from Dublin to Gartnamona, and was, at his own request, transferred in 1886 to the county judgeship of the united counties of Sligo and Roscommon. His position there was easier, but his attitude towards recent Irish legislation and his unsympathetic treatment of the de Freyne tenants in 1901 led to his being bitterly criticized. 
Morris then buried himself in his writing, publishing historical works which served as a welcome distraction, such as 'Hannibal... and the Crisis of the Struggle between Carthage and Rome' (1890), 'Napoleon... and the Military Supremacy of Revolutionary France' (1890), and 'Moltke: a Biographical and Critical Study' (1893). He examined the Irish past in works such as 'Ireland from 1494 to 1868' (1894), 'Ireland from '98 to '98' (1898), and 'Present Irish questions' (1901); and he published his autobiography, 'Memories and Thoughts of a Life', in 1895. Morris died at Gartnamona on 3 August 1904, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35119


Morris, William Richard, Viscount Nuffield (1877-1963), motor manufacturer and benefactor, was born on 10 October 1877 in the parish of St John, Worcester, the eldest son of Frederick Morris (1849-1916) from Witney and his wife, Emily Ann (died 1934), daughter of Richard Pether, of Wood Farm, Headington, Oxford. He was one of seven children, but only two sisters survived into adulthood. Both parents came from Oxfordshire farming stock, which Morris later traced back to the thirteenth century. When Morris was born his father worked for a draper, but in 1880 moved to his wife's farm in Headington to become bailiff. Morris was brought up there, and attended the Cowley village school until the age of fifteen. His father was forced to retire from farming because of asthma and in 1893 Morris was apprenticed for a short time to a cycle maker in St Giles', Oxford. 
From this modest, though not impoverished, background Morris rose to become the most famous industrialist of his age. His first enterprise began at the age of sixteen, when he left his apprenticeship and set up a small cycle-repair business in his parents' house at 16 James Street, Oxford, with $4 of capital. He began to assemble his own bicycles made from parts ordered from the flourishing midlands cycle industry, and his custom-built machines developed a reputation in Oxford for reliability and good value. In 1901 he set up as a cycle maker at 48 High Street, Oxford, and in 1902 bought stables in Holywell Street to manufacture motorcycles. The following year he entered into a partnership with a wealthy undergraduate whose spendthrift ways brought bankruptcy to the Oxford Automobile and Cycle Agency, of which Morris was works manager. A small bank loan allowed him to restart in business, but his primary interest was now in motor cars. He sold the cycle business and in 1909 set up the Morris Garage, where he sold, hired, and repaired cars. Sales quadrupled in four years and by 1913 Morris was a successful and respected Oxford businessman. 
Morris was an energetic and ambitious young man who made the most of the opportunities offered by the booming midlands industrial area and the dawning age of mass consumption. He had no formal training except for an evening class in engineering at the Oxford schools of technology, which he attended only twice. He disliked working for others, or depending on loans. His financial prudence and rigid individualism were bitter lessons learned from his bankruptcy, and he carried them on into later life. Most accounts show a personable but rather distant character, noted for his drive and competitiveness. He became a champion cyclist in the 1890s, winning more than a hundred events in and around Oxfordshire. Cycling introduced him to his future wife, Lizzie Maud Anstey (1877-1959), daughter of William Jones Anstey, an Oxford farrier. She worked in a department store and shared Morris's obsession with cycle touring. They married on 9 April 1903. The couple were childless, to Morris's profound regret. His wife (known as Elizabeth or Lillian) always remained in the background and their relationship was regarded by others as not particularly happy. The surviving photographs show a handsome couple. Morris was good-looking, of medium height and athletic physique, with dark hair smoothed back from his forehead. Although his hair turned silver by the 1930s his appearance changed remarkably little over the course of a very long life. 
In 1912 Morris took the predictable step of moving from the sale and hire of cars to actual manufacture. He adopted what had been until then a predominantly American practice, by buying in components from other suppliers which he assembled into a car of his own design and specification. This reduced the initial capital costs very considerably, and allowed him to buy supplies from the most competitive contractor in order to keep the costs low. His early experience with motor cars also convinced him of the importance of reliability. The car he designed in 1911-12, which became the Morris Oxford, was aimed at a broad popular market where price and easy maintenance were priorities. Delays in producing the engine forced Morris to sell his car from blueprints at the 1912 Motor Show. He sold 400, and the first was produced in April 1913. That year he produced 1300 cars, putting him at once among the top British car makers. In 1912 he founded W. R. M. Motors Ltd with himself as the sole ordinary shareholder, and $4000 borrowed from the earl of Macclesfield in the form of preference shares. Morris had met the latter in 1905, when the undergraduate was involved in a collision while at the wheel of a car hired from Morris. A motoring enthusiast, Macclesfield was prepared to support Morris in his manufacturing of cars. 
Morris's business career was again the victim of circumstance when war broke out in 1914. Car production collapsed during the war, but Morris had already begun to prepare for large-scale production. In 1914 he rented a disused military training college at Temple Cowley on the outskirts of Oxford. There he began to plan production of a second car, the Morris Cowley, to be manufactured from American components, which were cheap and reliable. Instead Morris found himself producing an assortment of military products, which made the company little profit (though Morris was rewarded by being made OBE in 1917) but provided further experience in mass production at the state's expense. In 1919 he began car production in earnest, but could produce only 387 cars that year. The British Ford company dominated the market. By 1923 Morris produced more than 20,000 cars a year at an exceptionally low price. He achieved this by forcing his suppliers to cut their prices and risk large-volume output. The economies of scale thus achieved allowed Morris to undercut almost all his competitors. His cars also developed a reputation for reliability, ease of maintenance, and innovation. Morris kept a careful eye on American practice, which led to the widespread introduction of hire-purchase schemes in the 1920s, aggressive advertising, and a system of Morris dealerships across the country. Morris exploited the growing car culture of the inter-war years more effectively than his rivals, including Ford, whose fortunes in Britain went into decline in the mid-1920s. 
Morris soon developed a circle of subsidiary businesses which were almost wholly dependent on supplying Morris cars. In 1923 he took over ownership of his engine, body, and radiator suppliers, and Morris Engines was founded in May of that year. In 1926 he took over his main carburettor supplier. This expansion called for a regular reorganization of the business. In July 1919 Morris had set up Morris Motors Ltd, with $29,000 of preference shares and $75,000 of ordinary stock, all of which he owned. In 1926 he floated shares in Morris Motors (1926) Ltd. He kept control of the ordinary shares, now valued at $2 million, and floated $3 million of preference shares which were oversubscribed. Over the 1920s capital in the company expanded at over $500,000 per year, much of the new capital coming from re-invested profits. 
From the late 1920s, when Morris supplied a third of all cars made in Britain, the fortunes of the company went into a slow decline. The launch of the successful Morris 8 and Morris 10 range in the 1930s kept Morris in the lead, but the competing pack closed in and other businesses imitated him successfully. Morris came to rely on the initiative of others in the organization, most notably the engineer Leonard Lord, who succeeded in reversing the decline in the early 1930s by modernizing factory practice (including the building of Europe's largest integrated car plant) and rationalizing the corporation as far as Morris would allow. His resignation in 1936, following Morris's refusal to give him a share of the profits, left the business in a difficult position, unable to rationalize effectively because of the insistence of its founder that he should keep general strategy in his own hands, and hostage to Morris's increasingly old-fashioned view of what would sell. Like Henry Ford in America, Morris exercised a damaging authoritarianism over his enterprise at a time when up-to-date production and sales required the move to more modern systems of management and control. Product development stagnated, and the successful post-war Morris Minor was only introduced into mass production against Morris's initial wishes. In 1951, disillusioned by the new era of state controls and the difficulties of holding his rambling industrial empire together, Morris merged the business with Austin to form the British Motor Corporation. He was its first president until he retired in 1954, and continued to interest himself in the affairs of the business until his death in 1963. 
Morris's routine involvement in the affairs of the company ended in the 1920s after the successful launching of volume car production. From 1927 he began a long series of annual cruises to Australia, which left him absent even from general policy-making for months at a time. His subordinates, whose views were recorded in the 1950s by Morris's official biographers, Philip Andrews and Elizabeth Brunner, have left a generally unkind picture of their leader. Morris had strong views, which he expected others to respect and interpret. He disliked committee meetings, and instead discussed issues face-to-face with particular individuals. Collective decisions were seldom made by the directors unless they were confident that Morris endorsed them; on occasion Morris could go behind the backs of his directors and authorize policy on his own. One manager recalled that 'Cowley politics' were 'too fierce for words' (Church, 'Deconstructing Nuffield', 571). Morris did not like yes-men, but he disliked being crossed or ignored. His chairmanship of the Morris company was, as a result, arbitrary and often ill-informed. His was a familiar experience of the small-time entrepreneur who found himself in the space of a decade or so riding the wave of a remarkable consumer boom, forced to cope with the administration of an organization and workforce for which he had little experience. For all his faults Morris did retain values which were commercially sensible. He insisted on low price combined with quality; he believed that after-sales service was a vital key to high sales; and he did not overcommit the business financially. The merger of 1951, which Morris's managers resisted, was on the surface a realistic decision which might, under different circumstances and leadership, have produced a successful post-war volume car industry. 
In the 1920s Morris became a figure of national importance, enjoying publicity and honours. In 1929 he was given a baronetcy, in 1934 a barony, and in 1938 he became Viscount Nuffield, of Nuffield in the county of Oxford, where he had settled with his wife in 1925. He was showered with academic honours, including five honorary LLD degrees, and honorary fellowships at four Oxford colleges, St Peter's, Pembroke, Worcester, and Nuffield, the college he founded in 1949. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1939, a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1948 (following extensive medical benefactions), and was made a Companion of Honour in 1958. For all these honours, Morris remained a man of simple tastes and pleasures. He liked golf and excelled at deck games on his many cruises. His habits were modest. He drove a small Wolseley car and kept his small office at the Cowley works for his entire business life. 
Morris's brief forays into public affairs ended unhappily. He was persuaded by Oswald Mosley during the slump to put up $50,000 to help found his 'New Party' in 1930, in the mistaken belief that Mosley favoured some of his ideas on involving businessmen in government to secure economic stability and rational action. Once Mosley began to demonstrate his more fascist aims Morris abandoned support, and any idea of businessmen's rule. In 1935 began a sharp dispute with the government over re-armament plans which ended with the exclusion of Morris from the so-called 'shadow factory' scheme. 
After 1945 Morris undertook a long and unsuccessful assault on the new Labour government's economic controls. His political instincts were profoundly conservative. He disliked socialism and delayed the introduction of trade unions at Cowley for as long as he could. As late as 1956 Morris Motors was only twenty-five per cent unionized: like Henry Ford, Morris believed that the loyalty of the workforce could be bought with high wages. He was an individualist of a classic Victorian kind and distrusted the mass culture and economic collectivism to which his product and business had in part contributed. 
Morris's greatest public achievements lay in philanthropy. He began to make educational and medical donations in the 1920s, and as his personal fortune grew he became aware of the contribution he could make to relieve suffering in a pre-welfare state. In 1936 he floated much of his ordinary stock in order to release funds that he could use for benefaction. In total he donated $30 million, two-thirds of it for educational and medical purposes. He was instrumental in establishing a network of provident societies which formed the basis of the British United Provident Association (BUPA), founded in 1947. He established a medical school in Oxford with a donation of $2 million in 1936. In 1937 he granted land and an initial $900,000 for the founding of an Oxford college. He wanted a college of engineering, which would link the world of industry and the university, but instead the Oxford authorities wanted a college to provide social studies. Morris reluctantly agreed, but he took very little interest in the new college and refused to favour the university again. His later donations went to hospitals, and in 1939 to the Nuffield Trust for the Forces of the Crown, which helped to provide welfare facilities for the military. In 1943 he agreed to set up the Nuffield Foundation with a capital of approximately $10 million. Its purpose was to provide medical and social relief, but from the 1950s it also provided educational grants. 
Morris took a lively personal interest in his medical benefactions. 'The progress of medical science and the conditions under which medical practice is carried on have long been... among my main interests', he wrote to the vice-chancellor of Oxford in 1936 (Andrews and Brunner, 288), and his endowments were especially important at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford (which successfully resisted the addition of Nuffield to its title) and at Guy's Hospital in London, where a statue was erected in his honour. He retained a lively and informed interest in medical science and was responsible for the initial supply of iron lungs to British hospitals when still in an experimental stage. Morris himself was a lifelong hypochondriac, constantly anxious about his health despite his early robustness. In fact he remained in good health for a man who chain-smoked until four years before his death, when he was forced to give up. His obsession with health perhaps owed something to his father's frail condition and the death of five siblings at a young age. 
Morris did finally decline physically after the death of his wife in 1959. Following surgery in 1963 he died on 22 August at his Oxfordshire home, Nuffield Place, Nuffield. His ashes were buried in Nuffield parish church, though Morris himself had taken almost no interest in religion throughout his life. The bulk of his remaining estate, valued at over $3 million, was given to Nuffield College. 


@@@@@


doc= 35120


Jones, Sir John Morris- (1864-1929), Welsh scholar and poet, was born at Trefor, Llandrygarn, Anglesey, on 17 October 1864, the eldest son of Morris Jones (died 1879) and his wife, Elizabeth Roberts, shopkeepers, both originally of Llanrug, Caernarvonshire. When he was three years old his parents moved to Llanfair Pwllgwyngyll, Anglesey, and he went to the local school, the Duchess of Kent's, and the board school. From 1876 to January 1879 he attended the Friars' School, Bangor, under the headmastership of Daniel Lewis Lloyd (afterwards bishop of Bangor), and when Lloyd left for Christ College, Brecon, Jones was one of the many Friars' boys to go with him. 
Jones's father died at Christmas 1879, and his help was now required at home. He assisted his mother for a year in the shop, but managed to find time to read a considerable amount of Welsh literature, especially poetry, and the beauty of the old 'cywyddau' and 'englynion' captured his imagination so completely that he could barely tolerate any other kind of verse again. Lloyd had a high opinion of his former pupil's gifts as a mathematician, and made it possible for Jones to return to Brecon early in 1881 in order to read for a mathematical scholarship at Oxford. But the old zest had gone. The year at home had roused in him such an interest in Welsh poetry that mathematics took second place. He did win a scholarship, and went to Jesus College, Oxford, in October 1883, but obtained only a third-class degree in mathematics in 1887. A Meyricke scholarship from his college, tenable for a year, then enabled him to follow his real bent. He had already attended the lectures of John Rhys on Celtic; he now devoted himself wholly to Welsh, and began to prepare an edition of 'The Elucidarium' and other tracts in Welsh from 'Llyvyr agkyr llandewivrevi', which appeared under his name and that of Rhys in 1894. 
Jones and six others had already (6 May 1886) founded the Dafydd ap Gwilym Society in Oxford for the discussion of Welsh language, literature, and culture. Two of the first members, Jones himself and Owen Morgan Edwards, were to play the leading parts in the revival of Welsh literature. Edwards focused upon history and Welsh prose; Jones on philology and Welsh verse. Both felt the need of a more regular and scientific orthography; both loved purity of idiom and diction, although Edwards found his models in the living dialect and Jones in the medieval poetry. Vigorous discussions at the Dafydd paved the way for the work of the orthographical committee of the Society for Utilizing the Welsh Language (Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg), whose report on 'Welsh Orthography' was published in 1893, Jones acting as secretary. He did most of the work on this report, and for years afterwards in controversy after controversy he defended this 'Oxford Welsh', as it was called, against all comers. 
Jones was appointed lecturer in Welsh at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in January 1889. The charter of the University of Wales was granted royal approval at the end of 1893, and he was elected professor of Welsh in 1895, holding the post until his death. The new University of Wales gave him students in plenty, and through them his lectures on Welsh grammar became known throughout Wales. In 1897 he married Mary, second daughter of William Hughes of Siglan, Llanfair Pwllgwyngyll, with whom he had four daughters. 
Jones studied the versification of the medieval poets and dealt faithfully, if not tenderly, with Joseph Loth's 'Metrique Galloise' in the 'Zeitschrift fur Celtische Philologie' (vol. 4, 1903). His own skill in the ancient technique of the bards was demonstrated by the ode 'Cymru fu, Cymru fydd', printed in 'Cymru' (1892) and later with other poems in his only published volume of poetry, 'Caniadau' (1907). Jones's exposure of the falsity of the claims made by Iolo Morganwg on behalf of the gorsedd appeared in 'Cymru' for 1896, and in the same year, curiously enough, he gave his adjudication on the odes, the chief poetic competition, at the national eisteddfod held at Llandudno. This was the first of a series of pronouncements, continuing until 1927, on correct Welsh and correct prosody given by him at this popular assembly, which made his name famous throughout Wales and helped to spread his doctrines. He castigated sloppy work with ruthless severity; no man did more to raise the standard of poetic diction in the eisteddfod poetry. 
Although Jones's chief interest lay in the strict alliterative metres, he also helped to perfect the form of the free lyric by his translations from Heine, J. L. Uhland, and others; in particular his translation of 'Umar Khayyam, 'Penillion Omar Khayyam wedi eu cyfieithu o'r berseg i'r Gymraeg' (1928), merits mention. His chief contribution to the study of Welsh prosody and, in the opinion of many, his best work, is his 'Cerdd dafod' (1925), a full account of Welsh metric art in which he displayed his belief that a Welsh literary and linguistic revival was impossible without a careful study of the Welsh literature of the past. It was also of immense importance for its practical demonstration that Welsh was an appropriate language for the discussion and publication of detailed scholarly material. 
Another of Jones's important contributions to Welsh prose is the masterly introduction to Ellis Wynne's 'Gweledigaetheu y bardd cwsc' (1898), which is significant not only for its discussion of Ellis Wynne's sources but also for its stylistic analysis, which displayed Jones's characteristic dedication to the purity of the Welsh language. He edited the quarterly magazine 'Y Beirniad' ('The Critic') from start to finish (1911-19), but wrote little himself for that periodical, although he spent a great deal of time in editorial work. Occasional articles from his pen appeared in various magazines: notably his 'Tudur Aled' in the 'Transactions' of the Cymmrodorion (1908-9) and the review in English in 'Cymmrodor' (vol. 28, 1918) of the edition of the 'Book of Taliesin' by John Gwenogvryn Evans. 
Jones's 'Welsh Grammar, Historical and Comparative' (1913), although limited in that it deals only with phonology and accidence, is a key work in the scholarship of the Welsh language. It was followed by an unfinished draft, printed posthumously in 1931 as 'Welsh Syntax'. Both texts display a remarkable gift of lucid exposition, and skill in the clear arrangement and presentation of grammatical facts. 
Jones was knighted in 1918, when he began to style himself Morris-Jones. In 1919 Glasgow University conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD, and in 1927 the National University of Ireland that of doctor of Celtic letters. He died after a brief illness at his home, Ty Coch, at Llanfair Pwllgwyngyll, on 16 April 1929, and was buried in the cemetery of that village. 


@@@@@


doc= 35121


Morrison, Herbert Stanley, Baron Morrison of Lambeth (1888-1965), politician, was born at 240 Ferndale Road, Brixton, London, on 3 January 1888. His father, Henry Morrison (1849/50-1917), was a police constable of Conservative politics and with a liking for alcohol; his mother, Priscilla Caroline Lyon (1848/9-1907), daughter of an East End carpet fitter, had been in domestic service. With six children surviving infancy, conditions were hard, but Morrison's father was a member of the uniformed working class. This meant both status and regular earnings. The family appears to have had no significant religious affiliation; Morrison's upbringing was largely secular. 
In one respect Morrison's childhood was distinctively difficult. An eye infection immediately after birth destroyed the sight in his right eye. During his schooldays, first at the Stockwell Road board school and from eleven at St Andrew's Church of England School, he was often marginal to children's pursuits. On leaving school he entered the world made famous in H. G. Wells's portrayal of Mr Kipps; he worked as a shop assistant in south London and then in Pimlico. Hours were long; at the Pimlico shop he 'lived in'. In 1908 he moved to Whitbread's brewery as a switchboard operator. This post brought him into the National Union of Clerks, his only direct experience of trade union activity. These jobs offered minimal long-term prospects; from 1912, when he took a post as a circulation traveller for the new Labour newspaper, the 'Daily Citizen', his career lay within the labour movement. 
Morrison's political formation was based on a dedication to self-education. Apparently on the advice of a phrenologist, he read extensively in history and economics, and gradually became a socialist. In October 1906 he joined the Brixton branch of the Independent Labour Party; however the ILP was relatively weak in London and he soon shifted to the formally Marxist Social Democratic Federation (Social Democratic Party from 1908). His wide reading now included not just radical economists and historians, and progressive fiction, but English translations of Marx, Engels, and Kautsky. His commitment to socialism produced rows with his tory father; he finally left home and lived in a succession of south London bedsitters. His appearance was shabby; his meals were irregular. Taken in hand by concerned comrades, his clothes became smarter. He ceased in public to be Bert Morrison and became Herbert. An effective outdoor speaker, he became increasingly interested in political organization and in specific achievements rather than symbolic protests. 
These priorities led Morrison back to the Independent Labour Party, which was allied with the trade unions in the Labour Party. In contrast the Social Democrats, relatively strong in London, and more pragmatic than some stereotypes suggest, stood alone. By 1910 he was clearly committed to a gradualist vision of economic and social transformation; his journalism in the ILP newspaper 'Labour Leader' proclaimed a socialist solution to the contemporary debate over national efficiency. His hopes for socialist transformation placed significant weight on the reform of local government; his first municipal candidacy, at Vauxhall in 1912, ended in defeat but his campaign was notable for the quality of the publicity material. 
This failure must be placed in the broader context of pre-1914 London Labour politics. Trade unionism was relatively weak and the continuing strength of the Social Democrats militated against the construction of a socialist-trade union alliance. Only in May 1914 did the diverse socialist and trade union elements combine to form the London Labour Party. The initial secretary, Fred Knee, died within months, and on 27 April 1915 Morrison by one vote was elected his successor. At twenty-seven he had secured his first significant base. 
The post not only solved an immediate problem -- the 'Daily Citizen' had folded the previous month -- it also gave Morrison a congenial and creative task for the remainder of a war that he opposed. His response to the outbreak of hostilities was one of political opposition to what he characterized as a capitalist and imperialist conflict. In 1916 he received his call-up papers; his disability would have been sufficient for exemption but he opposed the call-up on socialist grounds. Characteristically he rejected an absolutist position and accepted alternative work of national benefit. He became a rather incompetent gardener at Letchworth Garden City where a politically sympathetic employer gave him scope to carry out his work for the London Labour Party. 
Morrison's task was formidable. Labour successes in the capital before 1914 had been fragmented; the war threatened to be a divisive issue. His concentration on organizational improvements and on domestic topics produced little reward in the 1918 general election, but in the municipal contests of 1919 Labour achieved a sensational breakthrough. Before 1914 Labour had only forty-eight councillors in London; in 1919 the party won over 550 seats. It controlled twelve of the twenty-eight London boroughs. The reasons for this breakthrough were complex, and some of the ground was lost three years later; but Labour had become a credible force in London, and Morrison took much of the credit. 
Morrison now lived in Hackney, one of the twelve boroughs captured by Labour, and in 1920 became mayor. This appointment came despite his not being a member of the council. In office he was predictably efficient, and for a mayor took an unusually active role in making policy. Two characteristics of this early experience of political leadership proved enduring. His relationship with council officers involved frank debate followed by a firm decision. On a broader canvas he responded to the challenge of unemployment by insisting that action must be constitutional. This position contrasted with the contemporary and illegal response of George Lansbury and the Poplar councillors, which he saw as conducive to chaos. The gaoled Poplar councillors gained sympathy within the labour movement. But as post-war radicalism diminished, Morrison's municipal strategy became dominant within the party. 
From 1922 Labour lost control of Hackney. Morrison's political priorities shifted above all to the London county council (LCC). His power base remained the London Labour Party, which during the 1920s became a formidable political machine. In 1922 Morrison entered the LCC as a councillor for Woolwich. The borough had been a precocious Labour stronghold; it had an impressively large local party and a Labour newspaper, and from the late 1920s the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society was uniquely affiliated to the national Labour Party. Woolwich offered for Morrison a model of Labour organization -- extensive, efficient, and concerned not just with conventional political issues, but also with a variety of cultural activities. He moved to nearby Eltham; this suburb was Morrison's home for the rest of his life. For him Labour's appeal should not be restricted to established working-class communities: it must include the 'useful people' of the suburbs who would respond to a reasoned programme of reform. Within the LCC Morrison became chief whip in 1923 and then leader of the Labour group in 1925. Vigorous advocacy in debate was combined characteristically with more efficient group organization. 
Although Morrison was identified inevitably with London politics, he also emerged on the national scene as a significant figure in the 1920s. First elected to the Labour Party's national executive committee (NEC) in 1920, he remained a very active member, with three brief intervals, for over three decades. In the early years he was prominent in the tortuous discussions over the complex relationship between the Labour Party and the Communist Party. An early advocate of a hard line towards the communists, he ensured that local Labour parties in London with communist involvement were reorganized. At party conferences he established himself as an effective debater combining a firm defence of the party leadership with thoughtful and accessible presentations of issues. Labour Party chairman in 1928-9, he presided in 1929 over the party conference, a celebration of electoral victory that nevertheless contained harbingers of future disillusion. Morrison's conduct of the proceedings was assessed critically by an astute observer. Walter Citrine, the general secretary of the TUC, noted 'his peculiar insistence upon his own correctness of ruling. He was not only confident, but rubbed it into the Conference that he was right' (BLPES, Citrine papers, pt 1 7/8). 
Morrison's first period as a member of parliament was as a back-bencher during the first Labour government. Elected for South Hackney in a three-cornered contest in December 1923, he initially found the Commons less congenial than local government. His first speech was unpersuasively partisan; his subsequent interventions were stronger, reflecting his increasing grasp of parliamentary procedure, and his concentration on London issues. This led him to oppose the government's 'London Traffic Bill', which he attacked as the adoption of a Conservative proposal that would give regulatory powers to central government, not least for road passenger transport. In the election of October 1924 Morrison was defeated in a straight fight with a Liberal, but in May 1929 divided opposition helped to give him a comfortable victory in South Hackney. 
Despite his limited parliamentary experience Morrison went straight into the second Labour government as minister of transport. One observer wondered whether there was not 'a great future in the Party for the self-sacrificing, simple, honest and retiring devotion of Herbert Morrison' (Wertheimer, 188). In many respects his record over the government's troubled career enhanced his reputation, culminating in his promotion to the cabinet in March 1931. His ministerial performance in his department and in the Commons was recognized widely as a high point in an increasingly demoralized government. The skills polished in municipal administration and debate were appreciated more widely. Morrison's success owed something to the relative distance of his departmental concerns from the immediate impact of the depression. He could reform areas of transport policy without confronting immediately the constraints of Treasury orthodoxy. 
Morrison's first bill responded to the extensive growth of road traffic by modernizing the law. Although it included controversial elements, most notably the abolition of the speed limit for cars, it did not divide MPs on partisan lines. The passage of this complex legislation raised Morrison's profile; he then turned to a favourite topic, the reform of London transport. He began by killing off inherited proposals for a private combine; gradually, through ministerial discussions and bargaining with interest groups, an alternative emerged -- a public corporation responsible for most passenger traffic undertakings within the London area. Some elements would come from private ownership, others (the tramways) from municipal authorities. 
Morrison's persistent advocacy within the government brought the bill to the Commons in March 1931. His case combined both a partisan appeal -- this was practical socialism -- and an attempt to gain cross-party support through emphasizing the economic merits of the proposals. For Morrison well-thought-out schemes could be both socialist and consensual. But his expectations for the bill were not realized. The collapse of the second Labour government in August 1931 meant an end to the bill. Yet by 1933 the London Passenger Transport Board was formed following legislation by the National Government. 
Morrison's record at the Ministry of Transport earned widespread approval but helped to secure him the enmity of one increasingly powerful Labour figure. Ernest Bevin, the Transport Workers' leader, was a 'good hater' with a suspicion of many career politicians, especially of those whose links with the trade unions were sparse. After the general strike of 1926, Bevin became a dominant figure on the general council of the Trades Union Congress and within the Labour Party -- a man whose support was worth courting. His suspicion of Morrison might have begun with the latter's revolt in 1924 on the 'London Transport Bill'; this legislation had had the support of Bevin's union. Certainly there was considerable friction during the second Labour government. When Morrison's modernization of the road traffic law included powers to limit lorry drivers' hours, Bevin objected on the ground that this was a matter for trade union negotiators. More basically Bevin attacked Morrison's proposals for the composition of the London Passenger Transport Board. For Morrison ability should be the sole criterion; for Bevin trade unionists should be involved preferably as board members or at least in the consultations over membership. The exchanges on the principle carried on beyond the demise of the Labour government; they raised serious issues about the purpose and structure of publicly owned industry. 
This breach affected the remainder of Morrison's career. Widespread approval of Morrison's ministerial record was also eroded by rumours about his behaviour in the crisis of August 1931. During cabinet discussions over expenditure cuts gradual and often ambiguous opposition developed among some ministers to cuts in much social provision and especially in unemployment benefit. Morrison took no part in this opposition; he was loyal to MacDonald and voted with the majority in favour of a 10 per cent reduction in unemployment benefit. That much is clear, as is Morrison's subsequent decision, along with five others from this majority, to go into opposition with the Labour Party. The uncertainty concerns how far Morrison was attracted by a post in the newly formed National Government. Reasons might have included admiration for MacDonald, a concern to safeguard his London transport reforms, and an expectation that the new government's life would be short. Contemporary press speculation and contradictory accounts by some contemporaries suggest some uncertainty -- among others and, not least, within himself -- about his likely choice. The calling of an election meant the exorcism of residual doubts; it also produced Morrison's defeat in South Hackney. 
The 1931 crisis effectively terminated the leadership of the Labour Party's first generation; the initiative passed to those born largely in the 1880s who had established their political reputations after 1918. Among this group Morrison had established himself as a ministerial success; but like many of his peers he no longer had a parliamentary base. However, the small size of the post-1931 parliamentary party meant that influence within the party's NEC acquired an unusual significance. Along with another ambitious ex-minister, Hugh Dalton, Morrison played a critical role in the party's post-1931 policy making. He was a leading figure on the NEC's policy sub-committee, and especially in the study group on the reorganization of industry. Within this body he championed the public corporation as the preferred approach to nationalization, a method that he defended effectively in his 1933 book 'Socialisation and Transport'. Such advocacy reopened the argument with some trade unions, most notably Bevin's Transport Workers, and there were serious but inconclusive debates at the party conferences of 1932 and 1933. However, the lack of a formal victory for Morrison proved irrelevant; after 1945 the public corporation was the form of public ownership chosen by the Attlee government. 
More broadly Morrison's contribution to policy making helped to provide the party with a coherent programme of specific economic and social measures that could be represented as the first practical steps towards the replacement of capitalism by a socialist commonwealth. This combination of the practical and visionary had shaped the politics of Morrison and many colleagues since before 1914. The synthesis, aided by Morrison's presentational skills, made him a dominant figure at the party conferences of the 1930s. He defended specific policies and their gradualist rationale against the criticism of those who wished to draw more radical lessons from the debacle of 1931. As the challenge of fascism deepened, he insisted that the independence of the Labour Party offered the best defence; he thoroughly opposed proposals for a popular front with the communists and an increasingly ecumenical spectrum of progressives. 
Yet despite his national prominence Morrison's greatest achievement in the 1930s was in London. Labour's electoral recovery after 1931 was uneven. In the general election of 1935 the party gained significantly in the popular vote, but fared disappointingly in terms of seats. In contrast, under Morrison's leadership Labour took control of the LCC in March 1934. The result was unexpected; Morrison was greeted as the architect. Beatrice Webb paid tribute to his talents -- 'a long pull and a hard pull lasting twenty years -- the final victory doing endless credit to his doggedness, skill and masterfulness' ('Diary', 14 March 1935). 
Morrison's strategy as leader of the LCC majority was to demonstrate Labour's capacity to govern both in implementing a coherent programme of reform and modernization, and in meeting high standards of efficiency and procedural propriety. Success could remove doubts about the party that were the perceived legacy of 1931. A competent team delivered distinctive policies combined with financial prudence. Schools were built; a significant start was made on the clearance of East End slums and on their replacement by modern LCC estates. The green belt was introduced to check the city's unplanned expansion. The provision of public assistance was humanized. A symbolic and successful battle with central government over the replacement of Waterloo Bridge allowed Morrison to portray the LCC as decisive and forward-looking. The popularity of these policies was demonstrated when the LCC elections were held in 1937. Turnout increased and although the opposition Municipal Reformers improved their vote, so did Labour, maintaining its share of the poll and gaining six more seats. This outcome testified to Morrison's skills in policy and administration, party organization and publicity. The Labour Party had other inter-war municipal achievements, but London's size and symbolism gave Morrison's record a unique prominence. 
In contrast Morrison's parliamentary standing following his success at South Hackney in the 1935 election was ambiguous. In part this reflected his absence from the 1931 parliament. Under George Lansbury's leadership Clement Attlee, far less prominent than Morrison before 1931, had become deputy leader; Arthur Greenwood, whose status in 1929-31 had been similar to Morrison's, had returned to parliament after winning a by-election in April 1932. Following Lansbury's deposition from the leadership prior to the 1935 election, Attlee had served as temporary leader, and both he and Greenwood were candidates for the permanent post following the election. Morrison also stood. He had the support of influential MPs and advocates from both right and left who praised his drive and openness to discussion. They felt that he was interested in ideas. Yet in the first ballot he secured only forty-four votes to Attlee's fifty-eight and Greenwood's thirty-three. In the second round Morrison's vote increased by only four and Attlee's grew to eighty-eight. 
No doubt Attlee benefited from the loyalty of those who had appreciated his virtues in the difficult parliament of 1931. Morrison's parliamentary experience was comparatively slight, and it was widely believed that his priority would remain the LCC -- a concern that Morrison did nothing to dispel by an ambiguous comment at the decisive meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP). Indeed Morrison was regarded by some as too narrowly a London politician in style and interests. Above all there was a bloc of trade union opinion in the PLP and beyond that distrusted Morrison as devious and potentially disloyal, a man who stood outside the relaxed alcohol-lubricated camaraderie that prevailed within a section of the PLP. The leadership election of 1935 was the first sign of a bloc within the party that would resist Morrison's attempts to achieve the leadership. Whatever his achievements, this rejection coloured the rest of his career; his initial response was to refuse nomination as deputy chairman of the PLP. For the remainder of the decade Morrison placed the LCC as his first priority. 
As international crises increasingly dominated political debate, Morrison's national contribution became less distinctive. He travelled widely in the 1930s, but unlike his views on many domestic questions his line on international issues tended to reiterate conventional party themes. He favoured collective security through the League of Nations; with the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia in late 1938 he had to rethink the feasibility of this position. On the narrower question of whether the PLP should continue to oppose the National Government's defence estimates Morrison's reluctance to abandon his position put him at odds with his enemy Bevin and his previously supportive senior colleague, Dalton. 
Morrison's significant contribution to wartime politics began in May 1940. He intervened in the crucial parliamentary debate on the failure of the Norwegian expedition, widening the indictment to a general criticism of the government's policy on the war. His criticism included a statement that the Labour Party would divide the house. The resulting vote, with Conservative rebels joining Labour or abstaining, meant the end of the Chamberlain government and the formation of the Churchill coalition. In all probability Morrison took the initiative in this parliamentary strategy within the PLP leadership; however, in the subsequent negotiations to construct a coalition Morrison was a peripheral figure. 
Labour's entry into the coalition meant Morrison's return to government office and his effective farewell to the LCC; initially he was minister of supply. His time there was brief and assessments of his performance vary. As an organizer of his department and as a publicist he was predictably effective; but interdepartmental wrangles undermined attempts to organize raw materials and labour. One sympathetic observer felt that Morrison lacked the required sensitivity towards economic questions. His earlier achievements had not involved the need for a sophisticated appreciation of economic complexities and arguably this appointment did not capitalize on his strengths. 
At the beginning of October 1940, in the context of the blitz and the feared social disintegration of British cities, Morrison was appointed home secretary. He held the post until the end of the coalition in May 1945, and entered the war cabinet in November 1942. This department was ideal for him. His relatively weak areas were irrelevant; the skills, techniques, and flair evident at the LCC were transferred effectively to a more extensive brief. He responded to the blitz with administrative flair and with a sensitive grasp of popular feelings. His visits to devastated cities, his responsiveness to local needs, and his characteristically careful discussions with officials produced new policies for civil defence and a radical reorganization of fire services, with control passing from local authorities to the Home Office. 
Inevitably Morrison had to resolve conflicting pressures over civil liberties questions. In general he was a force for liberalism against Churchill's sporadic demands for more control of the press, though he banned the communist 'Daily Worker' and the politically similar 'The Week' in January 1941. The ban on the 'Daily Worker' remained until August 1942, more than a year after the German invasion of the Soviet Union. The most significant challenge on a civil liberties issue came, however, because of Morrison's allegedly excessive liberalism. In November 1943 he released from detention, on medical grounds, the leader of the British Union of Fascists, Sir Oswald Mosley. Protests came not just from communists and the Labour left, but also from the Labour Party's NEC and the TUC general council. Morrison won the vote in the Commons, but there was abundant evidence of dissatisfaction within the PLP. 
This controversy exemplified a persistent problem for senior Labour figures within the coalition. Their commitment to winning the war entailed a loyalty to their Conservative colleagues; but this was combined no doubt with awareness that their individual performances, not least that of Morrison, were strengthening belief in the competence of Labour. Yet they also had to contend with a PLP and a party in the country that feared loss of party identity through involvement in the coalition. This danger seemed the more serious since there was abundant evidence that popular sentiment was moving to the left. Frequently Morrison acted as a conciliator, arguing against those who claimed that Labour ministers were neglecting to exploit their indispensability to win progressive measures from the coalition. His most praised intervention, in February 1943, ironically failed to prevent a widespread PLP revolt against the discouraging coalition response to the Beveridge proposals on social security. 
Morrison's credibility as a ministerial troubleshooter was enhanced by his continuing commitment to party activities. He remained an assiduous attender at the NEC and its sub-committees and demonstrated eagerness to discuss the content of post-war reconstruction. Once again there appeared a central theme in Morrison's politics: the hope of a consensual basis for incremental progress towards socialism. That advance would involve significant elements of public ownership. 
This combination of ministerial success and principled and persuasive partisanship suggested that Morrison's claims to the Labour Party leadership were strengthening. However, the party conference of 1943 underlined for Morrison the limits to his support. The party treasurership had become vacant. This was a post elected by the whole of the party conference; significant trade union support was therefore essential. Morrison stood and was opposed by Arthur Greenwood, now widely recognized as in significant decline. A third candidate, William Glenvil Hall, had the benefit of the Miners' substantial vote, but little else. The unions were divided; Bevin's Transport Workers predictably provided the nucleus of Greenwood's support. Greenwood, the genial 'has-been', defeated the consummate politician on a minority vote. 
Nevertheless Morrison's role in the preparations for a post-war election was indispensable. He chaired both the campaign and policy committees and produced the initial draft of what became the election manifesto, 'Let us Face the Future'. His belief that Labour must appeal to progressive and useful people of all classes was expressed in his decision to leave South Hackney and move his candidacy to suburban East Lewisham. This seat had never been won by Labour; it was close to Morrison's home at Eltham and typified perhaps a social milieu in which Morrison felt particularly comfortable. His switch and his underlying expectations were justified by a majority of over 15,000 at the general election of 1945. 
The election of the first majority Labour government brought an immediate attempt by Morrison to supplant Attlee. He argued for a leadership election by the new PLP, citing constitutional reforms made in the aftermath of the 1931 split. Given Labour's victory under a leader who had held the post for almost a decade, the ploy was doomed to fail. Indeed, whenever the party leadership was his concern, Morrison's political touch seemed to desert him; such manoeuvres served only to deepen the image of him as a conspirator among those who distrusted him. One of Attlee's qualities as a leader, was a magnanimity that allowed him to reward talent whatever the personal issues. Morrison emerged from the post-election allocation of offices with the lord presidency of the council (28 July 1945), a supremo on the home front. He was also deputy prime minister and presided over the cabinet whenever Attlee was absent. 
Morrison played a pivotal role in implementing the government's extensive domestic programme. He co-ordinated the passage of contentious bills through the Commons; as leader of the house he also had good relations with a Conservative opposition that recovered from the shock of defeat and resolved to contest government legislation vigorously. Respect for Commons procedures was combined with a desire to fulfil heavy legislative commitments; at the start of the new parliament the Labour majority endorsed Morrison's proposal that the government should take over all private members' time. 
The skills demonstrated by Morrison were those central to his success on the LCC and now transferred to a national reform programme. Similarly Morrison spent much time responding to the concerns of a PLP which contained many new members, much idealism, and a significant number who positioned themselves on the Labour left. A liaison committee, with Morrison as the leading figure, facilitated communication between ministers and back-benchers. The government's large majority posed the problem of tasks for potentially bored back-benchers; Morrison responded with the introduction of policy groups, an experiment whose success varied with the topic and relevant ministers' support or lack of enthusiasm. Above all Morrison instituted a relatively liberal disciplinary regime with sanctions reserved for the most serious offences. Morrison's style, a broader ethos of loyalty, and the government's record combined to produce a more harmonious and generally more tolerant PLP than that of 1929-31. 
One further initial responsibility posed more problems for Morrison. Charged with the co-ordination of economic planning, and armed with planning machinery inherited from the war, most observers felt that -- as at the Ministry of Supply -- he lacked a subtle appreciation of economic factors. Attlee, at a nadir in the government's fortunes, claimed that Morrison read out 'briefs in Cabinet without really understanding them' ('Political Diary of Hugh Dalton', 413, mid-Sept 1947). A sympathetic civil servant felt that his mastery of economic detail and of the broader arguments was solid but that a deeper feel for the subject was lacking. Moreover the planning machinery was complex and fragmented, and defied Morrison's attempts at rationalization. 
The year 1947 was critical for the government. A harsh winter and coal shortages led to industrial dislocation; the convertibility of sterling against the dollar introduced in mid-July precipitated a financial crisis and the rapid suspension of convertibility. From January to June serious illness removed Morrison from decision making; the summer economic crisis, which raised fears of another 1931, produced conspiratorial conversations among senior ministers. Cripps, Morrison, and Dalton felt that Attlee was indecisive and should be replaced, although predictably they differed as to the appropriate replacement. Bevin, preferred by Cripps, was not prepared to replace Attlee, and was anathema to Morrison. The latter naturally felt that he was the best replacement. Attlee's response demonstrated the skill that had maintained his position for so long. Cripps was strongly critical of Morrison's grasp of economic issues. Attlee successfully offered Cripps a new and senior post in charge of economic planning. Morrison found his responsibilities curtailed, admittedly to those areas where he was most effective. Once again when the party leadership was under discussion -- this time among a very small circle of senior ministers -- Morrison was not viewed as the obvious successor. 
More congenially Morrison had charge of the government's nationalization programme. Predictably these years witnessed the triumph of the public corporation. The nationalization of public utilities was uncontentious within the Labour Party. Some viewed each individual measure as economically justifiable on its own merits; others emphasized their collective contribution to the realization of a socialist commonwealth. In contrast the iron and steel industry was a controversial candidate; Morrison was dubious about its merits, and in 1946 several within the cabinet wished to defer nationalization. The cabinet returned to the issue concurrently with the 1947 economic crisis; Morrison favoured a compromise -- public supervision of the industry but not full-scale public ownership. The deal had been negotiated by Morrison in conjunction with the industry and had the support of the steelworkers' trade union. Cabinet arguments resulted in the defeat of Morrison's scheme and led eventually to a long-running parliamentary struggle over a nationalization bill. On this issue Morrison found himself opposed by senior cabinet colleagues and out of step with dominant sentiments within the PLP. For many a firm line on iron and steel demonstrated a continuing commitment to socialist transformation. 
Morrison took particular pride in the legislative achievements of the 1945 parliament; his political skills were utilized to their best advantage. He loved the negotiations between ministers over priorities and the give and take of the bargaining with the opposition. Meticulous attention to detail cohabited with a broader vision. At one level this emphasized efficiency. Morrison insisted that the government's implementation of his programme showed that 'Parliament could be a workshop as well as discharging its necessary functions as a talk-shop' (H.S. Morrison, 'Government and Parliament', 2nd edn, 1959, p. 244). Moreover Labour's election manifesto of 1945 had proclaimed the party's commitment to a socialist commonwealth. In the aftermath of the 1931 collapse some on the Labour left had asked, 'Can socialism come by constitutional means?' For Morrison the record of the first majority Labour government provided a conclusive answer. 
The fidelity with which Labour had carried out its domestic agenda required the party to develop a new programme for the forthcoming election. Morrison's positions in government and party ensured that he played a central role. The challenge was not just that the programme which he and others had developed in the 1930s had been largely achieved; it was that the link between those measures and the advance to socialism had become tenuous. Full employment and a much more extensive welfare system appeared to meet many of the labour movement's central ambitions; but Britain in the late 1940s was clearly not socialist. The party could choose to rest largely content with these achievements, or to promote measures intended as the next stage of the transition to socialism. 
Morrison's response was at one level a compromise, but it also became characterized as the slogan of the Labour right: a second term must be one of 'consolidation'. Further nationalization measures should be at best limited; instead, the emphasis should be on improving the existing public sector. 'Consolidation' was an appropriate priority for someone concerned with administrative efficiency; Morrison also believed that his approach could help to retain the relatively broad social base of Labour's 1945 victory. His approach became a benchmark of a lengthy left-right dispute over public ownership. Yet the term 'consolidation' did not imply abandonment of any commitment to socialist transformation, and it remains unclear how far Morrison ever relinquished the basic objective of replacing capitalism by socialism through an accumulation of specific reforms. What is apparent is that by the late 1940s he was in significant respects an increasingly conservative figure, who had been in senior ministerial positions for a demanding decade, and had seen many of his political objectives achieved. The balance of radicalism and consensus that had characterized his politics from the 1920s had tilted away from radicalism. 
The Labour Party fought the general election of 1950 on a compromise platform that included a few candidates for public ownership. Morrison was returned comfortably in his redistributed seat, renamed South Lewisham, but Labour lost considerable support in south-eastern England while maintaining its strength in the older industrial areas. Morrison's concern about Labour's electoral base was thus confirmed, although the loss of such support probably owed far more to the government's austerity policies than to any unhappiness with proposals for more public ownership. Predictably, however, Morrison, who remained as lord president of the council in Attlee's government, continued through election post-mortems to insist on the need for 'consolidation'. Doubts and divisions about the future direction of Labour policy became focused narrowly on the issue of public ownership. 
Whatever the doubts about future policy, Morrison's touch within the Commons and the PLP enabled him to cope effectively with the reduction of Labour's majority to six. The physical decline of other leading ministers increased his eminence; however, a third leadership generation was beginning to emerge as Hugh Gaitskell became chancellor of the exchequer in succession to Cripps in October 1950. Morrison ruled himself out as an alternative chancellor -- 'I listen to Stafford explaining those figures, and I just know I could not do it' (Donoughue and Jones, 466). Yet Gaitskell's only budget in April 1951 precipitated the most divisive crisis of the Attlee government: Aneurin Bevan, Harold Wilson, and John Freeman resigned from the government specifically over National Health Service charges and rearmament expenditure, but in Bevan's case at least also over the government's alleged departure from socialist rectitude. Bevan's explosive exit was directed not just against Gaitskell's budget, but in effect against Morrison's emphasis on 'consolidation'; it scarred the Labour Party for over a decade. Attlee was ill and Morrison chaired the critical cabinet meetings without securing a compromise. There was little evidence of those managerial skills that had marked his successes on the LCC and in the Commons. Some felt that his own political sympathy for Gaitskell prevented him from seriously seeking a settlement. Yet there seemed little desire for compromise by the principal protagonists. The political cohesion that Morrison had nourished since 1945 was disintegrating. 
The government's crises were compounded by international pressures. With the resignation of Ernest Bevin in March 1951, Morrison became foreign secretary (12 March 1951), attracted perhaps by the status of the post, but it took him into a field remote from his expertise and skills. Once again a concern with his credibility as potential leader might have been decisive. Yet his seven months at the Foreign Office damaged his reputation. Critics blended reasoned assessments of Morrison's capabilities with snobbish references to Morrison's style, pronunciation of foreign place names, and lack of 'background'. As with economics, Morrison's touch often seemed unsure. International developments could not be moulded into his favoured rational structures. Characterizations of him as parochial seemed vindicated when he spent more time on the Festival of Britain on London's south bank than on his departmental affairs. These involved serious challenges particularly in Iran, where Dr Mossadeq nationalized British oil interests and Morrison raised the prospect of military action. This one-time opponent of capitalist war was now characterized by a cabinet colleague as 'rather a fire eater' ('Diary of Hugh Gaitskell', 11 May 1951). His interventionist views were not endorsed by most of his cabinet colleagues; the limits of Britain's claim to great power status were already evident. 
Along with senior cabinet colleagues Morrison had evinced a blend of scepticism and hostility towards the first moves for European co-operation. His concerns were fed in part by domestic political considerations. Confronted by the Schuman Plan for a European Coal and Steel Community in May 1950, his alleged response was that 'the Durham miners won't wear it' (Donoughue and Jones, 481). His pride in British political institutions also fuelled his distaste for any proposal that hinted at supranational erosion of parliamentary sovereignty. As foreign secretary his position mellowed -- at least on defence, where cold war pressures forced west European co-operation. 
The narrowness of Labour's electoral defeat in October 1951 suggested the feasibility of an early return to office. However, the party was riven by factionalism resulting from the Bevanite resignations and the associated and often confused debates about policy and strategy. Morrison remained deputy leader; he still hoped to succeed Attlee, and played a vigorous role in factional battles. Once away from international affairs, his speeches inside and outside parliament regained much of their quality. Yet gradually his position within the party was undermined. In October 1952 a shift to the left among party activists was demonstrated when a Bevanite slate made an advance in the elections to the constituency party section of the NEC. The victims were senior figures, Hugh Dalton and Morrison, who lost their places. 
Morrison was then taken up as their political champion by some trade union leaders who wished to block the Bevanite left and found Attlee lacking in determination and firmness. The consequence of this support was damaging for Morrison. His trade union backers wished to organize his return to the NEC. The only option for this strategy was the party treasurership occupied by the increasingly ineffective and ailing Arthur Greenwood, an incumbency that had begun with his defeat of Morrison in 1943. The attempt to remove Greenwood produced significant sympathy for him. Morrison could be portrayed as the insensitive instrument of authoritarian trade union leaders; on the eve of the party conference in 1953 he withdrew his candidacy. An amendment to the party constitution brought him onto the NEC as deputy leader. Some right-wing trade union leaders began to shift their backing from Morrison to Gaitskell. The former's hesitancy and withdrawal had fed doubts about his willingness to deal firmly with the left. Gaitskell showed no such inhibitions. 
Morrison remained for many the most credible successor to Attlee, but a gradual erosion of his support became terminal in the second half of 1955. A second election defeat eroded hopes of a quick return to office. The issue of Morrison's age became more salient as the party began slowly to consider a more thorough reassessment of its policies. It seemed that Attlee, born in 1883, would be better followed by Gaitskell, born in 1907, rather than by Morrison. The latter's parliamentary performances also deteriorated, reinforcing the claim that he was a declining force. Arguably Attlee remained leader until he felt that Morrison's prospects had been destroyed. If so then his judgement was sound. The contest for his successor in December 1955 signalled the end of Morrison's hopes. Long-standing supporters of Morrison shifted to Gaitskell, and Bevan had the backing of the left. The first ballot was decisive -- Gaitskell 157, Bevan 70, Morrison 40. Arguably the election of Gaitskell indicated more than the arrival of a new leadership generation. Whereas Morrison in all probability retained a basic belief that cumulative reforms would transform capitalism into socialism, Gaitskell and his closest supporters understood socialism as the more thorough realization of appropriate values. Yet Gaitskell's subsequent difficulties showed that many within the party, not least on the right, remained attached to older expectations. But Morrison's involvement in subsequent controversies was minimal. A quest for the leadership over two decades had ended in humiliation. Morrison resigned the deputy leadership and moved to the back benches. His interventions were few, and he retired from the Commons in 1959. 
Despite his earlier opposition to the unreformed House of Lords, Morrison took one of the recently introduced life peerages and went to the upper house as Baron Morrison of Lambeth (November 1959). He was an active peer, and from 1960 served as president of the British Board of Film Censors. His last political battle was in opposition to the Conservative government's plan to replace the LCC with a greater London council. He died in Queen Mary's Hospital, Sidcup, Kent, on 6 March 1965. He was cremated at Eltham on 11 March and the ashes were spread on the Thames at County Hall. The London county council which had been the arena for some of his greatest achievements disappeared less than a month later. 
Morrison was a massive asset to the Labour Party. Pugnacious and reasonable, indulging in knockabout partisanship and seeking broad agreement on specific reforms, he was a commanding presence in parliament and Labour Party institutions for over thirty years. As a minister he had major successes at transport and the Home Office and as lord president of the council. His periods at supply, in charge of post-war economic planning, and above all the Foreign Office were less successful. His ministerial talents were limited, but within their range they were outstanding. As a party organizer his skills were widely acknowledged; while intolerant of communists and their sympathizers, he was not a crude authoritarian. His managerial style combined bonhomie, discussion, the calculated use of threats, and the effective interpretation of party rules. Above all his record in London politics greatly enhanced Labour's administrative credibility and brought significant benefits to the people. His style was characterized often as that of the archetypal Cockney -- self-confident, humorous, a deflator of pretence. The portrait owed as much to social considerations as to geography. Morrison was thoroughly incorruptible. His tastes were essentially those of the south London lower middle class among whom he lived. Political concerns relegated all else to the sidelines. Suits bought from the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society were worn not for style, but for their pockets which provided a home for the papers that Morrison's politicking inevitably attracted. His quiff, spectacles, and taste in bow ties provided the raw material for countless political cartoons. 
Beyond the achievements and the homespun image lay complexities. Morrison's later career was damaged not least for himself by his failure to secure the party leadership. Perhaps he lacked the toughness needed to grasp opportunities. Certainly his failures suggested that his support within the party was limited. This was not just the visceral contempt of Bevin. Arguably he suffered from his distinctive route to the party's ruling group. Many of his contemporaries had risen through the trade unions; others were from the middle class, with the educational background that Morrison lacked. He was almost unique within his generation of leaders in having a working-class background and a social mobility provided solely by the party. It probably did not help that his closest counterpart in this respect in the preceding generation was Ramsay MacDonald. Such distinctiveness could lead to the criticism that he was simply a party boss, a fixer with no wider interests. This was unfair. Although his years of extensive reading predated the First World War, he remained interested in ideas. In particular his time at the Ministry of Transport and his long-standing involvement in party policy making demonstrated his concern not just with the detail of reforms, but with a broader vision of social change. As a result he gained respect from intellectuals such as Harold Laski who disagreed with him on specific policies. 
Morrison's life was dedicated thoroughly to politics. This could appear dubious to many colleagues and fed unreasonable claims that Morrison lacked depth. The preoccupation indicated tensions in his personality. The marginal youth had sought comradeship in the socialist movement. His marriage on 15 March 1919 to Margaret Kent (1896-1953), a secretary and daughter of a railway clerk, was not a success. Morrison spent little time with his wife and their daughter. His wife did not share his political enthusiasms; his private world withered. Following her death in July 1953, he married Edith Meadowcroft ('b'. 'c'.1908) of Rochdale. This marriage on 6 January 1955 to a businesswoman of Conservative politics appeared much more successful; but by then his career was in decline. 
The complexities within Morrison's politics and personality are evident in his published writings. 'Socialisation and Transport', published in 1933, is a lucid and knowledgeable analysis involving a reasoned defence of the public corporation. This was Morrison the sagacious yet creative reformer. Perhaps significantly the subtitle is 'the organisation of socialised industries with particular reference to the 'London Passenger Transport Bill''. Twenty-one years later Morrison published 'Government and Parliament'. This was the product of his visits to Nuffield College, Oxford. His drafts were revised by the warden of Nuffield, D. N. Chester. The result was an accessible and authoritative book on British government which was widely read. The subtitle, 'a survey from the inside', was not a harbinger of sensational disclosures nor heterodox views. Instead Morrison celebrated British exceptionalism in a resolutely empiricist style. 'The fact that the House of Lords has many irrational features is not in itself fatal in British eyes, for we have a considerable capacity for making the irrational work' (H.S. Morrison, 'Government and Parliament', 2nd edn, 1959, 194). This was Morrison the seeker after consensus, whose radicalism was giving way to conservatism. 
The book can be located within a very specific context. Morrison and his Labour Party contemporaries had never shown much interest in constitutional reform; for them economic and social questions provided the real business of politics. Moreover the record of the Attlee government suggested that existing institutions could be used effectively by a reforming administration. In the early 1950s few raised questions about the failings of British government. Within a decade the mood would be very different. 
Finally in 1960 Morrison published his 'Autobiography', the product of an unsatisfactory relationship with a ghost writer, F. G. Kay. The book was marked by the legacy of Morrison's failure to become party leader. His family were largely, and in the case of his first wife and daughter wholly, invisible. On critical moments in his career the text was laconic and misleading. This was the insecure Morrison behind the public style and the achievements. 
Morrison should be located in historical context. As with other socialists of Labour's second generation, his ideas were largely formed at a time when Britain's great power status seemed assured, but problems of modernization were increasingly evident. For him, as for many contemporaries, socialist solutions implemented through British institutions seemed feasible and desirable. Morrison justified his agenda with the belief that the resulting society would be more efficient and fairer; yet it would retain the best of past practices. The reforms would strengthen an ethic of public service and could be characterized as early steps in a socialist transformation. Morrison's achievements in office, especially at the London county council, and in government from 1945 to 1950, marked the apotheosis of this strategy. 


@@@@@


doc= 35122


Morrison, Walter (1836-1921), businessman, politician, and benefactor, was born in London on 21 May 1836, the fifth son of James Morrison (1789-1857), of the firm of Morrison, Dillon, & Co., and his wife, Mary (died 1887), daughter of John Todd, of the same firm. Walter Morrison inherited a share, which grew considerably during his own lifetime, of his father's vast fortune made in wholesale textiles, drapery, and haberdashery during the Napoleonic wars and later expanded through merchant banking and judicious investment in North America. He was educated at Eton College and at Balliol College, Oxford, where, like two of his brothers, he became a redoubtable oar, and gained a first-class degree. The mental and physical vigour shown in his youth was maintained throughout a long life. 
Morrison left Oxford in 1858, made a 'grand tour', which included Egypt, Palestine, and the United States, and entered the House of Commons in 1861 as Liberal member for Plymouth. He held that seat until the Liberal debacle of 1874, stood unsuccessfully for the City of London in 1880, parted from Gladstone over his Irish programme, and twice subsequently (1886-92 and 1895-1900) represented, as a Liberal Unionist, the Skipton division of Yorkshire, in which his home was situated. He finally retired from candidature in 1900 after a broken career in parliament extending over nearly forty years. It was a career, however, which was neither conspicuous nor, in all probability, congenial. 
A man of strong convictions and great independence, but neither an orator nor an ambitious politician, Morrison was never at any period an enthusiastic party man. In his early Liberal days his interests were largely centred on the co-operative movement for improving working-class dwellings. In the years following his break with Gladstone all his energies and resources were thrown into opposing home rule for Ireland. 
Morrison's intermittent absorption in politics did not keep him from a careful stewardship both of his private fortune and of the various business interests from which it arose. In particular he joined in 1874 the board of the Central Argentine Railway, in which his family possessed a large stake, became its chairman in 1887, and soon afterwards paid a protracted visit to South America which resulted in an elaborate report and the eventual absorption of the Buenos Aires and Rosario line. To the end of his life his portfolio included an unusually large holding in this company. The British Aluminium Company, in which his brother Charles was the largest investor, also stood out from the pack, as did a politically inspired investment in the Sligo, Leitrim, and Northern Counties Railway. These exceptional holdings had a nominal value of $149,000, $112,287, and $93,489 respectively. He was also director of a number of local concerns and chairman of the Craven Bank, travelling constantly between London and Yorkshire in discharge of these duties. His wealth grew partly by inheritance from a childless brother and sister who died before him, and partly through the simplicity of his personal tastes. At his death, his stocks and shares amounted to a nominal $3.5 million in several hundred companies located mainly in Britain (54 per cent) and Latin America (16 per cent). 
Despite all his miscellaneous interests, a remarkably large part of Morrison's time was spent at Malham Tarn, the wild moorland estate in Craven which had been acquired for him when he came of age, from the Listers of Gisburn. Here he indulged his love of walking, of folklore, and of local leadership. Always something of an aloof and self-centred figure, he played host at Malham to a number of eminent Victorians, including Henry Fawcett, John Ruskin, Charles Darwin, John Stuart Mill, Sir William Harcourt, and especially Charles Kingsley. As his guests, they witnessed numerous innocent eccentricities. These included a refusal to imbibe the wines of imperial France (he instead placed republican chianti on his dining table); the substitution of blue crockery for yellow following his break with Gladstone; and a smoking room papered with 6 inch Ordnance Survey sheets of the surrounding countryside to prevent the servants from tidying them away. It was at Malham Cove, below the house, that Kingsley had the idea of 'The Water Babies', and Walter Morrison was his 'Squire'. 
At Malham, away from the glare of publicity, Morrison planned his benefactions. He played a considerable part in the development of the northern universities -- a single anonymous gift of $10,000 to the new school of agriculture at Leeds was revealed almost by accident after his death. For Giggleswick School, where he was chairman of the governors for many years, he built and furnished down to the smallest detail, in celebration of Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee, that remarkable 'chapel with a dome' which was the expression both of his lifelong interest in oriental architecture and of his personal predilections in English history. The pews, of wood from the Argentine province of Tucuman, bore witness to a major source of his wealth. The windows of the clerestory display his judgement of English history and politics, placing Arnold, Livingstone, and Gordon alongside such older figures as Wykeham, Columba, and King Alfred. He supported Lord Roberts's campaign for national service; for some years he made an annual contribution of $10,000 to King Edward's Hospital Fund, and contributed to innumerable relief funds during both the South African and the European wars. He was a founder of the Palestine Exploration Fund, a society dedicated, in the words of the archbishop of York, to the rescue of Palestinian history 'from darkness and oblivion', and regarded himself in that connection as the 'discoverer' of Kitchener. His gift of $15,000 funded the Hittite excavations at Carchemish undertaken by the British Museum, and underpinned the short-lived Society of Biblical Archaeology. 
Towards the end of his life Oxford University became the special object of Morrison's benefactions. Fired perhaps by his experience at Giggleswick, he offered to rebuild the new chapel at Balliol College on the lines of the old, which he greatly preferred; on the rejection of this somewhat startling proposal, he gave $30,000 to the university to support a readership in Egyptology, a professorial pension fund, and the study of agriculture. Finally, in 1920, he endowed the Bodleian Library with a single payment of $50,000, which placed him among its chief benefactors. The honorary degree of DCL, which was conferred upon him in the following year, was the only public recognition which he received, or indeed would have valued. He died at Sidmouth, Devon, on 18 December 1921, and was buried at Kirkby Malham. Morrison left an estate with a gross value of $2 million, the greater part of which passed to his nephew, James Archibald Morrison. 


@@@@@


doc= 35123


Morrison, William Shepherd, first Viscount Dunrossil (1893-1961), speaker of the House of Commons and governor-general of Australia, was born at Torinturk, Argyll, on 10 August 1893, the sixth son of John Morrison ('b'. 1842), who had been a diamond prospector in South Africa before settling as a farmer at Torinturk, and his wife, Marion, daughter of Ronald McVicar, of North Uist. He was educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and in 1912 entered Edinburgh University, where he obtained his MA in 1920. His studies were interrupted by distinguished service in France in the First World War: he reached the rank of captain in the Royal Field Artillery, was wounded, and was awarded the Military Cross. He married on 22 April 1924 Katherine Allison (died 1983), daughter of the Revd William Swan, minister of South Leith parish. She was herself an Edinburgh graduate and was then reading for the bar; she was called by the Inner Temple in 1926. They had four sons, the eldest being John William Morrison, the diplomat. 
Morrison, like others of the trenches generation, sought public life in order to repay some of the comradeship experienced in wartime, and determined on the law as the prelude to politics. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1923 on the advice of two established Scottish Conservatives, Sir Robert Horne and the duchess of Atholl. In spite of these connections, he did not have an easy start and was defeated candidate in 1923 and 1924 in the difficult Western Isles. Though a man proud of his Scottish birth, accent, and skill in Gaelic, he had to go south to Cirencester and Tewkesbury to find a winnable seat. He was elected there in 1929 but then easily held it for thirty years. 
Morrison had acquired the nickname Shakespeare, or more often Shakes (Bernard Shaw's abbreviation of Shakespeare's name), because he had not only a deep love of Shakespeare's verse, from which he could quote extensively, but something of the playwright's way with words too. His speaking skills and striking appearance, a shock of early white hair overhanging black eyebrows and deep-set eyes, ensured that he quickly acquired the attention of the house, and the broad admiration for him on the Conservative side led to his election as only the second chairman of the 1922 committee in 1932 in a contested election against the committee's founder. Sir Gervase Rentoul had of late been dividing members by his high-handed attitude and now bitterly remarked that Morrison won 'partly because he was regarded as a neutral, having hardly ever attended a meeting of the Committee, or taken any part in its struggles or activities' (Goodhart, 60). The '1922' was in 1932 only a shadow of what it later became, but this was an early achievement, and his four years as chairman were an important phase in the committee's development. He was not 'an energetic innovator' but he 'guided the Committee with distinction through a difficult period of transition' (ibid., 74). 
Alongside politics, Morrison continued his legal career, which had begun as secretary to Thomas Inskip, the solicitor-general, taking silk in 1934 and becoming recorder of Walsall in 1935. In November 1935 his political career took off and then accelerated quickly, with appointment as financial secretary to the Treasury. In the following October he reached the cabinet as minister of agriculture and fisheries, and was sworn of the privy council in 1936. Unfortunately he was not successful either in dealing with the intractable agricultural depression, or in raising the morale of the farming community. As the European situation deteriorated he attracted criticism for refusing to prepare agriculture for war, arguing that to do so would injure the industry further, and unnecessarily so since war was not in his view inevitable. In much of this he was typical of the government in which he served, and paid the same penalty as others when war came and found them unready in 1939. On wider issues, Morrison was critical of appeasement, but ineffectively so, and his decision not to resign over Munich, if indeed he ever seriously considered it, weakened his influence further. Neville Chamberlain considered him one of the 'weaker brethren' in his team, and demoted him in January 1939 to the non-departmental duchy of Lancaster. This was combined for a few early months of wartime with the new Ministry of Food, but in April 1940 he moved to the non-cabinet post of postmaster-general, a backwater in wartime, and when Churchill became premier a month later he left Morrison there, though even the Chamberlainite chief whip Margesson wanted him sacked altogether as a manifest failure. 
Morrison's final ministerial post came when made first minister of town and country planning in February 1943, with a brief to implement the Uthwatt report. He piloted through parliament the 'Town and Country Planning Act' (1943), a milestone in legislation for building control, but though he had had little to do with its gestation he was caught in the crossfire between Labour MPs who wanted more intervention and Conservatives who wanted none at all, at least during a party truce. He sadly confessed to Hugh Dalton in November 1943 that he was 'having rows all round just now' ('War Diary', 663). When Churchill briefly formed a caretaker government with a full quota of Conservative ministers in May 1945, he left Morrison at the Ministry of Town and Country Planning and offered him no cabinet seat, and he carried on until Labour swept into office two months later. It was remarkable how rapidly Morrison's ministerial career waxed and waned. 'Chips' Channon, a friend of Morrison but an astute taker of political temperatures, noted in January 1943 that though 'once the hope of enlightened Tory England', he was 'now an amiable white-headed boy taken seriously by nobody'. By March 1945 Morrison was 'a ghost of his former self. He has lost all but the vaguest vestiges of power' ('Chips', ed. James, 349, 389). 
In the Conservative opposition after 1945, Morrison occasionally attended shadow cabinets, but took no active part in the work of the opposition. When not away pursuing his legal career he was more often seen sleeping in the library than speaking in the chamber. Through an intervention by Churchill, however, he suddenly re-emerged into the limelight in October 1951 when persuaded to stand for the vacant speakership. For the first time since 1895 the speaker's election was contested and went to a vote, for many Labour MPs were not happy to support a former minister with no experience of chairing the house. Morrison was elected on a mainly party vote, but rapidly established his authority, and was unanimously re-elected speaker in 1955. He used his rich voice, wit, and Scottish accent to considerable effect, jollying the house along with the frequent plea that 'We must get on', but exhibiting exemplary firmness. This was certainly the case during the Suez debates of 1956, when he had frequently to urge restraint on hot-headed MPs and on one occasion was obliged to adjourn the house altogether so that tempers could cool. He was generally thought to have done this difficult job very well indeed. 

'Physically he looked the part to perfection, with his towering figure and finely modelled countenance, so fitly framed in the wig. No man wore the habiliments of his office with such elegance. The Speaker's procession, with Morrison's presence to grace it, was a rewarding sight... His patience was wellnigh inexhaustible, and his courtesy, even with bores, was exquisite... To points of order and procedural conundrums he brought a lambent clarity, and his judgements usually commanded acceptance. But in such matters he was always meticulous in acting as one who essentially was the servant of the House. ('The Times', 3 Feb 1961)' Morrison's health was, however, undermined during the long hours and continuous strain of eight years as speaker, and in February 1959 he announced that he would not seek re-election to the house. He last presided over the Commons on 19 September, and was granted at the house's request a viscountcy (November 1959), the speaker's usual title in retirement, and a pension. This latter was soon the subject of controversy when it transpired in November that though leaving through ill health he had almost at once accepted, on the invitation of his friend Robert Menzies, the arduous post of governor-general of Australia, with a salary of $10,000. He arrived in Australia early in 1960, and whole-heartedly threw himself into the post, visiting every state capital within the first few months and embarking on an active social round to introduce himself to ordinary Australians. His health was not up to the exertion, though. He was ordered to rest in September and died suddenly of pulmonary embolism at Government House, Canberra, on 3 February 1961. His eldest son, John William Morrison (1926-2000), succeeded him as Viscount Dunrossil, and Morrison was buried four days later at St John the Baptist Anglican Church, Canberra, with a state funeral and military honours. 


@@@@@


doc= 35124


Morshead, Sir Leslie James (1889-1959), army officer, was born on 18 September 1889 at Ballarat, Victoria, Australia, the fourth son and fifth child of William Morshead, a miner, and his wife, Mary Eliza Rennison. He was educated at Mount Pleasant state school, Ballarat, and the teachers' training college, Melbourne. He taught at the Armidale School, New South Wales, and when war broke out in 1914 was a master at the Melbourne Church of England grammar school. Having been commissioned in the 2nd battalion, 1st Australian Imperial Force, in September 1914, he landed at Anzac Cove, Gallipoli, on 25 April 1915, the first day of the Gallipoli landings, as a captain and second-in-command of a company. He was promoted major in June 1915 but in October he contracted enteric fever and was invalided to Australia. On recovery he was promoted lieutenant-colonel and given command of the new 33rd battalion (part of Major-General John Monash's 3rd division), which he trained in Australia and England and took to France in September 1916. He commanded it until the conclusion of hostilities, leading it with rare distinction at Armentieres, Messines, Passchendaele, Villers-Bretonneux, and along the Somme in the 1918 final offensives. By the end of the war he had been wounded twice, mentioned in dispatches, and received the DSO (1917), CMG (1919), and Legion d'honneur. 
After demobilization Morshead tried sheep farming near Merriwa, New South Wales, but soon joined the staff of the Orient Steam Navigation Company; in 1948 he became its general manager in Australia. In 1921 Morshead married Myrtle, daughter of William Woodside, of Melbourne; they had one daughter. 
Between the wars Morshead combined success in business with continued interest in the citizen military forces. From 1920 to 1931 he commanded citizen force battalions, and in 1933 he was promoted colonel and given command of an infantry brigade. When war broke out in 1939 he was selected to command 18th brigade, one of the first formations raised for overseas service with the 2nd Australian Imperial Force (AIF). In February 1941 he was promoted major-general and given command of the new 9th Australian division. 
Incomplete, ill-equipped, and only partly trained, Morshead's division was sent to Cyrenaica, Libya, in March 1941 to relieve the more experienced 6th division withdrawn for Greece. When the British forces in Cyrenaica were driven back in April 1941 into Tobruk (which had been captured by the Australian 6th division in January 1941) by the sudden onslaught of the Afrika Korps, Morshead became the fortress commander (from 14 April). His resolute leadership quickly welded his motley collection of Australian, British and other troops into an effective fighting force which vigorously fought off Rommel's attempts to capture Tobruk. 
The division was relieved in October 1941 and was recuperating in Syria when the remainder of the AIF was transferred from the Middle East to the Pacific early in 1942. Morshead was promoted lieutenant-general and became general officer commanding (GOC) the AIF in the Middle East. He led his division with distinction at the battles of El Alamein (July and October-November 1942), and then took it to the south-west Pacific area. After a short period in command of New Guinea force (GOC 1943) he commanded the 1st Australian corps (1944) and directed the complicated amphibious operations which resulted in the recapture of Borneo (1945). He was mentioned in dispatches and made CBE (1941), KBE (1942,) and KCB (1942), and was awarded foreign honours. 
Morshead was one of the finest products of the Australian citizen force system of military service. Slight of build, he had a mild facial expression which masked a strong personality, the impact of which, even on first acquaintance, was quickly felt. He was unsparing and outspoken in criticism, yet also quick to commend and praise. Nicknamed 'Ming the Merciless' by his troops, he became just 'Ming' as they learned to appreciate the quality of his leadership, particularly his talents as a battle commander. 
After the war Morshead returned to business pursuits and occupied important positions in Australian commerce and industry: general manager in Australia of the Orient Line and a director of the Bank of New South Wales, Mutual Life and Citizens Assurance Company, Trustees Executors and Agency Company, and the Australian National Airways and Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation. In 1957 the Menzies government appointed Morshead chairman of a high-level committee (the Morshead committee) on the defence departments. It reported in December 1957 and February 1958 and its recommendations included amalgamation of the three service departments with the department of defence. However, most of the recommendations were shelved. Morshead died in Sydney on 26 September 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 35125


Moseley, Henry Gwyn Jeffreys (1887-1915), physicist, the only son of Henry Nottidge Moseley (1844-1891), Linacre professor of anatomy in the University of Oxford, and his wife, Amabel Nevile Gwyn Jeffreys (died 1927), was born at Weymouth on 23 November 1887, and educated at Summerfields School, Oxford (1896-1901), then at Eton College, of which he was a king's scholar, and at Trinity College, Oxford, where he was a Millard scholar, graduating with honours in natural science in 1910. On both sides he was descended from families of great scientific ability. His paternal grandfather, Henry Moseley FRS, was professor of natural philosophy at King's College, London, and his maternal grandfather, John Gwyn Jeffreys FRS, was a specialist on molluscs. Moseley soon showed marked originality of mind and interest in science. As an undergraduate he pursued his studies with great determination, with a preference for his own methods; he also rowed every year for the college. 
Immediately after graduation he was appointed lecturer in physics in the University of Manchester and began research under the direction of Professor Ernest Rutherford. He soon developed into a rapid and skilful experimenter with unusual powers of continuous work, and showed to a marked degree that combination of practical ability and philosophic insight so necessary for attacking new and difficult problems. Following a number of important investigations in the subject of radioactivity Moseley began, with C. G. Darwin (grandson of Charles Darwin), that work on the X-ray spectra of the elements with which his name is inseparably connected. Following up the demonstration of X-ray diffraction by Max von Laue, W. H. Bragg, and W. L. Bragg had already shown that the wavelength of X-rays could be determined by the crystal method, and had found evidence of bright lines superimposed on the continuous spectrum. Moseley's fellowship having expired, he returned to Oxford to live with his mother and to be on the spot should a position open in the university. He continued his work in the electrical laboratory directed by J. S. Townsend. There he examined systematically the relation between the bright line X-ray spectra given by different elements; he found that all the elements gave similar types of spectra, and that the frequency of vibration of corresponding lines was proportional to the square of a number 'M' which varied by unity in passing from one element to the next. From these observations, he was able to draw conclusions of far-reaching importance in connection with the constitution of atoms. 
Shortly before Moseley began his survey of the high frequency spectra of the elements Rutherford had revived the nuclear model of the atom in which the charge 'Z' on the nucleus, rather than the number of electrons orbiting around it, determined the character of the atom. Rutherford's theory of the scattering of alpha particles, on which he had based his atomic model, required that 'Z' = 2 for helium and 'Z' &asymp; 'A'/2 for heavy metals, where 'A' is the atomic weight of the metal, counting hydrogen's weight as one. Moseley knew these results, which were obtained during his time at Manchester, and he supposed that his 'M' was related to Rutherford's 'Z'. Since 'Z' for helium had to be two, 'Z' for hydrogen evidently was one. Examining the X-ray spectra from the metals from copper through calcium, Moseley determined that the ordinal number 'N' of their place in the periodic table of the elements differed by one unit from 'M', making irresistible the inference 'M' + 1 = 'N' = 'Z'. On this understanding he called the roll of the elements: if he could not find a specimen that emitted spectra characterized by a given value of 'M' he inferred that the corresponding element had not been discovered and kept a place open for it at 'N' = 'M' + 1. After a few erroneous assignments resulting from haste and the difficulty of procuring rare samples and handling their radiations, he deduced that four elements were missing between aluminium ('N' = 13) and gold ('N' = 79), at 'N' = 43, 61, 72, and 75. In this he was almost right; but accepting the opinion of many chemists, he incorrectly identified 72 as a rare earth. Numbers 72 and 75 soon were found in ores of their chemical homologues, zirconium and manganese respectively; the first and second numbers (43 and 61), which do not exist naturally, were first made in a cyclotron and in a nuclear pile, respectively. Moseley's law that an element's main properties are determined by a whole number defining its nuclear charge ranks in importance with the discoveries of the periodic law of the elements and of spectrum analysis, and is in many respects more fundamental than either. 
The difference of one unit between 'M' and 'N' = 'Z' naturally aroused great interest. Moseley explained that the effective nuclear charge acting on the electrons that he held responsible for the production of the line spectra was less than 'Z' owing to screening by electrons closer to the nucleus. He tried to derive a screening of one unit from the quantized version of the nuclear atom that Niels Bohr had proposed during Moseley's last year in Manchester. His ingenious attempt to show that 'Z'eff = 'M', though premature, was later justified when the mechanisms of X-ray emission on the Bohr theory were worked out. 
In 1914 Moseley travelled with his mother to Australia to attend the meeting of the British Association. He returned to England in order to enlist at once in the New Army, and he obtained his commission as lieutenant in the Royal Engineers. He took part in the Gallipoli campaign, and was killed in action in the Dardanelles on 10 August 1915 at the age of twenty-seven. He was buried at Gallipoli. He was unmarried and had no girlfriend; he found his satisfaction in intense and continuous work, which allowed him to complete during two years at the outset of his career a set of researches that would surely have brought him a Nobel prize. The premature death of a young man of such brilliant promise and achievement was everywhere recognized as an irreparable loss to science. His friends and scientific admirers in many countries united to erect a memorial tablet in the physical laboratory of the University of Manchester. He bequeathed his property to the Royal Society to aid scientific research, and a studentship bearing his name was instituted. 


@@@@@


doc= 35126


Mott, Sir Basil, first baronet (1859-1938), civil and mining engineer, was born at Leicester on 16 September 1859, the youngest son of Frederick Thompson Mott, wine merchant, of Birstall Hill near Leicester and his first wife, Elizabeth Ann (daughter of Isaac Dobell), who died in 1861. The Mott family came from the Weald where, as yeoman farmers, artisans, craftsmen, and later businessmen, they traced their origins to Guillaume de la Motte who came over from Normandy to Hastings in 1524. Mott was educated at Leicester grammar school, at the International College at Isleworth, and at Solothurn in Switzerland. From 1876 to 1879 he was a student at the Royal School of Mines, South Kensington, where he was awarded the Murchison medal and elected to an associateship. After pupillage at Whitwick colliery, Leicestershire, and at Sheffield, Mott spent three years as engineer to the Neston Colliery Company, Cheshire, in charge of all machinery and underground haulage; there he also had his first experience in tunnelling. 
James Henry Greathead, an outstanding figure in soft-ground tunnelling and responsible for major developments in the design and application of tunnelling shields, recruited Mott in 1883 to assist in preparing for the construction of the first deep-level 'tube', for the City and Southwark Railway Company, of which his uncle, Charles Grey Mott, was chairman. The line, which was subsequently known as the City and South London Railway, ran between Monument and Stockwell in London. From 1886 Mott served as assistant engineer, pioneering the use of the Greathead shield and employing special techniques, including the use of low pressure compressed air, to overcome local problems of the water-bearing ground. On completion of tunnelling in 1887, Mott, as resident engineer, supervised the equipping and initial operation of the railway, which was originally intended for traction by means of endless wire ropes, but changed to be one of the first examples of electric traction. In the same year he married Florence Harmar (died 1923), daughter of William Parker and an accomplished pianist; they had two sons. 
Following the death of Greathead in 1896, Mott entered into partnership with Sir Benjamin Baker and shared responsibility for the design and construction of the second deep-level tube, the Central London Railway from Bank Station to Shepherd's Bush, which was opened in 1900. This line first introduced acceleration and deceleration gradients adjacent to stations, with appreciable savings in traction power. After Baker's death in 1907, Mott took into partnership David Hay and David Anderson, serving as senior partner of the firm of consulting engineers until his own death in 1938. In 1932, Mott, Hay, and Anderson were appointed as joint consultants (with Sir Harley Dalrymple-Hay in association with William Halcrow) to the London Passenger Transport Board. Following a visit to the United States, Mott was responsible for the introduction of escalators to Britain, after exhibiting a working escalator which was subsequently built into Earls Court Station. Much work followed for the London underground railways. 
Meanwhile, Mott was becoming prominent in bridge design, construction, and reconstruction. In 1906, he was associated with Baker with planning the widening of Blackfriars Bridge in London and subsequently responsible for execution of the work. He was responsible for the new Southwark Bridge, started in 1913 then stopped for the duration of the First World War and completed in 1921. He was also concerned with the widening of Kingston Bridge on the River Thames, the construction of Queensferry Bridge, a lifting bascule bridge, at Chester, the high-level road bridge at Newcastle upon Tyne, Wearmouth Bridge at Sunderland, and the Tees Bridge at Middlesbrough, the first vertical lift bridge in Britain. 
After several years of controversy between the relative merits of bridge or tunnel, Mott, a strong advocate for a tunnel, had primary responsibility for the Mersey Tunnel, at the time the largest sub-aqueous tunnel in the world, which was constructed between 1925 and 1934. Extensive pioneering studies of ventilating a tunnel for petrol driven vehicles enlisted the assistance of J. S. Haldane. Mott was consulted by government and reported on many schemes, including the proposed Charing Cross Bridge, road bridges across the rivers Forth and Tay, and the channel tunnel. He was a member of the Severn barrage committee and chairman of the restoration works committee of engineers and architects for the preservation of the fabric of St Paul's Cathedral. 
Mott was admitted as a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1895, elected a vice-president in 1920, and president in 1924. In his presidential address he commented that 'it is unfortunate that the existing tube railways [of London] have been constructed in a piecemeal fashion in accordance with ideas of individual promoters and their advisors, without regard to the interests of London as a whole' ('PICE', 219, 1924-15). He was appointed CB in 1918, created a baronet in 1930, and elected FRS in 1932. In 1933 he was elected a fellow of Imperial College of Science and Technology. 
Mott was a kind, gentle, generous man, a strong character held in awe by his grandchildren. He suffered increasingly in later years from rheumatoid arthritis. He died of cancer at his home, 10 Arkwright Road, Hampstead, on 7 September 1938 and was succeeded as second baronet by his elder son, Adrian Spear (1889-1964). 


@@@@@


doc= 35127


Mott, Sir Frederick Walker (1853-1926), neuropathologist, was born in Brighton on 23 October 1853, the only son of Henry Mott, of Brighton, Sussex, who was of Huguenot descent, and his wife, Caroline, daughter of William Fuller, of Pulborough, Sussex. Both parents died when he was a child. He studied medicine at University College, London, where he graduated MB, BSc in 1881 and MD in 1886, and obtained many distinctions. In 1883 he was appointed assistant professor of physiology at Liverpool University, but in the following year returned to London in order to take up the post of lecturer on physiology at Charing Cross Hospital medical school, where he became, in succession, lecturer on pathology, assistant physician, physician, and lecturer on medicine. In 1885 he married Georgina Alexandra, daughter of George Thomas Soley, shipowner, of Liverpool; they had four daughters. He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1892 and fellow of the Royal Society in 1896. 
Mott laid the foundation for his subsequent study of the diseases of the nervous system by researches into its normal structure and functions. Most of his earlier work was carried on in Edward Sharpey-Schafer's laboratory at University College, some of it in collaboration with other workers. These investigations included the paths of conduction in the spinal cord, localization in the cerebral cortex (especially relating to movements of the eyes), and the effect of acute anaemia on the brain. These studies were to have great influence on his later work. 
In 1895 the London county council decided to appoint a pathologist in charge of the laboratory which it was proposing to establish at Claybury, Essex; all indications pointed to Mott as the most suitable occupant of the post. He stipulated, however, that he wanted to retain his clinical appointment at Charing Cross Hospital, considering it essential that the study of diseased conditions should be combined with clinical observation. The council agreed, and was therefore able to secure Mott's services for a long period of years, during which a vast amount of research work was carried out by him, his pupils, and assistants. Most of this is published in a series of important volumes as the 'Archives of Neurology (and Psychiatry)'. 
Subsequently, when the Maudsley Hospital for mental diseases was established at Denmark Hill, Mott's pathological work for the council was transferred to the newer and better-equipped laboratory attached to that institution, and was continued there until his final resignation from the position of pathologist to the London county council asylums in 1923, the age limit having been stretched in order that he might remain in the post as long as possible. But his activities were by no means at an end, as he continued to teach at the Maudsley Hospital, and also accepted the post of lecturer in morbid psychology at the University of Birmingham. He held this position up to the time of his death. 
Besides the articles in the 'Archives of Neurology', Mott contributed numerous papers on the nervous system to the 'Philosophical Transactions' and 'Proceedings' of the Royal Society, to 'Brain', to the 'Journal of Physiology', to the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine', and to other scientific and medical periodicals. 
Largely owing to Mott's researches it became established that the previously obscure disease of the nervous system known as 'general paralysis of the insane' was, in fact, a manifestation of syphilis, and was associated with the presence of the specific spirochaete. The determination of the association between syphilitic infection and this and other mental disorders is the achievement by which Mott's name will probably be best known. But it was by no means his only important contribution to neuropathology; he further demonstrated the close relation between the nervous system and the sexual organs manifested in dementia praecox, as well as the association of deficient mental condition with degeneration of the thyroid and other endocrine organs. 
As the result of these researches Mott firmly and insistently supported the view, which had previously been ignored, that mental disorders are, for the most part, correlated with bodily changes. Indeed, all his work tended to be based on this doctrine. Even in the disorder known as 'asylum dysentery' the cause used to be attributed to a hypothetical nervous affection of the intestine, instead of to an infection associated with micro-organisms, which Mott showed to be its true cause. He wrote a report on his work concerning sleeping sickness, entitled 'Histological Observations on Sleeping Sickness and other Trypanosome Infections', which was published as no. 7 of the 'Reports of the Sleeping Sickness Commission' of the Royal Society in December 1906. 
Mott received numerous honours and prizes, as well as appointments to lecturerships, in recognition of his scientific work. He was awarded the Stewart prize of the Medical Association (1903), the Fothergill gold medal and prize of the Medical Society of London (1911), and the Moxon gold medal of the Royal College of Physicians (1919). He was Croonian lecturer (1900), Oliver-Sharpey lecturer (1910), Lettsomian lecturer (1916), and Harveian orator (1925) to the Royal College of Physicians, London, Morrison lecturer to the Royal College of Physicians, Edinburgh (1921), Huxley lecturer at Charing Cross Hospital (1910), Bowman lecturer to the Ophthalmological Society (1904), and Fullerian lecturer at the Royal Institution. He delivered the Chadwick lecture at the University of Liverpool in 1917 and 1926. At the time of his death he was president of the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. 
Mott, an accomplished singer, was devoted to music, especially to vocal music, and published two works. His interest in this was recognized by his election as president of the Society of English Singers in 1923. In 1919 he was created KBE in acknowledgement of his war services as lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Army Medical Corps. His work on shell-shock was especially notable. In the same year he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. He was a good lecturer, always speaking to the point, and an honest investigator. Mott died in Birmingham General Hospital on 8 June 1926 as a result of cerebral haemorrhage, survived by his wife. A memorial volume, 'Contributions to Psychiatry, Neurology and Sociology', edited by J. R. Lord (1929), contains an appreciation of the man and his work by his lifelong friend, W. D. Halliburton, as well as a bibliography of his published writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 35128


Moule, George Evans (1828-1912), bishop of mid-China, was born on 28 January 1828 at Gillingham, Dorset, the second of the eight sons of the Revd Henry Moule (1801-1880), then curate-in-charge at Gillingham and from 1829 to 1880 vicar of Fordington, Dorchester, and his wife, Mary Mullett, 'nee' Evans (1801-1877). He was the brother of Arthur Evans Moule ['see below'] and of Handley Carr Glyn Moule. He was educated at home until 1844, in which year he underwent a sudden conversion, the result of a sermon on 'Acts' 28: 24, by Augustus Handley, his father's curate. The effect never passed away: it conditioned his whole subsequent life. In 1844 he was admitted sizar at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and in 1850 he graduated with mathematical and classical honours. James Scholefield, the regius professor of Greek, and Frederick Foster Gough helped to turn his thoughts to work abroad. He was ordained deacon at Salisbury in 1851 as curate to his father, and priest in 1852, and he acted as tutor to his father's pupils. From 1855 to 1857 he was also chaplain of the Dorset County Hospital. 
In 1857 Moule offered his services to the Church Missionary Society, and in the December of that year he sailed for Shanghai. On the way, at Hong Kong, he married Adelaide Sarah (died 1909), daughter of Frederick Moule, of Melksham, Wiltshire, and widow of Captain Griffiths; she accompanied him in his missionary travels and the couple had seven children. He was stationed at Ningpo (Ningbo) from 1857 to 1864; in the latter year he began a mission in Hangchow (Hangzhou), in Chekiang (Zhejiang) province, then practically destroyed by the Taiping insurgents. From 1865 to the end of his life the house in Hangchow was his only home. In 1864 he became a member of the Royal Asiatic Society, China branch, and most of his writings were papers in its journal. On the death of Bishop William Armstrong Russell, of north China, he was consecrated (on 28 October 1880 in London) first bishop of the new diocese of mid-China, a post which he held until his resignation in 1906. In 1905 he was elected an honorary fellow by his Cambridge college. He continued to work under the Church Missionary Society until his death, which took place at Auckland Castle, Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, on 3 March 1912, while he was on a visit to England. He was buried in Bow cemetery at Durham. 
George Moule was a man of wide interests: music, drawing, woodturning, medicine, swimming, botany (he introduced some hitherto unknown plants to science), and especially literature; all attracted him, and he attained exceptional command of the Chinese language, literary and colloquial. All this, however, was secondary to his missionary work, at which he laboured incessantly by prayer, preaching, teaching, translating, and church administration. During his time in China he had considerable success relative to that of his colleagues: the church membership in Chekiang increased from fewer than 100 to more than 4000. It was a son of one of his early pupils who became the first Chinese bishop -- Tsaeseng Sing, assistant bishop in Chekiang. Gentleness, reverence, humour, courage, and diligence were conspicuous in Moule, endearing him to a wide and varied circle of friends. 
His brother 


@@@@@


doc= 35129


Moule, Handley Carr Glyn (1841-1920), bishop of Durham, was born at Fordington, Dorchester, Dorset, on 23 December 1841. His parents were the classicist and inventor the Revd Henry Moule (1801-1880) and Mary Mullett Evans (1801-1877); they had a family of eight sons, one of whom died in infancy. The seven brothers, as they were known, were taught at home by their father; one committed suicide, one became a missionary (Arthur Evans Moule ['see under 'Moule, George Evans]), and two became bishops ['see 'Moule, George Evans]. Handley, the eighth and youngest son, was named after his godfathers, Augustus Handley and Carr John Glyn. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1860, and for his first year his tutor was J. B. Lightfoot. Moule had a brilliant university career and became a noted classicist, winning numerous academic prizes. He graduated BA (first class) in 1864 and MA in 1867. He took up a college fellowship and became an assistant master at Marlborough College before he was ordained deacon in 1867 and priest in 1868. Between 1867 and 1872 he was his father's curate, then for five years dean of Trinity College, Cambridge. On his mother's death he returned to Fordington as his father's curate and remained there until Henry Moule died. On 16 August 1881 Moule married Harriot Mary (1844-1915), daughter of the Revd Charles Boileau Elliott; they had two daughters. Though he came from an evangelical home, and was strongly influenced by his mother's faith, Moule did not experience an evangelical conversion until 1866. He later said, 'I am an Evangelical churchman... and of those convictions I am not at all ashamed' ('To my Younger Brethren', 1892, 254). In 1884 he had another profound religious experience, after which he became thoroughly identified with the Holiness Movement, speaking at the Mildmay conferences and the Keswick Convention, which he considered to be 'the vestibule of heaven' (Harford and Macdonald, 131). 
From 1880 Moule was the first principal of Ridley Hall, Cambridge, lecturer at Holy Trinity Church, and an examining chaplain to Bishop J. C. Ryle. As a preacher and teacher Moule exercised an immense influence over undergraduates and theological students and played an important part in making the evangelical party more pietistic and missionary minded. During Moule's principalship more than 500 men were ordained, of whom more than 100 became missionaries and 23 bishops. It was said that Ridley Hall men were pious but not learned. They may have been well taught, but Moule failed to tackle current critical issues. He was an inspiring writer and maintained a steady output of publications, which included devotional writings, biblical expositions, sermons, poems, and tracts. He achieved further academic success in gaining a BD in 1894 (this thesis was expanded and published as 'Romans' in the 'Expositor's Bible' series) and a DD in 1895 for his edition of Bishop Ridley's work 'A Brief Declaration of the Lord's Supper'. Moule became well known outside Cambridge as a respected evangelical leader, and was in demand as a preacher and speaker. He became a chaplain to Queen Victoria and then to Edward VII. In 1899 Moule was appointed Norrisan professor of divinity at Cambridge, and he continued to have links with Ridley Hall as a council member and later as college visitor. 
From 1901 Moule was bishop of Durham. He felt unworthy of following J. B. Lightfoot and B. F. Westcott, and his simple pietism and lack of judgement were severely criticized by his successor, who regarded Moule as a good Christian but a bad bishop. But Hensley Henson was too forthright in his condemnation. It is true that Moule found diocesan business tedious, being too timid in decision making and too ready to accept unsuitable candidates for ordination, but his humility, lack of guile, and godliness won the hearts of his clergy and people. As a bishop his priorities were spiritual and not administrative. He encouraged his clergy to be faithful in their devotions and to be powerful in the pulpit; to preach the good news but not to advocate political causes; to keep the Sabbath; and, like him, to become teetotal. Moule strongly supported mission at home and overseas and urged his clergy to follow his example. While Moule was not as politically astute as Westcott he was not uninformed, and spoke out on political and industrial issues. He believed in a just war, and spoke during the First World War on the 'holiness of patriotism', urging prayer for victory. Though he remained faithful to his evangelical convictions, he was not partisan; tolerant towards Anglo-Catholic practice, he was prepared to sanction the use of incense and the wearing of the alb at communion services. 
In 1905 Moule had suffered a severe illness following the death of one of his daughters, and from the autumn of 1915 was away from his episcopal duties for almost a year after an operation and following the death of his devoted wife. He died of pleurisy at 13 Cranmer Road, Cambridge, on 8 May 1920, and was buried next to his wife, daughter, and brother in Bow cemetery, Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 35130


Moullin, Eric Balliol (1893-1963), electrical engineer and university teacher, was born at Sandbanks, near Parkstone, Dorset, on 10 August 1893, the only child of Arthur Daniel Moullin, a civil engineer from an old Guernsey family, and his wife, Charlotte Annie Longman. He was delicate in childhood and was educated privately, learning at home the mathematics that won him a scholarship to Downing College, Cambridge. He sat part one of the mathematical tripos in 1913, then embarked on the mechanical sciences tripos. In 1914 ill health forced him to abandon his studies but the following year he returned and in 1916 obtained a first class in the tripos and gained the John Winbolt prize in 1918. Unfit for military service, from 1917 he was a lecturer at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. He married, on 2 January 1918, Christobel ('b'. 1888/9), daughter of Edward Schroder Prior, Slade professor of fine art at Cambridge; they had two daughters. 
In 1919 Moullin returned to the Cambridge Engineering Laboratory where he was a very active teacher and research worker for the next ten years. During this time he was attached to King's College as an assistant director of studies. In 1929 he was offered the chair of engineering at Oxford but withdrew with characteristic generosity in favour of R. V. Southwell. He then accepted the newly founded Donald Pollock readership (under Southwell) and two years later became a fellow of Magdalen College. His first marriage having ended in divorce, Moullin married, on 15 December 1934, Joan Evelyn Sinnock ('b'. 1904/5), daughter of Louis Francis Salzman, a medievalist and sometime editor of the 'Victoria History of the Counties of England'. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Moullin joined the Admiralty signals establishment at Portsmouth and in 1942 transferred to the Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Company Ltd of Manchester. At the end of the war he was appointed to the chair of electrical engineering at Cambridge, which had just been founded through the sponsorship of the Institution of Electrical Engineers and the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers Association. He was elected to a professorial fellowship at King's in 1946. He retired in 1960. He was awarded the Cambridge ScD in 1939 and was made an honorary LLD of Glasgow University in 1958. 
Throughout his career Moullin was an active member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. He was chairman of the radio section at the outbreak of war, served on council from 1940 to 1949, latterly as vice-president, and was then president for the session 1949-50; in 1963 he was made an honorary member. He was also a governor of the College of Aeronautics until 1949 and a member of the Radio Research Board of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1934-42. 
Throughout his life Moullin was a very original and creative research worker. He was a prolific writer of scientific papers and books. His first book, 'The Theory and Practice of Radio Frequency Measurements' (1926), had a considerable influence on the development of radio systems. As a boy he had been a radio amateur helped by his father in a workshop at their home in Swanage and almost to the end of his life he delighted in working in the attic laboratory at his home in Cambridge. Best known of his many inventions was the Moullin valve voltmeter developed during the 1920s, which became a standard laboratory instrument. His second and most important book, 'The Principles of Electromagnetism' (1932), formed the basis of his own lectures and had a profound influence by its unique blend of theory and practice. His last book, the 'Electromagnetic Principles of the Dynamo', was mostly written before the end of 1933 but was delayed until 1955 by pressure of other research. His central contribution to the study of electromagnetism was his insistence that the sources of fields are their most important feature and that these sources can be controlled by the engineer to achieve desired effects. 
The range of subject matter of these books demonstrated their author's grasp of the whole field of electrical engineering. Although Moullin disliked narrow specialization he was no generalist but had rather a distrust of general statements. He loved detail and delighted in particular cases, on which he focused his powerful mind and which he studied so carefully that they became windows through which one could see a whole landscape. He was an outstanding teacher of engineers, reinforcing his lectures with beautifully designed experiments. He was daily in the laboratory, where he showed a personal interest in individual students and in members of his staff, both academics and technicians. From his research students he called out the best. He did not praise often, but his praise was worth having. 
Moullin saw no conflict between academic and industrial engineering, being as much at home in the factory as in the college. He treated colleagues in industry as full partners in a professional enterprise and was an energetic supporter of industrial training schemes. In the university he was a fighter for academic freedom, which he felt was endangered both by central government and by academics in search of power and influence. 
He had a keen sense of history and was delighted when he inherited, in 1947, the Fief des Eperons in Guernsey. On Elizabeth II's visit to the island in 1957 he carried out, as seigneur, his feudal duty of presenting the gilt spurs to the reigning monarch. His scarlet doctor's gown added a splash of colour to the ceremony. He did much work on Guernsey parish registers and wrote several antiquarian papers for La Societe Guernsesiaise. In his will he endowed a prize at Downing College for the best student in engineering or history. Moullin died at his home, 21 Sedley Taylor Road, Cambridge, on 18 September 1963. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35131


Moulton, James Hope (1863-1917), biblical and Zoroastrian scholar, the elder son of the Revd William Fiddian Moulton (1835-1898), biblical scholar and headmaster of the Leys School, Cambridge, and his wife, Hannah, daughter of the Revd Samuel Hope, was born at the Wesleyan Institution, Richmond, Surrey, on 11 October 1863. His father was one of four brothers, all eminent, the best-known being John Fletcher Moulton, Lord Moulton, lord justice of appeal. James Moulton was educated at the Leys School from 1875, and then at King's College, Cambridge, of which he was a fellow from 1888 to 1894. Many of his family were Methodist preachers and missionaries; he entered the Wesleyan Methodist ministry in 1886, being appointed assistant to his father at the Leys. In 1890 he married Eliza Keeling Osborn (died 1915), granddaughter of George Osborn. They had two sons and two daughters; the elder son, Ralph, was killed in action in France in 1916. Moulton left Cambridge in 1902 on his appointment as 'New Testament' tutor at Didsbury College, Manchester. In 1908 he was appointed Greenwood professor of Hellenistic Greek and Indo-European philology in the University of Manchester. His outstanding work here was recognized by the award of doctorates from the universities of Edinburgh, Durham, Berlin, and Groningen. After his wife's death in 1915, he went to India to lecture to the Parsis on Zoroastrianism, and to qualify himself to write a volume, which was posthumously published (1917) under the title 'The Treasure of the Magi'. He left India in March 1917 and joined James Rendel Harris at Port Said. Their ship was torpedoed off Corsica. Moulton 'played a hero's part in the boat', died from exhaustion on 7 April, and was buried at sea, a heroic story which captured the imagination of his generation. 
Moulton's interests were wide, but his best work was done on the Greek of the 'New Testament' and on Zoroastrianism. A 'Grammar of New Testament Greek', originally intended to be jointly written by Moulton and his father, was not begun until after his father's death and remained unfinished at the death of the son. The first volume, the 'Prolegomena' (1906), was the only one published in his lifetime; but the greater part of the second volume had been written and it was published under the editorship of Wilbert Howard. Moulton's 'Grammar of New Testament Greek' was a development of an approach taken by the biblical scholar Adolf Deissmann. In his 'Bibelstudien', Deissmann had published a mass of evidence to show that the vocabulary of the 'New Testament' did not belong to a class by itself, but was to be put in the same category as the ordinary spoken Greek of the time, as preserved in the non-literary papyri. Moulton accepted his demonstration and applied it to the grammar. A well-regarded contemporary, Adolf Harnack, professor of church history in Berlin, spoke of him as 'the foremost expert in 'New Testament' Greek'. Moulton hoped to prepare for English readers an edition of Deissmann's projected lexicon; and he lived long enough to see the publication (1914-15) of two instalments of the 'Vocabulary of the Greek Testament', which he prepared in collaboration with George Milligan. His premature death meant that a projected third volume of his 'Grammar', devoted to the syntax of the 'New Testament', had to be brought to fruition by another scholar, Nigel Turner, in 1963. 
Moulton's study of comparative philology led him to Sanskrit and Iranian; and from the language of the 'Avesta' he naturally passed to the religion. In this field he owed much to the teaching of Edward Byles Cowell, professor of Sanskrit at Cambridge. As well as articles, he published four books on the religion. 'Early Religious Poetry of Persia' (1911) was an admirable introduction to the subject, and with it may be coupled 'The Teaching of Zarathushtra' (1917), lectures delivered to the Parsis. His most important contribution was made in his Hibbert lectures, 'Early Zoroastrianism' (1913). He was inclined to push back the date of Zarathustra several generations before the traditional date of 660-583 BC; and he sought to disengage the true Zoroastrian elements in the 'Avesta' from accretions which he attributed to the magi. The subject is discussed again in the first part of 'The Treasure of the Magi'. It is on this work that his posthumous reputation among Zoroastrian and Avestan scholars largely rests. It was the first work in English to argue that the 'Avesta' had its own internal history, and to initiate a line of scholarly investigation (directly continued for at least the next fifty years) which attempted to show how the doctrines of the religion's founder had been modified in the later parts of the 'Avesta'. Moulton was an enthusiast for Zarathustra, and for his teaching, which he regarded as the purest form of non-biblical religion. His scholarship was well regarded by the Parsi community. 
Though a scholar of the highest quality and exceptional range Moulton was deeply interested in practical questions. Foreign missions, social reforms at home, and Christian apologetics were always very near his heart. He was eminent for the strength, the loftiness, and beauty of his character, and for the intensity of his religion. 


@@@@@


doc= 35132


Moulton, John Fletcher, Baron Moulton (1844-1921), judge and politician, was born on 18 November 1844 at Madeley, Shropshire, the third son of the Revd James Egan Moulton (died 1866), a Wesleyan minister, formerly headmaster of New Kingswood School, Bath, and his wife, Catherine (died 1855), daughter of William Fiddian, brass-founder, of Birmingham. Moulton was named after a former vicar of Madeley, John William Fletcher, who had been a friend of John Wesley. He was a younger brother of William Fiddian Moulton and uncle of James Hope Moulton. 
Moulton received his early education from his father. At the age of eleven he was sent to Kingswood School and was at once placed in the headmaster's class. By thirteen and a half he was head of the school. At sixteen he scored the highest marks in England at the first of the Oxford and Cambridge local examinations. On leaving Kingswood School he was for a short time an assistant master at schools in Biggleswade and Northampton before in 1861 matriculating at London University, winning a studentship of $30. He took his BA degree in mathematics and was alone in the first class both at the intermediate and the final examination (1865). Meanwhile he had been elected to a scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge. His mathematical ability became famous in Cambridge, and he was the only applicant for a mathematics scholarship at London University. Coached by the famous Dr Edward John Routh, he was first Smith's prizeman and senior wrangler in 1868, with the highest marks then known. The same year he won the gold medal for mathematics at London University, and was elected a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, few of the St John's fellowships then being open to laymen. Moulton worked both as college tutor and private tutor, and regularly attended the debates of the Union Society, of which he was president in 1868, and then treasurer until he left Cambridge in 1873. The union records show that he was an advocate of votes for women, reform of the university system of education, and Irish conciliation. 
In 1873 Moulton read for the bar in London and the following year he was called by the Middle Temple. He read in chambers with William George Harrison, then a busy common-law junior, and soon had general work of his own. In 1875 he married Clara (died 1888), widow of Robert William Thompson, of Edinburgh and Stonehaven. They had at least one child, Hugh Lawrence Fletcher Moulton. 
The passing of the 'Patents, Designs, and Trade Marks Act' (1883), which increased the number of patent actions, gave Moulton the opportunity to take on many new cases, and in 1885 he became queen's counsel. His private experiments in electricity meanwhile won him a fellowship of the Royal Society. After Clara's death in 1888 Moulton took the lead in all patent cases of any importance. Scientific facts and problems presented no difficulties to him and he had the gift of easy and lucid speech. He often appeared in parliamentary committee rooms when bills relating to electrical undertakings were being promoted. He was also a favourite advocate in compensation cases and in those concerning trade marks and trade names. In the lengthy litigation over the right of the Kodak Company to register the word 'Solio' as a trade mark, the House of Lords accepted his arguments in spite of the adverse judgments of the two courts below. Moulton appeared in the cases which centred round the Dunlop and Welsbach patents, and he was counsel in the arbitration which settled the price of the London water companies when the Metropolitan Water Board was created. There were not many barristers of his time who earned more than he did. 
In November 1885 Moulton was elected to the House of Commons as Liberal member for the Clapham division of Battersea, and began a parliamentary career which received many setbacks. He lost his seat at the general election of 1886, failed to win a seat at the general election of 1892, and had to wait to get back to parliament until 1894 when he was elected member for South Hackney in succession to Lord Russell of Killowen, who, as Sir Charles Russell, had held the seat for eight years. This seat he lost at the general election of 1895. He returned to the House of Commons as member for the Launceston division of Cornwall in August 1898, and continued to sit for that constituency until the general election of 1906. 
In 1901 Moulton married his second wife, Mary (died 1909), daughter of Major Henry Davis, of Naples; they had one daughter. At about the same time he also began to take an active part in the House of Commons. He spoke effectively against the Chinese labour ordinances after the South African War; made a speech in 1904 which convinced many waverers that the supporters of a 'pure beer' bill were neglecting valuable scientific discoveries, and that beer drinkers had nothing to fear from what was represented as adulteration; and in 1905 he carried through the house a measure which became the 'Trade Marks Act'. Between 1885 and 1905 the Liberals were only in office for about three years, and Moulton had few chances of promotion; but on their return to power in 1906 he was made a lord justice of appeal in succession to Sir James Charles Mathew, knighted, and sworn of the privy council. 
During his six years in the Court of Appeal, Moulton cut an impressive figure. His powers of assimilation were his real strength, and he dealt with commercial cases, appeals under the 'Workmen's Compensation Act', and libel actions as if he had been dealing with them all his career. Notable cases in which his dissenting judgment was upheld by the House of Lords were 'Scott v. Scott' (1913, the right to order a trial in camera), and 'Attorney-General v. West Riding of Yorkshire County Council' (1907, the obligation of local education authorities to pay for religious instruction in non-provided schools). In 'Cuenod v. Leslie' (1909) he showed characteristic independence on the question of a husband's liability for the torts of his wife. From time to time he formed a court with two colleagues -- lords justices James Stirling and Robert Romer -- each of whom had also been a senior wrangler. In 1912 he succeeded Lord Robson as a lord of appeal in ordinary, and became a life peer with the title of Baron Moulton of Bank in the county of Southampton. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Lord Moulton was invited by the government to head a committee to organize the manufacture of high explosives and propellants for British forces. In this capacity, he organized a service which, as the explosives supply department (ESD), became a branch of the War Office. At the armistice in November 1918, ESD was turning out 1000 tons of high explosives a day. Moulton had to overcome great difficulties; there were few factories available and sources of raw materials were limited. Lyddite had been replaced by trinitrotoluene, every 3 tons of which required 2 tons of toluene. It took 600 tons of coal to produce 1 ton of toluene. Moulton suggested mixing ammonium nitrate with trinitrotoluene to produce a new compound explosive, amatol. At a time when shipping facilities were disorganized he had to secure large quantities of nitric acid, sulphuric acid, and glycerine. He had control of the gasworks, coke ovens, and fat and oil supplies of the whole country. After it was decided to use poison gas if the enemy used it first, Moulton undertook its manufacture. During the war his department delivered a total of 612,697 tons of high explosive and 450,487 tons of propellants. For these services in wartime Moulton was created KCB (1915) and GBE (1917). At Christmas 1920 he underwent a slight nasal operation; 8 March 1921 he sat in the House of Lords and seemed to have recovered his usual good health, but in the early hours of 9 March died in his sleep at his London home, 57 Onslow Square, South Kensington. His death, caused by a clot in an artery, was instantaneous. Addressing the lords of appeal two days later, Lord Birkenhead spoke of the intellectual force and dynamic impulse of personality which had enabled a judge to play a supreme part in the war. 


@@@@@


doc= 35133


Mountbatten, Dame Edwina Cynthia Annette, Countess Mountbatten of Burma (1901-1960), director of emergency relief services and vicereine of India, was born at 32 Bruton Street, London, on 28 November 1901, the elder of the two daughters of Wilfrid William Ashley, Baron Mount Temple of Lee (1867-1939), politician, and his first wife, Amalia Mary Maud 
(Maudie; 1879-1911)
, only child of Sir Ernest Cassel, financier and philanthropist. Edward VII, her grandfather's friend and client, was her godfather, and she was nearly christened Edwardina. 
Edwina's childhood was lonely, with an ailing mother, a distracted father, and, from 1914, a determined stepmother whom Edwina and her sister, Mary, found it hard to like. Cassel was Edwina's mainstay; at eighteen, after two years at boarding-school and six months in Italy, she went to live with her grandfather in London at Brook House, his palace in Park Lane. When he died in 1921 Edwina inherited Brook House and the greater part of Cassel's immense fortune. Edwina was now adrift, with nothing to do and, until she was of age, no access to her money. Of all her friends the most sympathetic was Lord Louis (Dickie) Mountbatten (1900-1979), whose adored father had died in the same week as Sir Ernest. Mountbatten, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and younger son of admiral of the fleet the marquess of Milford Haven, formerly Prince Louis of Battenberg, was ambitious, good-looking, and energetic. Despite the misgivings of his mother, Victoria, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria, who thought them both too young and her son too poor, on 18 July 1922 they were married. 
Edwina had beauty, wealth, restless energy, and quick intelligence. A woman of extremes, she was jealous of her husband's professional success and of the attention he gave the navy. She consoled herself first with lovers, then with increasingly exotic and testing journeys across the globe, leaving her children, Patricia ('b'. 1924) and Pamela ('b'. 1929), in the care of nurses and governesses, Dickie's mother, and Dickie himself. 
The war saved the Mountbattens' stormy marriage. At last Edwina's skills and energies were fully tested. Rejected at first by disapproving matrons, she eventually became deputy chairman of the Depot for Knitted Garments for the Navy. Her dedication won respect; that, and her connections, brought her to the Joint War Organization of the Red Cross and the order of St John, where she proved a brilliant administrator, tirelessly visiting bombed cities and shelters across Britain, military camps, and hospitals at home and overseas. Appointed superintendent-in-chief of the St John Ambulance Brigade in 1942, she worked closely with her husband, now chief of combined operations, for the welfare of servicemen and their families. 
Edwina's greatest contribution came in the aftermath of war. As supreme allied commander south-east Asia, Mountbatten had, in the wake of the Japanese surrender, formidable military and civil responsibility over vast and scattered territory. Edwina assembled teams and equipment to locate and rescue thousands of internees and prisoners of war, venturing at great risk into swamps and jungle. For this and later work she was appointed GCStJ (1945), DCVO (1946), GBE (1947), and CI (1947). 
Exhausted, Edwina longed, uncharacteristically, for tranquil family life at Broadlands, the house in Hampshire that had once belonged to Lord Palmerston, which Edwina had inherited from her father in 1939, together with Classiebawn Castle, in co. Sligo. In January 1947, however, Mountbatten was asked to go to India as viceroy to negotiate and achieve the independence of the subcontinent. Impatient with hierarchy and convention, Edwina brought a fresh breeze to the huge enterprise of the viceroy's household, opening it to people of every sort. Her links helped her to inform Mountbatten and his staff as they sought to resolve innumerable difficulties arising from the imminent independence and, inescapably, separation of India and Pakistan. Partition brought bloodshed, as whole populations fled across the country, their meeting places killing grounds. With Edwina at its head, the United Council of Relief and Welfare, co-ordinating all the major voluntary organizations, struggled to help the desperate refugees. 
In these demanding times Edwina grew close to Jawaharlal Nehru, prime minister of India. Six weeks before the Mountbattens' departure in 1948, their task complete, Edwina and Nehru acknowledged the depth of their feelings for each other. For the remaining twelve years of her life they wrote constantly, with rare meetings in England and India. This association, and Edwina's known anti-colonial sympathy, assisted Mountbatten's political opponents. His appointment in 1955 as first sea lord, long sought, was triumphant. Proud of each other's success, loyal, and affectionate, the Mountbattens' partnership at last achieved equilibrium. 
Unremitting work as superintendent-in-chief of the St John Ambulance Brigade, with the Save the Children Fund and some hundred other voluntary organizations, wore Edwina out and she died in her sleep at Jesselton, North Borneo, on the night of 20-21 February 1960. As she had wished, she was buried at sea, off Portsmouth, with naval honours, escorted by an Indian warship sent by Nehru. 


@@@@@


doc= 35134


Mountbatten, Louis Alexander, first marquess of Milford Haven (1854-1921), naval officer, was the eldest son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and his morganatic wife, Countess Julia Theresa von Haucke. He was born Ludwig Alexander at Graz, Austria, on 24 May 1854. The friendship between his mother and Princess Alice, daughter of Queen Victoria and wife of Prince Louis of Hesse (afterwards Grand Duke Louis IV), led to Prince Louis's settling in England as a boy. He was naturalized as a British subject, and entered the Royal Navy as a cadet in 1868, being promoted to lieutenant in 1876 after accompanying the prince of Wales to India. A brief liaison with the society beauty and actress Lillie Langtry resulted in the birth of a daughter, Jeanne-Marie Langtry, in March 1881. To avoid scandal, a financial settlement was made, and Prince Louis was appointed to the 'Inconstant', on which he served during the Egyptian war, taking part in the bombardment of Alexandria (11 July 1882). After serving on the royal yacht, he was promoted to commander in 1885. 
On 30 April 1884 Prince Louis married his cousin Princess Victoria (1863-1950), eldest daughter of Louis, grand duke of Hesse and by Rhine, at Darmstadt. They had two sons and two daughters: George Louis Mountbatten (1892-1938), who succeeded in the marquessate; Louis Mountbatten, later Earl Mountbatten of Burma (1900-1979); Alice (1885-1969), who married Prince Andrew of Greece; and Louise (1889-1965), who became consort of Gustav Adolf VI of Sweden. 
At this period British defence policy was undergoing a gradual readjustment in accordance with the theories of what became known as 'the blue-water school', and Prince Louis was selected by the Admiralty to act as naval adviser to the inspector-general of fortifications, with a view to co-ordinating naval and military ideas. He took up this appointment in 1892, having been promoted captain in the preceding year, and held it until October 1894. In February 1894 he became joint secretary of the naval and military committee on defence, afterwards the committee of imperial defence. During these years he studied the defence problem in its naval and military aspects and was well qualified when, in 1900, he was made assistant director of naval intelligence. He returned to the Admiralty in 1902 as director of naval intelligence, and retained that position until 1905, having been promoted to rear-admiral in 1904. 
By this time Prince Louis was regarded throughout the service as an officer who had established his fitness for high command at sea. On leaving the Admiralty in 1905 he hoisted his flag in the 'Drake' as rear-admiral commanding the second cruiser squadron. After two years in this post he was selected as second in command of the fleet in the Mediterranean. In the meantime Lord Fisher had become the dominating figure at the Admiralty, and it was no surprise when in 1908 Prince Louis was directed to move to the Atlantic fleet as commander-in-chief. Two years later he was appointed vice-admiral commanding the third and fourth divisions of the newly constituted Home Fleets, and in December 1911 he returned to the Admiralty as second sea lord, becoming first sea lord a year later. This appointment was questionable in view of Prince Louis's German birth, and of the threatening situation which was developing abroad. 
In July 1914 a test mobilization of the naval reserves was carried out, and the ships were due to disperse, after carrying out exercises in the English Channel, just as war was becoming increasingly likely. Winston Churchill, first lord of the Admiralty, was absent from his office during the critical weekend (25-7 July) when it had to be decided whether the fleet should be dispersed and the reserve ships demobilized (in accordance with the plans already made), or whether preliminary steps should be taken to place the squadrons at their various war stations. This decision rested with the first sea lord. After consulting Churchill, Prince Louis, as he subsequently explained, 'directed the secretary, as a first step, to send an Admiralty order by telegraph to the commander-in-chief of the Home Fleets at Portland to the effect that no ship was to leave that anchorage until further orders'. War had not then been declared, but the prevision of the first sea lord ensured that when it became inevitable the navy should be ready. By four o'clock on the morning of 3 August naval mobilization had been completed. The prompt initiative which Prince Louis had exhibited in this emergency did not subsequently shield him from attack on account of his 'German origin'. On 29 October 1914, finding his position increasingly untenable, particularly after British losses at sea, he resigned as first sea lord. Distressed at his being made a scapegoat, George V swore him of the privy council. Nevertheless, his family later asserted that his hounding from office was a blow from which he never really recovered. 
In July 1917, at the king's request, and in the interests of 'Anglicizing' the royal family, Prince Louis relinquished the style and title of serene highness and prince, assumed for himself and his descendants the surname of Mountbatten, and was raised to the peerage of the United Kingdom as marquess of Milford Haven, earl of Medina, and Viscount Alderney. On 22 August 1921 he was made an admiral of the fleet on the retired list, but his health was failing. He died on 11 September 1921 at 42 Half Moon Street, Piccadilly, London, of heart failure following influenza, and was buried at Whippingham church, on the Isle of Wight. 
Prince Louis's connections with other European courts had proved invaluable at times, notably in helping to improve Anglo-Russian relations after the Dogger Bank incident of 1904; and his test mobilization of the British navy in 1914 was vital in preparing the service for the outbreak of war. He was also involved in the invention of various scientific devices, including a cone signalling apparatus, and the introduction of an instrument enabling calculations to be resolved mechanically in naval manoeuvres. His intellectual mind and reserved German manner did not make him popular, but 'what he lacked in imagination was more than balanced by industry and attention to detail' (Hough, 171). Keenly interested in British naval history, he was the first president of the Society of Nautical Research. 


@@@@@


doc= 35135


Mountford, Edward William (1855-1908), architect, was born on 22 September 1855 at Shipston-on-Stour, Worcestershire, the son of Edward Mountford, draper, and his wife, Eliza Devonshire, daughter of William and Mary Richards of Northampton. He was twice married: first, on 28 June 1888, to Jessie Elizabeth, daughter of John Saunders Smith of Northampton, in whose memory he furnished the south chapel of St Anne's Church, St Ann's Hill, London (a building by Sir Robert Smirke); and second, on 11 July 1903, to Dorothy, daughter of A. G. Hounsham of Hampstead Heath. He had a son, who followed him as an architect, from his first marriage, and a daughter from his second. 
Mountford grew up in the Cotswolds and was educated privately at Clevedon, Somerset. In 1872 he was articled to Habershon and Pite, architects, and subsequently worked for them as a clerk of works. Lacking the connections that might have secured him patronage, he was employed as assistant to Messrs George Elkington and to Messrs Giles and Gough, before beginning independent practice in 1881. His early works were modest commissions in his native Worcestershire, beginning with a cottage hospital in Shipston-on-Stour. In collaboration with H. D. Appleton (also known as H. D. Searles-Wood) he built a few south London churches in the fourteenth-century Gothic style; and this type of commission formed an occasional part of his employment throughout his career. In his first decade of practice, however, lack of employment left him free to enter numerous competitions. 
Mountford's first real success was in winning the Sheffield town hall competition (1890); and thereafter he was regularly a winner (later still an assessor) of major public competitions. Among the buildings he won in competition (and subsequently built) were: Battersea town hall (1892; now the arts centre); St Olave's Grammar School (1893; now part of the South London College); the Northampton Institute (1896; now City University); and the central criminal court at the Old Bailey (1900-07), which replaced Newgate prison of 1769 and is probably Mountford's most important work. Among his other significant buildings were: Liverpool Technical College (1898); Booth's distillery, Cow Cross Street, Smithfield (1901; dem.); offices and flats at 34 Sloane Square, London (1905); the Northern Insurance Company building, 1 Moorgate, London (1906; with E. A. Gruning); and Lancaster town hall (1906-9), completed by his assistant and partner F. Dare Clapham. He was also among the architects invited to compete for the new Strand Crescent at the Aldwych (1900) and for London county hall (1907). 
Mountford was one of the initiators of the 'Wrenaissance' style in the 1890s and one of the most successful practitioners of its developed form of Edwardian baroque, winning a silver medal at the 1900 Paris Exhibition. He was committed to the association of sculpture and painting with architecture, and worked closely with the sculptors Paul Montford, F. W. Pomeroy, and Gilbert Seale, and with the painters Gerald Moira and Sir William Richmond. He also retained an attachment to the vernacular architecture of his childhood and designed his own house at Munstead, near Godalming, Surrey, in 1901, in collaboration with his wife and with the advice of his neighbour Gertrude Jekyll on the garden. 
Mountford became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1881 and a fellow in 1890; he served on its council and (1907-8) on its prizes and studentships committee. From 1893 to 1895 he was president of the Architectural Association (AA) and acted as an advisory member of the AA school of architecture until his death. He was described as an antiquary ('The Builder', 94, 15 Feb 1908, 274-5) and travelled in Italy (1880) and later Egypt (for his health). He was also an ardent cricketer and member of the Surrey County Cricket Club. Crippled by arthritis in his mid-forties, he died at his London home, 11 Craven Hill, Lancaster Gate, London, on 7 February 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 35136


Mowat, Sir Oliver (1820-1903), lawyer and politician in Canada, was born on 22 July 1820 in Kingston, Upper Canada, the eldest of the five children of John Mowat (1791-1860) and Helen Levack (1791-1873), immigrants from Caithness. John Mowat had left the British army after the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 and become a well-to-do merchant in the thriving town of Kingston. 
Oliver Mowat was brought up among Scots. He attended St Andrew's Presbyterian Church, where his father was an elder, and the Revd John Cruikshank's private school, followed by Midland district grammar school under headmaster George Baxter. He read law in the Kingston office of John A. Macdonald (1836-40) and with the Toronto equity specialist Robert Easton Burns (1841). When called to the bar in November 1841 he went into partnership with Burns, tying his future to the court of chancery and the rising city of Toronto. 
On 19 May 1846 Oliver married Jane Ewart (1824-1893), the attractive daughter of Scots-born John Ewart, a well-known Toronto contractor. They had three sons and four daughters; two of the children died in infancy. 
Increasing business in the mid-century presented many cases for equitable settlement, and Mowat, through his dedication and sound legal knowledge, was soon retained in the most important. In 1853 he was employing five clerks and had net earnings of C$14,000. Several of the decisions that he won were upheld by the highest court, the judicial committee of the British privy council. His professional standing was recognized by election in 1853 as a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada and appointments in 1856 as queen's counsel and commissioner to consolidate the provincial statutes. 
The established lawyer felt the challenge of politics. Elected alderman for 1857 and 1858, Mowat left his imprint on Toronto by his promotion of public parks and reforms in city management. At the same time, though hitherto without party affiliation, he came to the conclusion that it was his 'duty' to oppose the governing Conservatives, who had 'no principle nor patriotism' (Biggar, 77, 79). In the provincial election of December 1857 he ran as a Reformer in the riding of Ontario South, promising to perform his duties as became 'a Christian politician' (ibid., 70). 
In the legislature Mowat rose rapidly to a prominent place beside the Reform chief George Brown. Short, near-sighted, and plain-featured, he was not an impressive figure. Nor was he an orator, but he was a convincing speaker because he was lucid, sensible, and tactful. And he was loyal: Brown considered him one of the 'reliables' (letter to Gordon Brown, 11 May 1863, Brown MSS, Public Archives of Canada). He served as provincial secretary in the two-day Brown-A. A. Dorion ministry of 1858, and as postmaster-general in the nine-month Sandfield Macdonald-Dorion administration of 1863. In this post he negotiated improved contracts with the Grand Trunk Railway Company and the Montreal Ocean Steamship Company for carrying mail. 
As mounting sectional discord strained the union between Upper and Lower Canada which had been established in 1841, some Reformers proposed dissolution. Mowat, however, supported Brown at the convention of 1859 in endorsing a federal relationship with local governments for local matters and a general government for common concerns. In May 1864, when Brown's motion for a select committee to devise a solution for the deadlock between the Canadas was carried, Mowat was one of the twenty appointees. On 30 June, again as postmaster-general, he was included with Brown in the 'great coalition' to reconstruct the union. At the Quebec conference in October, according to D'Arcy McGee, a fellow delegate, Mowat took a 'constant and honourable share' ('Parliamentary Debates', 137) in drafting the federal plan that would be embodied in the 'British North America Act' of 1867. On 14 November 1864 his contributions as a father of confederation ended when he accepted the vice-chancellorship of Upper Canada. 
In chancery, Mowat rendered about 500 judgments, many of which became Canadian precedents. The work was congenial, and allowed him time for family and the general reading that he enjoyed. But his income was less than as a lawyer, and he was disappointed at being passed over for the chancellorship in 1870. He may have retained some political ambition as well. At any rate, on 24 October 1872 he resigned from the bench and accepted the invitation to head the Liberal government in his native province, which had been renamed Ontario in 1867 and was still adjusting to life in the new dominion of Canada. This unprecedented return of a judge to the political arena was denounced by both the opposition and the legal profession as a 'rude shock' to the independence of the judiciary. Still, the consensus was that, while vice-chancellor, Mowat had shown no 'tendency to fear, favor, or affection' ('Canada Law Journal', 8, 1872, 264-5; 33, 1897, 748-9). 
Mowat, who thus became Ontario premier by appointment, took also the portfolio of attorney-general, and was elected to the legislature in Oxford North. Inexperienced in leading a government and a party, he proved a master of the art. He chose as colleagues men who were of proven ability and integrity like himself, and maintained unity in cabinet and caucus with a firm hand. His government redrew constituency boundaries carefully, but with little evidence of gerrymandering. It utilized patronage, but without scandal, for Mowat personally controlled its volume and required honesty and efficiency in the recipients. 
Mowat's Liberals defeated the Conservatives and several third parties in six successive elections, though mostly with small margins in the popular vote, and he remained premier for almost twenty-four years. Contributing to his success, according to one of his ministers, was his 'sagacity' (Ross, 192) in assessing public opinion on divisive questions such as temperance or franchise reform. When Ontarians were ready, his government gradually stiffened restraints on the liquor trade, and widened the electorate until manhood suffrage was reached in 1888. A secret ballot modelled on the English was introduced in 1874. On the other hand, although Mowat sympathized in the 1890s with the suffragettes and, an abstainer himself, with the prohibitionists, he side-stepped both because, in his familiar phrase, 'the time was not ripe' ('The Globe' [Toronto], 11 May 1893). 
Issues of religion and race, the most contentious of all, were central in the elections of 1886, 1890, and 1894. Mowat, steadfast in the faith of his fathers, had nevertheless a catholicity of spirit, strengthened by lifelong study of the history of Christianity, which gave him a deep respect for all creeds. He aimed at justice to Ontario's Roman Catholic and French-speaking minorities as well as to the protestant, Anglophone majority. Thus, while denying Orangemen a special act of incorporation, which was offensive to Catholicism, he conceded their right to incorporate under a general act; and, while taking steps to improve Roman Catholic separate schools and Francophone schools, he refused extension of the separate system, which would have alienated protestants. By his moderation and conciliation he built a party that accommodated disparate elements in the population. 
For many years, however, historians remembered not the canny practical politician who presided over the golden age of Ontario Liberalism, but the stubborn defender of provincial rights against the dominion. They claimed that his legal battles with prime minister John A. Macdonald contradicted his own earlier work for confederation and weakened the nation. 
Actually, Mowat's federalism was rooted in the Upper Canadian ideology of self-government. Under the 'British North America Act', he believed, provincial sovereignty was retained, lieutenant-governors possessed the traditional royal prerogatives of escheat, pardon, and appointment of queen's counsel, and provincial legislatures had co-ordinate powers with the federal. In his view it was Macdonald's theory of dominion paramountcy and subordinate provinces that was a false construction. Their jurisdictional clashes were intensified by personal antagonism dating from the 1850s when Mowat joined the Reformers. Political advantage was also at stake. For example, although Macdonald dubbed Mowat a 'little tyrant' ('The Mail' [Toronto], 2 June 1882) for his persistence in their quarrel over the authority to grant liquor licences, the fact was that neither leader wanted to yield control of such a rich source of patronage. Similarly, Mowat resisted dominion disallowance of his 'Rivers and Streams Act' in 1881, 1882, and 1883 because he perceived a threat both to provincial autonomy and to the public interest in Ontario's waterways, which were essential for the lumbering operations that produced considerable revenue for his government. 
Mowat's vision for Canada was different from Macdonald's, but he was no less patriotic, as he demonstrated in his 1890s crusade against the advocates of commercial and political union with the United States. His interpretation of the constitution was confirmed by privy council decisions recognizing the provinces within their spheres as 'supreme' ('Hodge', 1883) and the lieutenant-governors as representatives of the crown in the provinces ('Maritime Bank', 1892). 
Mowat's prolonged boundary struggle with the dominion and province of Manitoba was territorial, not constitutional. Meticulously he gathered evidence to document before the privy council in 1884 and 1888 Ontario's claim from Lake Superior westwards to Lake of the Woods and northwards to the Albany River and James Bay. His victory was complete. Ontario acquired a vast domain with invaluable timber and mineral resources. 
Research since the 1960s has turned attention to Mowat's policies for the province's internal development. These were the major part of the 'record' that won repeated favour at the polls. His government stimulated every economic sector, helping Ontario to prosper despite the world depression. Agriculture, still the main occupation, received leadership from a new department of agriculture and a new agricultural college and experimental farm. Business and trade benefited from the political stability, provincial grants to railways criss-crossing the southern peninsula in the 1870s, and numerous public works, including dignified parliament buildings completed in 1893. Opening of the north, to complement the agricultural and industrial south, was aided by immigration propaganda, free land, and colonization railways and roads. Encouragement was given to the infant mining industry while ensuring that it furnish public revenue by a charge on ores. While it was uninterested in reforestation, the government did act to protect the forests from fire, check the extinction of fish and game, and begin three provincial parks for conservation and recreation. 
Challenged by the human problems emergent with late nineteenth-century industrialization and urbanization, Mowat departed from the 'laissez-faire' of the earlier Reformers and assumed many new responsibilities for the welfare of society, albeit with a wary eye to their cost and political acceptability. His government intervened in employer-employee relations by providing for arbitration of industrial disputes, workmen's compensation, regulation of working conditions in factories, shops, and mines, and protection, by liens, of mechanics' earnings. Education was brought under a minister, and modernized in so many respects that at the 1893 Chicago Exposition the province was honoured by a special award for 'a system of Public Instruction almost ideal in the perfection of its details' (Ontario Legislative Assembly, 'Sessional Papers' 1897, No. 1, Appendix Q). Various measures furnished protection for public health, neglected children, and women's property rights. As 'ex officio' bencher, Mowat insisted that the Law Society permit women to study and practise law. As attorney-general, he made the judicial system more efficient by instalments of legislation which culminated in 1881 in fusing, as in England, the old rival common law and equity courts. 
Mowat's balanced developmental programmes, hesitant though some appear today, set Ontario on the path towards the economic empire and broad social services of the twentieth century. They reveal the essence of his Liberalism: his consideration for all classes, his adherence to British patterns, his trademark blend of caution and progress. B. B. Osler, one of his supporters, commented: 'He kept the brakes on, but the motive power was always there' ('The Globe' [Toronto], 27 April 1892). 
Mowat was created KCMG in 1892 and GCMG in 1897. In 1893 Wilfrid Laurier, the Canadian Liberal leader, nominated him, 'as a veteran in the cause of Reform' ('Official Report of the Liberal Convention', 1893, 5), to chair the national party convention, and on the eve of the 1896 federal election persuaded him to enter dominion politics. The election won, Mowat resigned the premiership on 13 July, and was appointed a senator and Laurier's minister of justice. His main task was to assist in settling the Manitoba schools controversy. 
In Ottawa Mowat found his 'ten-hour days' exhausting (letter to Edward Blake, 1 July 1897, Blake MSS, Archives of Ontario). He returned to Toronto as Ontario's lieutenant-governor on 18 November 1897. But the social and ceremonial functions of this office grew difficult as his strength and eyesight failed. A fall and severe fracture hastened his death, at Government House, on 19 April 1903. He was buried on 22 April in Mount Pleasant cemetery. In his long and diverse public life he had played vital roles in defining the nature of the Canadian federation and transforming Ontario from a small frontier colony to a large, mature province. 


@@@@@


doc= 35137


Mowatt, Sir Francis (1837-1919), civil servant, was born in New South Wales, Australia, on 27 April 1837, the only son of Francis Mowatt (1803-1891), MP for Falmouth (1847-52) and for Cambridge (1854-7), and his wife, Sarah Sophia, daughter of Captain Barnes of Romford, Essex, of the East India Company's marine service. His sister Jane was married to Vernon Lushington (1832-1912), permanent secretary to the Admiralty (1849-77). 
Mowatt was educated at Harrow School (1851-3) and Winchester College, and went to St John's College, Oxford, in March 1855, but left after a year, having received a nomination to compete for a Treasury clerkship. In one of the first limited competitive examinations conducted by the newly established civil service commission he easily beat the other nominee, but scored only 880 marks out of a possible 1545. His annual salary as a third-class clerk was $100, rising to $250. 
On 9 June 1864, at the age of twenty-seven, and with a salary of $430, he married Lucy Sophia (died 1896), daughter of John Andrew Frerichs of Thirlestaine Hall, Cheltenham, and widow of Count Stenbock of Kolk, Estonia. The couple had three sons and three daughters. 
Mowatt spent the whole of his career at the Treasury, reaching the top position of permanent secretary in 1895. He was made CB in 1884, advanced to KCB in 1893, and was created GCB in 1901. Three years after his retirement in 1903 he was sworn of the privy council. In forty-seven years in the department he made steady but unspectacular progress through the ranks, his career and contribution overshadowed by his brilliant older contemporary Reginald Welby, who had joined the Treasury in the same year, and, in his later years, by the younger Edward Hamilton. Unlike either, Mowatt was never chosen to serve as private secretary to Treasury ministers. He spent all of his early and middle career in the divisions, and in those where the opportunities to make a mark or to show potential were far fewer. Where Welby and Hamilton each in turn acquired the reputation of the Treasury's financial expert, Mowatt languished in the dull routine of controlling the expenditure of law courts and the justice system. He was promoted second-class clerk in 1860, and ten years later first-class clerk in the assistant secretary's division, with a salary of $700 rising to $900. He was promoted principal clerk in charge of that division in 1881, by which time Welby had been promoted over the heads of seven of his seniors to the position of deputy head of the department. That position Mowatt reached in July 1888, at the age of fifty-one, and as assistant secretary and auditor of the civil list, with a salary of $1500. As such he was Welby's deputy, and was appointed permanent secretary on the latter's retirement in 1895. Sir George Murray, a junior colleague who later succeeded him as permanent secretary, remembered 'a keen sense of humour, a genial cynicism, unfailing good temper, and a sagacious appreciation of what was feasible' ('DNB'). There was at that time less obvious friction between the Treasury and the spending ministries, the long-running debate over the nature and effectiveness of its control of expenditure having temporarily subsided after the inquiry of the Ridley commission of 1887. 
Mowatt was due to retire in 1902 at the age of sixty-five, but was persuaded to stay on for a further year, partly because of the failing health of Sir Edward Hamilton, who had been groomed for the succession. The post of permanent secretary was divided between them -- Mowatt as joint permanent (administrative) secretary, Hamilton as joint permanent (financial) secretary -- thus establishing the precedent to be followed until the appointment of Sir Warren Fisher in 1919. 
Mowatt's deferred retirement was also owed partly to political expedience. With some relish he became embroiled in that episode for which he is perhaps best remembered. At the end of a long and distinguished career it is perhaps unfortunate that his name became indissolubly linked with the political manoeuvring over free trade which divided Balfour's cabinet. Steeped in the tradition of financial orthodoxy and free trade which characterized the stance of the Treasury and most of its senior officials throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, he was, if anything, more passionately committed to the doctrines of Gladstonian Liberalism than Welby. In his last year of office that commitment led him to compromise his position as the impartial head of the department. The chancellor, Charles Ritchie, was convinced that the corn duty introduced by his predecessor, Hicks Beach, in the budget of 1902 should be withdrawn. The fiscal strategy underlying that budget had been devised largely by Sir Edward Hamilton and his deputy, Robert Chalmers, in a fit of protectionist apostasy which both soon regretted. Ritchie's attempt to repeal the corn duty was defeated in cabinet, and he and his Treasury officials then 'worked hard to pull the mat from under Chamberlain's feet' (Roseveare, 222). Mowatt and other Treasury officials now openly canvassed support for Ritchie among the members of the government. 'In resisting Chamberlain Mowatt was not content, as were his senior colleagues, merely to stiffen the Chancellor Charles Ritchie through the medium of private counsel.... He remonstrated face-to-face with Chamberlain on the streets' and 'schooled the young Conservative M.P. Winston Churchill in the name of the anti-protectionist cause' (Barberis, 10), something he was to do on several occasions subsequently, to the detriment of Balfour's government (Gilbert, 154). The corn duty was withdrawn in the budget of 1903. Balfour regarded Mowatt's behaviour as 'that of a partisan and consequently subversive of all the loyalty which has characterised the Civil Servants of the Crown, no matter how much the measure is contrary to their individual opinions' (Hamilton, 436-7). The episode served to remind senior officials of the risk of becoming identified publicly with the causes of their political masters. 
After retirement Mowatt became an alderman of the London county council, alongside Welby; held directorships of several public companies and appointments connected with the University of London; and served on several royal commissions and official committees. He lived for some years at Patcham, near Brighton, and followed the South Down hunt. Later he returned to London, where, at 41 Sloane Gardens, Chelsea, he died on 20 November 1919, after suffering for some years from arteriosclerosis, attended by his daughter Hilda Russell, whose husband, William Russell, was the executor of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 35138


Moynihan, Berkeley George Andrew, first Baron Moynihan (1865-1936), abdominal surgeon, was born in Malta on 2 October 1865, youngest of three children and the only son of Captain Andrew Moynihan VC (1830-1867), of the 90th regiment, afterwards of the 8th foot (the King's regiment), and Ellen Anne, younger daughter of Thomas Parkin, cabinet-maker, of Hurst near Ashton under Lyne. His father, of Anglo-Irish origin and the third generation of the Moynihan to serve in the army, died of brucellosis (Malta fever) when Moynihan was about eighteen months old; his mother then settled in Leeds with her sister, the wife of Police-Sergeant Alfred Ball. Supported by a small army pension to his mother and a scholarship as an officer's son, and helped by the reputation of his father's decoration for gallantry, Moynihan was educated in London at Christ's Hospital (1875-81) and the Royal Naval School, New Cross (1881-3). He made little intellectual impact but did well at swimming, which remained his favourite recreation. Although he was originally intended to follow his forebears into the army, he opted instead to study medicine and entered the Leeds medical school, which was then at the Yorkshire College. He graduated MB, BS (London) in 1887. 
Loyal to his home institution Moynihan refused offers of a job elsewhere and was appointed house surgeon to William Mayo-Robson at the General Infirmary at Leeds, a post he held until early in 1889. Some (unrecorded) time in Berlin followed and he was then appointed resident surgical officer at the General Infirmary, a post which gave unrivalled experience of urgent admissions for surgical illnesses and which was generally regarded in the organization of large teaching hospitals as the path to preferment for an appointment to the consultant staff. In this post Moynihan attracted the attention of Thomas Richard Jessop, one of the senior surgeons in the area. Moynihan became Jessop's assistant in 1894 and also began his own private practice, but he was not elected to a vacancy which occurred at the infirmary in the same year, probably owing to (as his biographer notes) his youth and arrogance. However, two years later he became assistant surgeon at the infirmary; was advanced to full surgeon in 1906; and, after serving the then statutory twenty years, was appointed consulting surgeon in 1926. In 1909 he was made professor of clinical surgery in the University of Leeds, an institution which had been founded some years previously. In later years he had an additional practice in London by commuting from Leeds and employing assistants who profited professionally from the association. 
From 1896 the progress of Moynihan's surgical career was rapid, not only locally but also on the national and international stage. In this Moynihan was aided by his manual dexterity, his thoughtfulness about the underlying principles of the rapidly expanding discipline of abdominal surgery, by his undoubted qualities of oratory, and by his craftsmanship in the written word. According to E. W. Hey Groves: 'He took great care of his hands, keeping the skin from getting rough or cracked; while constantly, in idle moments, he practised feats of manual dexterity -- for example, knotting and unknotting a piece of string with the fingers of one hand, both left and right. (Groves, 13 April 1940, 604)' He also had a feel for the apt descriptive phrase: 'making the patient safe for surgery' (referring to the need for pre- and post-operative care), and 'the pathology of the living' (a plea for the study of disease in its early stages), being but two examples. The growth of his clinical practice was rapid and was certainly helped by what his 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry called (perhaps a shade unfairly) his 'consummate showmanship'. Nevertheless, his pre-eminence had yet been little recognized in Britain when, in May 1903, he was invited by the American Surgical Association (the senior surgical body in the USA) to read a paper at its meeting. The experience enabled him to form lasting friendships with surgeons who were at the helm of the discipline in the United States, such as the brothers William and Charles Mayo, and George Crile. Publication of a number of texts -- now inevitably dated but classics in their time -- took place over the years 1903-24 and enhanced his reputation. Virtually nothing that he wrote has stood the scientific test of time, though his interpretation of the cause of duodenal ulcer was justified by the knowledge then available. The analytic approach he adopted was, however, of importance in the development of his clinical method of careful assessment, gentle surgery, and good decision-making, all of which have survived. He was an advocate, though not a practitioner, of the scientific approach to surgery, including the need for surgical research; in particular some of his lectures, including the Hunterian oration in 1927 and the Romanes lecture in Oxford in 1932, endorse this view. 
Moynihan is remembered by surgeons chiefly for his surgical artistry but his influence went beyond this. He was part of the surgical establishment: elected to the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1912 and its president from 1926 for six years, he fostered its wider influence. He felt that eminent senior practising clinicians such as himself and Lord Dawson of Penn (president of the Royal College of Physicians) should develop and control medical research policy, and he was indeed able to persuade the college of surgeons in 1928 to establish an institute for research relevant to surgery at Buckstone Browne Farm (opened in 1933). However, the influence of the colleges on research was trenchantly opposed by Walter M. Fletcher, then largely responsible for the direction that the Medical Research Council was to take, who espoused the argument that it was not, in Gowland Hopkin's words to Fletcher, ''Distinguished Clinicians' who think the great thoughts which advance medicine'. The view which prevailed after a lengthy and often bitter clash both in public and in private correspondence was not that of Moynihan but of the non-clinical scientists, unfairly dubbed by him as truants from clinical research. Both sides had selective experience to support their views but it can be credibly argued that Moynihan's persistence and rhetoric entrenched an attitude that still persists in medical research in the UK. Moynihan was also unable to gain membership of the Royal Society, which he felt, without objectivity, was his due. He was also, because of his background as a 'provincial' surgeon in Yorkshire, convinced of the need for a more vociferous role for those outside London and campaigned for and founded both the 'British Journal of Surgery' in 1913 and the Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland in 1920. In addition his flamboyance and success resulted in the formation in 1909 of a surgical club -- ultimately to be called, when his baronetcy was awarded, the Moynihan Chirurgical Club -- which to the end of the century allowed a group of distinguished members of the profession to travel between centres of surgical activity. 
Between 1914 and 1915 Moynihan served in France as a consulting surgeon, rising to the rank of major-general. In this role he was influential in setting up the medical services for the British expeditionary force, particularly helped by his good command of both German and French. Later he continued as chairman of the Council of Consultants (1916-19) and as a member of the army medical advisory board. In 1917 he went to the United States as a semi-official delegate of the British government to promote American involvement in the war, a mission he conducted with great success -- largely the outcome of his ability to sway an audience. Moynihan was knighted in 1912; appointed CB in 1917 and KCMG in 1918; and made a baronet in 1922. He then, in the same year, became a peer as Baron Moynihan of Leeds. In the Lords he was less successful than would have been predicted from his oratorical experience elsewhere but he had some influence on the affairs of the day in medical fields such as osteopathy. His other honours were numerous and included many honorary doctorates and memberships of societies. 
Moynihan was married on 17 April 1895 to Isabella Wellesley Jessop ('b'. 1872/3), second daughter of his mentor in Leeds, Thomas Jessop. They had a son and two daughters. Lady Moynihan died on 1 September 1936, which seemed to remove Moynihan's will to live; he suffered a fatal stroke six days later at their home, Carr Manor, Meanwood, Leeds. He was buried, in spite of an offer of Westminster Abbey, in the Lawnswood cemetery at Leeds, the city with which he had identified throughout his career. 
Moynihan was a complex personality. He had exceptional skills in his chosen field, marked ability for self-promotion, a sense of his own importance, and the possession of the physical and mental ability to achieve. He answered to his own description of the 'ideal' surgeon: 'a handsome man of distinguished presence, a man of wide knowledge and general culture, a man of great technical skill and sound judgment, and a man of compassionate heart'. Whether he fulfilled his own definition is open to some lingering doubt. He stood 6 feet tall and was broad in proportion; until middle life his hair was a fiery red. He was widely read and had an organizational ability that carried him to the front of his profession. Many of his contemporaries thought him over-indulgent of his own skills and the younger generation in the 1920s and 1930s felt that his attitudes should give way to a more truly analytic and scientific approach. However, his was a landmark in the development of British surgical practice and he mixed his individualistic personality with real contributions to surgical care and organization. 


@@@@@


doc= 35139


Mozley, John Kenneth (1883-1946), Church of England clergyman, was born on 8 January 1883 at Horsforth, Leeds, the third son of John Rickards Mozley (1840-1931), former fellow of King's College, Cambridge, and an inspector of workhouse schools under the Local Government Board, and his wife, Edith Merivale, daughter of Bonamy Price. Mozley obtained a scholarship at Malvern College (1896-1898), but after a serious illness was moved to Leeds grammar school. He proceeded to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1902, where he was a scholar. 
Mozley's career in the university was distinguished. He was president of the union, and was placed in the second division of the first class in part one of the classical tripos (1905) and the first class in part two of the theological tripos (1906). He gained the George Williams (1906) and Norrisian (1909) prizes and the Crosse (1906) and Allen (1907) scholarships. He was ordained deacon in 1909 and priest in 1910 and from 1907 until 1919 was a fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, of which he became dean in 1909. In 1910 he married Mary Geraldine (died 1941), daughter of the Revd John William Nutt, fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and rector of Harpsden, Henley-on-Thames. They had no children. 
In 1920 Mozley left Cambridge to take up the office of principal of Leeds Clergy School, where he remained until 1925 when the school was closed for lack of funds. He then moved to a similar post as warden of St Augustine's House, Reading. From 1920 until 1930 he was lecturer of Leeds parish church, a position he regarded highly and to which he returned in the last year of his life. 
Mozley was a Liberal in politics, but, on the whole, a conservative in ecclesiastical affairs. He represented an intelligent and well-informed Anglican orthodoxy, but at the same time he was deeply influenced by the writings of the Revd Dr Peter Taylor Forsyth, the Congregationalist. 
Mozley was seen by some contemporaries as one of the leading figures in the theological world of his generation. He was an important member of the archbishops' commission on Christian doctrine and one of his most learned books, 'The Impassibility of God' (1926), was the outcome of research undertaken for that commission. Among his writings his first published work, 'Ritschlianism' (1909), was a penetrating account of an influential theological movement. 'The Doctrine of the Atonement' (1915) is perhaps the best example of Mozley's power of exposition and the clearest statement of his fundamental convictions. But Mozley's most significant contribution was perhaps his ability to write simply and to interest many among the lay population in theological issues. He wrote a series of popular articles on religious matters for 'The Times'. A contemporary said of him that 'though he was a scholarly theologian and churchman he had nothing of the 'highbrow' or ecclesiastic about him' ('The Times', 25 Nov 1946, 7). A good example of his more popular published work is 'The Beginnings of Christian Theology' (1931). 
The reputation built by Mozley's writings led to his being made a canon of St Paul's in 1930 and chancellor of the cathedral in 1931, playing a role in running the cathedral as well as presenting regular sermons which were both theological and evangelistic in tone. From 1937 to 1944 he was preacher of Lincoln's Inn. In 1941 Mozley felt compelled to resign his canonry because of his poor health, exacerbated by the strain of life in St Paul's during the night bombing of the City, and also the shock of the sudden death of his wife in that year, which was a consequence of the strain of continuous air raids. After his retirement Mozley continued to promote theological study, working particularly with women who were reading for the Lambeth diploma. He died at Merivale, Oak Road, Headingley, Leeds, on 23 November 1946, and was buried at Paddington new cemetery, Mill Hill, London, on 27 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 35140


Muddiman, Sir Alexander Phillips (1875-1928), administrator in India, was born at Leighton Buzzard on 14 February 1875, the second son of Alexander Phillips Muddiman, bookseller and publisher, and his wife, Anne Griffiths. Muddiman was educated at Wimborne School and University College, London. He passed the Indian Civil Service examination in 1897 and joined the service in Bengal in 1899. 
Muddiman's ability attracted attention, but his career did not follow a typical pattern. After three years in the districts he became an under-secretary to the Bengal government, then registrar on the appellate side in the Calcutta high court and, in 1910, deputy secretary in the legislative department of the government of India. He remained quite inconspicuous on the great issues of the day, confining himself largely to legal and technical matters; for example in 1917, amid pleas for increases in executive powers, Muddiman recommended quasi-judicial commissions to deal with those suspected of violent 'sedition'. He played no important part in the making of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms (1915-19), but was appointed to represent the government of India on Lord Southborough's committee on franchises and other rules of business, touring India and on deputation to London (1918-19). Significant political issues were involved in the details, when the franchise was being extended from a few thousands to several millions of voters, but again Muddiman's role seems to have been chiefly one of drafting, for example of the regulations for the conduct of legislative business. In this narrow sense he was well qualified for his later close involvement with the reformed councils, though there was general surprise when he was appointed president of the council of state, the new central upper house. As chairman he was courteous, imperturbable, and conciliatory. 
In March 1924 Muddiman became home member in the government of India. Unlike his notable predecessors, the inventive William Vincent or the influential but inflexible Reginald Craddock, Muddiman did not need to devise new strategies for dealing with nationalist agitation. His term coincided with a largely constitutional phase in the politics of the Indian National Congress, and was remembered chiefly for Muddiman's pledge in March 1925 -- an early instance of positive discrimination -- to reserve places for Muslims in the Indian Civil Service, appointing by nomination to make up any shortfall after the competitive examination. Nor did Muddiman devote great attention to the details of administration. For him the important focus -- unintentionally appropriate to the emerging political order -- remained the legislature, where he was now the official leader of the assembly (or lower house). Again he showed calm and good humour. 
Muddiman was the obvious person, in 1924, to head a committee appointed to report on the workings of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, the most exposed and political task of his career. Scarcely had the new legislatures met in 1920 when the Liberal Party, though co-operating in the reforms, called for a constitutional revision to allow at least provincial autonomy. Urgency grew after the election of the Congressite Swaraj Party members in 1924. The Muddiman committee was appointed to resist a constitutional conference demanded of the new British Labour government by the Swaraj Party leader, Motilal Nehru. By this time members of the government of India also expected that full provincial self-government would be conceded, if only to preserve British power at the centre. Muddiman's job was to produce a consensus for further concessions, to forestall more radical revisions. His task was complicated by calls to reverse the 1919 reforms rather than extend them, especially after the formation of a Conservative government in Britain, and the appointment as secretary of state for India of the ignorant and prejudiced Birkenhead, who thought the reforms ill-conceived and 'extremely mischievous' since it was inconceivable that India would ever be fit for dominion government. 
The workings of 'dyarchy' (division of the provincial functions of government between civil servants and ministers drawn from the legislatures) had been criticized for a lack of joint deliberations between the two wings of government, for confusions of responsibility, and for excessive financial controls, all matters related to Muddiman's drafting of the rules of business but also inherent in a divided administration. There were more general criticisms of a want of co-operation from British officials and of the lack of real authority vested in the ministers, especially collectively. Though he stuck at the task for eighteen months Muddiman did not succeed in securing a unanimous report from his committee. A minority of four (Sapru, Sivaswamy Aiyer, Jinnah, and Paranjpye) were strongly critical of the system's basic weakness and contradictions, and its operation in Bengal and the Central Provinces. A majority of five concluded that the problems were inevitable and transitional. Their denial of failure was important for resisting pressure to abandon the experiment. Admitted failures, being attributed to diarchy as well as the conditions and spirit of its operation, strengthened the arguments for a further transfer of power to Indians. Such a line was adopted in the report of the Simon commission (1930), but most significantly in practice in the extension of the reforms in 1935. 
Muddiman was knighted in 1922 and created KCSI in 1926. At the end of 1927 he was appointed governor of the United Provinces. But he was already a sick man, and on 17 July 1928, after barely six months in office, he died at Naini Tal of heart failure. 
As a legal draftsman Muddiman had an elegant and clear style, but he was not a profound or learned lawyer. His good nature and high spirits led him to take a larger part in the British social life of Simla and Delhi than was usual for high officials in colonial India; in particular he was a brilliant bridge player. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 35141


Muir, Edwin (1887-1959), poet and literary critic, was born on 15 May 1887 at The Folly, Ayre, on the Orkney mainland, the youngest of six children of James Muir (1833-1902), farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth Cormack (1843-1907). Two years later the family moved to the Bu, a 100 acre farm on the small island of Wyre, where there was a strong sense of community among its few families. Edwin also felt a larger unity -- between the human community and the animals and the natural surroundings. In his home the evenings were filled with story-telling and singing. When he was eight the family moved to Garth, another 100 acre -- but less good -- farm, 4 miles from Kirkwall, on the mainland. He went irregularly to Kirkwall burgh school and began to read voraciously. When he was fourteen the family moved to Glasgow -- a sudden transition from a pre-industrial community into the modern world. His father and his second brother, Willie (1877-1902), died within a month of each other. His mother then died three months after his third brother, Johnnie (1879-1906). Muir worked as an office boy in a law office and then in a publishing office; in a beer-bottling firm in Glasgow; and from 1903 to 1914 as a clerk in a bone factory in Greenock. He then returned to Glasgow and worked in a shipbuilding office in Renfrew during the war, having been rejected by the army as physically unfit. As a boy he had experienced two conversions at revivalist meetings but his early religious faith was undermined by what he saw in the slums and by the deaths of his brothers, and was replaced by faith in socialism and later by Nietzscheanism, two philosophies which he desperately tried to reconcile. He was a member of the Clarion scouts, of the Independent Labour Party, and of the guild socialist movement. He contributed to the 'New Age', from 1913, propagandist verses and, later, aphorisms in the manner of Nietzsche, which were collected in 'We Moderns' (1918). 

Willa Muir, nee Wilhelmina Johnston Anderson (1890-1970), remembered Muir at their first meeting in 1918: '[his] eyes and mouth promised well; his brow was an intellectual's, disproportionately wide and high, very noticeable above the slight, even meagre body, yet his eyes were dreamy looking, sea-blue, with a hint of distance in them, and his mouth was well cut, with full, sensitive lips. (W. Muir, 'Belonging', 15)' On 7 June 1919 they married: 'My marriage', said Muir, 'was the most fortunate event of my life' ('Autobiography', 147). He left Glasgow for London, where he became assistant to A. R. Orage on the 'New Age' and reviewed for 'The Athenaeum' and (drama) for 'The Scotsman'. The unhappiness of the Glasgow years had brought him close to nervous breakdown and he underwent a course of psychoanalysis. The analysis, more congenial work, and especially Willa Muir helped him to find inner peace in the years that followed, in Prague, Germany, Italy, and Austria (1921-4). Aged thirty-five he began to write poetry seriously, his 'First Poems' (1925) being published by the Hogarth Press. 
In Montrose and Buckinghamshire (1924-5), France (1926-7), Surrey (1927-9), Sussex (1929-32), Hampstead (1932-5), and St Andrews (1935-42) Muir made his living by voluminous work as a critic and reviewer; he also wrote three novels, 'The Marionette' (1927), 'The Three Brothers' (1931), and -- possibly the most successful -- the semi-autobiographical 'Poor Tom' (1932). Muir shared with Willa a dislike of Calvinism, which was confirmed for him by working on his 'John Knox: Portrait of a Calvinist' (1929). He and Willa also had mixed feelings about Scotland, some of which were expressed in his 'Scottish Journey' (1935), and even more so in 'Scott and Scotland: the Predicament of the Scottish Writer' (1936), where his criticism of Scottish literature and doubts about the viability of Scots as a language for intellectual thought led to the ending of his friendship with C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid). His torn feelings about being Scottish and a writer had already been expressed in 1931 to James Whyte, editor of the 'Modern Scot' (to which both Muirs contributed): 'we are neither quite Scottish... nor are we quite delivered from our Scottishness... The very words 'a Scottish writer' have a slightly unnerving ring to me; what they come down to... is a writer of Scottish birth' (10 Sept 1931, NL Scot., MS 19703.7; 'Selected Letters', 71). He and Willa Muir, a better linguist who did much of the work, produced about forty volumes of translations, mostly from German authors, including Hermann Broch, Lion Feuchtwanger, and Gerhart Hauptmann; they were particularly known for introducing Franz Kafka's works to the English-speaking world. 
Muir's criticism is contained in about a thousand reviews, in numerous articles -- some collected in 'Latitudes' (1924), 'Transition: Essays on Contemporary Literature' (1926), and 'Essays on Literature and Society' (1949), and posthumously in 'Edwin Muir: Uncollected Scottish Criticism' (1982) and 'The Truth of Imagination: some Uncollected Reviews and Essays' (1988) -- in broadcast talks, and in 'The Structure of the Novel' (1928), 'The Present Age, from 1914' (1939), and 'The Estate of Poetry' (1962), his Charles Eliot Norton lectures at Harvard University. His criticism is marked by scrupulous fairness and independence of judgement; T. S. Eliot thought it 'the best of our time' ('The Times', 7 Jan 1959). In 'An Autobiography' (1954), a longer version of 'The Story & the Fable' (1940), an impressionistic narrative as much concerned with dreams and his intellectual development as factual detail, Muir took a more philosophic approach than Willa Muir was to take in 'Belonging' (1968). His mature prose reflects his character -- quiet, lucid, witty without striving for effect. In 1954 he sent three poems to Janet Adam Smith: 'in doubt and trembling, for I have been writing prose so long, finishing my autobiography, that verse is now awkward to me: one seems to write prose and poetry with different hands, and whether the right or the left is the poetic one is hard to say... You mustn't think I am unhappy because the poems are; they came from I don't know where.(25 Oct 1954, NL Scot., MS 19703.17; 'Selected Letters', 169)' Muir's poetry is generally seen as his great achievement. Coming to the form late ('[initially] I wrote in baffling ignorance, blundering and perpetually making mistakes' ('Autobiography', 201) he went on maturing to the end, and wrote his best poems when over fifty. He used traditional metres and made no startling innovations in technique, being concerned only to convey his vision clearly and honestly. Beneath the story of his life he saw the fable of man -- Eden, the fall, the journey through the labyrinth of time. He made much use of his dreams and of myths, for in them the fable is most clearly seen. In his later poems he was able to relate a widening range of temporal experiences -- the Second World War, the communist victory in Prague, fears of atomic war, his marriage -- to his perception of an underlying timeless reality. He experienced to the full the doubts and fears characteristic of the twentieth century and came to see the incarnation as the answer to the problems of time and eternity, necessity and freedom; but his poetry embodied vision rather than belief. Immortality was to him a state of being, something immediately experienced. He wrote in 1939 that he had: 'believed for many years in the immortality of the soul; all my poetry springs from that in one form or another; and belief of that kind means belief in God, though my God is not that of the churches, and I can reconcile myself to no church... I look upon myself as an anti-Marx socialist; a man who believes that people are immortal souls and that they should bring about on this earth a society fit for immortal souls.(to Sydney Schiff, 16 Jan 1939, BL, Add. MS 52920, fols. 179-80; 'Selected Letters', 107)' The apparently simple words in his poems carry a great weight of meaning. The poems themselves are mostly short but are not fragments -- all are related to his central vision of the mystery of our common humanity. T. S. Eliot was struck by 'the power of his early work' but thought his late work was 'the most remarkable' (Eliot, 10); Willa Muir asked Kathleen Raine, who was to review him in the 'New Statesman', not to 'forget the sweet, lighter poems he wrote. Eliot, in his desire to present Edwin as an orthodox Christian, overdid, I think, the desolations and the saintliness. Edwin's wine could never be contained in any orthodox creed' (7 April 1960, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 109). His collected poems, co-edited by Willa Muir, were published in 1960. 
From 1942 to 1945 Muir worked for the British Council in Edinburgh, after which he was director of its institutes in Prague (1945-8) and Rome (1949-50), and warden of Newbattle Abbey (1950-55), an adult education college near Edinburgh. After a year as Charles Eliot Norton professor at Harvard (1955-6) he and Willa settled at Swaffham Prior, near Cambridge. He was appointed CBE in 1953 and received honorary degrees from Prague (1947), Edinburgh (1947), Rennes (1949), Leeds (1955), and Cambridge (1958): 'He is now five times a doctor -- quite enough' (Willa Muir to Violet Schiff, 1 Nov 1958, BL, Add. MS 52920). He died in Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 3 January 1959 and was buried at Swaffham Prior. He left one son, Gavin (1927-1991), and Willa Muir, who died in 1970. 

'The Complete Poems of Edwin Muir' was published in 1991. Muir was a man of complete integrity; gentle, unassuming, and vulnerable, but with firm tenacity of purpose; sometimes abstracted, but strongly affectionate and quick in sympathy. He spoke in a soft, lilting voice and sang almost in tune. 


@@@@@


doc= 35142


Muir, (John) Ramsay Bryce (1872-1941), historian and politician, was born on 30 September 1872 at Otterburn, Northumberland, the oldest of five children of the Revd Alexander Bryce Muir and his wife, Jane, daughter of Thomas Rowatt of Edinburgh. Muir's father, Reformed Presbyterian minister at Otterburn and later Birkenhead, Cheshire, died while Ramsay was a child. After private schooling in Birkenhead, Muir attended University College, Victoria University, Liverpool, from 1889 to 1894, and Balliol College, Oxford, where he held a Brackenbury scholarship and gained first classes in 'literae humaniores' (1897) and modern history (1898). 
From 1898 to 1899 Muir was assistant lecturer in history, under T. F. Tout, at the University of Manchester. In 1899 he became lecturer in history, and in 1906 professor, at his Liverpool alma mater, where he remained until resigning in 1913. At Liverpool, Muir was active in faculty politics, being influential in promoting student self-government and in securing a university charter in 1903. A visiting lectureship at the University of Punjab in India (1913-14), preceded Muir's assuming the professorship of modern history at the University of Manchester. His tenure at Manchester was interrupted in 1917-19 by service on a commission investigating Calcutta University and Indian post-secondary education. He resigned his professorship in 1921 to begin the political work that monopolized most of the rest of his life. 
Muir was a prolific writer of textbooks and popular works on history, international relations, economics, and politics, including the widely used 'Short History of the British Commonwealth' (2 vols., 1920-22). He was also co-author (with George Philip and Robert McElroy) of several respected historical atlases. Although Muir projected works of original scholarship, notably a biography of Warren Hastings, his busy life as teacher and subsequently politician precluded them, and his career as a historical writer was 'unfinished' ('DNB'). His only researched study was a 'History of Liverpool', published in 1907. 
After the First World War, Muir became interested in the revival of the Liberal Party through a programme of economic and social reform. His book 'Liberalism and Industry' (1920), endorsed by the National Liberal Federation, was widely viewed as initiating a Liberal renaissance. He was one of the founders, in 1921, of the Liberal summer school, an annual colloquium on contemporary issues, intended to restore interest and confidence in the party as an instrument of change. Under Muir's leadership and inspiration, the school -- held in alternate years at Cambridge and Oxford -- survived until 1939, although after 1931 it was in decline like the Liberal Party itself. Throughout its existence and beyond, the summer school was a source of ideas for all political parties. 
Muir was an assiduous Liberal journalist and propagandist. After sale of 'The Nation' in 1922 to a consortium headed by John Maynard Keynes, Muir was considered for the editorship, but he and Keynes were unable to agree on terms. In addition to contributing frequently to 'The Nation' from 1923 to 1930, Muir was editor of the 'Weekly Westminster', a subsidiary of the 'Westminster Gazette', from 1923 to 1926. He also edited during the 1930s the 'Westminster Newsletter', a weekly commentary on Liberal Party affairs. 
During the 1920s and 1930s Muir was deeply involved in Liberal electoral politics and party organization. A member of the House of Commons for Rochdale for only a few months during the 1923-4 parliament, he unsuccessfully contested this constituency in 1922, 1924, and 1929, as well as other seats in general and by-elections in 1926, 1931, and 1935. He was active in the Liberal and Radical Candidates' Association during the 1920s. 
Muir was a prominent figure in the National Liberal Federation (NLF) and the Liberal Central Association, the party's London headquarters. Service as chairman of the party's executive, the organization committee, in 1930-31 was followed by the chairmanship (1931-3) and presidency (1933-6) of the NLF. He was a driving spirit behind the party reorganization of 1936, and briefly (in 1936) acted as vice-president of the new Liberal Party Organization (LPO). From 1936 until his death he chaired the education and propaganda committee of the LPO and contributed to party literature. During the early part of the Second World War, Muir was a volunteer writer and lecturer for the Ministry of Information. He died, unmarried, at his home, Roseneath, Elm Park Road, Pinner, Middlesex, on 4 May 1941. 
Muir was an articulate if not especially creative political thinker. His ideas in many ways constituted a regression from the radical, social democratic 'new Liberalism' of the early 1900s to a more traditional, individualistic Liberalism. He placed his faith in rational progress and enlightened capitalism, while seeing much room for improvement in the industrial system. He was critical of socialism, which he thought encouraged class conflict, and trade unions, which he believed tyrannized over their members. He viewed defence of private property and personal freedom, and promotion of equal opportunity, as more important obligations of the state than provision of welfare. He maintained that only the industrious and thrifty were worthy of any but minimal social benefits, and that high taxation undermined the motivation needed to create and increase national wealth. Government, he argued, should create a level playing field for free enterprise but resist unnecessary intervention in the economy. He defended free trade, even after it became a political liability in the 1930s. 
Muir's ideas paralleled those of David Lloyd George, whose leadership of the Liberal Party in the late 1920s he generally supported although never fully trusted. He was an important contributor to the policy studies sponsored by Lloyd George which in 1928 produced 'Britain's Industrial Future', better known as the yellow book. 
Ramsay Muir was impressive and dignified in appearance, and possessed a mellifluous, resonant voice. He was in great demand and much admired as a public speaker, and during his brief parliamentary tenure was respected by colleagues and journalists for his debating skill. He became renowned for his proficiency in digesting and simplifying complex data, in both speech and writing -- although he had a weakness for polysyllabic words. He avoided rancour and never belittled opponents. His habitual manner of grave courtesy was relieved by quiet humour and the ability to laugh at his own foibles. Muir's charming eccentricities -- as well as his generosity, modesty, sincerity, and idealism -- endeared him to many. 


@@@@@


doc= 35143


Muir, Sir Robert (1864-1959), pathologist, was born at Balfron, Stirlingshire, on 5 July 1864, the second child and only son of the Revd Robert Muir (died 1882), a Presbyterian minister of saintly character and decidedly liberal outlook, and his wife, Susan Cameron, daughter of William Duncan, a Dundee merchant. Soon after Muir's birth his father became minister of Allans Church, Hawick. One of Muir's four sisters wrote short stories, another was a classical scholar of Edinburgh University, and the youngest, Anne Davidson Muir, acquired fame in Scotland as a painter in watercolours, especially of flowers. In later life Muir, who never married, lived with two of his sisters. 
Following a brilliant career at Hawick high school and at Teviot Grove Academy, Muir entered the University of Edinburgh in 1880 with the Sir Walter Scott bursary in classics and mathematics. He graduated MA in 1884 and MB, CM with first-class honours in 1888, after obtaining the Grierson bursary and the much coveted Vans Dunlop research scholarship. He also undertook coaching, for his father's death left him with considerable family responsibilities. Nevertheless he chose the rather precarious career of pathology, largely through the influence of William Smith Greenfield, Edinburgh's unrivalled pathologist and clinician. Muir acquired valuable experience as a clinician, bacteriologist, and what was later called haematologist as assistant to Greenfield (1892-8) and lecturer on pathological bacteriology (1894-8). He examined at the university and at the royal colleges of physicians and surgeons of Edinburgh and fostered closer personal contacts between staff and students, with whom he was a universal favourite. With James Ritchie, lecturer in pathology at Oxford, he wrote the 'Manual of Bacteriology' (1897) which went through many editions. 
In 1898 Muir was called to the new chair of pathology at St Andrews, held in Dundee, where his reputation as an original researcher and far-seeing administrator led to the offer of the chair of pathology at Glasgow, which he held from 1899 until 1936. There he gained world fame as a teacher, investigator, and writer, for in 1924 his 'Textbook of Pathology' became a substantial success and long maintained a place among the leaders. Muir served on the university court at Glasgow, the Medical Research Council (1928-32), the councils of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund and the British Empire Cancer Campaign, and on committees for the investigation of foot and mouth disease. During the First World War he held the rank of lieutenant-colonel and was in charge of the pathological and bacteriological routine of the 3rd and 4th Scottish general hospitals, and also acted as inspector of laboratories in Scotland. Elected FRS in 1911 he served on the council (1926-7) and was awarded a royal medal for his work on immunity in 1929. He was knighted in 1934, and received numerous honorary degrees and fellowships; he was awarded the Lister medal for 1936. 
Muir's discoveries fit so well into the mosaic of progress in pathology that it is difficult to realize now how fresh and original they seemed at the time of their announcement. His papers teem with unusual observations and offer many admirable lessons in planning and explaining experiments for the young pathologist. Muir was an unrivalled exponent on diseases of the blood cells, largely because he realized that much of their puzzling behaviour reflects the closely geared relationship between the bone marrow, where the red corpuscles and many of the white corpuscles are formed, and the sites of cell destruction. From these studies came fundamental knowledge about the processes during infection. Red cell destruction was linked up with iron metabolism, since these corpuscles are important iron carriers, and this led him to explain some of the anomalies of anaemia. This brought him to immunology, where he raised the status of the United Kingdom in world immunology. In his latter years he returned to the problems of cancer and in a brilliant series of papers devoted to cancer of the breast he clarified the relationship between the various types. His microscopical study of Paget's disease of the nipple is unsurpassed and has left no doubt about the serious nature of this misleading disease. 
Muir was a shy, aloof man who gave praise rarely, never shirked an unpleasant duty, yet seldom made an enemy. Only his most intimate friends knew of the warm heart which was carefully concealed by a deliberately cultivated austerity. He knew instinctively when young people needed help and made it his business to see that it was forthcoming. His habit of absent-mindedly pocketing other people's matches, his fanatical devotion to golf, and his ill-concealed delight in deflating pompous colleagues endeared him to his juniors. Many good stories are told of him, some no doubt invented, for his Olympian reserve was fair game for boisterous Scottish students. They were devoted to the one and only 'Bobby' and he in turn loved them all. 
Muir retired in 1936 and spent the remainder of his life in Edinburgh where he quietly pursued his interest in botany and geology, fished a stream, or played his favourite golf and bridge. He flew to Australia to see his eldest sister when he was close upon ninety; he died peacefully at 25 Belgrave Crescent, Edinburgh, on 30 March 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 35144


Muir, Sir William (1819-1905), administrator in India and Islamicist, born on 27 April 1819 in Glasgow, was the youngest child of William Muir (1783-1820), a Glasgow merchant, and his wife, Helen Macfie (1784-1866), of Ayrshire. The Sanskrit scholar John Muir (1810-1882) was his eldest brother. Widowed in 1820, his mother took her four surviving sons and four daughters to Kilmarnock, where William received a sound education at Kilmarnock Academy. He then studied briefly at both Edinburgh and Glasgow universities. Before he was able to graduate he entered East India College, Haileybury, on the nomination of his mother's uncle Sir James Shaw, a former lord mayor of London, who through company contacts obtained nominations as writers or cadets for his indigent nephews. Of the three brothers who had preceded William to Haileybury, two, James and Mungo, died after a short service in India. 
After his arrival in India in 1837 Muir was posted to the North-Western Provinces, and remained identified with that region for the next thirty-nine years, notably as its lieutenant-governor in the 1870s. He married, on 7 February 1840, Elizabeth Huntly (died 1897), daughter of James Wemyss, collector of Cawnpore. A series of junior postings in the revenue and judicial services in Cawnpore, Bundelkhand, and Fatehpur districts, which included responsibility for the settlement report on Hamirpur (1842), was followed by posts in the provincial capital of Agra, first as secretary to the board of revenue in 1848, and then, from 1852, as secretary to Lieutenant-Governor James Thomason, with whose evangelicalism and administrative innovations in the fields of land revenue and education he was very sympathetic. His first twenty years of Indian service proved him sound rather than exceptional. 
The sepoy mutiny and subsequent civil uprising of 1857-9 provided Muir with greater scope for initiative. On the death of Lieutenant-Governor John Russell Colvin shortly after rebel advances had necessitated the withdrawal of the European community into the Agra Fort, local responsibility was devolved to three middle-ranking civilians, including Muir. Special responsibility for intelligence made Muir also the nerve-centre for communications within and outside the region of revolt until British recovery began. His intelligence correspondence, an important source for understanding the nature and course of the rising up to January 1858, is deposited in Edinburgh University Library. Muir also wrote a memoir for his children entitled 'Agra in the Mutiny' which was published privately nearly forty years later. 
While his reliability during the 1857 crisis drew him to the governor-general's attention -- Lord Canning appointed him his secretary when the government was transferred to Allahabad in early 1858 -- Muir's career followed a steady rather than a dramatic course for a further ten years, notably on the provincial board of revenue from 1859 to 1865 and as foreign secretary to the government of India from 1865 to 1868. Although he was made KCSI in 1867, he had been passed over for the lieutenant-governorship of the North-Western Provinces in 1864. If his rather self-effacing character seemed to hold him back, in 1868 his rapport with the viceroy, John Lawrence, finally resulted in the provincial governorship; this appointment was extended until 1874 because of his reputation for maintaining stability. During his final two years in India, Muir was financial member of Lord Northbrook's council in Calcutta. He retired to Britain in late 1876 but continued to play an active role in Indian affairs until 1885, as a member of the Council of India in London. He was then appointed principal of Edinburgh University, his alma mater, retiring in 1903, aged eighty-four, with a reputation for benevolent scholarly patronage rather than for innovation. The Muir Institute, where oriental languages are still taught, commemorates the encouragement given by the Muir brothers, through the endowment of chairs and prizes, to the study of these languages in Edinburgh University. 
The entry on Muir in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' stressed his contribution to the stabilization of land revenue problems in north-west India after the convulsions of 1857-9. While Muir deserves credit for this, other aspects of his career proved of longer-term significance, notably his Islamic scholarship and his educational endeavours, both in India and in Scotland. On the base provided by his predecessor, Thomason, he attempted to improve the educational provision in the north-west of India, his interests ranging from village vernacular schemes and female education to university provision for the elites of the region. His preoccupation with higher education reflected partly his perception of these elites, particularly the Muslims, as bulwarks of the raj in the north-west, and partly his evangelical conviction that education would be conducive to social reform and hence to 'civilization', and even to his personal goal of the reception of Christian values. The Muir Central College, opened in Allahabad in 1872, marked the fruition of one of his plans when it became, in 1886, the core college for the province's first university. Muir was unsuccessful, however, in efforts to re-establish Persian as a medium of higher education alongside English, although his support for their interests won him the friendship of some influential members of the Muslim elites, notably the 'modernist' Sir Saiyid Ahmad Khan and the nawab of Rampur state. His motives were questioned, however, by those -- Saiyid Ahmad Khan among them -- who found that his scholarly but evangelical critiques of Islamic civilization and history conflicted with Muslim values. 
Muir's publications on Islam were certainly controversial, but because he was the first British scholar to attempt a popular interpretation of Islamic history based on study of the Arabic sources, they were widely regarded as authoritative during the colonial era. While he acknowledged the influence of German Islamicists (notably Gustav Weil), Muir's work, notwithstanding its overt evangelical perspective, is original in many of its linguistic and historical assessments, which reflect sound Arabic learning. His 'Life of Mahomet: History of Islam to the Era of the Hegira' (4 vols., 1858-61) was based on his own translation of the 'Koran' and on his study of the Hadith collections and early Arabic biographies of the Prophet. It became the standard English biography, going through several editions in the nineteenth century and provoking retorts from Indian Muslim scholars. Less controversial in his own day, though criticized in the late twentieth century for an 'orientalist' perspective, were his Middle Eastern histories -- notably 'Annals of the Early Caliphate' (1883) and 'The Caliphate: its Rise, Decline and Fall' (1891) -- also based on Arabic sources. His scholarship was recognized by election as president of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1884, and by the award of the society's triennial jubilee gold medal in 1903. Other academic honours included the honorary degrees of DCL of Oxford (1882), LLD of Edinburgh and Glasgow, and DPhil of Bologna (1888). 
Throughout his career in India, but especially in retirement, Muir used his scholarship to support evangelical efforts to gain influence among Muslims. As a junior officer he had attended missionary debates with Muslims, later assisting the evangelical cause with publications such as 'Testimony Borne by the Coran to the Jewish and Christian Scriptures' (1860) and 'The Old and New Testaments, Tourat, Zubur and Gospel: Moslems Invited to See and Read them' (1899). The practical help he extended to the tiny Christian convert community in northern India was commemorated at Muirabad, a village established near Allahabad for Christian victims of famine. 
Muir died at his home, Dean Park House, Queensferry Road, Edinburgh, on 11 July 1905, and was buried in Dean cemetery. His wife had died in 1897. Their correspondence over half a century reveals a devotedly close marriage. Of fifteen children, all born in India, several sons served in the Indian army, though none reached their father's prominence. 
Unusually, there was no biography or memorial publication. Though firmly within the 'paternalist' tradition of late nineteenth-century Indian governors, William Muir presents the paradox of a scholar drawn irresistibly to the Arabic literary heritage and to close friendships with individual Muslims, who nevertheless felt compelled by his religious convictions to denigrate Muslim beliefs and social institutions in both their Arabian and Indian settings. His lieutenant-governorship, at a time of growing tension for Indian Muslims, merits some further study. 


@@@@@


doc= 35145


Muirhead, John Henry (1855-1940), philosopher, was the third son of John William Muirhead (died 1857), writer to the signet, of Glasgow, and his wife, Mary Burns (died 1891), who claimed a connection with the novelist Susan Ferrier and her nephew the philosopher James Frederick Ferrier. He was born at Glasgow on 28 April 1855. He was educated at the Glasgow Academy (1866-70), and proceeded to Glasgow University, where he was deeply influenced by the Hegelianism of Edward Caird, professor of moral philosophy. He graduated MA in 1875. The same year he won a Snell exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford, to which he went up in Trinity term 1875. His teachers included T. H. Green and R. L. Nettleship. Among his close friends and contemporaries were Henry Jones, J. S. Mackenzie, John MacCunn, D. G. Ritchie, A. C. Bradley, and W. P. Ker. After obtaining a first class in classical moderations (1877) he was, to the surprise of the college, placed in the second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1879. He was 'proxime accessit' for the Gaisford prize for Greek prose and obtained the chancellor's Latin essay prize in 1881. After failing to obtain a fellowship, he became assistant in Latin to Professor George Gilbert Ramsay at Glasgow University from 1879 to 1885, when he left to study philosophy and theology at Manchester New College in London, and from then on philosophy was the subject to which he devoted himself. 
In 1888 Muirhead was appointed lecturer in mental and moral science at the Royal Holloway College; he also lectured for Bedford College and the London Society for the Extension of University Teaching. In the same year he became editor of the 'Library of Philosophy', a position which he held until his death, and which he used to introduce to English readers many notable works by the prominent leaders of every school of thought, British, continental, and American. In 1886 he helped James Bonar and others to found the Ethical Society, and he also edited the 'Ethical Library'. In 1892 he published his best-known textbook, 'The Elements of Ethics', which found a wide public. In 1897 he was appointed professor of philosophy and political economy in the Mason College at Birmingham. After the conversion of the college into the University of Birmingham (1900), political economy was, to Muirhead's relief, constituted as a separate chair, and he retained the chair of philosophy until his retirement in 1921. 
Muirhead's mental and physical vigour continued unimpaired, and in two visits to the United States of America (1921-2 and 1925-8) he lectured extensively. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1931. In retirement he devoted himself to initiating the 'Contemporary British Philosophy' series, editing the 'Library of Philosophy', acting as chairman of the council of the newly founded British Institute of Philosophy, and maintaining an active interest in the modern developments of philosophy at home, on the continent, and in the United States. He was lecturing and writing to the very end. 
Muirhead was far from being simply a stimulating teacher of philosophy. Always a social reformer in many spheres of civic endeavour, at Birmingham he played an important part in converting the Mason College into the first unitary civic university, and for twenty-six years was even more influential in the life of the city than in that of the classroom and senate. His interest in social questions was demonstrated by such publications as 'By what Authority?' (1909), a collection of his newspaper articles on the poor-law commission, in which he sought to emphasize the points of agreement between the majority and minority reports. Here, as elsewhere, his simplicity of character, his concern to bring ethical principles to bear in practice, his sympathy with thinkers and systems opposed to his own views, and his determination to find a common denominator underlying apparent antagonisms, earned him respect and affection. 
Philosophically, as a young man Muirhead had been deeply influenced by T. H. Green and R. L. Nettleship, as well as by Edward Caird, whose life he wrote in 1921 in collaboration with his friend Sir Henry Jones. Throughout his career he continued to regard Caird's philosophy as 'the true interpretation of the real Hegel' (Robertson and Ross, 382). Consequently, the innovations he sought to make in the more theoretical branches of philosophy were few. He preferred to concentrate, under Green's influence, on the application of idealist thought to moral, social, and political philosophy. Later influences included F. H. Bradley and Bernard Bosanquet, whom he knew well, so that, although his chief interest was ethics -- in which his main problem was to state the relations between the end or good and the rule or obligation for achieving it (in 1932 he published 'Rule and End in Morals') -- he continued to be throughout his career a prominent representative of the British school of idealists ['see 'British idealists]. This general attitude is maintained particularly in 'Coleridge as Philosopher' (1930), which remains the best account of Coleridge's philosophy with emphasis on the Platonic elements in it. This emphasis links it with his 'The Platonic Tradition in Anglo-Saxon Philosophy' (1931), which leads from the Platonists of the seventeenth century to Muirhead's own philosophical position, and represents nineteenth-century British idealism as the organic development of a native platonic tradition. It also contains a study of Bradley's metaphysics. Thanks to his wide professional contacts and open and sympathetic attitude towards divergent philosophies, his autobiographical 'Reflections by a Journeyman in Philosophy' (1942) and his memorial and other accounts of his contemporaries constitute an informal but reliable history of much of the philosophical thought, including its connections with social thought, in Britain in his day. The open and receptive character of his idealism meant that he was well placed to carry the initial impulse of idealist thought through the currents of later philosophical developments, finding some common ground with pragmatism and the new realism. 
Muirhead was twice married: first, on 29 July 1892, to Mary Talbot (died 1922), daughter of the Revd Gilbert Innes Wallas and sister of Graham Wallas; second, in the spring of 1927, to Pauline, daughter of George Bailey, who survived him. There were no children from either marriage. He died at his home, Dyke End, Rotherfield, Sussex, on 24 May 1940, with mental powers unabated. 


@@@@@


doc= 35146


Mullins, Edwin Roscoe (1848-1907), sculptor, born at 1 Great James Street, Bedford Row, Holborn, London, on 22 August 1848, was a younger son and sixth child in a family of five sons and three daughters of Edward Mullins (died in or before 1884) of Box, Wiltshire, solicitor, and his wife, Elizabeth Baker. After being educated at Louth grammar school and Marlborough College (1863-5), Mullins was trained in the art schools of Lambeth and the Royal Academy, and in the workshop of John Birnie Philip. Between 1866 and 1874 he studied under Professor Wagmuller at Munich, where he shared a studio with Edward Onslow Ford. He gained a silver medal at Munich and a bronze medal at Vienna for a group entitled 'Sympathy' exhibited in 1872. He was a regular exhibitor at the Royal Academy, the Grosvenor Gallery, and the New Gallery from 1874 onwards. He was best known for his ideal works. These were criticized by Walter Armstrong for their 'coldness' (Armstrong, 142) but admired by other contemporary critics for their simplicity and restraint. There are two examples in the Art Gallery and Museum, Glasgow: 'Morn Waked by the Circling of the Hours' (marble; dated 1887) and 'Isaac and Esau: Bless Me, Even Me Also, O My Father' (marble; dated 1904). 
Mullins executed many portraits including busts of Dr Martineau (1878); W. G. Grace (1887); the Rt Hon. C. T. Ritchie (1889), and Sir Evelyn Wood (1896), among others, which he exhibited at the Royal Academy. He executed statuettes of W. E. Gladstone (1878); Val Prinsep ARA (exh. RA, 1880); Sir Rowland Hill, and Edmund Yates (1878). His public statues include those of General Barrow (marble; 1882) for the senate house of Lucknow; Henry VII (stone; 1883) for King's College, Cambridge; and William Barnes, the Dorset poet (1887), for Dorchester. His most unusual work was the circus horse in Brighton cemetery, executed in 1893 as a memorial to Mr Ginnett, a well-known circus owner. Mullins married on 4 June 1884 Alice (1856- 'c'.1936), daughter of John Pelton JP, of Croydon. They had one daughter and three sons, the eldest of whom was Claud William Mullins. 
Mullins was particularly interested in architectural sculpture. He told the Royal Institute of British Architects: 'We may note the tendency of sculpture when separated from architecture, in the popular form it takes at exhibition, to develop into a species of bric-a-brac.... Too often the work, when done, is only suitable to become part of a rich man's collection of treasures, that only the few can possess, rather than fitted to the nation as a whole as it could do if it were executed for public buildings. (Beattie, 46)' The most important surviving examples of his architectural decoration are the pediment of the Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston, Lancashire, and five decorative relief panels for Braithwaite Hall, Croydon Municipal Buildings (1896). 
He published a practical guide to sculpture techniques entitled 'A Primer of Sculpture' in 1890 and was appointed teacher of modelling, with special reference to architectural decoration, at the new Central School of Arts and Crafts in 1896. Mullins died at Shirley, Walberswick, Suffolk, on 9 January 1907, aged fifty-eight. His remains after cremation at Golders Green were buried at Hendon Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 35147


Munby, Arthur Joseph (1828-1910), diarist and civil servant, was born in York on 19 August 1828, the eldest of the six sons and one daughter of Joseph Munby (1804-1875), a solicitor, and his wife, Caroline Eleanor, 'nee' Forth. He was educated at St Peter's School, York, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge (1848-51). His first, unsuccessful, career was as a barrister (being called to the bar in 1855). In 1860 he accepted employment with the ecclesiastical commission, but aspired to a literary career. Some initial successes here (his first book of poems was published in 1852 and he was a runner-up in the 1859 Burns centenary poetry competition) were followed by disappointments, particularly in 1861 when he was rejected for the librarianship of the Middle Temple. He worked for the commission until his retirement in 1888. He died of pneumonia at his home, Wheeler's Farm, Pyrford, near Guildford, Surrey, on 29 January 1910 and was buried on 3 February at Pyrford parish church. Publication of his will caused a minor scandal in July 1910 by disclosing that in 1873 he had married a working-class woman, Hannah Cullwick (1833-1909), following a long clandestine relationship, but had insisted that this remain secret from his family and friends because she continued working as a servant and refused to 'become a lady'. 
Early assessments of Munby's career (including his obituary in 'The Times', 5 February 1910, and his 'Dictionary of National Biography' entry, written by his friend Austin Dobson) focused on his literary activities and offered a generous assessment of his poetry, his main publications being 'Benoni' (1852), 'Verses Old and New' (1865), 'Dorothy' (1880), 'Vestigia retrorsum' (1891), 'Poems Chiefly Lyric and Elegiac' (1901), and 'Relicta' (1909). However, this assessment has not withstood the passing of time and the poetry is now little read. His greater and lasting accomplishment is seen as his diary, partly published by Derek Hudson in 1972, which is extensive and covers a fascinatingly wide range of people and activities. Its dominant themes include his daily life over a period of enormous social, economic, and political change, his record of topical events, the relationship with Hannah Cullwick, close literary friendships, involvement in Christian socialism through the Working Men's College, his forays into 'haute bourgeois' (although still 'serious') London society, and the collections he made of representations of different kinds of working women. 
Over the period of the diary -- from 1859 to 1898 -- many changes impacted upon Munby's life, including the opening of the 'underground railway', expansions to women's employment and accompanying struggles to achieve women's rights, moves to extend working-class educational opportunities, and attempts to reform the Church of England, including through the work of the ecclesiastical commission. As well as these his diaries often record public events with posterity most definitely in mind, including the July 1860 British Association meeting in Oxford when the bishop of Oxford spoke against, and Thomas Huxley lectured on, the theological as well as scientific consequences of Charles Darwin's 'The Origin of Species'. The entry for 10 January 1863 records the opening of the first underground railway in London, on which Munby travelled from Paddington to Farringdon Street, while entries for April and May 1864 first record the noises of workmen heard from his quarters in Fig Tree Court in the Temple as building of the Embankment was started. The growing volunteer movement and the formation of hundreds of rifle corps in 1859, and especially during 1860 within the Working Men's College, were recorded with much approval, although Munby himself did not join, feeling 'shrinking' at the thought of 'acting with so many other men' (Munby, diary). His admiration, and then solemn mourning, for the 'manly' prince consort is also recorded, with some interesting passages (December 1861 and January 1862) about the public reverberations of Prince Albert's death. Glimpses and impressions of the prince of Wales (later Edward VII), the Tooley Street fire (the most serious since the Great Fire of London), and exhibitions, concerts, and other events at the Crystal Palace were all recorded. So were the demonstrations of silent appreciative working-class support for Garibaldi on the part of many thousands of people during an appearance at the Crystal Palace in April 1864, and, in June 1864, his own thoughts on the thousands of people living and sleeping rough in London streets. In the autumn of 1888 he recorded the moral panic surrounding the Jack the Ripper murders, which led to his being surrounded and harangued by collier men. 
On this latter occasion Munby was staying with Hannah Cullwick in Hadley, Shropshire. Cullwick and Munby had met by chance in a London street in 1854. Against the odds, considering how many such encounters Munby had, they kept in contact, and in 1854, on a visit to her family in Shifnal, Shropshire, Cullwick began keeping her own diary, which she sent at regular intervals to Munby. The relationship was the result of her conviction that it was better to love at one remove a 'gentleman' than to be cowed and subjugated in marriage with a working-class man, and of his already-existing 'interest' in rough working women. Cullwick's diary was kept from 1854 to 1873 and is of almost unique importance in providing detailed information about the life, family circumstances, and working routines of those involved in that most typical employment for working women in Victorian England, domestic service. The relationship went through various vicissitudes, including Munby's attachments to a number of other women. They eventually married on 14 January 1873. He apparently expected that she would gradually come to live and behave more like 'a lady'; however, the reverse happened, and she became increasingly angry both at the transformations of dress, demeanour, and behaviour required, and at her husband's insistence that their relationship be kept secret. Following a major disagreement, she returned to Shropshire in 1877 and continued to work in a variety of domestic service roles. 
Some of Munby's most important friendships -- with Robert Borland, William Ralston, Vernon and Godfrey Lushington, and Richard Litchfield -- began at Cambridge. Litchfield, one of the founders of the Working Men's College, also gave him his entree into Christian socialist circles. It was thus that Munby attended inaugural meetings in 1854 of the Working Men's College, where he taught from 1857 until the 1880s, and was later a council member and always an admirer of F. D. Maurice, no matter what criticisms were made of Maurice's conservatism on matters of class and of college governance by more radical and agnostic members such as F. J. Furnivall. Through the college he also became acquainted with Dante Gabriel Rossetti, John Ruskin, and council members J. M. Ludlow, John Westlake, Thomas Hughes, and Charles Kingsley. He also retained close and affectionate links with two other friends, Richard Blackmore and Whitley Stokes, both met when reading for the bar in the chambers of Hugh Cairns. Two literary circles formed pivotal points in his social life: the 'tabacco parliaments' of the publisher and Christian socialist Alexander Macmillan from 1859, and the meetings from 1866 to 1874 of the Pen and Pencil Club at Aubrey House, founded by Clementia Taylor, feminist wife of radical MP Peter Taylor. It was through the Taylors' gatherings that Munby approvingly met Barbara Bodichon, Lydia Becker, Elizabeth Blackwell, and other well-known feminists of the day, including Elizabeth Malleson, the key figure in founding the Working Women's College in 1864, which Hannah Cullwick briefly attended (in 1874) and Munby fervently supported. 
Munby's friendship with Whitley Stokes acted as the bridge between these literary and reforming circles and those of the 'haute bourgeoisie' that Munby sought out during the 1860s and 1870s. Munby much admired the former classical actress Helen Faucit, a friend of Stokes's who was married to the prince consort's biographer Theodore Martin. At the Martins' 'at homes' he fell in silent love with the portraitist Mary Severn (later Newton), and admired the 'good and the great' who he met or saw in such gatherings, including Robert Browning and William Makepeace Thackeray. 
From early adulthood Munby had a fascination with the stark contrasts between delicate white-handed gentlemen, who employed a class of others to do the manual work (dressing, shopping, cooking, cleaning) that daily life requires, and the brawny, dirt-begrimed women servants who typically performed this. His fascination extended to other 'unbecoming women', including the large numbers who performed manual work in Victorian society (for example, delivering milk, working on the coal 'pit brow', moving into or out of prostitution, collecting refuse, gutting and skinning slaughtered animals, performing as trapeze artists and 'human cannon balls' or 'blacking up' to sing in the so-called 'nigger troupes' that performed in London streets). He was also interested in those who broke the law and appeared in court and those disfigured by accident or disease. However, his greatest fascination was with representations of these in his diary (Hudson) and extensive photograph collection (Hiley): he was a collector 'par excellence', although his collections were made to satisfy specifically private interests. 
Controversy still continues as to the nature of Munby's interest in working women and their 'dirt'. Some commentators see this and his collections of representations thereof as perversion and therefore necessarily sexual in nature. Others resist the imposition of post-Freudian categories on a pre-Freudian figure, and relatedly also reject reading all obsession as a priori sexual. However, regardless of the merits of either argument, Munby's diary does act as an important source for those interested in literary, artistic, reforming, and Christian socialist circles between 1859 and 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 35148


Munnings, Sir Alfred James (1878-1959), artist, was born on 8 October 1878 at Mill House, on the River Waveney, Mendham, Suffolk, the second of the four sons of the miller John Munnings (1839-1914), who was the tenth child of a successful farmer, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Ringer (1850-1945), one of nine children of a local farmer. 
His mother suffered frequent bouts of melancholia, a tendency which Munnings inherited together with her love of music, poetry, and nature. His boisterous and extrovert father gave public and family readings from the classics and nurtured his children on poetry and literature. Munnings inherited from him his rumbustious social nature, a love of words, a sense of showmanship, and an artistic talent. Living beside the river he was fascinated with the movement and colour of water which became a constant theme in his pictures and writings. But horses were his lifelong obsession. Great teams of shires brought corn to the mill and he learned the feel and scent of horses from an early age when he was put up in front of his father to ride. As he drove with his family through the countryside the movement of the grey mare drawing the trap held his attention far more than did the passing scenery. At the age of four his favourite toy was a wooden horse called Merrylegs, which his father taught him to draw. Because of his mother's illness he went to a dame's boarding-school for a few months when he was four. Afterwards he had a governess for three years until he went to the village school and then to Redenhall Commercial School, followed by four unhappy terms at Framlingham College. He was always drawing horses -- from memory or from his imagination -- and he demonstrated a remarkable talent which led his parents to send him to the local vicar's daughter for drawing lessons from the age of eight. At fourteen and a half Munnings was apprenticed for six years to Page Brothers, the Norwich lithographers, and for nine hours a day he created imaginative posters and advertisements. In the evenings he studied for two hours at the Norwich School of Art where his favourite model was the cast of a horse's head from the Parthenon. Early mentors were his headmaster, Walter Scott, who encouraged him to pursue art; James Reeve, curator of the Norwich Museum, who bought one of his early pictures for $85; and Shaw Tomkins, manager of Caley's chocolate factory and one of Page Brothers' most important customers, who commissioned him to design posters and boxes and took him on business trips to Europe when he introduced him to fine art galleries and a lively social life. Tomkins also gave him his first commission -- a portrait of his father, Daniel Tomkins, sitting on a garden bench with his dog beside him. 
Alongside his escalating commercial work for many firms Munnings painted intensively and in ten years sold 110 pictures for up to $100 each through the Norwich art circle. Often he paid a landlord with a small picture as part of his bill. In 1899 two of his small paintings, 'Stranded' and 'Pike-Fishing in January', were accepted for the summer exhibition of the Royal Academy; he also showed a landscape at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours. Some months later his career was interrupted when he was blinded in his right eye after it was accidentally pierced by a thorn. After weeks in a nursing home with both eyes bandaged he began a long struggle to overcome his lack of binocular vision. It was a permanent handicap which he rarely mentioned but, together with his recurrent gout, doubtless contributed to his explosive temper. 
Handsome and gregarious, Munnings invariably became the life and soul of many parties in East Anglian public houses, and his lively travels with the Gypsies resulted in some of his finest paintings. He often stayed with friends in London, revelling in a hectic social life, and at twenty-four spent the first of several periods of study at the Academie Julian in Paris. East Anglia remained his favourite place to paint, and for several summers he travelled there with a caravan of his own horses managed by a scruffy young handler called Shrimp, who became a frequent model. They parted when Munnings joined the group of painters at Newlyn in Cornwall and became the focus of a social group including Dame Laura Knight, her husband Harold Knight, (S. J.) Lamorna Birch, and Stanhope Forbes. There he met Florence Carter Wood (1888-1914), a brilliant young horsewoman and painter ten years his junior who came from a wealthy family. He probably fell in love with her when he saw her riding side-saddle, her habit flowing over the horse's back giving the centaur-like impression that horse and rider were one. (It was a potent image which he used to portray his wife.) Despite opposition from her parents they married on 19 January 1912; she attempted suicide on their honeymoon and succeeded two and a half years later. Her death apparently had little effect on Munnings's work, whose subjects then included the hop-pickers in Hampshire, horses and Gypsies, country-race meetings, hunting scenes, and a tender romantic portrait of a young girl which formed the basis of an academy painting entitled 'Evelyn'. He was a fast painter and averaged thirty to forty medium-sized or large canvases a year in addition to the many watercolour sketches and small canvases invariably produced as preliminaries to his large works. 
In 1914 Munnings volunteered for the army but was rejected three times because of the lack of sight in his eye. In desperation he became a scrapper in 1917, scratching the necks of Canadian soldiers' horses to look for mange, until in 1918 he was appointed civilian official war artist to the Canadian cavalry in France. His dramatic paintings of troops in action and lumberjacks working in the forests, and a fine equestrian portrait of General J. E. B. Seely (later Lord Mottistone), were exhibited at the Royal Academy. The portrait elicited a stream of lucrative and prestigious commissions from sitters, including the amateur steeplechase jockey Lord Mildmay on Davy Jones; the prince of Wales; Lord Harewood; the princess royal; and Lord Birkenhead, lord chancellor of England, which Munnings rated as about his best portrait of a man on horseback. 
In 1918 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy and, from his first London studio in Glebe Place, pursued an exciting social life. He felt financially secure when James Connell & Sons of Old Bond Street bought his three academy pictures and all his Cornish Gypsy and horse paintings at his own price. 'I was a millionaire... I'd care for nobody', he boasted in defiance of his early insecurity and failed marriage. The Chelsea Arts Club became his second home until his foul language, in which he could curse for ten minutes without repeating himself, resulted in his temporary suspension. He joined the Arts Club, the Royal Academy Dining Club, and the Garrick Club, where he revelled in reciting his sixty-verse 'Ballad of Anthony Bell' and John Masefield's 'Reynard the Fox' which the poet had asked him to illustrate. He similarly entertained at the Cafe Royal and at the many great houses in which he stayed between the wars to portray the owners and their horses and hounds. In the evenings he would play the piano and compose poems about the assembled company. 
Munnings's first attempt at sculpture (for which he received no formal training), made at the instigation of a young sculptor friend, Whitney-Smith, had been a small statuette of his mare Augereau. In Newlyn an artist friend, Charles Simpson, later commented that his painting represented the furthest limits to which a picture could go in approaching the art of the sculptor. This aspect of his paintings was the outcome of a protracted study of anatomy partly based on George Stubbs's 'Anatomy of the Horse' (1766) and also on visits to the stables of a local veterinary surgeon. His horse studies always reflected, over that of other equestrian painters, his unparalleled love and understanding of the animals' characters. His sculpting ability was recognized in 1919 when his friend Sir Edwin Lutyens, who considered that his horse paintings showed a sculptor's grasp of essential form, invited him to sculpt a bronze statuette of a young cavalry officer on horseback, Edward Horner, who was killed in the war, for a memorial in Mells church, Somerset, commissioned by his parents, Sir John and Lady Horner. This led twelve years later to a commission for a sculpture of the famous racehorse Brown Jack, a bronze statuette of which was placed in the royal enclosure at Ascot. 
In 1919 Munnings bought the house of his dreams -- as he called Castle House, Dedham, Essex -- an elegant Georgian house with 40 acres of grounds on which he built a studio and kept horses to ride, hunt, and paint. A year later he married a young divorcee, Violet McBride ('b'. 1885), who was a fine horsewoman and the daughter of a London riding master, Frank Golby Haines. As with Florence, he had been completely captivated by seeing her riding side-saddle on a magnificent horse, looking as if horse and rider were one. Seven years his junior, she took over all their domestic and financial affairs, leaving him free to paint. She encouraged him, often against his will, to accept many commissions from wealthy society figures rather than leaving him free to paint the country scenes he loved and which came to be seen as his best works. 'He was never such a good artist after he married me', she admitted. 'It meant painting for money.' But the commissions enabled him to keep his thirty-four horses. Munnings wrote to her daily when he was away from home; she never curtailed his club life nor complained about his solitary painting expeditions. It was a childless marriage in which she surrounded herself with dogs. He gave her power of attorney so he need never enter a bank again, asked her for money when he needed it, and maintained an illusion of independence by hiding pound notes between the pages of books in his library. She was a favourite equestrian model of his. 
Munnings travelled abroad: to paint Robert de Rothschild's family at Chantilly; to judge an international art exhibition at Pittsburgh, where he was exhausted by painting too many millionaires; to Spain, where he was revolted by the use of horses in the bullring; and to Ireland, from where his study of 'Kilkenny Horse Fair' was accepted as his diploma work when he was elected Royal Academician in 1925. 
Severe gout made Munnings increasingly irritable and he had frequent mood swings. He gradually abandoned painting in watercolour because he felt its immediacy interrupted his work on large oils such as 'The Ascot Procession Crossing Windsor Park', painted at the invitation of Queen Mary. Bought for the Royal Collection, it hung in the royal box for several Ascot meetings. He much preferred Epsom, with its Gypsies, to Ascot, and he enjoyed the smaller intimate meetings at Sandown and Hurst Park, and at Newmarket, which he thought was the most beautiful course in the world. There the Jockey Club loaned him an old horse-box on the course to use as a studio, and it was in this that he painted some of his best racing pictures. He bought the old grammar school schoolroom at Dedham to convert into a large studio. He loved the views of the countryside from the building and, like his writer friend Adrian Bell, grew very concerned about the loss of old country values and the desecration of the land by mechanization. 
During the Second World War Munnings retired to his cottage on Exmoor, where, despite gout in his right wrist, he painted landscapes, Dartmoor ponies, and hunting scenes, and, feeling more at peace with himself than he had since the early Newlyn days, wrote gentle reflective poetry rather than the long ballads and obscene verses in which he once indulged. His peace was shattered, however, when he reluctantly agreed to stand as president of the Royal Academy in succession to Sir Edwin Lutyens, who had defeated him for office in 1938. On 14 March 1944 he beat Augustus John by twenty-four votes to seventeen and in June received a knighthood in the king's birthday honours. 
Munnings was the Royal Academy's most controversial president. He ignored protocol at council meetings, was frustrated when duty stopped him from painting, and counteracted the boredom of selecting pictures for the summer exhibition by writing letters and articles to the press. His notoriously short temper was aggravated by sleepless nights caused by heavy air raids and increasing gout. He was temporarily appeased by his successful exhibition at the Leicester Galleries, by receiving the freedom of Norwich, and by hosting splendid dinners at the academy. At one of these he made Sir Winston Churchill the first Royal Academician extraordinary, after persuading him to submit six paintings anonymously to the summer exhibition when all were accepted. At Churchill's suggestion, in 1949 he revived the academy's men-only annual banquet after a lapse of ten years. His uninhibited sixteen minute after-dinner speech at it made academy history: he berated the academy, the Arts Council, the Tate Gallery, and Anthony Blunt (surveyor of the king's pictures), and ranted against modern art, including 'those foolish daubers' Cezanne, Matisse, and Picasso, whose influence, he said, had defiled British tradition. While sackfuls of letters showed that, in general, the public agreed with him, the BBC received forty objections to his use of the word 'damned'. He was privately rebuked by Churchill, not for the tenor of his speech but for publicizing a private joke. Churchill had said to him 'Alfred, if you met Picasso coming down the street would you join with me in kicking his something, something...?' and he had replied 'Yes Sir, I would.' 
Despite its public appeal, the after-dinner speech ostracized Munnings from the art world. He resigned the presidency of the academy at the end of the year to make 'a joyous return to painting', which he interrupted by an unsuccessful attempt to have one of his reviled moderns, Stanley Spencer, prosecuted for obscene painting. He lectured against modern art and what he perceived as the subversive activities of the Arts Council; and also against mechanized farming, promoting instead the need for more ecological methods. He also wrote a highly acclaimed, copiously illustrated three-volume autobiography. Persistent gout, increasing physical disability, and a rarely voiced fear of diminishing eyesight aggravated his irritability. He became too ill to attend his retrospective exhibition of 200 paintings at the Royal Academy in 1956; by April 1959, with both hands bandaged, he could not even write. 
Munnings died in his sleep at Castle House on 17 July 1959. After a private cremation at Colchester, Essex, his ashes were interred in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London, where his memorial plaque was placed next to that of John Constable. A memorial service was held a week later in St James's, Piccadilly. His estate and possessions were left to his wife. In fulfilment of his wish that his estate and the paintings in his possession should be left to the nation, his widow worked to establish, through trusts, an art museum at their Dedham home where a large collection of his work is hung (now the Sir Alfred Munnings Art Museum). Together with many other paintings in private and public collections, including the Castle Museum in Norwich, the Canadian War Museum in Ottawa, the Royal Academy, and the Tate collection, the Sir Alfred Munnings Art Museum helps to endorse the artist's belief that he would be remembered best as a painter of the English landscape rather than primarily as a horse painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35149


Munro, Hector Hugh (1870-1916), short-story writer, was born on 18 December 1870 in Akyab, Burma, the youngest of the three children of Colonel Charles Augustus Munro (1844-1907), inspector-general of police in Burma, and Mary Frances Mercer (died 1872). He was proud to belong to the ancient clan Munro. Owing to the death of his mother and his father's absence abroad he was brought up with his brother and sister by two aunts in the village of Pilton, near Barnstaple, Devon. The aunts' stern, unsympathetic methods and the children's resentment are reflected in some of Munro's most memorable stories, in which dictatorial aunts are worsted by their charges. He was educated at a preparatory school in Exmouth and for four terms at Bedford grammar school (later known as Bedford School), until in 1887 Colonel Munro returned from Burma and took the children on extensive continental travels. In 1893 Munro joined the Burma police, but malaria brought him home fifteen months later. After recuperating in Devon he decided to earn his living as a writer in London. 
Munro's first book, 'The Rise of the Russian Empire' (1900), cost him much labour but it was a false start, although Russia always fascinated him. When Francis Carruthers Gould introduced him to the 'Westminster Gazette' in 1900 Munro began contributing brief political satires, signing himself Saki, the name of the 'cypress-slender Minister of Wine' in the 'Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam'. In 1901 the 'Westminster' published the first of his short stories about an exquisite young man named Reginald; these were later published in book form as 'Reginald' (1904). 
Munro went to the Balkans as special correspondent for the 'Morning Post' in 1902, then to Warsaw, St Petersburg (where he witnessed the 1905 massacre), and Paris. His dispatches show his right-wing convictions, criticizing inefficiency and unnecessary repression, but respecting strong government. He returned to London in 1908, taking a flat at 97 Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square. Handsome and impeccably dressed, with a slightly crooked smile that rarely became a laugh, he seems to have moved on the fringes of polite society with few, if any, intimate friends. Some people knew he was homosexual, with many young contacts, but that side of his life had to be secret. 
By 1909 Munro had begun writing the short stories which were to make his reputation. Originally published in the 'Westminster' and from 1911 in the 'Morning Post' and elsewhere in the tory press, the stories were collected as 'The Chronicles of Clovis' (1911), 'Beasts and Super-Beasts' (1914), 'The Toys of Peace' (1919), and 'The Square Egg' (1924). Original though his best work is, its line of descent is clear: his epigrammatic style and witty, amoral young men such as Clovis Sangrail derive from Oscar Wilde, his fantastical humour owes much to Lewis Carroll, and some of his grimmer stories, like his politics, put him close to Kipling. In his turn he influenced comic writers of the next generation such as A. A. Milne, Noel Coward, and P. G. Wodehouse. 
His methods were simple but ingenious. Characters are defined with a bizarre name and a deft phrase or two, the wit depends on perfect wording and unexpected turns, and the action is often some kind of practical joke, aimed at deflating pretension or exposing cowardice. Many of the stories bring animals into formerly placid households: a leopard in the bedroom, a wolf at a dinner party, a boar in the orchard. Occasionally the forces of wild nature are embodied in what Munro may have thought of as their truest image, a naked boy, beautiful and cruel. 
In some ways Munro remained a boy himself, delighting in practical jokes and exotic animals, and scornful of the regulated adult world. Religion struck him as absurd. With his knowledge of less orderly places, he saw respectable English life as fragile and anaemic. The compression demanded by a newspaper column exactly suited the ruthless precision of his satire and the limitations of his talent. In his few long works the lack of mature human sympathy which runs throughout his writing is revealed as a real deficiency, wonderfully funny though its effects can be when confined to a few pages. He wrote two novels, 'The Unbearable Bassington' (1912), the story of a wayward young man whose eventual exile may be the author's comment on his own isolation, and 'When William Came' (1913), a portrait of England shamefully giving way to a German invasion (William being the Kaiser). 
Munro enlisted in the ranks in August 1914 despite his age, first joining King Edward's Horse but soon transferring to the 22nd Royal Fusiliers. The contempt for pacifists and shirkers expressed in his wartime articles has been seen, inaccurately, as a betrayal of his earlier self, as though he had turned against drones such as Clovis, but Clovis would surely have enlisted too, enjoying patrolling in no man's land just as his creator did, imagining himself to be a wolf hunting fat farmers' wives. Like many others Munro welcomed the war as the return of honour to a society which had become hypocritical and weak-willed. He refused a commission, preferring to serve as corporal and eventually lance sergeant, faultlessly courageous and efficient. His malaria recurred in November 1916, but he discharged himself from hospital on the 11th when he heard an offensive was due. The battle of the Ancre began on the 13th. Munro was killed by a sniper's bullet the next day during the final assault on Beaumont Hamel. He is listed on the Thiepval memorial as one of the many soldiers whose bodies were never found. 


@@@@@


doc= 35150


Munro, James (1832-1908), politician and temperance advocate in Australia, was born on 7 January 1832 at Glen Dubh in the parish of Eddrachillis, Sutherland, the second son of Donald Munro, a tenant farmer, and his wife, Georgina, 'nee' Mackey. He left Armadale village school in 1848 to be apprenticed to Constable's printing works in Edinburgh. Here he soon joined the total abstinence movement. On 28 November 1853 he married Jane, the daughter of Donald Macdonald, a fellow printer, and in 1858 they migrated to Victoria with their three children. 
After working as a printer, from the mid-1860s Munro emerged in the three main areas of his public life -- property investments, the abstinence movement, and politics. In 1865 he established the Victorian Permanent Property Investment and Building Society, of which he was secretary for seventeen years. He acquired interests in the Melbourne Woollen Mill Company and the Victoria Permanent Fire Insurance Company. In 1882 he established the Federal Banking Company and the associated Federal Building Society, which became his main means to extensive land dealing, speculation, and manipulation during the Melbourne land boom. 
Munro won respect for his puritanical Presbyterianism and charitable activities. He was on the board of management of the Toorak Presbyterian Church (1878-92), a board member of the Alfred Hospital (1876-85), and a vice-president of the Caledonian Society of Melbourne. Sabbatarian and total abstinence advocacy preoccupied him, and he was prominent in the order of Rechabites, the Melbourne Total Abstinence Society (president, 1878-92), the Permissive Bill Association, and its successor, the Victorian Alliance for the Suppression of Liquor Traffic (president, 1881-92). He was also president of the two international temperance conferences held in Melbourne. He was a major shareholder in the grandiose temperance coffee palaces in Melbourne (Federal, Grand, and Victoria) and in Geelong and Broken Hill, which all soon ran into financial difficulties. 
Having entered local politics, in 1872-3 Munro was shire president of Gardiner shire. He stood unsuccessfully for parliament in 1869 but held various seats over twelve years between 1874 and 1890. As a supporter of protective tariffs, railway building, land reform, and votes for women (which be hoped would help the temperance campaign), he was associated with various shades of liberals, though he was in cabinet for only three months. One of his main parliamentary achievements was pressing for the 1880 International Exhibition. 
In the late 1880s Munro reached the brief peak of his public life. He was one of the principal land boomers and acquired large leaseholds throughout the north of Australia. Having borrowed heavily to finance his investments, he appeared as a man of great wealth, living in a mansion in suburban Armadale. In 1887 he established the Real Estate Mortgage and Deposit Bank, and in 1890 he visited Britain to raise more capital for his speculations. His criticism of the Gillies-Deakin coalition government's financial management led to his leadership of the more liberal parliamentary opposition. In October 1890 Munro carried a no-confidence motion and on 5 November he formed his own government, though he was hardly the man to implement financial reform. 
The fragility of the boom, government finances, and his own financial empire now began to fracture. Munro struggled through 1891 to salvage his fortune and the government, but on 16 February 1892 he resigned and took refuge as Victorian agent-general in London. His escape was short-lived and he returned to witness the collapse of the Federal Bank in January 1893 and to file for bankruptcy in the following month, his failures contrasting with his moral pretensions. 
After living on the charity of his family, Munro started a small suburban estate agency and auction room, and twice more stood unsuccessfully for parliament. He was widowed in 1904 and died at his daughter's residence in Caulfield, Melbourne, on 25 February 1908, survived by four of his five sons and his three daughters. He was buried at St Kilda on 27 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 35151


Murdoch, William Lloyd (1854-1911), cricketer, was born at Sandhurst (later renamed Bendigo), Victoria, Australia, on 18 October 1854. He was the son of Gilbert William Lloyd Murdoch (1826-1854), at one time a corporal in the United States army, and his wife, Edith Susan Hogg. His father, of Scottish ancestry, had emigrated from Maryland to Australia in 1849. After being educated at Dr Bromley's school in Ballarat and at Bonwick School, Melbourne, Murdoch moved to Sydney, New South Wales, where he was articled to a solicitor and subsequently practised until 1891. 
Murdoch made his debut as a cricketer for New South Wales in 1875 and made nineteen appearances for the state until 1884. Against Victoria at Sydney in 1882 he made 321. He was selected for Australia in what was retrospectively seen as the second test match to be played against England, at Melbourne in 1877. In the following year he toured England as a wicket-keeper and batsman. In 1880 he made the first of four tours to England as the Australian captain, heading the batting averages on each occasion and doing much to sustain the reputation he had acquired in Australia in the 1880s as the 'W. G. Grace of Australia'. In the first test played in England, at the Oval in 1880, he carried his bat for 153 not out in Australia's second innings. Australia had followed on 271 runs behind and Murdoch's contribution reduced the margin of defeat to five wickets. His outstanding innings on the 1882 tour was 286 not out against Sussex. On his third tour as captain, in 1884 -- again against England -- he made 211 at the Oval, the first double-century in a test match. 
In 1879 the family firm for which he worked was dissolved and Murdoch was declared bankrupt with debts of $775. He had, nevertheless, been able to embark on his cricket tours to England, and his marriage (on 8 December 1884) to Jemima Watson (died 1917), daughter of a wealthy goldmine owner from Bendigo, gave him financial security. In 1888-9 he paid an extended visit to England and, on his return, was the choice of the players -- but not the press -- to captain Australia for a fourth time. The 1890 tour was a 'failure' but 'it would be wrong to say that he (himself) failed', reported 'Wisden'. 
Immediately after returning home Murdoch took the decision to move permanently to England with his family. Thanks to his wife he enjoyed financial independence. He knew the country well and was encouraged by his friend W. G. Grace. He disliked the vicious attacks being made on players -- and especially on himself for being past his best -- by an increasingly savage Australian press. Finally, he simply wanted to play cricket at first-class level for a few more years. While awaiting qualification for Sussex, he toured South Africa in the winter of 1891-2 and his appearance for England at Cape Town in March 1892 gave him the distinction (again retrospectively) -- of playing test cricket for two countries. The match represented his only performance at test match level as a wicket-keeper, since that position had been filled in the Australian team during his career by J. McC. Blackham. 
Murdoch captained Sussex from 1893 to 1899, and under his leadership the county's fortunes revived. His best scores during this period were 226 against Cambridge University at Hove (1895) and 172 against Hampshire at Southampton (1894). But with increasing years and weight his batting deteriorated. He subsequently played first-class cricket (1901-4) for the London County Cricket Club founded by W. G. Grace at the Crystal Palace, making several good scores against first-class counties, including 155 against Lancashire at Old Trafford in 1903. His last important score was 140 at the Oval in 1904, when he played as substitute for the Gentlemen against the Players. His being invited to join the side on the second day, after a player had dropped out through injury, was held by the MCC to be contrary to the laws but no action was taken by the authorities. Of fine physique, Murdoch was an orthodox and correct batsman who played with a straight bat. He had a wide range of strokes, especially the off-drive and the cut. As a batsman he was excelled only by W. G. Grace on hard, true pitches, and by few in defence on soft, treacherous wickets. As a captain he was a resourceful tactician. His second 'career', from 1893 onwards, enabled him to compile nearly 17,000 runs besides securing 243 dismissals as a wicket-keeper. In his London county days he usually opened the batting with Grace, the two great veterans of nineteenth-century cricket in Australia and England playing out their last years together. 
Murdoch was a genial, good-tempered man whom C. B. Fry called 'genuinely and unaffectedly amusing' ('Oxford Companion to Australian Sport', 1992, 732). Contemporaries recognized his relaxed and easy manner. He died on 18 February 1911, during a test match between Australia and South Africa at Melbourne. During the lunch interval that day he suffered a stroke, from which he died without recovering consciousness. His body was returned to England, and was interred at Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 18 May 1911; his wife and five children survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35152


Murison, Alexander Falconer (1847-1934), jurist and author, was born at Walhowe, in the parish of Deer, Aberdeenshire, on 3 March 1847, the eldest of the four sons of Alexander Murison, a crofter of Walhowe, and his wife, Elspeth, daughter of William Murison, a crofter of Bridge-foot, near Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire. He was proud to recall that he had once acted as a herd-boy on his native hills. In his autobiography, written at the age of eighty-six, he vividly described the struggles involved in securing a better education than that afforded by the local village schools. Having won a bursary at Aberdeen grammar school, he showed his gift for languages, winning school prizes for Latin and Greek and gaining the first bursary at Aberdeen University, where he graduated with first-class honours in classics. 
On leaving university, Murison returned to his old school as head English master (1869-77), and soon proved to be an inspiring teacher. In 1870 he married Elizabeth (died 1924), the elder daughter of William Logan, shopkeeper, of Fetterangus, Aberdeenshire; they had two sons, the younger of whom, (James) William Murison (died 1945), became a chief justice of Zanzibar and of the Straits Settlements. 
Murison then decided to go to London, where he entered the Middle Temple on 16 November 1876 and was called to the bar on 29 June 1881. During this period Murison supported himself by teaching and by journalism, practising before the privy council and the Chancery Division. On 1 October 1883 he succeeded W. A. Hunter, to whom he owed much, as professor of Roman law at University College, London. In 1901 he was appointed professor of jurisprudence there and in 1913 he became deputy professor of Roman-Dutch law. He held these posts concurrently until he retired in 1925, having been in the service of the college as professor for forty-two years, during which he was also dean of the faculty of laws (1912-24), and a member of the senate of the University of London (1921-4). In 1915 he was appointed deputy reader in Roman law at Oxford, and in 1916 deputy professor to Henry Goudy, the regius professor of civil law. That Murison did not succeed Goudy to the chair on the latter's retirement was attributed by his contemporaries to his advancing years. In 1924 he was appointed KC by Lord Chancellor Haldane. 
During the forty-two years in which he held office in London, Murison set himself the stupendous task of collating the codices of the text of Justinian's 'Institutes'. Pursuit of this aim led him to all the great law libraries of Europe, always travelling third class (and on one occasion in a cattle-truck) because of the meagreness of his pay and the paucity of his private means. But his immense erudition, his mastery of practically every European language except Turkish, his accomplishment as a Latin, Greek, and Hebrew scholar, combined with his engaging modesty and charm, made him friends everywhere among foreign jurists, and won him an international reputation for scholarship. Unfortunately the colossal undertaking was never completed, and the results remain in manuscript in voluminous notebooks. Almost the only published contribution in English made by Murison on the civil law is a historical introduction entitled 'The external history of Roman law' prefixed to the second edition (1885) of W. A. Hunter's 'Roman Law'. As his poverty diverted him from pursuing the success that might have been his at the bar, by enticing him into the production of educational textbooks and journalism (he joined the staff of the 'Daily Chronicle' in early days and from 1902 to 1912 was editor of the 'Educational Times'), so also the versatility of his mind led him to play truant to the cause of jurisprudence, for he translated the whole of Horace (1931) and of Pindar (1933) into verse, Virgil's 'Bucolics and Georgics' (1932), and the first twelve books of the 'Iliad' (1933) into English hexameters, and Schiller's 'Wallenstein' (1931) into English verse with the original metres. A translation of books xiii to xix of the 'Iliad' remained in manuscript. In Italy, where his scholarship was highly esteemed among his contemporaries, he published a characteristic treatise, 'Il diritto nei poeti Latini' (1935), which was read at the International Congress of Roman Law held in Rome in 1933. His intellectual vigour remained unimpaired to the last. 
The honorary degree of LLD was conferred on Murison in 1893 by the University of Aberdeen, for the lord rectorship of which he stood against Lord Huntly in 1896 and was but narrowly beaten. In politics an ardent Liberal, he unsuccessfully contested, at four general elections, in 1900, 1906, and 1910, three Conservative strongholds, the Bridgeton division of Glasgow, the universities of Glasgow and Aberdeen, and, twice, the Central division of Glasgow. 
Murison died at his home, 26 Victoria Road, Clapham Common, London, on 8 June 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 35153


Murray, Alexander Stuart (1841-1904), museum curator, was born at Arbirlot, near Arbroath in Forfarshire, on 8 January 1841, the eldest son in a family of four sons and four daughters of George Murray ('b'. 1814), a tradesman, and his wife, Helen Margaret Sayles ('b'. 1819). His younger brother George Robert Milne Murray (1858-1911) was keeper of the department of botany at the British Museum from 1895 to 1905. After being educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, Murray attended Edinburgh University in 1863-4, but did not graduate. He also attended Berlin University in 1865, where he studied philology and archaeology under August Bockh, Emil Hubner, and August Wilhelm Zumpt; Henry Nettleship (1839-1893) was a fellow student. 
On 14 February 1867 Murray was appointed assistant in the department of Greek and Roman antiquities at the British Museum, under Charles T. Newton, then keeper. The Blacas and Castellani collections had just been purchased, and John Turtle Wood's excavations were in progress at Ephesus. Between 1867 and 1886 Murray worked energetically under Newton's direction, acquiring a close knowledge of the whole collection of Greek and Roman antiquities. In the first five years alone he entered in the museum's register over 5000 items from the Blacas and other collections and catalogued over 2000 bronzes. He was highly regarded by Newton (a notoriously strict judge of his subordinates), and contributed through his fluency in German to Newton's grasp of new archaeological research published in that language. 
On 13 February 1886 Murray succeeded Newton as keeper of the department of Greek and Roman antiquities. The recent removal of the natural history collections to South Kensington, the completion of the new building known as the 'White wing' at Bloomsbury, and other alterations had greatly increased the available space for the exhibition of antiquities. An additional gallery was allocated to the Elgin marbles, and a further reorganization of the galleries devoted to Greek and Roman antiquities became for many years Murray's main preoccupation. The objects were set out with greater consideration than before for effect and space, and at the same time all the fittings and labels were improved. Murray was always helpful to visitors to his department, and patiently answered the enquiries of correspondents. 
For many years Murray made it a practice to visit the continent, especially Greece, Italy, Sicily, or Spain, gaining familiarity with important classical sites and foreign collections and with foreign archaeologists. The only occasions on which he took part in work in the field were in 1870, when he visited the site of Priene with Newton to copy Greek inscriptions, and in 1896, when he was temporarily in charge of the excavations at Enkomi (Salamis) in Cyprus. He subsequently wrote most of the Enkomi section of 'The British Museum: Excavations in Cyprus' (1900). 
Although Murray did not see through the press a departmental catalogue of his own, he was a careful reader and critic of all the publications of his assistants, and contributed introductions to several volumes by them. His text for 'Terracotta Sarcophagi, Greek and Etruscan, in the British Museum' (1898) was vitiated by the later discovery that the 'Etruscan' sarcophagus was a fake. Murray wrote widely on classical archaeology independently of his official work, and published among other works 'A History of Greek Sculpture' (2 vols., 1880; 2nd edn, 1890), 'The Sculptures of the Parthenon' (1903), based on lectures to the Royal Academy, and three other books on mythology and antiquities. He also contributed an excursus on the pottery of Cyprus to Luigi Palma di Cesnola's 'Cyprus' (1877), and articles on a wide variety of topics to learned journals, to the 'Contemporary Review' and 'Quarterly Review', and to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. His writings showed the breadth of his knowledge, and were full of observations on points of detail; but his contemporaries found his style difficult, and a century later his works were little read, apart from the Enkomi excavation report, which was reprinted in 1970. From 1879 all his work on early Greece was coloured by his reluctance to accept the early date for Mycenaean culture, which was gradually being established beyond controversy. 
Murray was made LLD of Glasgow University in 1887. He was corresponding member of the Royal Prussian Academy and of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres of the French Institute, a member of the German Archaeological Institute, a fellow of both the Society of Antiquaries (1889) and the British Academy (1903), an honorary associate of the Royal Institute of British Archaeologists (1890) and a vice-president of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies (1891). 
Murray maintained through life his Scottish accent and his adherence to the presbyterian Church of Scotland. He was small in stature and somewhat quick-tempered -- on occasion outspoken to the point of offence -- but his underlying courtesy and warmth ensured his popularity. He was twice married: first on 21 December 1872 to Sarah Jane (Jenny) Handcock ('c'.1839-1874), daughter of William Hill, a farmer, and second, on 5 April 1881, to Anne Murray Welsh (1836-1922), youngest daughter of David and Jean Welsh, of Tillytoghills Farm, Fettercairn, Kincardineshire. There were no children by either marriage. Murray died of pneumonia at his official residence in the museum on 5 March 1904 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 9 March 1904. 


@@@@@


doc= 35154


Murray, Andrew Graham, first Viscount Dunedin (1849-1942), judge, was born on 21 November 1849 at Edinburgh, the only child of Thomas Graham Murray (1816-1891), of Stenton near Dunkeld, Perthshire, writer to the signet and crown agent for Scotland, and his wife, Caroline Jane (died 1906), daughter of John Tod, writer to the signet, of Kirkhill, Midlothian. On both sides Murray came from a legal background. His paternal grandfather, Alexander Murray of Murrayshall, had been an advocate. John Tod was one of the founders of the leading Edinburgh solicitors' firm of Tod, Murray, and Jamieson, in which Murray's father was a partner. 
Murray was educated at a private school in Tunbridge Wells and was a Spencer scholar at Harrow School. From there he proceeded with a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a second class in classics in 1872. The effort he put in at school appears to have been diverted more into sports at Cambridge. Murray, together with a college friend, made a pioneering eight-hole golf course on Midsummer Common. He also further developed the skills at rackets he had shown signs of at school. His education thus far had also given Murray an English veneer which never wholly rubbed off, even in later life. 
From Cambridge, Murray went to Edinburgh University where he passed through the ordinary law classes. He then spent, according to the usual practice, a year in his father's practice before being admitted to the Scottish bar in July 1874. It is worth noting that in choosing the bar he had given up his claim to 'probably the richest prize in the legal profession in Scotland' of a partnership in this firm for the somewhat less certain career of an advocate ('Glasgow Herald', 22 Aug 1942). Murray was an early friend of R. L. Stevenson, who was admitted to the bar on the same day in the following year and who was said to have consulted Murray when writing 'Weir of Hermiston'. Both were members of the Speculative Society at the university, in which Murray held the offices of librarian and president. On 1 October 1874 Murray married Mary Clementina (1857-1922), seventh of the eight daughters of Admiral Sir William Edmonstone MP of Duntreath, Stirlingshire, fourth baronet. They had one son and three daughters. Murray's first wife was very active in the support of charitable and patriotic causes in Edinburgh. 
Tradition had it that Murray spent the year at Tod, Murray, and Jamieson, studying Italian rather than law. Doubts were expressed about his ability to concentrate and at the start of his career as an advocate he 'enjoyed himself in every lawful manner' ('Scotsman', 22 Aug 1942). Golf, dancing ('hard and late'), and shooting and fishing (though he lacked the patience for the latter and preferred games to both) helped to fill up the time left by the practice he had. In his physical prime Murray was tall, slender, and athletic, with a well-knit frame, muscular and energetic. Some of his energy was, nevertheless, obviously taken up by extensive legal reading. It was at this time that he read the work on feudal law by George Ross (his uncle by marriage). He later referred to this as having given him the grounding in the area in which he was to enjoy a leading reputation. Murray also brought together a number of advantages which ensured that by the mid-1880s he had a large and lucrative practice, specializing in conveyancing and patent cases. These included an ability to switch rapidly from one occupation to another and the gift of clear-headed, logical, and lucid exposition. Though he was not an orator, he excelled in arguing a case with imperfect preparation, not only because he was acute, but also due to his absence of nervousness. To these personal skills Murray at the outset added the backing of his father's firm and family legal connections. 
In 1888 Murray was appointed advocate-depute in the crown office, and in 1890 he was considered for the vacant post of solicitor-general for Scotland. Passed over on this occasion in view of the stronger claims of Sir Charles Pearson, he was made sheriff of Perthshire, but he became solicitor-general in 1891 when Pearson succeeded James Robertson as lord advocate. At this time he also became a queen's counsel. In October 1891 Murray was elected to parliament as a Conservative member for Bute, the seat Robertson had vacated on his elevation to the bench. This was the seat that Murray's uncle David Mure had represented some thirty years before. Murray had previously and unsuccessfully contested East Perthshire, also as a Conservative, at the 1885 general election. He represented Bute until he became a judge more than thirteen years later, and he was also lord lieutenant from 1901 to 1905. Murray was not, however, a natural constituency politician. In addition to not being an orator, he displayed either an absent-mindedness or a too-obvious exertion to make himself agreeable in this field of activity. 
Out of office from 1892, Murray again became solicitor-general when the Conservatives returned to power in 1895. In the following year he succeeded Sir Charles Pearson, who had become a judge, as lord advocate, and he also became a privy councillor. Murray's friend and ally, Scott Dickson, became solicitor-general in his place. As lord advocate Murray earned a reputation as an excellent administrator, open to those he worked with and conciliatory in his approach to business. He was not, however, counted a great success as a parliamentary debater. 
In 1903 Lord Balfour of Burleigh resigned over tariff reform, and as a consequence Murray succeeded him as secretary for Scotland with a seat in the cabinet. He accepted this appointment with some reluctance as it involved a cut in his official salary from $5000 to $2000, but he was reportedly mollified by the assurance that he would retain any claims to a judicial appointment that would have been his as lord advocate. In his short tenure of office Murray was involved in the negotiations which preceded the introduction of the 'Churches (Scotland) Bill'. He was also brought into closer official contact with Edward VII and was credited with being a mentor to the king in Scottish matters for the remainder of the reign. 
In early 1905 Murray was appointed to succeed Lord Kinross, who had died, as lord president of the Court of Session and lord justice-general. His mother was present to see him take his seat. Just before taking up this position he was raised to the peerage as Baron Dunedin of Stenton in Perthshire. His friend Hugh Pattison Macmillan, later his biographer and colleague as a House of Lords' appeals judge, believed that this period in the chair of the first division of the Court of Session was the summit of Dunedin's career. Of his immediate predecessors, Robertson had been more interested in politics and Kinross had been prevented by ill health from exercising vigorous leadership. Dunedin, by contrast, was really interested in legal problems and believed strongly in the integrity of the law of Scotland. He was also able to 'breathe fresh life into his colleagues' ('Scotsman', 22 Aug 1942) in a relationship helped by his accessibility to argument and a lack of vanity which allowed him to admit that his first view might be wrong. In his relations with the bar Dunedin did not continue to be an advocate when he became a judge and apparently enjoyed listening to a well-arranged presentation, interrupting only to clear away obscurities. As an example of Dunedin's courage in the pursuit of justice and readiness to brush aside technicalities, Macmillan cites the case of his willingness to arrange payment so that an appellant from the Court of Session who had run out of funds could take a case on to the House of Lords ('Scottish Law Review', 151). Dunedin had been in the majority in the case in question and the outcome saw this judgment overturned. In his opinions Dunedin tried to seek out the principle involved in a case and welcomed the opportunity to restate appropriate legal rules, which gave his judgments the authoritative reputation of being a storehouse of legal opinion. As a result, however, they were not always restricted to a statement of what was strictly necessary for a decision and were marked by occasional colloquialisms and circumlocutions. 
In 1913 Dunedin was chosen to fill one of the two new positions as a lord of appeal-in-ordinary created to strengthen the supreme appeals court. Accepting this position removed him from a leadership role to one of playing his part in a team. He appears to have made the adjustment well and was thereafter involved in many of the landmark judgments handed down in his nineteen-year tenure. Commentators have seen a contrast between his work during this period and that of the other Scottish law lord at the time, Lord Shaw of Dunfermline. In the case 'R. v. Halliday' in 1917 over the internment of a British citizen in wartime, Shaw, in the minority, emotionally invoked the liberty of the subject, while Dunedin, with the majority, was in favour of upholding the regulations regarding the defence of the realm. This approach to the law, 'pure and simple, touched, if at all by common sense' ('Law Journal', 3 Oct 1942, 317), was also evident in Dunedin's agreement with the majority in 'Bowman v. The Secular Society', also in 1917, that a bequest to a rationalist society was legal. In this he was opposed by Lord Chancellor Finlay who appears to have thought that Christianity was in some danger. Dunedin presided in 1920 at the hearing of the 'Attorney-General v. De Keyser's Royal Hotel', probably the best-known of the wartime cases he was called upon to judge. He delivered the leading judgment that the company concerned was entitled to full compensation under the 'Defence Act 1842' for the requisition of property for defence purposes. This judgment was to be superseded in 1939 by the more restricted provisions of the 'Compensation (Defence) Act'. Other cases worth mentioning with which Dunedin was concerned and which reached the House of Lords included 'Sinclair v. Brougham' (1914), in which he dealt at length with the problem of 'unjust enrichment' and argued that English equity should be able to deal as well as other systems with the problem of equitable restitution. In 'Lord Advocate v. Marquess of Zetland' (1920), one of the last cases to deal with the intricacies of Scottish feudal law, Dunedin, on ground he knew so well, was able to assist his colleagues in dealing with the abstruseness of the points at issue. Finally, 'Cantiere San Rocco v. Clyde Shipbuilding and Engineering' (1923) allowed Dunedin to display his preference for the Scottish law of restitution as against the English law as it then stood. 
Comparisons between the English and Scottish legal systems were a theme also in Dunedin's published writings. His letter to 'The Times' of 20 April 1927 discussed the rights of crown and subject under Scottish law and contained a comment characteristic of his terse, pungent, witty style: 'in England you have to find the remedy in order to discover the right, whereas in Scotland you have to find the right in order to discover the remedy'. His 'Fifty years: the bench and the bar', published in the same newspaper on 18 February 1932, was a valuable reflective piece on legal developments in both countries which traced the replacement of feudal cases in Scotland by those generated by companies and workmen's compensation legislation; it also pointed out that a new class of scientific lawyer, concerned with patent cases, had left judges struggling to keep pace in this area. In all these developments Dunedin makes clear his firsthand experience or direct shaping involvement. He recounts, for instance, his ticking off by Joseph Chamberlain for inserting a clause in the Scottish version of workmen's compensation legislation which allowed the use of paid lawyers in such proceedings. Chamberlain had in the end to give way, having been brought to see that companies would simply use specially trained non-lawyers to the disadvantage of inexperienced employee litigants. Similarly, Dunedin's expression of regret at the passing of judges of high individuality and purely Scottish education such as Lord Deas echoes the belief at the Scottish bar that one reason for Dunedin's early success had been his courageous and tactful handling of the person whose outspokenness from the bench he had so much enjoyed. 
Though more active in writing to the press in later life, and a source of information and guidance -- often, owing to his judicial position, not available for publication -- to the 'Law Journal', Dunedin was otherwise not a prolific writer. 'A Digest of Registration Cases', which first appeared in 1877, and the historical pamphlet 'A short account of the principality of Scotland and the title of prince and steward of Scotland' (1892), are titles which can be mentioned. 
In 1900 Dunedin became the keeper of the great seal of the principality of Scotland, an office he held until 1936. Many other honours were also bestowed on him in this later period in his life. He was awarded the GCVO in 1923 and created Viscount Dunedin of Stenton in 1926. Honorary LLD degrees were bestowed by the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, Toronto, Chicago, and Columbia, and that of DCL by Oxford. He was elected an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple, London, in 1910. In addition to being lord lieutenant of Bute, he was also a deputy lieutenant of the county of the city of Edinburgh. 
In December 1922 Dunedin's first wife died and in July 1923 he married Jean (1885-1944) ['see 'Murray, Jane Elmslie Henderson], daughter of George Findlay, merchant, of Aberdeen. The second Lady Dunedin was probably best-known as the first director of Scottish War Savings from 1916 to 1923. She was created CBE in 1920 for her work in this position. Lady Dunedin had been assistant editor at Everyman from 1914 to 1916 and was to be editor in 1933-4. She published works of her own also, such as 'Three Aspects of the Russian Revolution' (1918). 
Dunedin was reportedly very proud of his wife's achievements, and it is a matter for speculation how far his second marriage encouraged him in the discovery of new activities aside from the law and in his greater participation in current affairs through letters to the press. This is not to say that his early pace of social activity had abated before this time. Profuse hospitality, friendships in high social circles, and a lasting preference for dancing over more sedentary evening pleasures, all showed Dunedin's taste for the good life. Golf continued to be an interest. Dunedin was captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club in 1892 and of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers in 1893-4. He was also a good tennis and billiards player and had some experience of coaching as a sport. Mechanical and technical things were another interest. Dunedin was a pioneer motorist, and he was also said to have been one of the first MPs to ride into Palace Yard on a bicycle. He was responsible for the design of his house, 7 Rothesay Terrace, Edinburgh. As he had been no orator in politics, so he was no raconteur on the after-dinner circuit, but he told a good story and reportedly gave after-dinner speeches in languages other than English. In addition to a good knowledge of French, which he spoke with a marked British accent, Dunedin took up the study of Romanian and German in middle age and enjoyed showing off his linguistic proficiency. To all these social qualities and activities must be added his wit. On Hugh Macmillan's appointment to be his House of Lords' colleague in 1930, for instance, Dunedin telegraphed 'heartiest congratulations to 'myself'' ('Scottish Law Review', 151), most probably a reference to the inspiration Macmillan said he had derived from the older man's example. 
Dunedin retired as an appeals judge in March 1932, having confided to Macmillan that his memory was failing. This was still not matched, however, by any comparable loss of interest in pursuing an active life. Dunedin became a keen amateur film-maker, and in 1935 he was appointed the first honorary fellow of the Cinema Institute, of which he was a founder patron. He also exhibited a marked wanderlust, travelling widely in different parts of the world. 
Viscount Dunedin died in an Edinburgh nursing home on 21 August 1942, having been ill for some time previously, and he was buried three days later at Caputh churchyard in Perthshire. He was survived by his widow, who died in March 1944, and by two of his daughters from his first marriage. 
Dunedin held a sequence of high offices, both political and judicial, on his way to becoming a law lord, and was the recipient of a range of honours. A unionist, his career was a product of the union from his education to his easy movement between the Scottish and English legal systems in later life, and beyond that his contact as an appeals judge with colonial cases. His place in history, however, is not that of a well-known public figure. Rather it is of the kind that fades more quickly from the public mind, namely that of a great lawyer of his generation. Hugh Macmillan ranks him with Inglis and Watson as the best that the Parliament House, Edinburgh, produced in the half century that Dunedin himself looked back on in his 'Times' article of 1932. His judgments were seen as standing in the Scottish tradition of substance rather than form, and of principle rather than precedent. His varied and highly active life outside his profession, and his apparent wish to be counted a man of the world rather than as a legal scholar, should not detract from his obvious interest in the law as an intellectual exercise. In addition Dunedin was concerned above all with the sound and rational administration of the law. His rejection, after trying it out as a junior, of the parliamentary bar as too turbulent, and his preference for feudal and patent cases, are indicative of this; so too are the references to his contribution to legal development, especially with respect to workmen's compensation legislation, from his friend Lord Macmillan. 


@@@@@


doc= 35155


Murray, Sir Archibald James (1860-1945), army officer, was born on 21 April 1860 at Woodhouse, near Kingsclere, Hampshire, the third child of Charles Murray, landed proprietor, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Captain John Baker Graves, of the 19th regiment, and later judge at Kurunegala, Ceylon. Educated at Cheltenham College, Murray entered the army through the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and in 1879 was gazetted to the 27th regiment which, two years later, became the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers. His early service was abroad, at Hong Kong, Singapore, and the Cape, where in 1888, as a captain, he took part in the suppression of a Zulu rising. In 1890 he married Caroline Helen (died 1910), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Baker Sweet of Hillersdon, Tiverton. They had a son. 
In 1897 Murray gained entrance to the Staff College, Camberley; among his fellow students were the future field marshals W. R. Robertson, D. Haig, and E. H. H. Allenby. Thoughtful and reserved in manner, Murray seemed old for his years, and was generally spoken of at the college as 'Old Archie'. 
At the end of the two-year course Murray rejoined his battalion, but on the outbreak of the South African War he was appointed intelligence officer on the staff of Sir William Penn Symons, commanding in Natal, and was with him when he was mortally wounded, and his senior staff officer killed, in the opening frontier fight at Talana. The next-in-command was ill, and Murray, appointed chief of staff by him, managed skilfully to extricate the British force from its advanced position and bring it back to Ladysmith. His reputation as a field soldier was deservedly high and he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1900. Henceforward generals competed for his services. He was on the staff of Sir George White during the siege of Ladysmith; and during 1900 was senior staff officer to Sir Archibald Hunter of the 10th division. In October 1901 Murray was promoted to command the 2nd battalion of his regiment in India, soon to be warned for service in South Africa, where it arrived in February 1902. In leading his men in an attack in the northern Transvaal, for which he was appointed to the DSO, he was dangerously wounded in the abdomen. 
Between the South African War and the First World War Murray held a series of important staff appointments: senior general staff officer of the 1st division (Aldershot); director of military training, general staff, at the War Office, 1907-12 (Haig being one of the other two directors); and inspector of infantry (1912-14). He was promoted major-general in 1910, the year in which his first wife died. In 1912 Murray married Mildred Georgina, daughter of his former Colonel, William Toke Dooner, of Maidstone. 
Murray had held the command of the 2nd division for six months when war was declared in 1914, but he was appointed chief of the general staff of the British expeditionary force (BEF) at the express wish of Sir John French, under whose command he was serving at Aldershot. The early days of the campaign -- the battles of Mons and Le Cateau, the retreat on Paris, the advance to the Marne and the Aisne, the transfer of the BEF to Flanders, and the first battle of Ypres -- were more than strenuous, and according to French's reminiscences, '1914', at the end of the year Murray had fallen sick. He was obliged in January 1915 to go to England for rest, and Robertson (who was then quartermaster-general) took his place. In February 1915 Lord Kitchener appointed Murray deputy chief of the Imperial General Staff for the special purpose of superintending the training of the New Army, and in September he was promoted chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS). In December, however, French resigned and was replaced by Haig, and Robertson became CIGS. 
Murray was appointed to a command in Egypt, where he arrived in January 1916, with instructions to secure the safety of the Suez Canal, administer martial law in Egypt, and reorganize the troops evacuated from Gallipoli. That his forces were to be regarded as the 'imperial strategic reserve' made the task Murray confronted in Egypt all the more challenging and he was widely considered an excellent choice for the job. He tackled his large and complex workload with determination and enthusiasm. 
In August, after an invading enemy force had been defeated at Romani (20 miles from the canal) it was decided that the Egyptian expeditionary force (EEF) would advance across the Sinai peninsula. By December, in spite of opposition and physical difficulties, this had been successfully achieved with the laying of a railway line and a 12 inch water main across the desert. As Allenby would note in his dispatches: 'Murray's brilliant campaign in Sinai had removed the danger to Egypt, and had forced the enemy back across his own frontier'. Early in 1917 Murray was instructed to advance into Palestine. Frustration with the attritional war on the western front, combined with religious attachments to the land of Palestine, led Prime Minister Lloyd George to urge for an ambitious offensive in the east. On 26 March an attempt was made to capture Gaza: though the objectives were initially secured, poor communications in the command structure resulted in troops being pulled out at the last minute. Murray none the less sent home a positive report of the battle and was then directed to renew operations and occupy Jerusalem. Although Murray protested that the operations required more forces than were at his disposal, he obeyed his instructions and attacked Gaza again. However, the Turkish troops fought notoriously well on the defensive and inflicted upon Murray a serious defeat, the scale of which had an immediate effect on the troops. 
A change in command was deemed necessary and Murray was superseded by Allenby, who took over on 29 June. With additional forces the EEF under Allenby's command made dramatic advances in the autumn of 1917 (including the highly publicized capture of Jerusalem in December). While the view that Murray's departure marked a new beginning for the EEF gained wide currency in the light of Allenby's significant achievements, Murray's preparations for the Palestine campaign are also widely acknowledged. Allenby himself, in his final dispatch, noted his indebtedness to his predecessor 'who, by his bridging of the desert between Egypt and Palestine, laid the foundations for the subsequent advances of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force'. Murray by his foresight and strategic imagination 'brought the waters of the Nile to the borders of Palestine, planned the skilful military operations by which the Turks were driven from strong positions in the desert over the frontier of Egypt, stood all tests and formed the cornerstone of my success'. 
On his return to England, Murray became general officer commanding at Aldershot in August 1919. In 1920 he published the full text of his dispatches. He retired from the army in 1922 and died at his home, Makepeace, Park Lane, Reigate, on 23 January 1945. He was appointed KC (1911), KCMG (1915), GCMG (1917), and GCB (1928). Murray was a grand officer of the Legion d'honneur and a member of a number of other European orders. 


@@@@@


doc= 35156


Murray, Charles Adolphus, seventh earl of Dunmore (1841-1907), traveller, born in Grafton Street, London, on 24 March 1841, was the only son of Alexander Edward Murray, sixth earl of Dunmore (1804-1845), and his wife, Lady Catherine (1814-1886), fourth daughter of George Augustus Herbert, eleventh earl of Pembroke. He succeeded his father as seventh earl on 15 July 1845. Educated at Eton College, he served with the Scots Fusilier Guards from 1860 to 1864. He married on 5 April 1866 Lady Gertrude (1847-1943), third daughter of Thomas William Coke, second earl of Leicester. Their only son, Alexander Edward, succeeded as eighth earl of Dunmore. They also had five daughters. A Conservative, he was lord-in-waiting to Queen Victoria from 1874 until 1880 (his mother had been a lady of the bedchamber in 1841-5). He was also lord lieutenant of Stirlingshire from 1874 to 1885, and honorary colonel of the 1st volunteer battalion of the Cameron Highlanders from 1896 to 1907. 
A strong and active man, Dunmore travelled in many parts of the world, including Africa and the Arctic, but his principal journey was made in 1892 through Kashmir, western Tibet, Chinese Tartary, and Russian central Asia. He started from Rawalpindi in April 1892, reached Kashgar in Chinese Turkestan in December 1892, and continued west through Ferghana and Transcaspia, reaching Samarkand in January 1893. He had ridden and walked 2500 miles, traversing forty-one mountain passes and sixty-nine rivers. His account of the journey, 'The Pamirs' (1893), was a pleasant travel book, but of no great scientific or geographical value, and was not flatteringly reviewed in the professional press. His novel 'Ormisdale' was also published in 1893. 
A few years before Dunmore's death he and other members of his family became Christian Scientists, and in 1907 he claimed that his daughter had cured him of rupture by the methods of Christian Science. He died suddenly of heart failure on 27 August 1907 at Manor House, Frimley, near Camberley, and was buried at Dunmore, near Falkirk, Stirlingshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35157


Murray, David Christie (1847-1907), novelist and journalist, born on 13 April 1847 in High Street, West Bromwich, Staffordshire, was one of the six sons and five daughters of William Murray, printer and stationer of West Bromwich, and his wife, Mary Withers. He attended private schools at West Bromwich and Spon Lane, Staffordshire, but at the age of twelve was set to work in his father's printing office. 
Murray began his career in journalism at an early age by writing leaders for the 'Wednesbury Advertiser'. He soon became part of the staff of the 'Birmingham Morning News' working under George Dawson, reporting police court cases at 25's'. a week and rapidly winning the approval of his employer as an admirable descriptive writer, notably in his descriptions of colliery disasters which brought him more than a local reputation. In January 1865 -- without friends, funds, or prospects -- he went to London, where he found casual employment at Messrs Unwin Brothers' printing works. In May he enlisted as a private in the 4th Royal Irish dragoon guards, and accompanied his regiment to Ireland, but after a year a great-aunt purchased his discharge. From that time his profession was journalism or foreign correspondence, varied by novel-writing. When in London he passed his time in bohemian society. In 1871 he became parliamentary reporter for the 'Daily News' and on 5 September of that year married Sophia Harris ('b'. 1847/8) of Rowley Regis, near Birmingham, daughter of William Harris, a farmer. They had one daughter, who died young. After his wife's death he married, on 17 November 1880, Alice Lydia Mary West ('b'. 1856/7), daughter of William West, a warehouseman; they had one son, Archibald. He also had four illegitimate children. 
Murray travelled a great deal and wrote extensively on foreign affairs. He represented 'The Times' and 'The Scotsman' during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8. He described a tour through England in the disguise of a tramp in a series of articles for 'Mayfair'. From 1881 to 1886 he lived mainly in Belgium and France, and from 1889 to 1891 he was based in Nice. Subsequently he resided for a time in north Wales. He made lecture tours through Australia and New Zealand in 1889-91, and through the United States and Canada in 1894-5. Australia was described by him in articles in the 'Contemporary Review' in 1891. In 'The Cockney Columbus' (1898) he collected letters on the United States from the 'New York Herald'. In 1892 he was editor of 'The Morning', a short-lived Conservative daily London paper. A few years later he contributed ethical, literary, and political articles to 'The Referee', which were collected as 'Guesses at Truth' (1908). From 1898 he devoted much energy to writing and lecturing to support Emile Zola's plea on behalf of Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a French officer, who had been wrongfully condemned for espionage. 
In 1879 Murray had contributed his first novel, 'A Life's Atonement', periodically to 'Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science and Arts'. From then until his death in 1907 scarcely a year passed without the publication of one or at times two novels. Between 1887 and 1907 he occasionally collaborated with Henry Herman or Alfred Egmont Hake. His novels 'Joseph's Coat' (1881) and 'Val Strange' (1882) achieved a notable success. 'By the Gate of the Sea' (1883) and 'Rainbow Gold' (1885), which first appeared in serial form in the 'Cornhill Magazine' under the editorship of James Payn, assured his reputation. 'Aunt Rachel' (1886) was critically acclaimed. Murray's fiction abounds in vigour. The loosely constructed plots contain incidents drawn freely from his journalistic experiences. His style gives evidence of his profession as a journalist, but he is effective in describing the neighbourhood and inhabitants of Cannock Chase, the area in Staffordshire which served as a setting for most of his novels. He also wrote several volumes of rambling autobiography, including 'A Novelist's Notebook' (1887), 'The Making of a Novelist: an Experiment in Autobiography' (1894), and 'Recollections', the last published posthumously in 1908. 
Murray died at his home, 4 Lancaster Road, Belsize Park, London, on 1 August 1907 after a long illness caused by abdominal problems, during which he endured much discomfort. He was buried at Hampstead. A memorial tablet in copper with a pewter medallion was unveiled at West Bromwich Public Library in December 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 35158


Murray, Sir (George) Evelyn Pemberton (1880-1947), civil servant, was born at 7 Eaton Square, London, on 25 July 1880, the only son of Sir George Herbert Murray (1849-1936), civil servant, and his wife, Helen Mary (died 1932), daughter of John Mulholland, later first Baron Dunleath. His father was successively chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, secretary of the Post Office, and sole permanent secretary of the Treasury until his retirement in 1911. His son -- who was always known as Evelyn -- followed in the steps of his father. He was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, from where he was awarded an 'aegrotat' in the final examination in 'literae humaniores' in 1903. In that year he joined the civil service as a junior examiner in the Board of Education, which made appointments by patronage, and from 1905 to 1909 he was private secretary to three successive presidents of the Board of Education. On 10 January 1906 he married Muriel Mildred Elizabeth (1884/5-1961), daughter of Philip Beresford Hope of Bedgebury Park, Kent. 
Murray was promoted rapidly to commissioner of customs and excise in 1912 and to his father's old office as secretary of the Post Office in 1914. He was the youngest secretary of the Post Office, and also the longest serving. He remained at St Martin's-le-Grand until 1934, when he returned to his former position at customs and excise until his retirement in 1940. 
In 1914 the Post Office was the single largest employer in the country, with a staff of 250,000 and a revenue of $32.6 million. Its business extended beyond the mail services with the addition of financial services and the successive nationalization of telegraphs in 1870 and telephones in 1912. There were major problems concerning labour relations, negotiation with transport companies for the carriage of mail within Britain and across the seas, the adoption of new technology, and relations with foreign administrations. Murray arrived at the Post Office at the end of a period of rapid growth and development, and spent the next twenty years preserving the 'status quo' to the best of his ability. The outbreak of the First World War meant that his task was not easy. Staff shortages, the dislocation of transport, mounting costs, and the need to cut services, dominated his first five years at the Post Office. After the war, he faced conflicting pressures. The public demanded the restoration of pre-war levels of service and charges. Unions were seeking higher wages, which had serious consequences in a labour-intensive service. The Treasury pressed for a speedy return to surplus. Murray thus faced severe problems of wartime dislocation and post-war reconstruction. The Post Office did well to avoid a breakdown of services during the war, and to recover from a deficit of $6.7 million in 1920-21 to a surplus of $12.3 million in 1933-4. His success in coping with the disruptions of the war was marked by his knighthood in 1919. 
Murray was a conservative, aloof, and patrician figure, and consequently his administrative style had serious weaknesses. D. O. Lumley, who was Murray's personal secretary from 1922 to 1927, provided an insight into his working methods. He arrived at St Martin's-le-Grand a little before noon and remained until 8 p.m., which allowed him to minimize contact with his colleagues. Lumley remarked that Murray 'said very little as a rule, his instructions were laconic and he disliked going into explanations or answering any but the most essential questions' (Lumley, 'The last secretary to the Post Office'). He was punctilious about acquiring facts and would summon officials to provide information. What he would not do was discuss the issue with his officials, or allow them to take part in meetings with the Treasury and the postmaster-general, which he kept in his own hands. The one area in which he did delegate responsibility was labour relations. His emphasis was on orderly transaction of administration, which gave him a horror of anything so vulgar as commercial business practices. He opposed delegation of executive power to the regions although his father had observed before the First World War that the highly centralized system was breaking down. Murray did nothing to produce a workable scheme of reform. 
After the war, the select committee on telephones suggested the creation of two distinct organizations for post and telecommunications, which was implemented in a limited form in 1922 with the creation of two new offices of director of postal services and director of telegraphs and telephones, below the secretary. But centralization of power in the hands of the secretary's office remained a problem, and in 1932 a committee of inquiry under the chairmanship of Lord Bridgeman recommended a regional structure to execute policy, with the central office in London concentrating on policy. The committee also recommended the abolition of the autocratic position of the secretary, and the appointment of a functional board with a director-general as the 'primus inter pares'. Murray was vehemently opposed to the changes, which were 'based on incomplete knowledge and a misconception of the position'. In his view, the existing system had proved its worth and 'it would be safer to mend it rather than to scrap it', although he did have enough self-awareness to realize that 'my own inclination by temperament has been to the conservative side' (Post Office archives, Post 33/5529, M8566/1940). His departure from the Post Office coincided with the implementation of the reforms in 1934, and it is significant that his career did not progress. Lumley's assessment of his time at the Post Office is a fair one, that 'chinks in the palpably top heavy structure of the Post Office did not show themselves earlier, solely because of the immense administrative ability and experience which Murray brought to its management' (Lumley, 'The last secretary to the Post Office'). He had the abilities to keep an existing structure in reasonable working order but he had little inclination to reform or change. 
Both Murray and his father were at some time heirs presumptive to the dukedom of Atholl; his grandson George Iain became the tenth duke in 1957. Murray's only child, George Anthony ('b'. 1907) was killed in command of an artillery regiment in Italy in 1945. Murray died of cancer at his London home, 23 Fursecroft, George Street, Bryanston Square, on 30 March 1947. 


@@@@@


doc= 35159


Murray, (George) Gilbert Aime (1866-1957), classical scholar and internationalist, was born in Sydney, Australia, on 2 January 1866, the second son of Sir Terence Aubrey Murray (1810-1873) and his second wife, Agnes Ann, 'nee' Edwards ('c'.1835-1891). Murray's father, a prosperous stock farmer, had been since 1862 president of the legislative council of New South Wales; his elder brother Sir (John) Hubert Plunkett Murray (1861-1940) later became governor of Papua. The family thus belonged to a colonial elite, though Murray's paternal ancestors had been expropriated from their Irish estates by the English in the seventeenth century and the Murrays thus tended to be 'agin the government'. Murray's first name came not from W. S. Gilbert, as has been supposed, but from another maternal relative, Gilbert Edwards. In his childhood and youth Murray was known as George; he became Gilbert on his marriage in 1889. In 1875 he was sent to Southey's, a boarding-school 80 miles from Sydney. The bullying of pupils and mistreatment of animals he witnessed there prompted a lifelong detestation of cruelty in any form. 
As Sir Terence's fortunes declined, the Murrays moved into progressively smaller houses. Four years after his father's death in 1873 George was taken to England by his mother to complete his education. This began with a year at a dame-school in Brighton and continued at Merchant Taylors' School, one of the nine leading (Clarendon) public schools, then still in London. Here Murray did well in rugby and won several prizes for his work as well as learning a little Hebrew. Francis Storr, head of the modern (non-classical) side of the school and an intelligent Liberal, became a strong influence and a friend. Murray now began to read Spencer and Comte, and especially J. S. Mill, a lifelong influence, whose philosophical radicalism was reinforced for Murray by the idealism of Shelley. In 1884 he went on to St John's College, Oxford, to which the school was linked, with scholarships which eased a financial burden his mother could hardly have borne. 
Already an accomplished composer in Latin and (especially) Greek, Murray was coached before he went up to Oxford by the well-known classical tutor J. Y. Sargent, who had examined at Merchant Taylors'. In his first year he won two university classical prizes, the Hertford and the Ireland -- the former open to first- and second-year students, the latter to all years -- as well as scoring forty runs in the freshmen's cricket match. He proceeded to gain first classes in both classical moderations (1885) and 'literae humaniores' (1888), and to gain three more prizes for composition and the Craven scholarship (1886). His precocious gifts led to friendship with several Oxford scholars, including three eccentrics: Thomas Snow (his college tutor), Robinson Ellis, and David Margoliouth. He was also befriended by Arthur Sidgwick of Corpus Christi College, whose liberalism and instinctive feeling for Greek resonated with Murray's talents and assumptions. 
By the end of his student career Murray had already become involved in political debate, and had spoken several times at the Oxford Union. His support of home rule for Ireland was predictable but placed him in a small minority. His allegiance to Mill was tested, but not broken, by the idealist critiques developed in Oxford. Religion, too, was explored, and the agnostic Murray formed a friendship with the Anglican Charles Gore, then head of Pusey House. Several colleges offered him fellowships, and in 1888 he chose New College (taking an examination which the college had offered to waive). By this time he had finished his first work, the utopian adventure 'Gobi or Shamo'; after several rejections, with support from Andrew Lang it was published by Longmans in 1889. 
In 1887 Murray met Rosalind Howard, later countess of Carlisle, and with other promising young men was invited to the family home, Castle Howard. Here he met, and promptly fell in love with, his hostess's beautiful eldest daughter Lady Mary Henrietta (died 1956). At first rejected, he paid court for two years, powerfully supported by Mary's mother, who when her daughter attempted to make conditions, overruled them. The engagement was finally announced in October 1889. By this time Murray was in a position to support a wife, since he had in July been elected to the chair of Greek at Glasgow and could expect an income of $1350 a year. His youth -- he was twenty-three -- and a lack of evidence of his social standing caused concern among the electors, but were swept aside by glowing academic testimonials and the support of Mary's father (the ninth earl of Carlisle) and James Bryce. The couple were married on 2 December 1889 at Castle Howard by Benjamin Jowett. The arrangements were made by the countess of Carlisle and Murray's mother was in effect excluded from the occasion, which remained a source of bitterness until her death in 1891. 
At Glasgow Murray entered a teaching environment very different from that of Oxford. He faced large classes (100 was not uncommon) of beginning students, some of them older than their new professor; most of them had never previously encountered Greek, which was compulsory for the general degree. Murray was obliged to collect and bank the student fees which formed part of his professorial income, and to mark large quantities of scripts, though in this he was helped by two assistants. Luckily he discovered a natural authority as a teacher and became a successful lecturer, though he intensely disliked the disciplinary aspects of the role. The contrast was noticed between Murray's unforced eloquence and the plainer style of his predecessor Richard Claverhouse Jebb. In his inaugural lecture Murray followed Jebb in taking a wide view of his subject, declaring that 'Greece, not Greek, is the real subject of our study. There is more in Hellenism than a language, although that language may be the liveliest and richest ever spoken by man.' 
On his appointment Murray became a member of a local elite. He and Lady Mary played their part in social functions, and he made some firm friends, including A. C. Bradley; but their determined liberalism alienated some of his colleagues. In 1889 Murray became a director of the local workers' co-operative, and he and his wife shopped at the local Co-op. In politics he held to a Gladstonian Liberalism, and remained loyal to the teaching of Mill and of his follower John Morley. His public criticism of official policy in the Anglo-Transvaal War placed him in a somewhat beleaguered radical Liberal minority. He also campaigned consistently for teetotalism, a speech to the university's Total Abstinence Society being printed as 'Claims of Total Abstinence' (1894). The Glasgow teaching year ran from November to April, and thus left ample time for writing, though Murray suffered from a series of illnesses, which led in 1892 to his securing a year's leave on medical grounds. Much of this period was spent on what was to be his only return to Australia. In 1893 he circulated other scholars with a proposal for a series of classical texts. This came to nothing, as did a plan to compile an index to Euripides; but his ideas may have influenced D. B. Monro, Ingram Bywater, and Charles Cannan, who were planning what became the 'Oxford Classical Text' series. In 1896 Murray accepted an invitation to contribute a text of Euripides. On all these projects he received much-appreciated advice from the great German Hellenist Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (1848-1931), to whom he wrote (in Greek) in 1894 after reading the latter's celebrated edition of Euripides' 'Heracles'. Murray sent some of his most promising pupils to Wilamowitz's seminar, the first being Dorothy Murray (no relation) in 1901. The coincidence of name perhaps led to the supposition by his pupil Maurice Bowra and a later regius professor, Hugh Lloyd-Jones, that Murray himself studied under Wilamowitz. The encounter with Wilamowitz, whom he did not in fact meet until the latter's visit to England in 1908, was the most important of Murray's scholarly life: he was exhilarated by Wilamowitz's breadth of scholarship and his concern to bring ancient Greek literature to life, his commitment to the staging of his own translations of Greek drama, and his love (which Murray shared) of the plays of Ibsen. As Murray said in his presidential address to the Classical Association in 1918, 'The Scholar... must so understand as to relive'. 
The other major product of Murray's time in Glasgow was his 'History of Ancient Greek Literature' (1897), based on his student lectures. The book is eloquent, but though enthusiastically reviewed by his friend Verrall, had a mixed reception among classical scholars. In his preface Murray wrote that 'to read and re-read the scanty remains now left to us of ancient Greek literature is a pleasant and not a laborious task'; the Cambridge Greek scholar Henry Jackson wrote in his copy, 'Insolent puppy'. The major weakness of the book was that it fell between two stools, the short inspirational essay and the longer, more comprehensive account. Nevertheless it was several times reprinted. 
In 1897 Murray was urged by his doctor to resign his chair on the ground of ill health, and in 1899 finally did so. One of his medical advisers encouraged him to apply for a pension under a contractual clause relating to permanent incapacity; but he later became reluctant to sign a certificate, and Murray withdrew his application. The Murrays, with their children Rosalind ('b'. 1890), Denis ('b'. 1892), and Agnes ('b'. 1894), moved to Churt in Surrey, to a house bought for them by Lady Carlisle. It was on her financial support that Murray now relied until 1905. The nature of his illness is unclear, but it is likely that both physical and psychosomatic illness played a part. An additional factor was the health of their daughter Rosalind: she had had diphtheria and pneumonia and was, Murray claimed, 'absolutely forbidden to live in Glasgow or anywhere near' (letter to David Murray, 31 March 1899, U. Glas., Archives and Business Records Centre, Mu.22-f.7 [10]). Rosalind was eventually dispatched abroad in the care of companions, and did not emerge into ordinary society until she was eighteen. In these early years the Murrays' marriage was not always harmonious. As well as concerns about their own and their children's health, they had clashes of temperament to deal with, and serious quarrels can be detected in their correspondence, even where it was later weeded by their daughter Rosalind and by Murray's secretary Jean Smith to remove evidence of disagreement. 
While at Churt Murray began working on Euripides for the 'Oxford Classical Text' series; his text appeared in three volumes in 1902, 1904, and 1909. For the first volume he relied heavily on material sent by Wilamowitz, but in 1901 he travelled to Paris, and in 1903 to Florence and Rome, to inspect manuscripts of the plays. The volumes were several times reprinted and enjoyed a long life, being replaced only by the text of James Diggle (1981, 1984, 1994). In his preface the new editor praised Murray's sober judgement, though he was less impressed by his care in collating manuscripts. Murray himself wrote to Bertrand Russell on 7 May 1901 that 'It is like laboriously cleaning a very beautiful statue' (Bodl. Oxf., MS G. Murray 165.13); in 1908, in the final stages of the project, he called it a 'disgusting task' (West, 118). This may explain why in 1906 Murray refused an invitation from Oxford University Press to produce an 'Oxford Classical Text' edition of Sophocles; a task which he unsuccessfully urged on Wilamowitz in the following year. But it was in any case not Sophocles but Euripides, with his psychological insight, rationalism, and scepticism -- not least towards established religion -- who attracted Murray. 
The other major task Murray worked on at Churt was a series of translations of Euripides and Aristophanes. Published from 1902 onwards, they were widely performed on stage, and made Murray's name in theatrical circles. They were also taken up by amateurs, including working-class groups. Murray gave readings from them in schools, universities, and elsewhere, impressing his audiences with his beautiful voice. Even in his late eighties his voice retained much of its beauty: in a review of Wilson's 'Murray' Peter Levi described it as 'preposterously golden' ('The Independent', 28 Jan 1988). It later became fashionable (a fashion led by T. S. Eliot) to decry the style of the translations as a too-faithful echo of Swinburne and Morris. Their original auditors, however, must have found in them a clarity and eloquence missing from the stilted language of many contemporary translations from Greek literature. Murray's reading of the 'Hippolytus' at Cambridge in 1902 brought praise from Bertrand Russell, a cousin of Lady Mary's, to whom he became very close. He also met Rudyard Kipling, but while admiring his work he was repelled by him. 
Murray's involvement with the theatre went well beyond these translations. During his recuperative sea journey in 1892-3 he had begun a play, 'Carlyon Sahib', a rather grim utopian tale set in India. Its production in 1899 was not a success, but by this time Murray had come into contact with leading members of the theatrical world, notably the critic William Archer, the actor-manager Harley Granville Barker, and the playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw. Of these the first became a firm friend, the second produced plays for Murray, and the last caricatured him, his wife, and his mother-in-law in 'Major Barbara' (1905): Murray's character Adolphus Cusins was played by Barker. Archer advised Murray on his second play, 'Andromache', an attempt to write a tragedy for modern times. It was produced in 1901 but failed, though it impressed some severe critics, including Shaw and A. E. Housman. The philosopher Henry Sidgwick found it 'very spirited and excellent reading: but it seemed to me that between deliberate erudite barbarism and spontaneous natural modernity what we used to call the 'Hellenic spirit' has somehow slipped through' (Sidgwick to H. G. Dakyns, 7 May 1900, Schultz collection, Newnham College, Cambridge). Murray's venture into theatrical life brought him into contact with several leading ladies, and led to quarrels with Lady Mary. In 1908 he admitted to her that 'I do become charmed by a certain kind of beauty... these rather emotional friendships do come drifting across my heart' (Wilson, 144), but reaffirmed his love for her, while insisting on the right to act according to his own judgement. 
Murray also made academic friends in this period, including the Cambridge classical scholars Arthur Verrall and his friend Jane Harrison. In both cases their styles of work resonated powerfully but only partially with his own. Verrall, whom he had met in Switzerland in 1894, was an eloquent re-creator of Euripidean drama with a strong theatrical sense, but his interpretations were vitiated by rationalist fantasy. Some of the emendations he offered of Euripides' text Murray described as 'subtle and attractive', but treated with caution. Harrison was the moving spirit of what has been called Cambridge ritualism: the reinterpretation of Greek tragedy as a product of ritual practices ['see 'Cambridge ritualists]. She, Murray, and her protege Francis Cornford exchanged ideas about the new potential of anthropology for the analysis of Greek literature and religion, and (unusually for the time) contributed to each other's books. Thus Harrison's 'Themis: a Study of the Social Origins of Greek Religion' (1912), which was dedicated to Murray, included his 'Excursus on the ritual forms preserved in Greek tragedy'. Murray, however, always remained unwilling to abandon his vision of a liberal and progressive Hellenism for Harrison's focus on primitive origins and chthonic religion. He recognized that each generation had constructed its own picture of Greece -- the 'serene classical Greek' of Winckelmann was a phantom -- but, while acknowledging that 'there is more flesh and blood in the Greek of the anthropologist', insisted that 'he is... a Hellene... without the spiritual life, without the Hellenism' (Murray, 'A History of Greek Literature', 1897, xv). 
In 1905 the family moved to Oxford, after Murray accepted an offer of a fellowship at New College. At Oxford he found several talented undergraduates, including J. D. Denniston and Arnold Joseph Toynbee, later to become his son-in-law. In 1908 Murray was appointed regius professor of Greek in succession to Ingram Bywater; he had been dubious of his fitness for the post, and was ready to work with another candidate, the Scottish Hellenist John Burnet. In the same year Wilamowitz visited Oxford, giving two addresses in translations made by Murray; and in his inaugural lecture at Oxford Murray quoted Wilamowitz's declaration that 'ghosts will not speak till they have drunk blood; and we must give them the blood of our hearts', pleading for a revivifying of Greek studies. To this end he urged a reconstruction of the Oxford classical course to make it more integrated, wider in scope, and less mechanical in its training. For much of his time there, until he retired in 1936, Murray worked to broaden what he saw as an unduly limited and unintegrated Greats curriculum of history and philosophy: literature hardly figured, being largely confined to the first half of the preliminary (moderations) course, and the subjects which did were rarely placed within a wider context. To remedy this he organized a series of lectures prefatory to the course; these came to be known as the 'Seven against Greats' (a reference to Aeschylus's 'Seven Against Thebes', in which a band of heroes attacks the seven-gated city). The metaphor was apt for a challenge mounted from without to a system of teaching dominated not by professors, but by college tutors. Murray himself was never a 'college man', though he proved a staunch supporter of Somerville College until his death. 
The most contentious issue Murray faced on taking up his chair, however, was that of compulsory Greek -- a requirement made by Oxford (and Cambridge) of all students. The debate on whether it should be maintained, which had begun in 1870, had flared up recently, and Murray, with some heart-searching, adhered to his commitment to 'Greece, not Greek'. He became a leading spokesman for the abolition of the requirement by the university, making a number of enemies in the process. In 1909-10 he pressed a compromise position which was rejected. The issue was raised again after the First World War, and compulsory Greek was finally abolished in March 1920. By this time Murray was an influential member of the prime minister's committee on the position of classics in the educational system, appointed in 1919. In its report, published in 1921 and in part written by Murray, the committee concluded that while the position of Latin was fairly secure, Greek was in a precarious position, being taught to under 5 per cent of secondary school pupils. 
At Glasgow Murray had considered a political career, but after his resignation resolved to devote himself to Greek literature, and refused several invitations to stand for parliament. Nevertheless he continued to speak in public about causes dear to his heart, including women's suffrage (he supported the suffragists but not the suffragettes). An important educational initiative in which Murray was involved for the rest of his life began when he agreed to act as general editor of the 'Home University Library' in 1911. This series of short books, written by experts in an accessible style and aimed at the intelligent reading public, proved very popular; by the end of 1913 over a million had been sold. Murray's own contribution was 'Euripides and his Age' (1913). In it he presented the poet as a radical and freethinker; the book belonged to a contemporary revaluation of a dramatist whom the Victorians had regarded as inferior to Aeschylus and, especially, Sophocles. If this was his best-known book, perhaps his best was 'The Rise of the Greek Epic' (1907), based on a series of lectures at Harvard. In it Murray attempted to mediate between unitarian (single-author) and analytical (multipe-author or disintegrationist) views of the Homeric poems by seeing them as the products of a coherent tradition which moved steadily towards the expurgation of cruder elements in favour of a higher humanity. (In an appendix he discussed the possibility that some passages in the version handed down had been affected by bowdlerization.) 
Another American lecture series, at Columbia in 1912, produced Murray's 'Four Stages of Greek Religion' (1912). Here he again argued for a progressive Hellenism, highlighting the virtues of fifth-century Athens and reacting against the primitivist emphases of Jane Harrison. The book revealed its author to be a reverently agnostic rationalist with a maturing scepticism about religion. 
After the outbreak of war in 1914 Murray became increasingly involved in government activities, his initial doubts about Britain's declaration of war having been overcome by Sir Edward Grey's speech to the House of Commons on 3 August 1914. He wrote several pamphlets for the bureau of information, including 'The Foreign Policy of Sir Edward Grey' (1915), and made lecture tours of Sweden and the USA. In 1917, despite the rise to power of Lloyd George, whose policies he detested, Murray became a civil servant and worked part-time for the Board of Education, whose president was his friend H. A. L. Fisher. He used his position to help those imprisoned as conscientious objectors, notably Bertrand Russell. Throughout the war Murray was involved in discussions about international peace, some of them within the League of Nations Society (1915), whose vice-president he became in 1916. In 1919 he was persuaded to stand as a Liberal parliamentary candidate for Oxford University; he did not campaign and barely saved his deposit. 
By this time Murray was working for the League of Nations Union (1918), and on the foundation of the League of Nations itself in 1920 he began a long association which lasted until the Second World War, working with his friend Robert Cecil. In 1921 he attended the league's assembly by arrangement with his friend Jan Smuts, to whom he remarked on the 'rather large proportion of small dark Latin nations' (Murray to Smuts, 8 Oct 1921; Murray, 185). He joined the league's committee of intellectual co-operation on its foundation in 1922 and succeeded Cecil as its chairman in 1928. Between the wars Murray was tireless in chairing international meetings, mediating, conciliating, and smoothing over differences. A proposal by George V to offer him membership of the Order of Merit in 1921 was blocked by Lloyd George; he was eventually appointed in 1941. (He had refused offers of knighthood in 1912 and 1917.) His name had also been on the list of the peerages that the Liberal government was contemplating creating if a forced creation became necessary in 1910 to get its budget through the House of Lords. 
All this outside activity inevitably curtailed the time Murray spent on his university duties, and in 1923 the vice-chancellor, Lewis Farnell, asked Murray if his League of Nations Union duties were compatible with retaining his chair; Murray responded by offering up to half his salary to fund a readership in Greek. This was subsequently filled by Edgar Lobel. It was for Murray's efforts in the field of international relations that he became best-known, and he was a powerful inter-war Liberal presence; his stature was such that in 1929 Ramsay MacDonald's government considered asking him to become ambassador in Washington. Yet he was never an ordinary Liberal: his mind has been described as 'freakishly individual', and some found him 'oppressively virtuous and intellectual' (Bentley, 171). After his defeat in 1918 he stood unsuccessfully as candidate for the Oxford University parliamentary seat on five further occasions (1919, 1922, 1923, 1924, 1929). His political choices had in some ways led him into the wilderness. Like other Liberals, he had been sidelined by the growth of the Labour Party, and in Oxford his commitment to Asquith had distanced him politically from Herbert Fisher, who supported Lloyd George. Murray's drift away from party politics led him in the 1930s to a dead-end destination: the well-intentioned but bloodless Next Five Years Group, whose manifesto he signed in 1935. 
The Murrays had moved in 1919 to their final home, Yatscombe on Boars Hill outside Oxford; after 1921 their finances were bolstered by inheritances from the earl and countess of Carlisle. They had difficulties with their two youngest children, Basil ('b'. 1902) and Stephen ('b'. 1908), and the health of the eldest son, Denis, had never recovered from his internment during the war. Denis died prematurely in 1930, Basil in 1937. The most serious blow, however, was the death of their daughter Agnes from peritonitis in 1922. This may have deepened Murray's involvement in the Society for Psychical Research, of which he had been president in 1916. He had taken part in psychic seances since the turn of the century and was regarded as having strong telepathic powers. Changes in relations within the family were manifested in part in religious commitments. In 1925 Lady Mary joined the Quakers, for whom she worked devotedly. Rosalind converted to Catholicism in 1933, and in 1939 published 'The Good Pagan's Failure', an anti-rationalist manifesto containing thinly veiled criticism of both her parents. 
In the 1930s Murray played a major part in efforts to relocate and employ German refugee scholars. His collaboration with William Beveridge of the London School of Economics led to the foundation in 1934 of the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning, in which he worked with the Aristotelian scholar David Ross and with Walter Adams. One of the most notable refugee scholars brought to Oxford was Eduard Fraenkel, who was in 1935 elected to the Corpus chair of Latin. Fraenkel played a large part in advising Murray on the 'Oxford Classical Text' edition of Aeschylus, to the point where Murray became tired of his somewhat peremptory admonitions. Advice was also forthcoming from Ludwig Radermacher of Vienna and from Denys Page. The resulting text, which appeared in 1937, was not well received, and has indeed been described as perverse and eccentric (Lloyd-Jones, 209). It is perhaps significant that in the lengthy discussion of his predecessors in his massive edition of the 'Agamemnon' (1950), Fraenkel makes no mention of Murray. Murray in turn found Fraenkel's edition Germanic, lacking in taste despite all its learning: a judgment which echoed the contrast he had made during the First World War between English sensitivity to style and Teutonic systematic learning ('German scholarship', 'Quarterly Review', 223, 1915, 330-39). A later revision (1955), accomplished with the help of Eric Dodds, Edgar Lobel, and Paul Maas, suffered from a failure to take adequate account of the work of the Polish scholar Aleksander Turyn on the manuscript tradition of Aeschylus. It was sharply criticized after Murray's death by a combative young Cambridge scholar, who quoted the remark of the car designer Alec Issigonis that a camel was a horse designed by a committee (R. D. Dawe, 'The Collation and Investigation of Manuscripts of Aeschylus', 1964, 9-10). The replacement 'Oxford Classical Text', edited by Denys Page (1972), makes no mention of Murray's text -- another significant silence. A general book on Aristophanes ('Aristophanes', 1933) also received little critical acclaim. It was not a major work of scholarship, and the preface opens with the statement: 'There is little or no research in this book'; but it includes a notable discussion of the poet's skill as a parodist. 
Murray's retirement from his chair in 1936 was marked by two collaborative volumes reflecting the breadth of his work: 'Greek Poetry', a set of academic essays, and 'Essays in Honour of Gilbert Murray', a wide-ranging tribute by eighteen friends. The appointment to the regius chair was in practice made by the prime minister, and Murray approached Stanley Baldwin with suggestions. The Oxford candidates were the learned but dry John Denniston and Maurice Bowra, whose scholarship Murray thought lacking in 'quality, precision and reality' (Murray to Baldwin, 2 June 1936 Bodl. Oxf., MSS G. Murray 77.138-40). His preferred candidate was Eric Dodds -- also admired by Fraenkel -- who was duly appointed to succeed him. Murray's intervention was unwise, breaking as it did the convention that one should not influence the appointment of a successor, and caused some scandal in Oxford; but in the event Dodds proved a worthy holder of the chair. 
The League of Nations remained a major preoccupation for Murray after his retirement, but its fortunes declined after its failure to prevent or end the Ethiopian war of 1935-6. Murray later declared that he and his colleagues had overestimated the reasoning powers of the masses and underestimated the strength of nationalism; nor had they realized that the league could not function properly unless the USA joined it. His continuing commitment to the league's ideals was reflected in his being elected president of the United Nations Association three times after the Second World War. Yet he became in this period increasingly conservative in his views. In 1950 he voted Conservative; in 1955 he was pleased with the Conservative election victory, and remarked that 'nearly all the educated people I meet are Liberal, but vote Conservative' (Wilson, 391). In 1956, to the surprise and alarm of some fellow Liberals, he supported the Anglo-French military action in Suez, regarding Nasser's nationalization of the canal as a barbaric encroachment on the civilized world. Within the United Nations Murray felt that 'We lie at the mercy of a mass of little barbarous nations, intoxicated with their own nationality who constitute a great majority of the Assembly' (ibid., 392). 
From 1952 onwards Lady Mary was unable to cope with ordinary social life. Her death in September 1956 was a heavy blow for Murray, who became noticeably more frail. He himself died at Yatscombe on 20 May 1957 and was, according to his wishes, cremated. His final days gave rise to a controversy which was magnified by the religious divisions between his children. Shortly before his death he was visited by a Roman Catholic priest, but it remains unclear whether any rites were administered or, if so, whether Murray was capable of requesting or understanding them. A newspaper interview given by his (Catholic) daughter Rosalind led to a bitter argument within the family, and to public protests against his interment in Westminster Abbey, which nevertheless took place there, at the request of the United Nations Association, on 5 July 1957. 
Murray's reputation as a scholar has suffered posthumously. Like his friend and fellow Hellenist J. W. Mackail, as a young man he abandoned plans to go to Germany to learn the methods of systematic research which were so highly developed there. Though his mastery of Greek gave him great insight into ancient texts, examining the minutiae of their transmission was not his forte, and in this area he remained a gentleman amateur. It is remarkable by modern standards that though regius professor of Greek for twenty-eight years, Murray published only a handful of articles in classical journals: indeed he once expressed a 'physical abhorrence for writing in periodicals' (West, 119). Nor did he produce commentaries on ancient texts, like his predecessor and successor in the Oxford chair. His interest was not in research, but in bringing Greece ('Greece not Greek') alive for those he taught: both undergraduates and the public at large. The decline in his posthumous reputation has been due largely to the passing of the generational styles and assumptions which underlay the success of his attempts to make the ancient world live for his contemporaries. Where other scholars saw classical Greece as an eternal exemplar, Murray sought to reconstruct Hellenism as a progress toward perfection: a progress which involved constant struggle against opposing forces. More than anyone else he embodied a lifelong commitment to this ideal, in which for him Greece, liberalism, and international peace were equally involved. Yet his unremitting concern for others was based on an essentially aristocratic liberalism, and this, as his son-in-law Arnold Toynbee observed, came into increasing conflict after 1914 with the determination of the oppressed to improve their own lot (Murray, 214-16). 
Gilbert Murray was seen even in his lifetime as a kind of secular saint; his friend Salvador de Madariaga called him a 'civic monk'. He was never a pacifist, and many were surprised at his sense of the thrill in war and his buoyancy at its outbreak in 1939. The extremism of others only strengthened his resolve to act fairly toward them; a serenity founded on inner strength persisted through marital problems, personal tragedies (notably the premature deaths of three of his five children), and the apparent collapse of the causes he believed in. His high principles, austere lifestyle, and teetotalism might suggest a humourless prig; as might Virginia Woolf's account of him in her diary: 'The cleanliness of Gilbert was remarkable; a great nurse must rub him smooth with pumice stone every morning; he is so discreet, so sensitive, so low in tone and immaculate in taste that you hardly understand how he has the boldness to beget children. ('Diary', 1, 1977, 210, Oct 1918)' Yet a sense of humour and of the absurd both animated his conversation and enlivens his letters. His party tricks ranged from accomplished mimicry to taking his socks off without removing his shoes. Until old age he was physically fearless, whether in walking up ladders with his hands free (a favourite entertainment) or in attempting difficult routes through snow and ice. A man of many friends, he was nevertheless remarkably self-sufficient: as J. A. K. Thomson, who knew him better than most, commented after his death, 'while he was one of the friendliest, he was one of the remotest of men' (Thomson, 254). Eric Dodds's conclusion was that 'Whether he is to be ranked with the greatest of scholars depends on one's conception of scholarship; but that he was a truly great man no one who knew him could doubt' (Murray, 19). 


@@@@@


doc= 35160


Murray, Sir George Herbert (1849-1936), civil servant, was born on 27 September 1849 at Southfleet, Kent, the elder son of George Edward Murray (1818-1854), fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and rector of Southfleet, and his wife, Penelope Frances Elizabeth Pemberton Austin (died 1910), youngest daughter of Brigadier-General John Austin. The great-grandson of Lord George Murray, bishop of St David's, second son of John Murray, third duke of Atholl, he was heir presumptive to the dukedom from 1865 to 1871 and second heir presumptive at the time of his death. 
Educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford, Murray took third-class honours in the school of 'literae humaniores' in 1872. He entered the Foreign Office in the following year under the system of limited competition after nomination by the secretary of state, and was transferred to the Treasury in 1880, with a post as second-class clerk in the department of the auditor of the civil list. Murray married on 23 September 1879 Helen Mary (died 1932), eldest daughter of John Mulholland, later first Baron Dunleath. He was appointed secretary to successive royal commissions on the depression of trade (1886), on gold and silver (1887), and on conditions in the western highlands and islands of Scotland (1889). He was private secretary to the first lord of the Treasury throughout Gladstone's last ministry (August 1892 to March 1894), a post he retained under Lord Rosebery. In 1897 he was appointed chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, and in 1899 transferred to the Post Office as secretary. In 1903, on the retirement of Sir Francis Mowatt, he became joint permanent secretary of the Treasury, in conjunction with Sir Edward Hamilton, who handled financial matters, while Murray dealt with administration. When Hamilton retired in October 1907 Murray became sole permanent secretary, and in 1909, additionally, auditor of the civil list. He retired from the civil service on 23 July 1911. 
Although described by Hamilton as a 'born administrator' (MSS Asquith, vol. 19, 25 Sept 1907), there is evidence to suggest that Murray was somewhat lacking in imagination. In 1906-7 he chaired the government factories and workshops committee, which had been set up to inquire into 'the economy of production (of munitions) in time of peace and the power of expansion in time of war'. Unfortunately Murray seems to have showed much more interest in economy than in expansion, and it has been claimed that the committee's recommendations contributed to the 'shell shortage' of 1915 (Trebilcock, 152-4). He was a civil servant of the old school, who worked best by written minutes, and who, when Lloyd George became chancellor in 1908, refused to adapt to the latter's habit of ignoring paperwork and relying on oral briefings. As a result, Lloyd George bypassed Murray and looked to Robert Chalmers, the chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, for advice on more than revenue matters, as well as to John Bradbury, the principal clerk in charge of the Treasury's finance division. Having been brought up in Gladstonian principles of public finance, Murray's personal political inclination was towards this school of Liberalism, and he was opposed to many of the ideas introduced in Lloyd George's budget of 1909, particularly the supertax and allowances for taxpayers with children. 
Murray had a dry sense of humour: he once opposed a proposal to spend money on a subway under Whitehall for the secret disposal of army's archives in the event of an invasion on the grounds that 'the last objective of any intelligent invader... would be the War Office' (Asquith, 1.256). He was very fond of gossip and enjoyed the good things in life, being a connoisseur of food, wine, and cigars. He regularly attended dinners at Grillons, The Club, and the Society of Dilettanti, and was a familiar figure at Brooks's. 
Murray was appointed KCB in 1899, GCB in 1908, and GCVO in 1920, and was sworn of the privy council in 1910. He was elected an honorary student of Christ Church in 1913. He continued to be a public servant in his retirement: on the outbreak of war in 1914 he took a leading part in the management of the Prince of Wales's Fund and in 1915 he became chairman of the committee on the employment of soldiers and sailors disabled in the war. He was a member of the Haldane committee which reported on the machinery of government in 1918. He also held directorships in a number of companies, including the Westminster Bank and the Southern Railway. 
Murray was predeceased by his wife, who was honoured with a CBE in 1914 and died on 19 February 1932. He died at his home, 39 Bryanston Court, London, on 4 April 1936. He was survived by a son, Sir George Evelyn Pemberton Murray (1880-1947) KCB, who was successively secretary to the Post Office and chairman of the board of customs and excise, and a daughter, Irene Helen. 


@@@@@


doc= 35161


Murray, George Redmayne (1865-1939), physician, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne on 20 June 1865, the eldest son of William Murray (1839-1920), a physician, and his wife, Frances Mary (died in or before 1885), daughter of Giles Redmayne. Murray was educated at Eton College and, from 1883, at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1886 with first-class honours in part one of the natural sciences tripos. He then joined a group of Cambridge medical students who had been attracted to University College Hospital, London, by the teaching of Sydney Ringer and Victor Horsley. He won the Fellowes junior clinical silver and the senior clinical gold medals, and passed his final examinations in 1888. He graduated MB in 1889, and obtained the MD in 1896. He envisaged a career in experimental medicine, and between 1889 and 1890 he visited medical clinics in Berlin and Paris, carrying letters of introduction from Horsley. He returned to Newcastle in 1891, and worked there as pathologist to the Hospital for Sick Children, and was lecturer in bacteriology and comparative pathology in the University of Durham College of Medicine. While in that post, and at the early age of twenty-six, Murray made the discovery that brought him fame. 
Murray devised an effective treatment for myxoedema, which is due to deficiency of thyroid hormone, by the injection of an extract of sheep thyroid. This was the first example of successful hormone replacement therapy, and reduced the scepticism towards organotherapy in Great Britain. Horsley was a member of the committee set up by the London Clinical Society in 1882 to investigate myxoedema and other diseases in which defective thyroid function was suspected. It reported in 1888. In February 1890 Horsley suggested animal thyroid grafts for the treatment of myxoedema. Murray and Horsley corresponded about treatment, and in December 1890 Horsley noted that injection of thyroid extract could do no harm. Murray said that his idea of injecting thyroid extracts came from hearing about successful therapy of a human with a sheep thyroid graft, and the suggestion that the rapid improvement following the graft was due to simple absorption of the juice of the sheep's thyroid gland by the tissues of the patient. Murray's writings give no indication that he was aware of the attempts of C.-E. Brown-Sequard in Paris to rejuvenate old men by the injection of testicular extracts, or the 'British Medical Journal''s sceptical note in 1889 on 'the pentacle of rejuvenescence'. 
In February 1891 Murray showed a patient with myxoedema at a meeting of the Northumberland and Durham Medical Society in Newcastle, and suggested that 'it would be worthwhile to try the hypodermic injection of an emulsion or extract of the thyroid gland of the sheep'. He obtained permission from the patient, and at the October meeting he showed her greatly improved after six months' treatment. These findings were published in the 'British Medical Journal' in 1891 as were further cases in 1892. The effectiveness of the treatment was rapidly confirmed. Hector W. G. Mackenzie and E. L. Fox separately introduced oral treatment in 1892, and Murray's first patient was then treated with oral thyroid extracts for many years. The minute book of the British Medical Association notes a grant of $15 for the year 1893-4 for studying thyroidectomy in animals. 
Murray married, in 1892, Annie Katharine, daughter of Edward Robert Bickersteth, a well-known Liverpool surgeon, a cousin of Edward Bickersteth (1814-1892), dean of Lichfield, and of Robert Bickersteth, bishop of Ripon (1816-1884). They had three sons, two of whom were killed in the First World War, and a daughter. 
With his reputation established, Murray was appointed Heath professor of comparative pathology at Durham in 1893, and physician to the Royal Victoria Infirmary at Newcastle in 1898. In 1908 he was appointed professor of systematic medicine at Manchester University, which carried with it the post of physician to the Manchester Royal Infirmary. The choice of Murray for the vacant post raised a storm of local opposition, which his friendliness and competence overcame. However, he did not return to experimental medicine, but occupied himself in teaching, medical practice, and university administration. He retired in 1925. 
Murray received many honours. He was Goulstonian (1899) and Bradshaw (1905) lecturer to the Royal College of Physicians, and on the council (1914-17), member of the Medical Research Committee (1916-18), which later became the Medical Research Council, and president of the Association of Physicians in 1936. Honorary degrees were conferred upon him by Durham and Dublin universities. Two of his most practical achievements were work as a member of several departmental committees of the Home Office on dust diseases in card-room workers, and his service as a consulting physician to the British forces in Italy, 1918-19. He retired from active work, because of increasing angina, a few years before his death. He died at his home, the Manor House, Mobberley, Cheshire, on 21 September 1939. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35162


Murray, George Robert Milne (1858-1911), botanist and algologist, was born at Arbroath, Forfarshire, on 11 November 1858, one of the eight children of George Murray ('b'. 1814), a tradesman, and his wife, Helen Margaret Sayles ('b'. 1819). Alexander Stuart Murray (1841-1904), keeper of Greek and Roman antiquities at the British Museum, was an older brother. Murray was educated at Arbroath high school, and in 1875 studied under Anton de Bary at Strasbourg. In 1876 he became an assistant in the botanical department of the British Museum. Initially responsible for the cryptogamic collections, in 1895 he became keeper of the department. He was lecturer on botany at St George's Hospital medical school from 1882 to 1886, and to the Royal Veterinary College from 1890 to 1895. In 1884 he married Helen (died 1902), daughter of William Welsh of Walker's Barns and Boggieshallow, Brechin, Forfarshire; the couple later had a son and a daughter. 
In 1886 Murray acted as naturalist to the solar eclipse expedition to the West Indies, an area to which he returned on a dredging expedition the following year. Two years later he chartered a tug for a dredging expedition 300 miles west of Ireland, on which he was accompanied by a party of naturalists. In 1901 he became director of the civilian scientific staff of the national Antarctic expedition in HMS 'Discovery', under Captain R. F. Scott, although he accompanied the expedition only as far as Cape Town. For some years he devoted much of his vacations to the collection of phytoplankton in the Scottish lochs from the fishery board's yacht 'Garland'. Murray was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1878, apparently in contravention of the by-laws, as he was then under age, and became its vice-president in 1899. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1897. 
Murray's main contribution to botany is his work on marine algae. He wrote a number of papers on the subject, including 'The distribution of marine alga in space and time' ('Journal of the Linnean Society', 1883) and 'A comparison of the marine floras of the warm Atlantic, the Cape of Good Hope and the Indian Ocean' ('Phycological Memoirs', 1892). He also reported on the discovery of at least one new species of phytoplankton. Apart from his work on marine algae, Murray also wrote the section on fungi in Henfrey's 'Elementary Course of Botany' (3rd edn, 1878), contributed the articles on fungi and vegetable parasitism to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1879 and 1885), and published a 'Handbook of Cryptogamic Botany', together with Alfred William Bennett. Between 1882 and 1885 he published three reports on his investigations of the salmon disease, undertaken at the instance of Professor Huxley. From 1892 to 1895 he edited 'Phycological Memoirs, being Researches Made in the Botanical Department of the British Museum', of which three parts appeared, each containing papers by him, and in 1895 he published 'Introduction to the Study of Seaweeds'. He also edited 'The Antarctic Manual' for the expedition of 1901, arranging the contents and securing contributors, but only writing some four pages of instructions on plant collecting. He retired from his position at the British Museum in 1905, on the grounds of ill health. He died at Stonehaven, Kincardineshire on 16 December 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 35163


Murray, Sir James Augustus Henry (1837-1915), lexicographer, was born in the village of Denholm, near Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 7 February 1837, the eldest of the four sons and one daughter of Thomas Murray (1811-1873), a village tailor, of Hawick, and his wife, Mary (1803-1888), the sixth child of Charles Scott, a linen manufacturer of Denholm. 
Thomas Murray was highly regarded in Denholm. He was an elder of the Congregational church and a promoter of the Total Abstinence and Horticultural societies, of the Reading Room Club, and of other institutions contributing to the welfare of the village. His formal education was limited, however, and there was certainly no tradition of academic scholarship in the ancestral families of the Murrays or the Scotts that would account for the emergence of the lexicographical prodigy that his son proved to be. James Murray is reputed to have known the letters of the alphabet by the time he was eighteen months old and to have acquired a knowledge of the written forms of Greek letters before he was seven. He is also known to have copied out on scraps of paper some lists and passages in Hebrew and Chinese written in copies of the 'Bible' that happened to come into his parents' possession. 
Murray was educated first at Cavers School, the parish school of his native village. It was a 3 mile walk from Denholm, and his lifelong interest in botany may well have begun among the many wild flowers that grew beside the footpaths that took him to and from this school. In 1845 he moved to Denholm School, which took pupils from infancy until they were old enough to go out to work. He was soon recognized to be a pupil of unusual ability: he took in his stride the names of the parts of speech, the elements of geography and mathematics, and, as the only boy taking the subject, an outline knowledge of Latin. In his out-of-school hours he became interested in astronomy and in identifying the Latin names of plants, as well as the names of rock formations and other features of geology, and the classification of the names and varieties of animals. 
An outbreak of cholera in Denholm in 1849 closed the school and led to an arrangement for Murray to spend six months as a cowherd on a friend's farm near by, where he remembered 'hammering away at [his] Latin grammar and 'Lectiones Selectae'' in his spare time. The family returned to Denholm at the end of summer 1849, but Murray did not return to his old school. He went instead to Minto School, a mile and a half from Denholm, where he fell under the influence of an inspiring new schoolmaster, John Rankin Hamilton, and a new syllabus. He began work on four new languages: French, German, Italian, and classical Greek. 
Murray left school at fourteen and a half, and helped the family budget by taking temporary employment of various kinds. He learned how to bind books and declared on the flyleaf of the first issue of John Cassell's serial publication 'Popular Educator' (1852) 'Knowledge is power' and 'Nihil est melius quam vita diligentissima'. In 1854 he left home and was accepted first as a junior assistant master at the grammar school in Hawick, and then, in 1857, he became headmaster of a private school called the Hawick Academy. His extra-curricular activities continued in the same vein as before: he acquired an outline knowledge of the written form of up to twenty-five foreign languages (his own figure), including Russian and Tongan, and also made a close study of the local border dialect. In addition to his language work, he explored the geological structure of the Teviotdale district, and its flora and fauna. 
In August 1856 a public meeting was called in Hawick at which it was agreed to form an archaeological society, with James Murray as its secretary. By 1858 Murray's interests had widened to include philology. In Edinburgh in 1857 he had attended a vacation course on elocution by Alexander Melville Bell, the inventor of a phonetic system called 'Visible Speech', a set of symbols designed to record the pronunciation of every sound used in human speech. Melville Bell's son Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone, later became Murray's friend; when he moved to London Melville Bell was one of those who introduced him to the Philological Society. Reflecting a more general movement in Europe, the Hawick Archaeological Society turned its attention in 1859 to philology, and in particular to the history and nature of the variety of English used in the Hawick area. As a typical example of the new thinking, Prince Louis-Lucien Bonaparte, nephew of Napoleon, persuaded Henry Scott Riddell, the president of the society, to translate parts of the 'Bible' into lowland Scots. 
James Murray, by now alerted to the need for someone to investigate the nature and history of varieties of English extant in the British Isles, learned Gaelic, began his research into the dialects of Scotland's southern counties, and planned a phonetic key to Jamieson's 'Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language' (1808). He also began studying the language of the Anglo-Saxon period, especially that used in the surviving works of King Alfred. Members of the Hawick Archaeological Society placed many books at his disposal. He absorbed them all, including the language of the 'Bible' as translated into Gothic (also formerly called Moeso-Gothic) AD 'c'.350 by Bishop Ulfilas (or Wulfila), preserved in a manuscript of the fifth or sixth century entitled the 'Codex Argenteus'. 
At this stage of his life Murray was in many respects a recluse -- interested, it would seem, only in the pursuit of a scholarly 'vita diligentissima'. He was also a 'tall, strong, healthy, good-looking boy' who wore his hair to shoulder length in the fashion of his time. At the time of his appointment to Hawick grammar school 'he was encouraging the growth of the red beard, which turning to snow white in later years, was to contribute to his striking and patriarchal appearance' (K. M. E. Murray, 26). 
On 12 August 1862 Murray married Margaret (Maggie) Scott (1834-1865) an infant-school mistress, the daughter of a Hawick clerk. She had taught for three or four years in a primary school near Manchester, but at the time of her marriage was living in Belfast. She and Murray were married in the Fisherwick Presbyterian Church, Belfast, after which they lived in Hawick, with Murray returning to teach at the Hawick Academy. In January 1864 Maggie gave birth to a daughter, but both mother and daughter were 'weak and ailing', and the baby died in August of that year. Their doctor recommended that for the sake of Maggie's health -- she was suffering from consumption in an advanced stage -- they should migrate to a place in a more equitable climate. The place turned out to be London. Murray found rented accommodation in Nunhead Lane, near Dulwich, and accepted a post as a bank clerk in the Chartered Bank of India, Australia, and China in Threadneedle Street. The couple attended the Congregational church at Camberwell. Murray was soon invited to preach, and to take part in the educational work of the church. But Maggie's health did not improve, and she died in September 1865. 
Before Maggie's death the Murrays had become friendly with the Ruthven family, who were near neighbours in Camberwell, and on 17 August 1867 James Murray married the eldest daughter, Ada Agnes Ruthven (1845-1936). Alexander Graham Bell was his best man. The marriage proved remarkably happy -- where Murray was 'naive in dealing with money matters', Ada was by contrast exceptionally businesslike. 
Murray obtained a reader's ticket at the British Museum, and revived his earlier interest in comparative philology and in the study of the border dialects. Through Melville Bell he met Alexander John Ellis, who was writing an important history of English pronunciation. Ellis in turn introduced Murray to Henry Sweet, who was also to make signal contributions to the study of the English language. It was not long before Murray met other philologists: these included Richard Morris, who, along with A. J. Ellis, Walter Skeat, and Melville Bell, introduced him to the activities of the Philological Society and the publications of the Early English Text Society. Murray made progress with the project close to his heart: the preparation of his book 'The Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland' (finally issued by the Philological Society in 1873). He was invited to deliver papers at meetings of the society, and duly gave three papers between 1868 and 1869. He had entered new territory in the systematic study of dialects of the English language as found in Scotland, referring to them as 'Scotch dialects', as was customary at the time. He also joined the English Dialect Society. 
Perhaps Murray's most important scholarly connection, however, was with Frederick J. Furnivall, a mercurial scholar, who had deservedly established a reputation as an energetic founder of organizations designed to promote the study of English language and literature. Murray produced several editions for Furnivall's Early English Text Society: 'The Minor Poems of Sir David Lindesay' (1871), 'The Complaynt of Scotlande' (1872, 1873), and 'Romance and Prophecies of Thomas of Erceldoune' (1875). This editorial work, apart from its value to Middle English scholarship, formed an ideal background to the stern lexicographical task that lay ahead. 
Murray's work as a bank clerk came to an end in 1870 when he became a schoolmaster at Mill Hill School, which had been established in 1807 as the 'Protestant dissenters' Grammar School'. Mill Hill was then a village just north-west of London. A particular attraction of the post was that he was offered a rented house, with a garden, only five minutes' walk from the school. His years there were among the happiest of his life, his 'Arcadian Years' as he called them. He founded a Natural History Society, and encouraged his pupils to explore the countryside and learn how to classify the local flora and fauna, for example by listing all the quadrupeds to be found locally -- mice, voles, weasels, and so on. He had a real talent for teaching, dating from his early childhood when he had done his best to pass on his knowledge and enthusiasms to his younger brothers. His school lessons were interesting and entertaining -- it was said that 'a nominal geography class might easily develop into a lecture on Icelandic roots'. Another tradition has it that in teaching German he composed doggerel verses and stories to illustrate the declension of German nouns. He often preached in the school chapel, and his sermons had two dominant themes -- the doctrine of work and his belief in divine guidance. 
Elisabeth Murray neatly summarizes the pressures on her grandfather as he worked away on a wide range of activities: 'In the years 1870 to 1875 it must be remembered that besides his school duties he was also working on dialects with [A. J.] Ellis... He was helping Ellis, [Henry] Nicol and [Frederick] Elworthy with their proofs: he was writing papers for the Philological Society: he was working on numerous texts for the Early English Text Society in addition to the three he actually published,... and he was also reviewing books for the 'Academy' and the 'Athenaeum'. (K. M. E. Murray, 116-17)' In addition to all this he was now studying for an external London BA degree, which he completed in 1873. In 1874 he was awarded the honorary degree of LLD by the University of Edinburgh. He was now entitled to wear a 'full-dress gown of extra Saxony light scarlet cloth, faced with rich blue silk' (a revival of the old ceremonial dress worn at the university before the Reformation) and a cap of a pattern worn by his hero John Knox. Murray wore the cap to work in for the rest of his life. In 1878 he was elected to the office of president of the Philological Society. 
Between 1868 and 1888 the Murrays had eleven children, and all were brought up in an intellectual atmosphere. They were discouraged from the reading of novels, and encouraged to write their own stories and poems. They produced a series of magazines. Their father helped them to form the Sunnyside Amateur Debating Society, Sunnyside being the name of the house at Mill Hill and later of the family's home in Oxford. Family holidays in Hastings, the Isle of Wight, the Lake District, Wales, and elsewhere were characterized by Murray's insistence that the children should pursue his own boyhood hobbies -- history, archaeology, botany, geology, and so on. All the Murray children were given first names drawn from Anglo-Saxon literature and history, with second and other names honouring relations from their father's or mother's families. 
In 1857, at the suggestion of the dean of Westminster, Richard Chenevix Trench, the Philological Society resolved to prepare a large dictionary of the English language, intending to include as comprehensive a collection as possible of English words and meanings that had survived the Norman conquest or been introduced into the language after the conquest. The hope was that the final product, 'by the completeness of its vocabulary, and by the application of the historical method to the life and use of words, might be worthy of the English language and of English scholarship' (preface to vol. 1 of the 'Oxford English Dictionary'). 
The project was motivated by the need for a more up-to-date dictionary than the latest editions of the three standard dictionaries of the time, those of Charles Richardson, Noah Webster, and Joseph Worcester. These were three very respectable dictionaries, but the difference was that the proposed new one was to be based on historical principles: that is, each word and meaning was to be supported by evidence drawn from works of every kind -- those of famous authors, such as Chaucer, Malory, Shakespeare, Milton, Pope, Wordsworth, and Dickens, but also those of 'minor' authors, private letters, glossaries and early dictionaries, technical handbooks, newspapers, learned journals, and so on. 
Herbert Coleridge was appointed editor, and as a first step he established an ambitious reading programme in which quotational evidence was to be systematically gathered. Several hundred readers were drawn into the scheme, including F. J. Furnivall, the novelist Charlotte Yonge, and the etymologist Professor W. W. Skeat. One of the odder incidents in the history of the dictionary was that a particularly prolific contributor of illustrative quotations, Dr W. C. Minor, was later discovered to have been confined in the Broadmoor Asylum for the Criminally Insane during the time of his contributions -- he had shot and killed a man some years before in an apparently motiveless attack. Minor provided an invaluable service to the dictionary with his painstaking lexicographical research. 
The importance of these readers to the larger project cannot be overemphasized. One reader (Thomas Austin) had produced 165,000 supporting quotations by the time that the first volume (A-B) was published in 1888. Furnivall had produced 30,000 in the same period, and Minor came up with between 5000 and 8000 quotations. Ultimately, the dictionary was very much a collaborative effort. Other assistants, including members of Murray's own family, helped with sorting and filing the material as it arrived. About fifty names, including those of Charlotte Yonge and W. W. Skeat, are listed in the preface to volume 1 as having sub-edited, or prepared for sub-editing, the quotational evidence submitted to the editor. 
However successful the reading of sources was to become, in the early years of the project it proved inadequate. What Dean Trench had grandly described in 1857 as 'this drawing as with a sweep-net over the whole extent of English literature' had by 1860 garnered only about one-tenth of the quotations that were ultimately needed. In 1861 Herbert Coleridge died. Furnivall was persuaded to take on the editorship, but his methods of work were erratic and in the end unsuccessful. As a first step he proposed the compilation of a concise dictionary, and forecast that such a book could be produced in three years. Both ideas came to nothing. Negotiations with Macmillan as possible publisher of the society's dictionary also proved to be unfruitful, and the dictionary's future was uncertain. 
In March 1879, after a series of prolonged discussions, the Philological Society came to an agreement with the Oxford University Press concerning the editing and publication of what was now to be known as 'The Oxford English Dictionary' ('OED'). After consulting several scholars, among them Frederick Furnivall, Henry Sweet, and the comparative philologist Max Muller, the delegates of the press offered the task of editing the dictionary to James Murray. He was invited to edit the material for publication in parts. It was proposed that he would be able to compile the successive fascicles with help from a small editorial staff while he was still teaching at Mill Hill School. Murray, estimating that the dictionary could be finished in ten years in an estimated 7000 pages, accepted. In fact the first fascicle, consisting of words in the range A-Ant, was not published until 1884, and the last one in 1928, forty-four years later. (Volume publication, collating the fascicles, also took place over this span of time). In its final form the dictionary consisted of more than 16,000 pages. 
Murray arranged for a workroom to be built in the small front garden of his house in which to store all the accumulated piles of illustrative quotations that had arrived over the years; it was also to serve as a suitable place for editing the dictionary itself. He jokingly called this building his scriptorium. Elisabeth Murray describes the initial chaos in graphic terms: 'Many of the sub-editors had clearly found difficulty in packing up hundredweights of [dictionary] slips. Some were sent in sacks in which they had long been stored, and when opened a dead rat was found in one and a live mouse and her family in another... Many of the bundles had stood for so many years in unsuitable places that the slips were crumbling with damp and the writing had faded. (K. M. E. Murray, 174)' It was clear that much additional work needed to be done before the editing could begin.Nor did it take long for Murray to discover that much of the reading of sources already conducted was inadequate. Moreover, many early English texts previously existing only in manuscript form or in inadequate editions were being issued while work on the dictionary continued. These new editions, many published by the Early English Text Society, needed to be taken into account by the voluntary readers. One other set-back was that the excerpting of eighteenth-century works having been allocated to a group of American readers, the organization of their work had proved to be unsystematic. 
In 1885 the second part (Ant-Batten) of the dictionary was published. Murray left Mill Hill and moved with his family to Oxford, where he could devote his whole time to the dictionary. He worked, with a small group of modestly paid assistants, in a new scriptorium built for the purpose in the garden of his house at 78 Banbury Road. The Mill Hill scriptorium, which had been planned from the beginning as a portable building, was presented to Mill Hill School, the costs of its removal being met by money raised from an appeal to old boys. Murray's idea was that it would be a quiet place for the boys to read in, especially on Sundays. It was burnt down by accident in 1902, but was replaced, and there is still a 'Murray scriptorium' used as a reading-room at the school. 
Before the editing of words in the letter B had been completed it became obvious that another editor should be appointed, to work for a year under Murray's supervision, and then, with a small team of assistants, to produce some later sections of the dictionary. Henry Bradley was this second independent editor, beginning in 1889. He and his assistants had a separate office in Broad Street, Oxford. At the end of the nineteenth century, by which time less than half the dictionary had been completed, a third co-editor was needed. The person appointed, in 1901, was W. A. Craigie, who had joined the staff of the dictionary in 1897. His work as an independent editor began with the letter Q, and by 1928, when the dictionary was completed, he had edited nearly a fifth of the 'OED'. In the same period he was appointed professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University of Oxford, and also played a leading role in two other lexicographical projects. A fourth editor, C. T. Onions, who had been an editorial assistant on the staff of the dictionary, first in 1895 in Murray's team and later in Bradley's, became responsible from 1914 to 1928 for fascicles in the range Sub-Sz, parts of the letter W, and the whole of the letters X, Y, and Z. 
The thirty years from 1885 to 1915 that Murray spent in Oxford were almost wholly devoted to his work on the dictionary. Except for brief holidays in Britain and an absence of some months in 1905 on a visit to Cape Colony, during which he received an honorary LittD degree from the University of Cape Town, he worked unceasingly on the dictionary with a small staff of assistants including some of his children. 
Throughout the preparation of the dictionary he had to endure what his biographer called 'The Triple Nightmare: Space, Time, and Money'. The project was plagued by a lack of adequate office space in which to accommodate the editorial staff and their essential books, as well as the pigeon-holes for the quotation slips. There was also mounting pressure from the delegates of the University Press, who feared that the return on their investment was increasingly at risk because the dictionary was taking much longer to prepare than had seemed likely when the contract was signed in 1879. Murray felt persecuted by what he saw as harassment to accelerate the rate of completion of the fascicles. 
Murray gave occasional lectures on the project, the best-known of which was the Romanes lecture, 'The evolution of English lexicography', which he delivered on 22 June 1900 in the Sheldonian Theatre, Oxford. It gave an outline account of the emergence of interlinear glosses (some Latin/Latin, others Latin/English) in England in the pre-conquest period, and the later transformation of individual glosses into classified and alphabetized lists of 'hard words', then into dictionaries of 'hard words', and finally into dictionaries of 'the whole' language, including ordinary words such as the definite and indefinite articles, adverbs, prepositions, phrasal verbs, and so on -- arguably the most difficult entries to compile in any modern dictionary. The scale of the 'OED' was astonishing by comparison with that of any English dictionary published before the end of the nineteenth century. Murray had revolutionized the whole process by which the English language was mapped. 
Murray had the satisfaction of receiving honorary degrees from nine universities, Cambridge and Oxford among them in 1913 and 1914 respectively. The 'OED' was dedicated to Queen Victoria in 1897. Murray was knighted in 1908. He died at his home in Oxford on 26 July 1915 from heart failure, following a year of ill health which culminated in a bout of pleurisy, one of many such illnesses caused by working in his cold, damp scriptorium. Sheer determination had earlier that month driven this ill, old man of seventy-eight to complete a double section of the dictionary, covering entries in the range 'Trink' to 'Turndown', on schedule. He was buried on 30 July in the Wolvercote cemetery on the northern outskirts of Oxford, and was survived by his wife and children. 
The 'OED' was completed in 1928, the editing of the fascicles after Murray's death having been entrusted to his colleagues Henry Bradley, W. A. Craigie, and C. T. Onions. Some other dictionaries on historical principles have been produced or are in hand in Germany, Sweden, France, and the Netherlands, each of them presenting its material in a manner broadly similar to that of the 'OED'. Several dictionaries of varieties of English with the entries presented historically -- in Scotland, the USA, Canada, the Caribbean, Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand -- were published in the twentieth century. All owe a great deal to the methodology of Murray's pioneering work. 
A one-volume supplement to the twelve-volume 'OED', edited by W. A. Craigie and C. T. Onions, was published in 1933, and a four-volume supplement, edited by R. W. Burchfield, was published between 1972 and 1986. The contents of these four volumes, together with some additional material, were absorbed in the second edition of the 'OED' in 1989. The twelve volumes of the 'OED' had become twenty volumes by 1989. It is expected that the third edition will be double that size. 
Later editions of the dictionary have departed from Murray's basic principles in only two important ways. He had not given sufficient attention to the English used outside the British Isles, whereas since the 1972-86 supplement the 'OED' has attempted to cover the language as it is written and spoken throughout the world. And, as was to be expected of a Victorian lexicographer, Murray drew a veil over all coarse words: none of the ancient 'four-letter' words was included in his dictionary. 
At the time of Murray's death in 1915 the portions of the 'OED' for which he was personally responsible amounted to about half of the whole. Henry Bradley's tribute to Murray in the 'Proceedings of the British Academy' is just: 'When the remaining part of the last volume is finished, the Oxford English Dictionary will stand unrivalled in its completeness as a record of the history of the vocabulary of a living language, and it is to Murray far more than to any other man that the honour of this great achievement will belong.' 



@@@@@


doc= 35164


Murray, Sir James Wolfe (1853-1919), army officer, was born on 13 March 1853, the eldest son of James Wolfe Murray (1814-1890) of Cringletie, near Peebles, Peeblesshire and his first wife, Elizabeth Charlotte (died 4 Oct 1857), daughter of John Whyte-Melville. The addition of Wolfe to the family name derived from Murray's grandfather being a godson of General James Wolfe of Quebec fame. Murray was educated at Glenalmond College then Harrow School (1867-9). After attending the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he was commissioned lieutenant, Royal Artillery, on 12 September 1872. He was promoted captain on 1 November 1881 and, after passing Staff College, began a period of almost continued staff service for the remainder of his military career, much of it on intelligence duties. He was deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general of the north British district from January to August 1884 before entering the War Office's intelligence branch in a similar capacity. He advanced to deputy assistant adjutant-general in the intelligence branch in June 1887, becoming head of section D with responsibility for Russia, central and south Asia, and the Far East. He was promoted major in January 1889 and, after a brief spell of regimental service from July 1890 to March 1892, returned to the War Office as a special service officer from April 1892 to January 1894. From the War Office he moved to Aldershot as deputy assistant adjutant-general for instruction, and remained in post until February 1897. However this was interrupted by special service on the lines of communication for the Asante expedition between November 1895 and February 1896, for which he was rewarded with a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 25 March 1896. He went to India as assistant adjutant-general in January 1898 and was serving as assistant quartermaster-general for intelligence at army headquarters when the South African War broke out in October 1899. 
Murray was sent to South Africa to act on the lines of communication with the Natal field force under Sir Redvers Buller, being progressively colonel on the staff and then both brigadier-general and major-general commanding lines of communication between September 1899 and November 1900. These were local ranks and Murray, who had received his substantive colonelcy in March 1899, was created KCB for his services. He returned to India to command a brigade in May 1901, being promoted to major-general on 1 January 1903 and appointed quartermaster-general in India in May 1903. On 12 February 1904 he became master-general of the ordnance and fourth military member of the new army council, established as a result of the War Office reconstitution committee chaired by Reginald Brett, Lord Esher. However, in something of a precursor of his future ineffectualness at the highest level, Murray found it difficult to comprehend his precise responsibilities in the new system and he was also bitterly opposed to the army reform scheme advocated by the secretary of state for war, H. O. Arnold-Forster. In particular, Murray opposed the attempt to institute both long- and short-service recruiting simultaneously, but he also objected to the creation of a 'blue ribbon' general staff, which would become the only route for promotion to high rank. Indeed, Murray offered and then withdrew his resignation on three occasions in his first six months of office. The temperamental Arnold-Forster concluded at an early stage, 'If ever there was a wholly useless member of a Board, it is this tiresome, but no doubt well-meaning Scotsman' (Arnold-Forster, diary, 12 July 1904, BL, Add. MS 50339). Arnold-Forster was hard put to understand how Murray had gained his apparently high reputation, commenting on another occasion, 'He really sometimes gives the impression of being only half-witted' (Arnold-Forster, diary, 10 Nov 1905, BL, Add. MS 50352). In the event Arnold-Forster's scheme was swept away by the Balfour government's resignation in December 1905, but it was already apparent that it could not prevail against the entrenched military opposition. Murray himself took up the divisional command at Secunderabad in March 1907 and was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 April 1909. After his tour in India in February 1911 he was general officer commanding (GOC) in Scotland then South Africa. 
On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 most of the general staff departed for Flanders with the expeditionary force, while Field Marshal Lord Kitchener became secretary of state for war. On 25 October 1914 Sir Charles Douglas, who had acted as chief of the Imperial General Staff since March, died of overwork and Murray was hastily recalled from South Africa to replace him. It was said that Murray was a master of detail but lacked breadth of view, but in any case the War Office was utterly dominated by Kitchener, whose autocratic and secretive methods were ill-suited to the proper functioning of the staff system. Murray was certainly not the man to challenge Kitchener's authority and he was noted for his total silence in meetings of the war council, hence the nickname of Sheep bestowed on him by Churchill. This was especially true of the planning for the Gallipoli expedition in 1915, Murray's only response to a direct question on strategy addressed to him in February 1915 being that 'he had no suggestions to make' (minutes of war council, 16 Feb 1915 TNA: PRO, CAB 42/3). Examined before the Dardanelles commission in 1917, Murray remarked of his relationship with Kitchener that 'it did not appear to me that he, having so to speak, taken the whole thing in hand and working on it almost entirely himself, to be necessary or desirable that I should interfere' (Dardanelles commission: minutes of evidence, Q.2605, TNA: PRO, CAB 19/33). He also professed to leaving meetings with 'a very indistinct idea of any decision having been arrived at all' (ibid., Q.2648). Murray neither saw the plans for the expedition nor even suggested that he should. Following Bulgaria's entry to the war in September 1915 the cabinet finally acted to reconstitute the general staff, and on 25 September 1915 Murray was replaced by Sir Archibald Murray. 
Following his departure from the War Office Murray was employed on a special mission to Russia before becoming GOC at eastern command in 1916. Appointed colonel-commandant of the Royal Artillery on 9 April 1917, he retired on 5 May 1918. Murray was twice married: first, on 14 May 1875, to Arabella (died 1909), daughter of W. Bray, with whom he had two sons and three daughters; and, secondly, in 1913 to Fanny, daughter of James Scott Robson and widow of Sir Donald Horne Macfarlane (died 1904). Murray died suddenly of heart failure at Cringletie, Peeblesshire, on 17 October 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 35165


Murray, Sir John (1841-1914), marine scientist and oceanographer, was born at Cobourg, Ontario on 3 March 1841, the second son of Robert Murray, an accountant from Scotland who had settled in Upper Canada about 1834, and his wife, Elizabeth Macfarlane. He attended public school in London, Ontario, and later studied at Victoria College, Cobourg. At the age of seventeen he went to Scotland to complete his education under the care of his maternal grandfather, John Macfarlane, of Coney Hill, Stirlingshire. Murray attended the high school at Stirling and afterwards studied at the University of Edinburgh. His name appears on the university rolls for two periods, 1864-5 and 1868-72. He began his studies as a medical student but attended classes in the subjects which appealed to him; he never took examinations and did not graduate. In 1868, Murray shipped as surgeon on the whaler 'Jan Mayen'. During seven months' voyage in northern seas he reached a latitude of 81 degree N, explored part of Spitsbergen, and landed on Jan Mayen Island. He returned with a collection of marine organisms and also records of observations on currents, on the temperature of the air and of the sea, and on the distribution of sea ice. 
On his return to Edinburgh Murray found congenial conditions in the physics laboratory and studied there until 1872, under Peter Guthrie Tait, doing experimental work on thermal conductivity and on the construction of an electrical deep-sea thermometer. In 1872 he took a considerable share in the preparation of the scientific apparatus for the 'Challenger' expedition, intended scientifically to explore the world oceans under the direction of Charles Wyville Thomson (1830-1882), professor of natural history in the University of Edinburgh. When a vacancy on the expedition's staff unexpectedly arose he was appointed, almost at the last moment, one of the naturalists, and this led to the great work of his life. 
During the 'Challenger's' voyage -- which lasted nearly three and a half years -- the physics, chemistry, geology and biology of the great ocean basins were investigated, especially those of the deep sea, about which little was known. Murray devoted himself particularly to near-surface plankton organisms, especially the foraminifera and radiolaria, and to the study of ocean floor sediments. He demonstrated the part played by near-surface foraminifera in forming deep-sea globigerina ooze. He also worked on improvements in sediment samplers, the sounding apparatus, and deep-sea thermometers. Thomson put Murray in charge of the collections -- unrivalled in range and importance -- made during the expedition. Shortly after their return, the ''Challenger' office' was opened at 32 Queen Street, Edinburgh, to deal with the collections, and for nearly twenty years this was the place to which marine scientists from all over the world went to work and to discuss the results of the expedition. Murray was appointed chief assistant in the office and, owing to Thomson's failing health, became responsible for organizing the study of the collections. 
In 1882, after Thomson's death, Murray became director of the office and editor of the 'Report on the Scientific Results of the Voyage of HMS Challenger' (1880-95). In fifty volumes, this was the work of experts from many countries, their labours co-ordinated and encouraged by Murray. During the later years of this period Murray's task was made difficult by an unsympathetic Treasury, particularly when the completion of the report was long overdue, and he spent a large amount of his own money in completing the publication. 
During much of this time Murray and his friend Professor A. F. Renard, of Ghent, studied the marine sediments. In 1891 their report, 'Deep Sea Deposits', was published, establishing the general classification of deep-sea sediments that was still being used, over one hundred years later. As a result of this work, samples of sediments obtained by surveying ships and by various expeditions after 'Challenger' were sent to Murray, creating a unique collection. Another result of Murray's observations during the expedition was his well-known paper 'The structure and origin of coral reefs and islands' ('Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', 10, 1880), in which he disagreed with Darwin's view that the form of atolls was due to subsidence of the land forming the foundation of the reef. Murray put forward the view that coral reefs formed where sediments accumulated on banks and submarine peaks. He held that as coral colonies approached the surface of the sea they assumed the atoll form owing to the more abundant supply of food and more vigorous growth on the outer margin, and to the removal of dead coral from the interior by currents and by dissolution of calcium carbonate. Murray's work stimulated several decades of research on coral reefs and the formation of atoll lagoons, but had to give ground to Charles Darwin's explanation that reefs formed on subsiding pedestals. Murray was joint author of the 'Narrative of the Cruise of HMS Challenger' (1885), and he drew up the last two volumes of the 'Report' (1895), which form an impressive summary of the results of the expedition, and in which he reviewed comprehensively the history of oceanography. 
In 1880 and 1882 Murray and Captain T. H. Tizard explored the Faeroe Channel in the government surveying ships 'Knight Errant' and 'Triton'. They demonstrated the existence of the Wyville Thomson Ridge, between Scotland and the Faeroe Islands, which accounted for differences in bottom temperatures and faunas first noted in 1868 by Wyville Thomson and W. B. Carpenter. He established small marine laboratories at Granton and at Millport (1885); the latter developed into the laboratory of the Scottish Marine Biological Association. Murray's steam yacht, 'Medusa', built and equipped for marine biological work, enabled him with the help of several younger colleagues to carry out marine research along the west coast of Scotland between 1883 and 1894. The results were published in 1918 by his former secretary, James Chumley, with the title 'The Fauna of the Clyde Sea Area'. 
Two years after the 'Challenger' reports were finished Murray undertook a bathymetrical survey of the freshwater lochs of Scotland with a capable young collaborator, Frederick Pullar. Several important papers on the results had appeared when in 1901 Pullar was drowned while attempting to save the lives of others. His father -- Laurence Pullar, Murray's oldest friend -- was determined that the survey should be continued, and provided funds for a staff of assistants; they began work in 1902 and carried on the investigations until 1909. Some 60,000 soundings were made in 562 lochs, and the records of these and of other scientific results, forming the most extensive limnological survey anywhere to that date, were published in six volumes by Murray and Pullar in 1910. 
When the 'Challenger' office was closed (in 1895) Murray bought a house, Villa Medusa, near his residence Challenger Lodge, in Wardie, near Granton, to serve as a library and laboratory. This housed Murray's samples of oceanic sediments, 'Challenger' samples and records until 1921, when the collections and the greater part of his library were moved to the British Museum (Natural History); it was also the headquarters of the lochs survey. Like the 'Challenger' office previously, Murray's home and laboratory attracted a stream of scientific visitors and collaborators. 
As the result of his detection of calcium phosphate in rock specimens brought in 1887 from Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean, Murray urged the annexation of the island, which took place the next year. In 1891 Murray and G. Clunies Ross, of the Cocos Islands, obtained a lease of Christmas Island, and in 1897 they formed a company to develop its mineral resources. Murray also paid the expenses of two scientific expeditions to the island in 1897-8 and 1908. Following the first expedition, Murray married, in 1889, Isabel, only daughter of Thomas Henderson, shipowner, of Glasgow; they had two sons and three daughters. 
As a result of the first expedition Dr C. W. Andrews of the British Museum (Natural History), brought home extensive collections. 'A Monograph of Christmas Island' (1900), which gives the results of the first expedition, is important as a record of the indigenous fauna and flora of an isolated tropical island before human contact. Murray himself made two exploring visits (1900, 1908) to the island. He claimed that the Treasury had received from the island in the form of rents, royalties, and taxes a sum exceeding the cost of the 'Challenger' expedition and the publication of its results. This was an exaggeration in his time, but true by the 1920s. 
In 1909 Murray visited Copenhagen and urged upon the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea the need for an oceanographic expedition to the north Atlantic. Shortly thereafter, he offered to pay the operating expenses of a four-month expedition on condition that the Norwegian government lent the research vessel 'Michael Sars' and her scientific staff for the purpose. The offer was accepted, and in April 1910 the vessel left Plymouth with Murray on board and with the Norwegian marine biologist Dr Johan Hjort as leader of the scientific staff. The immediate results of this expedition -- including important physical and biological observations at all depths between Europe and North America -- were published in 'The Depths of the Ocean' by Murray and Hjort in 1912; this volume summarized the oceanography of its era and served as a text for many years. 
A description of 1426 samples of deposits from the floor of the Atlantic Ocean, gathered during thirty-five cruising expeditions between 1857 and 1911, was being prepared under Murray's supervision at the time of his death. The work was completed by James Chumley, who added a discussion of the results, and the monograph was published (1924) in the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh'. 
Murray received honorary degrees from several universities, was elected FRS in 1896, and created KCB in 1898. From 1896 to 1898 he was scientific member of the fishery board for Scotland, and he filled various offices in the scientific societies of Edinburgh. His recreations were yachting -- during which he carried on soundings, dredging, and other observations -- golf, and motoring. He was killed in a motor accident at Kirkliston, near Edinburgh, on 16 March 1914. 
The exploration of the deep sea during the late nineteenth century is due largely to Wyville Thomson and John Murray. Murray left an enduring mark on the science of oceanography through his research, his influence on others, and through his estate, which funded the John Murray expedition to the Indian Ocean in 1933 and the John Murray travelling studentships which began in 1948. He was an original, suggestive, broad-minded thinker and did not hesitate to attack established views if they did not coincide with his conclusions. A strong and forceful personality, he was confident of his own opinion and somewhat brusque, occasionally domineering, in manner, but full of good humour, and most helpful and friendly to his assistants and to other investigators who sought his aid. To a large degree it was his influence that transformed oceanography from a patchwork of unrelated disciplines into a coherent science. 


@@@@@


doc= 35166


Sir John Murray (1851-1928), publisher, was born at 50 Albemarle Street, London, on 18 December 1851, the eldest son of the five children of John [iii] Murray and his wife, Marion. His childhood was spent largely at the family home, Newstead. 
Murray was sent to Eton College, and in 1870 he entered Magdalen College, Oxford. His father, anxious that his son should lose no time in joining the firm, allowed him only two years at university. He prized the lifelong friendships he had made at Oxford and always maintained that his presidency of the Magdalen junior common room taught him to run a business. For the next twenty years he learned the trade, initially as his father's assistant and then spending time in each department. During his training he helped to edit the 'Quarterly Review' and worked on revisions of the handbooks to London and Scotland. He became a partner in 1878. 
On 4 March 1878 Murray married Katherine Evelyn (Evie) (died 1938) of Warthill, Aberdeenshire, fourth daughter of William Leslie, sometime MP for Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Matilda. This prompted the comment that the Murrays always returned to Scotland for their wives. They had one son, John [v] ['see below'], and two daughters, Amy Marion and Dorothy Evelyn. Mrs Murray was often ill with a depressive nervous condition. 
Murray's younger brother, Alexander Henry Hallam Murray (1854-1934), known as Hallam, joined the firm in 1876 and became a partner in 1884. He was educated at Eton College, at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and afterwards at the Slade School of Fine Art. A very accomplished landscape and architectural watercolour painter, and an admirer of Ruskin, he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1884 and thereafter. In 1885 he married Alicia Maria Du Cane (1861-1947) and settled at Sandling, Hythe, in Kent. 
Upon the death of John [iii] Murray in April 1892, John [iv] Murray inherited five-eighths of the business and the Albemarle Street property, while the remaining three-eights, together with Newstead, went to Hallam. As a publisher Hallam's strengths lay largely in the decisions relating to typography, paper, printing, illustration, and binding. He became responsible for the production of the 'Handbooks for Travellers', and he himself travelled extensively in Europe, often to Fiesole, where he had a large circle of friends. He also ventured to India, Australia, and north Africa. Hallam is seen at his best in writing, illustrating, and publishing 'The High Road of Empire' (1905) and in illustrating H. W. Nevinson's 'Sketches on the Old Road through France to Florence' (1904). 
John [iv] Murray's chief personal service to literature was to edit the six original manuscript versions of the historian Edward Gibbon's 'Autobiography' (1896). He was a founder of the Publishers' Association, becoming president in 1899, and in that year played a leading part in setting up the net book agreement. The 'Copyright Act' of 1911 was drafted largely at 50 Albemarle Street. Following family tradition, Murray was a staunch Anglican and tory. He was a member of the board of the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children for forty-two years and on the committee of the Athenaeum Club, where it was said that if his boots were left outside his door they would walk on their own to the club and then up the stairs to the billiard room. He was also a member of the Roxburghe Club. 
In 1898 Murray published the first of a six-volume edition of Byron's letters and journals, edited by the poet's grandson Lord Lovelace. By this time the Murrays, who had been collecting manuscript material since Byron's death, had come to regard the poet as their own property. Lovelace withdrew from the editorship part way through publication having refused permission to print controversial letters relating to the causes of Byron's marital troubles. The Murrays had a right to publish but continued the series without the contentious correspondence. Lovelace published a defence of his grandmother in a book entitled 'Astarte' (1905) and the Murrays replied with 'Lord Byron and his Detractors' (1906). 
In 1900 the firm resumed publishing fiction. One of the first titles, Laurence Housman's 'An English-woman's Love Letters', became one of the most popular novels of the time, backed by an uncharacteristically aggressive advertising campaign. The 'Handbooks for Travellers' were sold to Stanfords in 1901 (save for 'India' and 'Japan'), the preparation of such guidebooks having become too specialized for a general publisher. Stanfords immediately regretted their bargain but were held to the contract. The 'Monthly Review', under the editorship of Sir Henry Newbolt, restarted in 1900 and was of good literary quality, but was abandoned in 1907. A more successful venture was the 'Wisdom of the East' series, which began in 1905, having been initiated the year before by the Orient Press. Edited by Cranmer Byng (both father and son), it ran to 122 booklets at 5's'. each and continued until the 1950s. 
In the early 1900s the firm was becoming well known as publishers to the establishment, and that reputation was confirmed by the eagerly awaited appearance of the 'Letters of Queen Victoria' (1907-32). Murray was more proud of this title than any other, as no private correspondence of a sovereign had been published in modern times. However, in 1906 'The Times' attacked the Murrays for declining to make the first series of the correspondence available cheaply to the Times Book Club (which would have been in breach of the net book agreement). John and Hallam sued, and in May 1908 the jury awarded them a substantial $7500 in damages. 
Late in 1908 there was a serious dispute between the brothers, and Hallam resigned from the partnership. The cause was kept secret even in the family, and files for this period were destroyed. The probable cause for the rift was Murray's proposed introduction of his 24-year-old son, John, into a full partnership. Long-standing difficulties with Hallam's wife, Alicia, who believed her husband to be undervalued, exacerbated the situation. An undisclosed financial settlement was reached, and Hallam left the firm, taking with him in addition some Byron manuscripts, literary portraits, and books. Hallam lived for another twenty-six years at Hythe in Kent, friendly but no longer intimate with his brother. 
The only significant event of the war years was the daring acquisition for $18,000 of the house of Smith Elder after the death of Reginald Smith in December 1916. There were long-established family and business ties between the Smiths and Murrays. Indeed, the original Smith started his career at Albemarle Street in 1814. Murray knew that the copyrights of Smith's prominent writers would provide the next generation with financial security. It turned out to be an acquisition of singular importance. 
In 1919 John [iv] Murray wrote a dutiful but rather dull biography of his father. The sixth and final volume of Byron's 'Letters and Journals' appeared in 1922, and the centenary of the poet's death in 1924 brought Murray both an honorary degree from the University of Athens and the order of the Redeemer (of Greece). His knighthood (KCVO) came in 1926 during the publication of the second series of the 'Letters of Queen Victoria'. Murray's last, rather surprising, publishing venture was in progress when he died, 'The Story of San Michele' (1929) by Axel Munthe, a Murray author since 1887. No one could have foretold that this curious book would sell over a million copies in Britain alone. It was translated into thirty-seven languages and remained in the firm's catalogue for nearly fifty years. On 30 November 1928 Sir John [iv] Murray died at 7 Wilbury Road, Hove, Sussex, of blood poisoning. He was buried at Wargrave, Berkshire, the home of his daughter Dorothy. 



@@@@@


doc= 35167


Murray, John (1879-1964), educationist and politician, was born on 28 February 1879 at Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, the eldest son of Francis Robert Murray, fish curer, and his wife, Isabella Watt. He was educated at Robert Gordon's College, Aberdeen. In 1896 he entered the University of Aberdeen as first bursar, graduating in 1900 with honours in Greek and Latin, having won the Simpson Greek prize and the Seafield Latin medal. In 1901 he went up as an exhibitioner to Christ Church, Oxford, on a Fullerton scholarship. He took first-class honours in classical moderations in 1903 and in 'literae humaniores' in 1905. In the same year he was elected prize fellow of Merton College, and in 1908 student and tutor of his old college, Christ Church, where in 1910 he became censor. Murray published nothing except the occasional political piece in the 'Oxford Magazine' (which he edited from 1911 to 1914) during his years as a don, but the Oxford system of education had made a lasting impression. 
In 1915 Murray left Oxford to join the labour department of the newly created Ministry of Munitions. By the end of the war he had reached the fairly senior rank of assistant commissioner in the labour adviser's department. In the general election of December 1918 he stood as a Coalition Liberal in Leeds West, and was elected with a large majority. He was soon given minor administrative work to do as officer in charge of a section of the Board of Education concerned with university awards to former servicemen. In 1920-21 he was chairman of the central committee on trusts, a body set up under the 'Profiteering Acts', 1919-20. The committee had powers to investigate and report on price increases, and during Murray's chairmanship published a large number of brief reports, on which little or no action was taken. 
In 1921 Murray married Ellen, widow of George Harwood (1845-1912), Liberal MP for Bolton, and daughter of Sir Alfred Hopkinson (1851-1939). He thereby became stepfather to her two daughters, including gthe biographer Georgina Battiscombe. In 1922 he stood as a national (Lloyd George) Liberal in Leeds West and retained his seat by a narrow majority in a straight fight against Labour, but in 1923, when the Conservatives fielded a candidate, Murray came third, at the bottom of the poll. In 1924 he retreated to Kirkcaldy, but succeeded only in reducing the Labour majority. He fought a by-election in the safe Conservative seat of Ripon in 1925, his last attempt to re-enter parliament. Murray was never a leading member of the Liberal Party, but during his brief parliamentary career he spoke lucidly and with originality; in happier days for Liberals he would undoubtedly have achieved office. His speeches in the house showed a certain radicalism: he favoured sympathetic treatment of the unemployed and was an early (and lifelong) advocate of family allowances. In later years he described himself as an individualist and associated with Sir Ernest Benn in the Society of Individualists. Already in the by-election at Ripon in 1925 he had openly disagreed with Lloyd George's plans for nationalization of land and the coal industry, and privately expressed his dislike of what he called 'promise-politics'. 
In 1926, after nearly three years in the political wilderness, Murray was appointed principal of the University College of the South West, Exeter, in succession to W. H. Moberly. Although Murray at first hoped to return to politics one day, he was to spend the rest of his working life in the service of the University College, declining in 1929 the vice-chancellorship of the University of Sheffield. He inherited a college with cramped buildings and few endowments, partly engaged in training teachers for elementary schools, but mostly preparing students for external degrees of the University of London. The college had two assets: recognition by the University Grants Committee as a grant-receiving institution; and a magnificent and almost empty site of 150 acres on the north-western outskirts of Exeter. It was Murray's object to develop these assets until the college became a full university. The first need was money. Murray plunged happily into the business of fund-raising, which he likened to 'a perpetual by-election'. While he was principal the substantial sum of $250,000 was raised for buildings, scholarships, and chairs. He was not the man to suffer a fool gladly -- unless a prospective benefactor: the largest benefaction ever received by the college was owing to Murray's tact, firmness, and inexhaustible patience exercised over a period of fourteen years in the face of considerable provocation. Murray sought to combine in Exeter the merits of Oxford and Aberdeen: he promoted the Oxford system of residence and of tutorial teaching and he envisaged Exeter as providing for poor English boys and girls the educational ladder that Aberdeen offered to aspiring Scotsmen like himself. In addition he strove to provide an international dimension to the college by attracting students from Europe, the United States, Africa, and the Middle East. In all this he had considerable success, but the final prize -- a university charter -- eluded him. He retired, unwillingly, in 1951. Murray received three honorary doctorates: LLD from Aberdeen (1930), LittD from Columbia, New York (1939), and, fittingly, DLitt from Exeter (1956), conferred at the first degree congregation held by the new university that he had done much to foster. In 1963 the University of Exeter named a new hall of residence Murray House in his honour, though with accommodation for 150 students it was built on a larger scale than he would have thought desirable. 
Murray was eloquent, formidable, autocratic, and in his later years careless of administrative forms. He gave time and money generously to help students and staff. He wrote occasionally for the 'Hibbert Journal' and the 'Contemporary Review' and circulated privately a humorous fantasy 'Shinid' (1938) in celebration of English hospitality in an Irish setting. He was a staunch Christian and as a member of the De La Warr committee on higher education in east Africa in 1936-7 wrote a minority report opposing secular education there; in his view the mission schools should have continued to monopolize popular education even in territories three-quarters non-Christian -- 'an educated pagan is a pagan still'. Murray died in London on 28 December 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 35168


Murray, Sir (John) Hubert Plunkett (1861-1940), colonial governor and judge, was born on 29 December 1861, in Manly, near Sydney, New South Wales, the elder son of Dublin-born Sir Terence Aubrey Murray (1810-1873) and his second wife, Agnes Ann ('c'.1835-1891), third daughter of Welsh-born John Edwards of Hammersmith, London, governess to her husband's two daughters and son from his first marriage. He was the elder brother of the classical scholar (George) Gilbert Aime Murray (1866-1957). 
Hubert's father lost his lands and his money through drought, sheep disease, and over-liberality in 1865. Hubert and his elder stepbrother were in the fine house near Lake George when bailiffs and creditors stripped its contents, before being driven over 200 miles of rough road in the middle of a storm to Sydney. There their mother maintained a close family circle in a succession of smaller and smaller urban households in support of her husband's continuing political career as president of the legislative council of New South Wales; he was knighted in 1869. It was also an educated household with a good library, for Sir Terence had been taught classics in Dublin, and his wife, a cousin of W. S. Gilbert, was a lively conversationalist and fluent linguist who, after her husband's death in 1873, ran a successful school for the young ladies of Sydney to support her family. Although Sir Terence was Roman Catholic, his religious views were liberal to the point of eccentricity, and he left their spiritual fortunes to his Anglican wife. Hubert was baptized into the Church of England as an infant, and only reluctantly did his father agree, in the face of outside pressure, to his Catholic baptism in 1869, a ceremony his father did not attend and which was not followed by regular religious practice by Hubert. 
After preparatory school in Melbourne, Hubert was sent in 1872 to the Sydney Church of England grammar school, where he had a brilliant scholastic and athletic record, becoming captain of school. In 1878 he joined his mother, who had sold her school at a profit, and Gilbert in England, where he went to Brighton College. Having had a sound classical education in Sydney, Hubert gained a demyship of Magdalen College, Oxford, but he was expelled from Brighton for striking a master who had called him a wild Irishman. The intervening year, before he could go up to Oxford, he spent at a German academy at Sinzig Remagen. After he arrived in Oxford in 1881, he took firsts in classical moderations and Greats, graduating in 1886, but his associates in Oxford were not scholars but athletes and 'hearties', for he rowed and boxed and in 1885 was a member of the university athletics team. He ate his dinners at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1886, the year in which, under the auspices of the West London Boxing Club, and possessing a massive physique (standing 6 feet 3 inches and turning the scales at over 14 stone), he became amateur heavyweight champion of England under the Queensberry rules. 
With this impressive record Murray returned to Sydney in 1886. Admitted to the New South Wales bar, he then failed in private practice, attributing this to his Oxford education which repelled clients. His mother and others, however, described his aloof manner, his arrogant-seeming saunter, and an air of superiority, enhanced by his sense of a distinguished fighting Irish gentlemanly ancestry. Although in 1889 he married, in an Anglican church, Sybil Maud (died 1929), fifth daughter of Richard Lewis Jenkins MD of Nepean Towers, a rich family friend, his income from the bar in that year was $35 'and rapidly approaching vanishing point' ('Selected Letters', 8). With the birth of a son, Terence, in 1891 and a daughter, Mary, in 1893, he was driven to accept a post as a parliamentary draftsman at $700 p.a., work which 'will drive me into a lunatic asylum' (ibid., 9). His position, given his brilliant promise, seemed to him ridiculous, his 'living death' only relieved by some crown prosecution work on circuit which, however, separated him from his family. When Gilbert visited Sydney in 1893, he detected in his brother signs of heavy drinking and of Roman Catholicism, with Sybil, although loving and patient, no real companion. 
Murray tried to relieve his monotony by becoming a practising Catholic in 1896, and by joining a volunteer militia unit, the New South Wales Irish rifles, of which he became commanding officer in 1898. He was bitterly opposed to the South African War, but, thinking it his duty to his regiment, he sailed for Cape Town in command of troops aboard ship in January 1900. At first frustrated by command of a rear railway depot, he finally found some fighting, swimming the Modder River under fire, and then taking part in a dashing mounted infantry ride into Pretoria. He hated his subsequent duty of burning Boer farms, while, as part of a force vainly pursuing the Boer general De Wet, he formed a contempt for British officers, although he was himself commissioned into the imperial force as a major, and held the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Australian force. His younger son, Patrick, was born in England while he was in South Africa. Returning to Australia in 1901, his legal career was scarcely more successful, although he occasionally acted as a district court judge. The family separation had affected his wife, and he forswore alcohol. In 1904, in the hope that his wife could live with him for half the year, he applied for the post of chief judicial officer of British New Guinea, about to become the Australian Territory of Papua. But Port Moresby, the capital, then with fewer than fifty inhabitants, was too tropical, malarial, and primitive for his family, and he spent most of the rest of his life alone, except for periods of leave and occasional family visits to Port Moresby. His salary, however, enabled him to maintain his wife in Australia, and to educate his elder son in England and his daughter and younger son in Australia. 
As the only judge, sitting without jury or counsel, Murray had to administer a slightly adapted Queensland code. He inherited the view that in small stateless, chiefless, indigenous societies speaking some two hundred different languages there was no body of custom which could be codified, yet he became immediately aware that the motives for what were crimes under European law were Papuan ones. 'At present I do little or nothing but sentence people to death for murder' Murray wrote to Lady Mary Murray on 24 October 1904 ('Selected Letters', 33), but Papuan custom he held to be a sufficient mitigating factor as to allow him to commute such sentences to a relatively short term of imprisonment. His intention was to educate in European ways prisoners who, in committing murder, had fulfilled Papuan social obligations. His judicial work led Murray to a fascinated interest in Papuan customs, an interest stimulated both by his own classical knowledge and by his acquaintance in Port Moresby with the anthropologist C. G. Seligman. 
Murray was not only a judge. As legal adviser he was a member of the executive government. As such, he was drawn into the factions which divided the administration of Captain F. R. Barton during the interregnum between Britain's formal relinquishment of authority in March 1901 and the proclamation of the 'Australian Papua Act' in September 1906. With division between a Colonial Office party and an Australian one in British New Guinea, Murray found his position difficult, especially when invited by Alfred Deakin, the Australian prime minister, privately and confidentially to offer his views on present and future policy and administration. When the Australian government decided on a royal commission to recommend policy, Murray by permission repeated in evidence what he had written to Deakin: Papuans were certainly protected, but development of a potentially rich possession was discouraged. In his opinion, the interests of Papuans and Europeans were not incompatible but the former must learn habits of industry, while the latter must be actively encouraged by government. The Australian government also took this view. Murray was appointed acting administrator in 1907 and then lieutenant-governor, the title adopted for the head of administration, in 1908. He retained the position of chief judicial officer, combining judicial circuit with inspections and some exploration of difficult country. 
Murray had drafted the native land and labour ordinances in 1906 in order to carry out Australian policy. The former provided that only the government could buy land from Papuans, and then make it available to Europeans for plantations, chiefly rubber and coconuts for copra, on thirty-year leases. Such land would be purchased only if Papuans were willing to sell and if it was surplus to their present and future needs. The latter allowed licensed private recruiters to bring labourers before a government officer to ensure that they were willing to engage under indenture, and that the numbers recruited were not so great as to cause the disintegration of their social group. Murray was satisfied that enough land was available to Europeans, and that there was sufficient labour to work it, without damaging the interests of the Papuans. By 1912 he believed that Papua could rely on the skill of the settlers -- over 140 plantations -- soon to dispense with the annual Australian subsidy of $30,000, and to become self-supporting. Between 1906 and 1912, he reported, revenue had increased by 152 per cent, trade by 109 per cent, and shipping by 162 per cent. 
Confident by 1911 that development by Europeans was well under way, Murray put forward a scheme to pacify the whole of still largely unexplored Papua, with an indigenous population estimated at 300,000. 'My scheme is to pacify the whole Territory first, and then tax the natives, the proceeds of the taxation being used to provide schools for them -- especially technical schools' ('Selected Letters', 71). He embarked on peaceful penetration, with new stations and more field staff to patrol, establishing government influence and then control, under strict orders never to fire unless their own or their native police escort's lives were at actual risk. 'When you are dead, you may shoot', was the Papuan service parody. The influence gained was maintained by the appointment of village constables, first introduced by Sir William MacGregor in the 1890s. When Murray wrote his book 'Papua or British New Guinea' in 1912, his optimism about both development and native policy permeated it. He was appointed CMG in 1914. 
Before the First World War Murray hoped for transfer to the imperial colonial service, with its chances of promotion to larger colonies, but he was disappointed. His optimism about Papua faded. The First World War reduced both his field staff and Papuan trade. After the war, the application of the 'Australian Navigation Act' to Papuan shipping prevented recovery; when it was lifted, the great depression halted further development, despite unfulfilled hopes of oil and gold strikes. Murray was further disappointed when the former German colony of New Guinea was not combined with Papua under his governorship. In 1920, complaining that the Papuan government discriminated against Europeans, an unofficial meeting of residents of Port Moresby led to an ineffectual telegram to the king asking for Murray's removal from office. 
Nevertheless, throughout the 1920s and 1930s, Murray's reputation as an enlightened colonial governor grew, as he published his second book, 'Papua of Today', in 1925, and a dozen articles and addresses on native administration. The balance of Papuan and European interests that he proclaimed, although now inclined to stress Papuan protection, especially against European demands for labour, were not dissimilar to Lord Lugard's dual mandate nor to the League of Nations' 'sacred trust'. As early as 1919 he had begun to look for a social anthropologist to assist his government's understanding of indigenous society. He claimed that in Papua he was true to the spirit of indirect rule, even if there was no chiefly system. It was in these years that the 'Murray policy' was so named by his admirers, although later critics described it as benevolent paternalism. His achievement was recognized by advancement to KCMG in 1925, and by an address in 1937 from the unofficial residents of Papua, including former opponents. 
Apart from the peaceful penetration of new country and some limited encouragement of indigenous development, however, primary education Murray left to missionary schools which were subsidized by the government. There was no development of village councils and local government, Papua being still a 'stone age' country, not comparable with contemporary Africa or Asia. In any case, with revenue limited by the relative failure of development, with a small Australian subsidy, his resources were not adequate for education and training programmes. 
Despite public reputation, Murray in his sixties privately despaired. His first wife died in 1929; his second marriage in 1930 to Mildred Blanche Bloomfield, daughter of Henry Bloomfield Trench and widow of George Arthur Pomeroy Vernon, who also was unable to live in Port Moresby, ended in judicial separation in 1936. From May 1934 he suffered heart trouble, but was determined not to resign until he could be sure of a successor who would continue his policy. War, in 1939, filled him with horror and disgust. In February 1940 he set off on tour of south-east Papua in the government yacht in a mood 'to curse God and die' ('Selected Letters', 241). Taken ill, he died in his sleep in the hospital at Samarai of lymphatic leukaemia on 27 February, his body taken for burial in the old cemetery at Port Moresby. After forty days of mourning, and watch fires burning on the hills, the Papuan ceremony concluded with the words: 'He promised us all 'I will not leave you. I will die in Papua.' His words were the words of a true man, for his body lies in our ground' (West, 262). 
Murray's colonial governorship of thirty-three years was unique. He successfully established law and order in Papua and early colonial development. Well-educated and intelligent, he reflected and wrote about the initial problems of colonial rule, bearing comparison, although he worked in a smaller sphere, to colonial governors such as Sir Donald Cameron, Sir Arthur Gordon, and Lord Lugard, and to the highest standards of his own day. 


@@@@@


doc= 35169


Murray, Margaret Alice (1863-1963), Egyptologist and folklorist, was born in Calcutta on 13 July 1863, the younger daughter of James Charles Murray (died 1891) and his wife, Margaret Carr (died 1913?). James Murray, whose family had been in India for several generations, was managing partner of a firm of Manchester merchants; his wife was from a Northumbrian family, and had gone to India as a missionary and social worker among Indian women. Margaret Murray's early life was spent partly in India and partly in England, with a period (1873-5) in Bonn, Germany. She was educated mainly by her mother, but when she was in England without her parents she normally stayed with her uncle John Murray, vicar of Lambourn, Berkshire, and later rector of Rugby. From him she acquired an interest in ancient monuments. Nevertheless she first decided on a nursing career, and trained for three months -- the most her father would permit -- in Calcutta General Hospital in 1883 as the first 'lady probationer' in India; she acted briefly as sister-in-charge during an epidemic. She returned to England in 1886 but had to give up her hopes of a nursing career because she was too small (only 4 feet 10 inches) to qualify. She next tried a career in social work, first in Rugby and then in Bushey Heath, Hertfordshire, where her parents settled in 1887, but found it uncongenial. 
Murray's main career did not begin until her sister, Mary, who had been impressed by the work of the famous Egyptologist W. Flinders Petrie, prevailed on her to study under him. In January 1894 she entered his department at University College, London, where she made rapid progress under the tuition of J. H. Walker and F. Ll. Griffith. Petrie, recognizing her abilities, started her on research and encouraged her to publish the result, as 'The descent of property in the early periods of Egyptian history' ('Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology', 17 (1895), 240-45). She remained Petrie's devoted disciple for the rest of her life; it was even rumoured that she had wanted to marry him. 
In 1898, after Griffith's departure from London, Murray took over the teaching of the beginners' language classes. Despite her lack of formal qualifications she was appointed a junior college lecturer the following year, and was later promoted assistant (1909), lecturer (1921), senior lecturer and fellow (1922), and assistant professor (1924); in 1931 she gained the degree of DLitt. After Walker's death in 1914 she effectively ran the Egyptology department, since Petrie was absent for much of the year on excavations, and she was largely responsible for organizing the teaching into a formal training course (1910) leading to a certificate in Egyptian archaeology. This involved her in a wide range of subjects: besides Egyptian language, history, art, and religion, there were drawing, photography, surveying, mineralogy, and dating of objects, as well as anthropology and ethnology. Her salary was not high, and in order to bring her income up to $200 per annum she undertook much outside teaching, mostly evening classes but also extension lectures at Oxford (1910) and London (1911), and proved a conscientious cataloguer, first of the Egyptian collection of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, to which she belonged from 1900, and later of the Egyptian antiquities in the National Museum of Ireland, the Royal Scottish Museum, Manchester University Museum, and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. 
Murray's first experience of fieldwork came when she assisted Petrie in his excavations at Abydos in 1902-3 and she also worked in Saqqara in 1903-4, but later her teaching duties prevented her from digging except in the summer, when work in Egypt is virtually impossible; but she took such opportunities as were available, excavating in Malta (1920-23) and Minorca (1930-31). After she retired from University College in 1935 -- the normal retirement rules having been suspended for seven years, for she was then seventy-two -- she went on a lecture tour of Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Estonia. She then spent time with Petrie in Palestine (where he had retired in 1933); she was involved especially in his work at Petra (1937) and Tell Ajjul (Gaza; 1938). 
Murray was highly industrious, and published more than a hundred books and articles (see her bibliography in 'Folklore', 72, 1961, 560-66), including several valuable excavation reports, such as 'The Osireion at Abydos' (1904), 'Saqqara mastabas' (2 vols., 1905-37; perhaps her best work), and 'Seven Memphite Tomb Chapels' (1952, with Hilda Flinders Petrie). Of the works she intended for a wider audience, such as 'Egyptian Temples' (1931), the best-known is 'The Splendour that was Egypt' (1949), unfortunately not one of her best, since it was marred by her uncritical acceptance of Petrie's superseded chronology and of the theory that inheritance in Egypt was matrilineal and led to frequent sibling marriages. In general her scholarship showed breadth of interest rather than profundity; she was not an expert philologist, and was occasionally guilty of making unsubstantiated statements. Perhaps the main criticism that might be levelled is that she tended to take a myopic view of Egyptian civilization; lack of perspective is particularly evident in her failure to appreciate the important outside influences which were manifest in the Proto-Dynastic period. Nevertheless, her knowledge of the language was of the greatest help to Petrie. At heart she was a true archaeologist who enjoyed concentrating on the material remains. Her main legacy to the study of the ancient world was probably her fieldwork, together with her influence on the large number of Egyptologists who were her pupils. 
Murray was remembered as a forceful character, with bright blue eyes that could flash in indignation; her strength of character was shown in her success in the hitherto entirely male world of professional Egyptologists. Like her mother, she was determined to do whatever she could to improve the conditions of women. This had been her motive for attempting a career in social work, and was shown in her time at University College by her undemonstrative but unfailing support for her female colleagues and pupils. Furthermore she ventured into territory not then considered suitable for women by her involvement in anthropology. This began as part of her Egyptology, but became a second academic legacy after, in two ground-breaking books, 'The Witch-Cult in Western Europe' (1921) and 'The God of the Witches' (1933; 2nd edn, 1952), she explained medieval European witchcraft as a survival of the pre-Christian nature cult of the horned god (Cernunnos). This theory was controversial but proved popular and widely influential. She became a recognized authority on the subject, a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute from 1926 and a member of the Folk-Lore Society from 1927 (its president for 1953-5). However, her later, characteristically independent-minded, 'attempt to attribute the death of certain English monarchs to the survival of the killing of the divine king in a Frazerian context' -- in 'The Divine King in England' (1954) -- 'can hardly be regarded as among her more convincing anthropological contributions' ('Folklore', 74, 1963, 569). Another idiosyncrasy was her occasional practice of the arts she studied; more than once she was reported by friends to have cast spells in a saucepan to try to reverse academic appointments of which she disapproved (Janssen, 56). Such activities may not have been entirely serious, for she was practical and quite unsuperstitious, and her sense of humour was well developed, as is shown by her remark to Leonard Cottrell in a BBC broadcast she made at the age of ninety-six: 'I've been an archaeologist most of my life and now I'm a piece of archaeology myself' ('Folklore', 72, 1961, 437). 
Murray remained relatively active in her old age and in her hundredth year published not only her last academic work, 'The Genesis of Religion' (1963), but also her fascinating autobiography, 'My First Hundred Years'. Two days after her hundredth birthday she was still able to attend a celebration held in her honour by University College, but she died a few months later, on 13 November 1963, at the Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital, Welwyn, Hertfordshire. She never married. Her funeral was held and her body cremated on 20 November at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35170


Murray, Sir Oswyn Alexander Ruthven (1873-1936), Admiralty official, was born at Mill Hill, near London, on 17 August 1873, the fourth son and the fourth of the eleven children of Sir James Augustus Henry Murray (1837-1915), then a schoolmaster and later first editor of the 'Oxford English Dictionary', and his second wife, Ada Agnes (1845-1936), daughter of George Ruthven, of Kendal. The family moved to Oxford in 1885, where Oswyn was educated at the Oxford high school as a day boy and from 1891 at Exeter College, Oxford, where he held a classical scholarship and was placed in the first class in classical moderations (1893), 'literae humaniores' (1895), and jurisprudence (1896). In 1897 after the higher civil service competitive examination he was appointed to the Admiralty secretariat. Later in the year he won the Vinerian (law) scholarship but declined the offer of a resident fellowship in law at St John's College. As resident clerk at the Admiralty from 1898 until 1901 he became close to G. J. Goschen, then first lord, who made him his assistant private secretary; from 1901 to 1904 he served as private secretary to H. O. Arnold-Forster and E. G. Pretyman, when they were parliamentary and financial secretaries. He became assistant principal clerk in 1904. On 1 August 1900 he married Mildred Octavia, who survived him, fourth daughter of the Revd Septimus March. They had a son and a daughter. 
Murray's exceptional ability was recognized early and in October 1904 he was selected for the post of assistant director of victualling and clothing, and in 1905 became director. His obituary in 'The Times' commented that from Murray's years in this department 'the lower deck will remember him with gratitude as the man who entirely reformed the feeding of the Navy' ('The Times', 11 July 1936, 16). The standard ration was thoroughly overhauled, the savings system (of money taken in lieu of portions of the ration) abolished, a messing allowance introduced, the contract canteen arrangement placed on a sound footing, and a school of cookery established in the home ports -- 'more progress than had been seen since Trafalgar' (ibid.). Murray's wife later wrote that in his reform of conditions Murray regarded the sailors 'as his big family' (Murray, 64). 
Murray was brought back to the secretariat in 1911 as the assistant (or deputy) secretary of the Admiralty, and was actively concerned with the preparations for war as its likelihood increased, and then with the difficulties of administration during the conflict. In 1917 Sir Eric Geddes was made first lord of the Admiralty, with a brief to reform its management. He appointed Murray as permanent secretary on 7 August 1917, in place of Sir Graham Greene who was transferred to the Ministry of Munitions. Murray ultimately became 'probably the ablest secretary of the Admiralty in modern times' (Marder, 4.216). Extremely talented in administration and in dealing with the intricate budgetary and other manoeuvring necessary with bureaucracy, Murray managed both to preserve much of the resources of the navy at a time of severe government cost-cutting and to make many needed reforms. Admiral Sir William Fisher referred to him as the 'great man who did more for the navy in his time than, perhaps, anyone else' (Murray, v). Negotiating the navy estimates occupied much of Murray's time during each year, but he was so successful in this that the navy was in a much more powerful position when war broke out again in 1939 than it might have been had the position not been 'held by a man of such high ability as Murray' (Roskill, 1.209). 
A reserved man, but one with an almost 'boyish simplicity... [which] gave him a directness and certainty in dealing with complicated problems' ('The Times', 11 July 1936, 16), Murray's main outside interest was research in Devon family history, in which he became a recognized authority. He was appointed CB in 1910, KCB in 1917, and GCB in 1931, and was elected an honorary fellow of Exeter College in 1919. He died at his home, Annery, Akehurst Street, Roehampton, London, on 10 July 1936, and was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex, on 14 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 35171


Murry, John Middleton (1889-1957), writer and journal editor, was born on 6 August 1889 in Peckham, London, the elder of the two sons of John Murry (1860/61-1947), a clerk in the Inland Revenue, and his wife, Emily (1869/70-1951), 'nee' Wheeler. John Murry was a determined man from an impoverished and illiterate background who taught himself to write. Poor but ambitious, he saw education as the sole means to fulfil his aspirations for his son. Subjected to intense pressure to learn from the time he could speak, John Middleton Murry could read by the age of two. He won one of the first six scholarships to Christ's Hospital, where he attended school (1901-8), and then won an exhibition and a scholarship to study classics at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he took a first in honour moderations (1910) and a second class in his finals (1912). 
By this time Murry had abandoned Oxford to live with the writer Kathleen Beauchamp (Katherine Mansfield) ['see 'Murry, Kathleen (1888-1923)]; they married on 3 May 1918. He had also begun his distinguished editorial career as founder of the avant-garde magazine 'Rhythm' (1911-13). His friendship with D. H. Lawrence further secured his passionate commitment to modernism in the arts. He and Katherine Mansfield were the witnesses for the Lawrences' wedding in 1914 and the two couples were intimate until their estrangement in 1918. Murry's early career as a journalist demonstrated his exceptional promise and his lifelong capacity for hard work. As well as reviewing literature and art for the 'Westminster Gazette' (1912-14), and writing for the 'Times Literary Supplement' (1914-18), Murry worked in the War Office in the political intelligence department from 1916 to 1919, first as a translator and then as editor of the confidential 'Daily Review of the Foreign Press'. In 1919 he was made chief censor, for which he was made OBE in 1920. As editor of the ailing but still prestigious 'Athenaeum' from 1919 to 1921, he championed modernism in literature and provided a platform for the work of writers as diverse as George Santayana, Paul-Ambrose Valery, Lawrence, Aldous Huxley, T. S. Eliot, and Virginia Woolf. His own first significant critical work, 'Dostoevsky' (1916), and his most frequently reprinted book, 'The Problem of Style' (1922), further secured his reputation with his contemporaries. 
Katherine Mansfield's death from tuberculosis in 1923 marked a watershed for Murry, whose subsequent life was shadowed by his devotion to her memory, as well as by his embattled engagement with D. H. Lawrence's ideas. Indeed, despite publishing over forty books and pamphlets, Murry now is remembered chiefly for his relationships with these two central figures of his youth. His controversial, often mystical, criticism and journalism returned obsessively to the ideas of the sanctity of art and the need for a new order of pseudo-religious brotherhood, although the forms these ideas took changed through his life. He designed his journal, 'The Adelphi', which he edited from 1923 to 1948, specifically to promote his often fluctuating, but always passionately held principles. 
Murry's personal life remained as turbulent as his intellectual affiliations. On 24 April 1924 he married Violet Le Maistre (1901-1931). They had two children: a daughter, Katherine Violet Murry (1925-2003), and a son, John Middleton Murry (1926-2002). Preoccupied by his grief for his first wife, Murry was shocked to discover that Violet, who cultivated her uncanny resemblance to Katherine Mansfield, welcomed the tuberculosis that killed her in 1931 as a Romantic disease. His third marriage, to Ada Elizabeth Cockbayne (1896-1954), housekeeper, on 23 May 1931, proved even more difficult. Although the couple produced two children, a daughter, Mary (born 27 January 1932), and a son, David (born 25 May 1938), the marriage was disastrous. Murry left in October 1941 to live with the author and political activist Mary Gamble (1897-1983). They married on 10 March 1954, after Elizabeth's death in the previous month. Murry's final marriage was his happiest. 
Throughout his writing career, Murry remained preoccupied by a semi-mystical Romantic humanism which showed itself to best advantage in his books 'Keats and Shakespeare' (1925), 'William Blake' (1933), and 'Jonathan Swift' (1954). His book on D. H. Lawrence, 'Son of Woman' (1931), is still read for its argumentative fidelity in the presentation of Lawrence's life and ideas. Murry's autobiography, 'Between Two Worlds' (1935), stands as one of the classic memoirs of the modernist period. Finally, his many essays on Katherine Mansfield, as well as his editions of her stories, journals, and letters, provide invaluable documentary sources for the rise of literary modernism in England. 
From the early 1930s through to the end of the 1940s, Murry dedicated himself to socialist and pacifist causes. His writing of this period, such as 'The Necessity of Communism' (1932) and 'The Necessity of Pacifism' (1937), reflect these commitments. In demand as a lecturer, in both Great Britain and America, he was the editor of the pacifist publication 'Peace News' from 1940 to 1946, and suffered a great shock when he learned of Hitler's and Stalin's death camps in 1945. Unsurprisingly, his political views further diminished his already faded reputation during the war. His brief experiment in communal living on his farm, Lower Lodge, Thelnetham, on the Norfolk-Suffolk border, in the 1940s ended with the dozen young men and women he recruited to the project all drifting away. But if the commune foundered, the farm was a success, and Murry ended his life as a well-off gentleman farmer, a Conservative voter, and an integral member of the Thelnetham village community. Murry died of a heart attack on 13 March 1957 in the West Suffolk Hospital, Bury St Edmunds. He was buried three days later in Thelnetham churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35172


Murry, Kathleen (1888-1923), writer, was born Kathleen Mansfield Beauchamp at 11 Tinakori Road, Wellington, New Zealand, on 14 October 1888. She was the third child and daughter of Harold Beauchamp (1858-1938) and his wife, Anne Burnell (Annie) Dyer (1864-1918), both born in Australia of parents who had left England in the mid-nineteenth century. Harold Beauchamp had a hard start in life and scant education, but he was ambitious and able, and he prospered greatly as a businessman in the expanding economy of New Zealand; his wife shared his financial and social aspirations. They made the first of many voyages to England in the year after Kathleen's birth, leaving the children in the care of Mrs Beauchamp's mother. There were two more daughters, one dying in infancy, and a cherished son, Leslie. Kathleen, never a favourite, felt herself to be 'the odd man out of the family -- the ugly duckling' ('Turnbull Library Record', 8). 
In 1893 the Beauchamps moved out of Wellington to a country house at Karori, where Kathleen attended primary school (some of her best-known stories, including 'Prelude' and 'At the Bay', draw on memories of this time). They returned to the city in 1898, and the girls went to the high school and then to the more exclusive Miss Swainson's school. By now Kathleen was a keen reader and beginning to write stories. 
In 1903 Beauchamp, eager for his three elder daughters to be 'finished' in Europe, took them to London and left them at Queen's College, the remarkable school founded by F. D. Maurice. They remained for three years in this liberal environment; teaching was by visiting professors, and pupils were free to walk about London unchaperoned. They were also allowed to choose their own course of studies, in Kathleen's case music, German, French, and English. Under the influence of an enthusiastic teacher, Walter Rippmann, she read Ibsen, Tolstoy, Shaw, and Wilde, and edited the school magazine, for which she wrote stories. She also made a friendship that lasted throughout her life with Ida Baker, who gave her an intense and unwavering devotion, and although Kathleen was an imperious and sometimes cruel friend, she thereafter called on Ida whenever she needed help. 
Kathleen and her sisters were given holidays in Paris and Brussels, where two young New Zealand musicians, the Trowell brothers, gave her a glimpse of the 'vie de boheme' which impressed her. She went reluctantly home to New Zealand in 1906, determined to persuade her parents to allow her to return to London. As she saw it, they stood for trade, she for art. She continued to read voraciously -- Maupassant, Bashkirtseff, Balzac -- and placed some stories in a New Zealand magazine, the 'Native Companion'. She made a trip through the northern wilderness of New Zealand, and also conducted a love affair with a young woman artist, Edith Bendall. This may have persuaded her parents to let her go, and she sailed for England in July 1908. She never returned to New Zealand, and spent the rest of her life on the move. 
Arriving in London, Kathleen had an allowance of $100 a year and a room booked in a hostel for young women in Warwick Crescent, Paddington. Ida Baker met the boat train, and became her principal support through the chaotic events of the next year, during which Kathleen joined a touring opera company to be with the young musician Garnet Trowell. She became pregnant by him, but soon parted from him, and made a hasty marriage to a respectable singing teacher, George Bowden (1877-1975), on 2 March 1909. She left him after the ceremony to take refuge with Ida. Hearing of the marriage, Mrs Beauchamp crossed the world to investigate, warning Ida's family about lesbianism and taking Kathleen straight off to a Bavarian spa, Bad Worishofen. Here she abandoned Kathleen and returned to Wellington, where she disinherited her. Her father, however, continued to pay her allowance, and over the years increased it to $300 per annum. 
Kathleen meanwhile had a miscarriage and acquired a Polish lover, Floryan Sobienowski. She was very short of money and only when Ida sent her the fare was she able to return to London. She was planning to join Sobienowski in Paris and marry him, once divorced; but early in 1910 she became seriously ill with the effects of untreated gonorrhoea. An operation left her unable to have children, with her health permanently undermined. Sobienowski was dropped. 
While in the spa Kathleen set down her impressions of it in a set of bold stories, some humorous and cynical, some with a strongly feminist slant. Her husband, whom she now saw again, introduced her to A. R. Orage, editor of the 'New Age', a fine radical weekly supported by Bernard Shaw. Orage was delighted with Kathleen, and her stories began to appear in the 'New Age', which led to the publication in 1911 of her first collection: 'In a German Pension', under the name Katherine Mansfield. One story, 'The Child-who-was-Tired', was an unacknowledged adaptation of a Chekhov story, an act of plagiarism which haunted her later; but the book was clever and original, and made its mark in the literary world. 
Mansfield was leading a peripatetic life, borrowing flats from friends, sometimes sharing with Ida, sometimes staying with Orage, and involved with a series of male lovers. She was strikingly attractive, small and slender, her dark hair now cut short with a fringe. Her eyes, according to Virginia Woolf, were 'beautiful eyes -- rather doglike, brown, very wide apart, with a steady slow rather faithful & sad expression. Her nose was sharp... Her lips thin & hard' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 225-7). Others described her face as like a mask, and the painter Anne Estelle Rice, who became a close friend, noticed how she enjoyed changing her appearance dramatically from day to day. There was a Russian Mansfield, a Japanese one, a French one, and so on: she was a natural performer. She often spoke her stories to herself before she wrote them down, and said she would like to act them out before an audience as Dickens had done. 
Soon after 'In a German Pension' appeared Mansfield met John Middleton Murry (1889-1957), an Oxford undergraduate who was also running an avant-garde magazine, 'Rhythm'. He became first her lodger in her flat in Clovelly Mansions in the Gray's Inn Road, London, then her lover, at which point he abandoned his formal studies and his Oxford scholarship. They called themselves 'the two tigers', and worked together as editors on 'Rhythm' (later the 'Blue Review'), living on her allowance and what small sums they could earn, and always on the move, in Sussex, in London, and in Paris. They ran up debts but they attracted exceptional talents, including D. H. Lawrence and the French artist Henri Gaudier-Brzeska. Rupert Brooke was asked for a poem, and introduced them to Edward Marsh, who gave them some financial support. On a trip to Paris, Murry introduced Mansfield to a minor French writer, Francis Carco, and she discovered and greatly admired the work of Colette. In 1913 Lawrence and Frieda Weekley returned to England, and the two unmarried couples became close friends. Their circle expanded to include the writer Gilbert Cannan, the painter Mark Gertler, and S. S. Koteliansky, a Ukrainian political exile whose affections became fixed on Mansfield and D. H. Lawrence. 
After the outbreak of war in August 1914, first the Lawrences and then Murry and Mansfield established themselves in two uncomfortable cottages near Chesham in Buckinghamshire; they dined together twice a week, and Frieda found Mansfield 'gay and gallant and wonderful' ('Memoirs and Correspondence', 425). Her reminiscences of New Zealand probably inspired Lawrence with the lesbian episode in 'The Rainbow' (written in winter 1914-15), and she was certainly the model for Gudrun in 'Women in Love'. 
Mansfield was, however, doing little effective writing herself at this period, and she was dissatisfied with Murry. Early in 1915 she went to France and began a love affair with Carco, making a daring visit to him at the front which she described in 'An Indiscreet Journey'. She then borrowed his flat on the Quai aux Fleurs in Paris, and began to write the story that became 'Prelude'. In May she was back in London, living with Murry again in Acacia Road, St John's Wood, helping to edit a new magazine, 'Signature', with Lawrence, and seeing her brother, Leslie, who had volunteered for the army. In October, when Leslie was killed accidentally while giving grenade instruction in France, she insisted on leaving for the south of France in her grief. January 1916 saw her installed with Murry in the Villa Pauline in Bandol: a short period of stability and happiness followed, as they worked side by side. 
Then, summoned by the Lawrences, Murry and Mansfield joined them in Cornwall, at Higher Tregerthen, near Zennor, in an attempt at communal living. It was a failure. Mansfield wrote a memorable description of a quarrel between Lawrence and Frieda, and the quarrels extended to involve them all. Within weeks she and Murry moved on; but her loyalty to Lawrence remained, and later in the year she famously defended him in the Cafe Royal, where two undergraduates at another table were laughing at Lawrence's newly published poems. She went up to them, asked politely for the book, took it, and walked out into the street with it, leaving an admiring Gertler and Koteliansky to report the scene to Lawrence, who immediately wrote it into 'Women in Love'. 
During the summer of 1916 Mansfield invited herself to Garsington Manor, where Murry was already a frequent guest of the Morrells. She made a conquest of Lady Ottoline Morrell and friends of two women painters she met there, Dorothy Brett and (Dora) Carrington; later in the year she shared a house with them in London at 3 Gower Street. There was a flirtation with Bertrand Russell, and Lytton Strachey was impressed by her. Through him she met Virginia Woolf in 1917; the friendship was important to both aspiring writers, each of whom had so far published one book, and Virginia encouraged her to finish 'Prelude', which she was eager to publish with the Hogarth Press, the small publishing firm Woolf had just started with her husband Leonard. He also thought highly of Mansfield, describing her as 'a very serious writer' with the gifts of 'an intense realist, with a superb sense of ironic humour' ('Autobiography of Leonard Woolf', 204). Both the Woolfs deplored the influence of Murry who encouraged her, they believed, in a 'sickly sentimentality', which does indeed spoil some of her work. There were tensions and jealousies between the two women, but Virginia Woolf entertained her and visited her, and in her diaries showed the value she placed on their meetings: 'to no one else can I talk in the same disembodied way about writing; without altering my thought more than I alter it in writing here' ('Diary of Virginia Woolf', 45). Again, Woolf wrote that she got 'the queerest sense of an echo coming back to me from her mind the second after I've spoken' (ibid., 61). 
Before 'Prelude' could appear, Mansfield, currently sharing a studio flat in London with Ida at 141A Old Church Street, Kensington, became seriously ill again. In December 1917 tuberculosis was diagnosed, and she was told she must go south. She travelled alone through wartime France to Bandol in January 1918, and there she suffered her first haemorrhage. Like Lawrence, she would not consider treatment in a sanatorium. Part of her understood the seriousness of her condition, but another part sought to deny the reality of her illness altogether. 
Ida Baker, by pleading with the authorities against the wartime prohibition on travel, managed to join Mansfield in France, only to find her insistent on returning to England in March. One reason for this was that her divorce from Bowden was about to come through, and she and Murry could be married. On the way the two women were trapped in Paris during a prolonged German bombardment, and when she arrived back in London at last she was so exhausted and emaciated that Murry was aghast, and fearful of catching tuberculosis himself; instead of embracing her, he turned aside and put a handkerchief to his lips. They were nevertheless married on 3 May 1918 at Kensington register office. Almost at once she developed pleurisy and had to go to Cornwall to recover. Murry took a house, 2 Portland Villas, overlooking Hampstead Heath, and Mansfield persuaded Ida to give up her job and become their housekeeper. 
In October Mansfield was warned that she had only four years to live unless she went into a sanatorium. From now on her life was a series of increasingly desperate journeys between London, France, and Switzerland, while her condition grew steadily worse. The four summer months could be spent in Hampstead, then she had to leave England again. She resented Murry's absorption in his work as editor of 'The Athenaeum', and found the separations from him hard to bear. She also resented her dependence on Ida, who accompanied her when she went abroad; but it was Ida's care that allowed her to go on writing, and to produce some of her best work. This she acknowledged in the end, when she wrote to Ida, 'the truth is I can't really work unless I know you are there', and called her 'wife', in acknowledgement of the role she had played (Baker, 203). 
Lawrence, also denying his tuberculosis, and penniless, was angry with Murry for refusing to print his work, and transferred the anger to Mansfield in a furious letter (now lost) early in 1920: 'You revolt me, stewing in your consumption' ('Letters between Katherine Mansfield and John Middleton Murry', 274). After an angry reply she forgave him, continued to think of him with affection to the end, and left him a book in her will. 
Murry gave Mansfield work reviewing fiction for 'The Athenaeum', and he negotiated the publication of her second collection, 'Bliss and other Stories', with Constable, in December 1920. Her $40 advance was lost when Floryan Sobienowski blackmailed her with her old letters. 'Bliss' was a success in both London and New York, and that winter she wrote 'The Daughters of the Late Colonel', praised by Thomas Hardy. 
In May 1921 Mansfield and Ida moved to the Chalet des Sapins, high up in Montana-Sierre in Switzerland. Murry joined them and they lived quietly for six months, during which Mansfield wrote 'At the Bay', 'The Voyage', and 'The Garden Party' and began 'A Married Man's Story', a brilliant and sinister fragment (published in 'The Dial' and 'The Dove's Nest'). The publication of her third collection, 'The Garden Party and other Stories', in February 1922 brought her great and deserved acclaim. In the same month she decided to go to Paris, where a Russian doctor was offering a new treatment for tuberculosis by irradiating the spleen with X-rays. It was useless and unpleasant. 'If I were a proper martyr I should begin to have that awful smile that martyrs in the flames put on when they begin to sizzle', she wrote to Brett, but she persisted ('Letters of Katherine Mansfield', 2.199). While she was in Paris she refused her agent Pinker permission for a reissue of 'In a German Pension', the most likely reason being her fear that the Chekhov plagiarism would be noticed. 
In August 1921 Mansfield was in London without Murry, staying at Dorothy Brett's house at 6 Pond Street, Hampstead. She saw her father, who had been widowed and was remarried and about to be knighted, and Koteliansky, who urged her to work as a way of facing pain and suffering. Orage told her he was giving up his editorship in order to follow the teachings of Gurdjieff, a Greek-Armenian guru with a new establishment, Le Prieure, financed by Lady Rothermere, at Fontainebleau, outside Paris. Gurdjieff preached that civilization had thrown the physical, mental, and emotional aspects of humanity out of balance; Orage was impressed, and so was Mansfield. 
Mansfield knew that she was dying. About the time of her thirty-fourth birthday she wrote, 'My spirit is nearly dead. My spring of life is so starved that it's just not dry. Nearly all my improved health is pretence -- acting' ('Journal of Katherine Mansfield', 248). Still she set out her hope that she might yet live to enjoy 'a garden, a small house, grass, animals, books, pictures, music' -- and life (ibid., 251). In spite of her growing reputation, she was dismissive of the stories she had written so far, and wanted to do better work. 
In mid-October 1922 Ida accompanied Mansfield to Fontainebleau, only to have Mansfield send her away, for the last time. She had a few weeks to live, but started to learn Russian, since most of Gurdjieff's disciples were Russian speakers. At first she was given a comfortable room, then moved to one without a fire until her suffering was obvious and she was restored to the better room at Christmas. Gurdjieff allowed her to invite Murry to visit. He came on 9 January 1923 and found her 'very pale, but radiant' ('Katherine Mansfield's Letters to John Middleton Murry', 700). That evening as she went up the stairs she began to cough, a haemorrhage started, she said 'I believe... I'm going to die', and within minutes she was dead (ibid., 701). On 12 January Mansfield was buried in the nearby cemetery at Avon, with Murry, Ida, Brett, and two of her sisters present. Murry inherited her manuscripts and over the next two decades he edited and published almost all her remaining stories and fragments, her journals, her poems, her reviews, and her letters. In doing so he presented to the world an image of a saintly young woman and suppressed the darker aspects of her character and experience, perhaps understandably, given the conventions of the time. He also made a good income out of her considerable royalties. Not a penny went to Ida Baker. 
Mansfield's journal, with its vivid impressions of travel, of landscape and weather, gardens, and animals, and of her ever-fluctuating moods, has made her into a cult figure among young women especially. Her stories have found many distinguished admirers including, in addition to those already mentioned, Walter de la Mare, Elizabeth Bowen, V. S. Pritchett, Brigid Brophy, Christopher Isherwood, Angus Wilson, and Alice Munro. She is praised for her economy and speed in assembling and dissolving a scene; for her wit, and touch of the surreal; for her divination of the hatred and cruelties beneath the sweet surfaces of family life; and for her sympathy with the vulnerable, the displaced, and the lonely. She fails chiefly where she falls into sentimentality, and succeeds best when her touch is lightest. She has also had detractors -- Aldous Huxley (who portrayed her as Gilray in 'Point Counter Point') was one -- and even among her friends both Lawrence and Virginia Woolf regretted that so much inferior work was published by Murry. By the end of the twentieth century her reputation lagged far behind that of the more prolific Woolf, but it is still secure, and not only in English-speaking countries, for she is particularly admired in France and Germany. 
For many years there was no likeness of Mansfield in the National Portrait Gallery (at the time of her death a rule forbade the acquisition of any portrait until ten years after the death of a subject). In 1932 Theodora Bosanquet offered the gallery a portrait painted by Anne Estelle Rice in Cornwall in 1918, and letters of support were sent to the trustees by, among others, Leonard and Virginia Woolf, G. K. Chesterton, Rose Macaulay, H. G. Wells, Rebecca West, Walter de la Mare, Edward Garnett, Winifred Holtby, Viola Meynell, and J. C. Squire. Despite this, and despite receiving expert advice that the portrait was a good one, the trustees rejected it and for many years took no further steps to acquire even a photograph (in 1940 the portrait was bought by the National Art Gallery of New Zealand). In 1999 a photograph of Katherine Mansfield was finally hung in the National Portrait Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35173


Musgrave, Sir James, baronet (1826-1904), industrialist and philanthropist, was born at Lisburn, co. Antrim, Ireland, on 30 December 1826, the seventh of nine sons (and one of the twelve children) of Dr Samuel Musgrave (1770-1836), a leading physician of Lisburn, and his wife, Mary (died 1862), daughter of William Riddel, of Comber, co. Down. The Musgrave family had come to Ulster from Cumberland in the seventeenth century. Musgrave's father, who sympathized with the United Irishmen, was arrested on 16 September 1796 on a charge of high treason and imprisoned in the new gaol, Dublin. Released in 1798, he resumed professional work in Lisburn; but in 1803 he was again arrested and imprisoned for a time on a similar charge. 
After attending local schools and receiving private tuition, Musgrave began early a business career in Belfast, and ultimately, with two of his brothers, John Riddel and Robert, he established the important firm of Musgrave Brothers, iron founders and engineers. Taking part in the public life of Belfast, he was in 1876 elected one of the Belfast harbour commissioners, and was subsequently regularly re-elected, serving as a chairman of the commission from 1887 to 1903. Under Musgrave's direction the harbour was greatly improved, and new docks, quays, and deep water channels constructed for the increasing trade, one of these being named the Musgrave Channel in his honour. 
In 1877 Musgrave was elected president of the Belfast chamber of commerce. The moving spirit in the establishment of the Belfast Technical School, he helped greatly in the erection of the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast, in commemoration of the jubilee of Queen Victoria, and founded in 1901 the Musgrave chair of pathology in Queen's College, Belfast. Musgrave worked hard as a member of the Recess Committee, formed in 1895 by Sir Horace Plunkett to devise means for the improvement of the agricultural and economic condition of Ireland, and whose proposals were embodied in 1899 in an act of parliament. 
In 1866 Musgrave and his brother John purchased an estate of some 60,000 acres in co. Donegal. During part of every year he resided on the estate at Carrick Lodge, Glencolumbkille, taking a personal interest in the welfare of the tenants. He was appointed JP and deputy lieutenant of co. Donegal, and served as high sheriff in 1885-6. He was chairman of the Donegal Railway Company, in the establishment of which he had a large share. In 1897 he was created a baronet of the United Kingdom. Musgrave, who was unmarried, died at his home, Drumglass House, Belfast, on 22 February 1904, and was buried in the cathedral churchyard, Lisburn. A stained-glass window to his memory, and to that of other members of the family, was put up in the First Lisburn Presbyterian Church, to which his ancestors belonged. 


@@@@@


doc= 35174


Muybridge, Eadweard James (1830-1904), developer of motion photography, was born on 9 April 1830 at Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the second of four sons of John Muggeridge (1797-1843), corn chandler, of Kingston, and his wife, Susannah (1807/8-1874), daughter of the Smith barge-owning family of Hampton Wick. Nothing is known of his education and upbringing. By the time he emigrated to New York in the early 1850s, he had changed his name to Eadweard Muybridge (probably inspired by the recent discovery in Kingston of a Saxon coronation stone memorializing two King Eadweards). He soon prospered in the business of importing English books, and by 1855 his befriending of the New York daguerreotypist Silas T. Selleck brought him into contact with the emerging art of photography. In his later 'Animals in Motion' Muybridge recalled studying with interest during this period the flight of seabirds. 
Following Selleck and the gold rush to California, Muybridge moved to the burgeoning city of San Francisco in 1855, establishing a bookstore at 113 Montgomery Street. He became an active member of the literary community, serving on the board of the Mercantile Library Association and also selling photographs in his bookshop. His ingenuity in mechanical devices was demonstrated by his taking out a patent in 1860 for improvements to printing and another in 1861 for machinery for washing cloth. A younger brother George (1833-1858) joined him in business, but George's early death from tuberculosis brought in another brother, Thomas (1835-1923). An 1860 business and vacation trip to Europe was cut short by a stagecoach accident in Texas, in which Muybridge was so seriously injured that his doctor, Sir William Gull, recommended an active outdoor life for recovery. 
Between 1860 and 1866 Muybridge travelled between England, New York, and the continent. Some time during this period a Kingston friend, Arthur Brown, taught him wet plate photography, and about 1866 he returned to San Francisco where he joined Silas Selleck in his photography business. By 1868 he offered splendid views of Yosemite under the name of 'Helios'. 
Muybridge emerged as a highly talented and ingenious photographer, building an extensive catalogue of views of the American west, recording the emerging San Francisco, and accepting various positions as photographer for government boards and expeditions. His reputation as a leading photographer led to an 1872 commission that changed his professional life. Former governor Leland Stanford, the wealthy president of the Central Pacific Railroad and an avid horse racer, hired him to provide scientific evidence whether a horse could ever have all four feet off the ground at once. By contriving a high speed shutter and speeding up his exposure by recording only a silhouette of the horse against white sheets, in May 1872 Muybridge made several negatives of Occident, Stanford's celebrated horse, as it trotted laterally in front of his camera at the speed of 38 feet per second. These experiments, which showed that the horse's four feet were at times all off the ground, were further developed in 1873. In the same year he photographed the Modoc Indian war, and continued his western views. 
In 1871 Muybridge married Flora Shallcross Stone (1851-1875), a divorcee half his age. The birth of a son in 1874 led to his discovering that the true father was Harry Larkyns, an English drama critic and adventurer. Enraged, he shot and killed his rival. He was acquitted of the charge of murder in an emotional trial, and quickly escaped to Central America, photographing for the Pacific Mail Steamship Company. He was formally divorced in the same year. One of his first efforts on his return to San Francisco early in 1876 was an enormous panoramic view of the city. In 1877 he proposed photographing on a reduced scale the official records of San Jose (an approach directly akin to modern microfilming). He again took up photographing horses in motion, now under Stanford's sponsorship at his stud farm in Palo Alto, California. 
The photographs for Muybridge's earliest experiments had been made with a single camera, and required a separate trotting for each exposure. His 1877 experiments carried out a suggestion first made by Oscar Gustav Rejdlander, of employing a number of cameras placed in a line, thus obtaining a succession of exposures at regulated intervals of time. Twelve electrically tripped cameras were arranged in a line, pointing at a measured backdrop. Six views were published in 1878 under the title of 'The Horse in Motion'. In his analysis of the quadrupedal walk, Muybridge's investigations led to much modification of the treatment of animal movements in the works of painters and sculptors. In 1878 Muybridge patented his 'method and apparatus for photographing objects in motion'. His battery of cameras was expanded to twenty-four and his subject matter extended, first to animals other than the horse, and by 1879 to the study of the human figure in motion (the latter possibly inspired by correspondence with the painter, Thomas Eakins). By then Stanford had spent more than $42,000 on supporting Muybridge's studies. Muybridge's work had captured the attention of the French scientist and photographer Etienne Jules Marey, professor at the College de France, and his active promotion of Muybridge's pioneering efforts did much to establish him in the scientific world. 
In 1878 the editor of the 'Scientific American' suggested mounting Muybridge's sequence photographs in a zoetrope, a popular children's toy based on the phenakistoscope, that utilized slits to give an illusion of continuous movement to the images inside. In 1869 Sir John Herschel (in the same article in which he coined the term 'snapshot'), had prophesied that photographs might one day be used in the phenakistoscope to show continuous motion. A decade later Muybridge, using a device he called the Zoopraxiscope, became the first to exhibit photographic motion pictures taken from life. It was a direct step towards modern film-making, and was a popular device. By its means horse races were reproduced on a screen with such fidelity as to show the individual characteristics of the motion of each animal, flocks of birds flew with every movement of their wings clearly perceptible, two gladiators contended for victory, athletes turned somersaults, and the like. At Marey's home in Paris in September 1881 Muybridge lectured before the assembled men of science with his newly animated illustrations for the first time in Europe. He then lectured in London, before the Royal Institution, the Royal Academy of Arts, the Royal Society of Arts, and the Royal Society. 
With such enthusiastic reception, Muybridge was on the verge of transferring his base of operations to his native England. He was invited to prepare a paper on animal locomotion for the Royal Society. Just days before this was to be published, he was summoned to its rooms and confronted with Dr J. B. Stillman's just released book, 'The Horse in Motion', which illustrated Muybridge's photographs through drawings. Published by Muybridge's patron, Leland Stanford, the book made absolutely no mention of Muybridge's contribution, and it is understandable that the society viewed him as a plagiarist. Francis Galton, acting as referee, diplomatically referred to concern about photographs to which Muybridge had 'no sure legal claim', but the immediate damage was done. Muybridge's standing in Britain was destroyed. Stanford's actions were never satisfactorily explained, and legal actions instituted by Muybridge failed to redress the situation. 
During a lecture tour of American cities in 1883 Muybridge circulated a prospectus for a massive reference work of animal locomotion. Numerous backers were found in Philadelphia, and the University of Pennsylvania became his scientific home. Specially constructed apparatus allowed the photographing of a living, moving subject from several angles simultaneously. Improved photographic materials finally enabled him to give these photographs full tones, rather than work with the silhouettes he had previously been restricted to. In 1884-5 more than a hundred thousand photographic plates were obtained and embodied in a work published at Philadelphia in 1887 as 'Animal locomotion, an electrophotographic investigation of consecutive phases of animal movement, 1872-1885'. The work contains over two thousand figures of moving men, women, children, beasts, and birds, in 781 photo-engravings, bound in eleven folio volumes. The great cost of preparing and printing this work restricted its sale to a very few complete sets, and a selection of the most important plates on a reduced scale was published in London in 1899 as 'Animals in Motion'. 
For several years Muybridge, now more respected than ever, alternated between England and America. In 1892 he lectured on animal locomotion in a specially built hall at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago. Legal problems continued to plague him, but from 1894, apart from a visit to America in 1897, he lived in his native Kingston, residing with a cousin at Park View, 2 Liverpool Road and actively corresponding with publications. He died on 8 May 1904, while digging a miniature scale reproduction of the Great Lakes in his garden. His cremated remains were buried at Woking. He left $300 to Kingston Public Library, together with his lantern slides, Zoopraxiscope, and a selection from the plates of 'Animal Locomotion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35175


Myers, Charles Samuel (1873-1946), psychologist, was born in London on 13 March 1873, the eldest son of Wolf Myers, merchant, and his wife, Esther Eugenie Moses. His father's family was principally interested in commerce. From his mother and her family came powerful social, musical, and philosophical influences. As a boy at the City of London School, Myers turned towards science, and later at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, he gained first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1893, 1895) and was Arnold Gerstenberg student in 1896. He proceeded MB at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1898, but disinclined to medical practice, in that year he went with the Cambridge anthropological expedition to the Torres Strait. He joined W. H. R. Rivers and William McDougall in experimental studies of the sensory reactions of the inhabitants of that area, and he became profoundly interested in ethnic music. 
In 1902 Myers returned to Cambridge to help Rivers teach the physiology of the special senses. In 1904 Myers married Edith Babette, youngest daughter of Isaac Seligman, merchant, of London; they had three daughters and two sons. Myers remained in Cambridge to become, in succession, demonstrator, lecturer, and, in 1921, reader in experimental psychology. From 1906 to 1909 he was also professor in experimental psychology at King's College, London. At about the time of the First World War he did much to develop scientific psychology in Britain, for example, by using his enthusiasm and ability to raise funds to establish the first English experimental laboratory especially designed for psychology at Cambridge in 1912. 
In 1915 Myers was given a commission in the Royal Army Medical Corps and in 1916 he was appointed consultant psychologist to the British armies in France. Frustrated with opposition to his view that shell-shock was a treatable condition, after the war he returned to his Cambridge position. But here too he was deeply dissatisfied, wanting wider opportunities for the development of his more practical interests, and feeling that official and academic circles showed little genuine interest in psychology. In 1922 he left Cambridge for London, thereafter devoting himself to the development of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology which he had founded with Henry John Welch in 1921. He was also involved in what became the industrial health research board and was the first president of the British Psychological Society. 
Myers's 'Text-Book of Experimental Psychology' (1909) was for long the best work of its kind in any language. His 'Introduction to Experimental Psychology' (1911) went through several editions. 'Mind and Work' (1920), 'Industrial Psychology in Great Britain' (1926), and 'Ten Years of Industrial Psychology' (with H. J. Welch, 1932) all dealt with the later interests of his life. He also published two volumes of essays: 'A Psychologist's Point of View' (1933) and 'In the Realm of Mind' (1937). His many contributions in the field of ethnic music won him an international reputation in anthropology. 
In 1915 Myers was elected FRS; he was appointed CBE in 1919, and received honorary degrees from the universities of Manchester (DSc, 1927), Calcutta (LLD), and Pennsylvania (DSc). He was a fellow (1919) and later an honorary fellow (1935) of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, a foreign associate of the French Societe de Psychologie, twice president of the psychology section of the British Association (1922, 1931), president of the International Congress of Psychology in 1923, and editor of the 'British Journal of Psychology' (1911-24). 
Myers was rather above medium height, well built, and remembered for his smile. He made friends readily, but had a tendency to imagine enemies. He enjoyed mountain climbing and lawn tennis, and was a talented violinist. He combined freemasonry with philanthropic activity for the Jewish community. Students and visitors from every part of the world were always welcome at his home. Myers died at his home at Winsford Glebe, near Minehead, Somerset, on 12 October 1946. He was survived by his wife. 
Myers undertook more laboratory experimental work than his publications would suggest, but his greatest contributions to the emergent science of psychology in Britain were in establishing many of its pioneering institutions, and promoting it internationally. 


@@@@@


doc= 35176


Myers, Ernest James (1844-1921), poet and translator, was born at Keswick on 13 October 1844, the second son of Frederic Myers (1811-1851), perpetual curate of St John's, Keswick, and his second wife, Susan Harriet (1811-1896), the youngest daughter of John Marshall of Hallsteads, on Ullswater. His elder brother was Frederic William Henry Myers (1843-1901). Ernest Myers, who spent many of his summer holidays in the fell country, retained throughout his life an ardent love for the region. 
From Cheltenham College, where he was head of the school, Myers went in 1863 as an exhibitioner to Balliol College, Oxford. He enjoyed college life to the full, rowing in the college eight and playing rackets and tennis. He was also academically successful, obtaining a first class in classical moderations (1865) and the Gaisford prize for Greek verse (1865), but he narrowly missed the Hertford scholarship and a first class in 'literae humaniores'. In 1868 he was elected a fellow of Wadham College, where he remained for three years as a lecturer. While at Wadham, he wrote and published his first poem, 'The Puritans' (1869), a short drama intentionally reminiscent of the 'Persae' of Aeschylus. 
From 1871 to 1891 Myers lived in London, where he was called to the bar (1874) but never practised. During these years he published his prose translations of Pindar's 'Odes' (1874) and of the last eight books of the 'Iliad' (with Andrew Lang and Walter Leaf, 1882), as well as some essays in magazines, and one, on Aeschylus, in the collection entitled 'Hellenica', edited by Evelyn Abbott (1880). Myers's enthusiasm for Greece was the most striking characteristic of his writing, although he also compiled a selection of prose passages by Milton ('Parchment Series', 1884); a short biography of Viscount Althorp (1890), whose services in connection with the 'Reform Act' of 1832 he thought to be insufficiently recognized; and three volumes of verse, 'Poems' (1877), 'The Defence of Rome' (1880), and 'The Judgement of Prometheus' (1886). 
Myers's activities during his life in London were not confined to literature. From 1876, for nearly six years, he acted as secretary to the London Society for the Extension of University Teaching. He was on the council of the Hellenic Society from its foundation in 1879. Later, after abandoning the idea of parliamentary life, he worked for the Charity Organization Society, serving on its central administrative committee until he left London. 
On 1 February 1883 Myers married Nora Margaret, daughter of Samuel Lodge, rector of Scrivelsby, Lincolnshire; they had two sons and three daughters. In 1891 the family moved to a house at Chislehurst on the edge of Paul's Cray Common, which was to feature in his poem 'A Common', in his 'Gathered Poems'. Here Myers remained for the rest of his life, abandoning the habit of continental travel to which some of his poems bear witness, but paying a weekly visit to London in order to see friends and to attend the council meetings of the Society for the Protection of Women and Children. Most of the verse composed in these years is included in 'Gathered Poems' (1904), a collection which also contained what he thought best in the volumes previously published. Myers died of pneumonia at Fontridge, Burwash, Sussex, on 25 November 1921. He was survived by his wife, one son, and two daughters; one daughter had died in infancy, and his elder son was killed while serving in France in 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 35177


Myers, Frederic William Henry (1843-1901), psychical researcher and essayist, was born on 6 February 1843 at St John's parsonage, Keswick, Cumberland, the eldest son of Frederic Myers (1811-1851), perpetual curate of St John's, and his second wife, Susan Harriet Marshall (1811-1896). The mathematician Thomas Myers was his grandfather, and the poet Ernest James Myers a younger brother. 
On his father's death Myers's mother moved with her three sons to Blackheath, Kent, where Frederic attended a preparatory school. Mrs Myers was a daughter of John Marshall (1765-1845), owner of large estates in the Lake District, whose considerable fortune came from his Leeds flax mills. Money was not a serious problem, and in 1856 she took a substantial house in Cheltenham, sending her sons as day boys to Cheltenham College. There Myers's love of poetry and taste for classical literature were recognized and fostered. An early admiration for Virgil (instilled by his father) was followed by enthusiasms for other Greek and Latin authors. The reading of Plato's 'Phaedo' at the age of sixteen occasioned a kind of religious conversion, which profoundly influenced his later thought. Before he left school he had learned the whole of Virgil by heart. These early enthusiasms were matched by a remarkable precocity in the use of language. At fourteen two of his poems were placed first and second for the college's English verse prize (the subject was 'Belisarius'), and in the same year he won the prize for a Latin lyric. In 1859 he came second in a national competition for a Robert Burns centenary poem. At the end of that year he left school to study privately, but in 1860 won the English verse prize (for which he was still eligible) with a striking poem on 'The Death of Socrates'. 
That October, Myers went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a minor scholar. His university career was outstandingly successful. He won two university classical scholarships (the Bell and the Craven), the chancellor's medal for English verse twice, the Camden medal for Latin verse once, and the members' prize for a Latin essay three times. In 1864 he was second in the first classes of both the classical and the moral sciences triposes. Despite these achievements, Myers was not popular. Many thought him an eccentric and a poseur. The fervent and emotionally intense Hellenism which consumed him might easily have seemed like an affectation, but it was not. Thirty years later (in an autobiography only published in 1961) he wrote: 'That tone of thought came to me naturally; the classics were but intensifications of my own being' (Myers, 10). However, he added: 'They drew from me and fostered evil as well as good; they might aid imaginative impulse and detachment from sordid interests, but they had no check for lust or pride' (ibid.). 
It was more than anything overweening conceit which led Myers into a piece of folly that seriously damaged his reputation. He had won the Camden medal for Latin verse in 1862. Into his entry for the following year he packed (mostly without acknowledgement) a considerable number of what he considered the best lines from past Oxford prize poems. He was following what he believed to have been Virgil's practice, and to his friends would disdainfully quote Virgil's remark 'Aurum colligo e stercore Ennii' ('I am collecting gold from Ennius's dunghill'). He was awarded the prize, but when the borrowings were discovered was forced to resign it. 
The outward events of Myers's life over the next few years are easily told. He took his BA in 1864 and his MA in 1867, was a fellow of Trinity from 1865 until 1874, and a college lecturer in classics from 1865 to 1869. Feeling himself unsuited for teaching, he resigned his lectureship to work on behalf of the movement for the higher education of women. In 1872 he became an inspector of schools, an occupation which he followed until not long before his death without much impeding his other activities, and in 1875 was appointed to the Cambridge district. 
The inward events were more interesting and a great deal more complex. A tour in the summer of 1864 of classical sites in Italy, Greece and Asia Minor had somewhat cooled Myers's Hellenic ardour by showing him how unattainable was that vanished ideal world. A tour of Canada and the United States the following summer found him for the first and last time in a state of religious apathy which was brought home to him when, about to swim the river below Niagara Falls, he asked himself, 'What if I die?' and found the answer void of emotion. To a man of Myers's eager temperament sustained indifference was not possible. Christianity had for many years been displaced in his mind by Platonism, but now he was converted to Christianity by Mrs Josephine Butler, wife of the vice-principal of Cheltenham College, a lady for whom niceties of dogma were subordinate to the lived experience of Christian verities. Under her influence Myers for several years passed much of his life in prayer, self-discipline, and inner rapture. His best-known poem, 'St Paul' (1867), which was dedicated to Mrs Butler, reflects the feelings of this period. 
By 1869 disillusion had set in. It came, Myers said, 'from increased knowledge of history and science, from a wider outlook on the world... insensibly the celestial vision faded' (Myers, 13). The years of religious doubt that followed were exceedingly painful. Though for a while he moved much in the society of Mary Ann Evans (George Eliot) and other earnest disbelievers, he could derive no satisfaction from their attempts to find meaning in a life bereft of God and the prospect of immortality. 
Myers now turned, with the collaboration and cautious encouragement of his Trinity colleague and mentor, Henry Sidgwick, to an investigation of spiritualistic and kindred phenomena, which were then attracting a fair amount of interest. Between 1873 and 1878 Myers, Sidgwick, and a group of Trinity fellows and friends, including Edmund Gurney, Walter Leaf, Lord Rayleigh, and Arthur Balfour, together with Balfour's sisters, Eleanor (who was to marry Henry Sidgwick) and Evelyn (Lady Rayleigh), sat in various permutations and combinations with a good many mediums. Most proved in the end disappointing but Myers felt that he had witnessed occasional phenomena which justified continued hope that such investigations might eventually open an escape route from the prison of materialism. 
These investigations coincided with other events which were to have a profound influence on the rest of Myers's life. His first cousin, Walter James Marshall, had married in 1866 Annie Eliza Hill, but Walter's increasingly frequent manic-depressive episodes and eccentric behaviour put great strains on the marriage. Myers and Annie were often in each other's company, partly because of family attempts to cope with the problem of Walter, and from about 1873 a deep, though unconsummated, affection developed between them. In May 1876 Walter was certified insane and taken to a private asylum at Ticehurst in Sussex where he was (wrongly) pronounced incurable (Beer, chap. 4). His anger and recriminations distressed Annie and, overwhelmed by these and other problems, she drowned herself in Ullswater on 29 August 1876. Myers, who had gone abroad, was devastated. Annie had shared his religious doubts and his interest in spiritualism and was already associated in his mind with his quest for evidence of survival of death; proof of her survival now became a principal object of that quest. 
In the years following 1876 Myers threw himself into literary work, publishing (mostly in the 'Fortnightly Review' and the 'Nineteenth Century') the essays later collected as 'Essays Modern' (1883) and 'Essays Classical' (1883). In several of these essays are passages -- most notably the end of his essay on Ernest Renan, and the section on the neoplatonists in the essay on Greek Oracles -- which foreshadow much of his subsequent thought. To this period also belong a further volume of poems, 'The Renewal of Youth' (1882), and 'Wordsworth' (1880), a brief sketch for the 'English Men of Letters' series. The latter was frequently reprinted -- Myers's love for and intimate knowledge of the Lake District, together with his own poetic gifts and strong sense of a spiritual reality behind and interpenetrating the sensible world, fitted him particularly well to be a biographer and interpreter of Wordsworth. 
On 13 March 1880, after a whirlwind courtship, Myers married Eveleen Tennant (1856-1937) ['see under 'Tennant, Gertrude Barbara Rich], the youngest daughter of Charles Tennant, of Cadoxton Lodge, Neath, Glamorgan. In most ways they were exceedingly different. Eveleen's interests were social and artistic -- she was a gifted photographer -- and not in the least intellectual, still less other-worldly. The bond between them was emotional and passionate. Eveleen was a devoted if somewhat possessive wife and mother -- they had three children, Leopold Hamilton Myers (1881-1944), Silvia ('b'. 1883) and Harold ('b'. 1886) -- and the marriage was on the whole happy, despite the fact that Myers's inmost affections remained secretly fixed on the idealized Annie Marshall. 
Myers and his wife both came from wealthy families (at his death his estate was valued at $37,370) and they were able to enjoy a settled and comfortable lifestyle. In 1881 he built as their home the substantial Leckhampton House, set in 4 acres of grounds just to the west of Grange Road, Cambridge. From then on his outward life -- the activities for which the world at large most particularly knew him -- and his inward life came together more fully than they had previously done. The result was twenty years of sustained endeavour and impressive productivity. 
Early in 1882 Myers joined Sir William Barrett, the physicist, certain prominent spiritualists, notably E. Dawson Rogers and W. Stainton Moses, his own Trinity friends, Henry Sidgwick and Edmund Gurney, and various others, in setting up the Society for Psychical Research (the SPR). The aim of this society was to investigate psychic phenomena in a scientific spirit and without presuppositions as to outcome or explanations. Sidgwick became its first president and, more than anyone, set its tone, but it was above all Myers whose enthusiasm drove it on. His own motivation was of course broadly religious, but it would be unjust to accuse him of wholesale credulity. His experience of spiritualistic frauds was considerable, and his tendency towards belief was restrained by his sense that momentous issues were at stake. His contribution to the SPR and to psychical research in general was fourfold. He was centrally involved in organizing the society and in promoting its image, which he did by recruiting distinguished members, speaking at international psychological conferences and placing informative articles in leading reviews. He devoted a great deal of time and energy to the investigation of cases of apparitions (he was co-author with Edmund Gurney and Frank Podmore of the monumental 'Phantasms of the Living', 2 vols., 1886) and of automatic writing, trance mediumship, and so forth, and travelled widely in Britain and abroad to obtain first-hand testimony and sit with mediums. (Sittings with the American trance medium Mrs Leonora Piper and with the English Mrs Rosina Thompson eventually convinced him that he had made contact with Annie Marshall.) He used his classical learning to coin a specialist vocabulary for psychical research, the term 'telepathy' being one of his inventions. And he developed a theory to unite the findings of psychical research with the latest discoveries in psychopathology, abnormal psychology, and hypnotism. 
The reading with which he supported this theory was prodigious. He probably knew more than any man in England (except perhaps his own youngest brother and close collaborator, the physician Arthur Thomas Myers (1851-1894)) about current continental work on hypnosis, dissociation, and secondary personality, and had met many of the leading French authorities. He was the first to describe in English the early work of Pierre Janet and Freud. The development of his theory of the subliminal self can be traced through numerous lengthy articles in the 'Proceedings' of the SPR, and a more popular book, 'Science and a Future Life' (1893), to its fullest, though still incomplete, expression in his posthumous 'Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death' (2 vols., 1903). Myers regards each human personality as consisting of a number of distinct streams of consciousness, which he sometimes compares to geological strata. These are in some sense modifications of the same soul, and have the potential for unification. But normally they remain separate, and one, the ordinary 'supraliminal' stream of consciousness, has evolved to cope with the problems of everyday living. Others, however, may possess faculties, for instance telepathy, of less immediate practical relevance. Waking telepathic experiences may be regarded as leaks or messages from these 'subliminal' streams of consciousness, and telepathy is most likely to occur when such streams are tapped, as in dreams or hypnosis, or become to an extent detached and autonomous, as in automatic writing or secondary personality. This theory had for a while great influence within psychical research, and some outside it. Whether it could be made credible or even wholly coherent might be doubted. None the less 'Human Personality' -- despite the rhapsodical style in which some passages are written -- remains an impressive attempt to systematize a vast quantity of interesting materials. 
As a person the later Myers was admired by many but also disliked by not a few. The self-conceit of his earlier days had been replaced by a chastened insight into his own shortcomings, and the snobbery and excessive respect for titles, which had irritated his American friend, William James, was substantially moderated. But lingering memories of the Camden medal affair, together with his unconventional religious views, made some doubt his sincerity, a doubt not allayed by the sonorous fluency with which he would talk or lecture on his favourite themes. His prose was liable to similar excesses; they represented, however, not insincerity but a brief lifting of the curtain on his intense inner life. A sentence from the manuscript of his autobiography runs: 'I cannot feel that I am entirely candid unless I write in this emotional, over-decorated style which corresponds in some subtle way to the idiosyncrasy of the soul within.' His ordinary bearing was serene and reserved, and he had great social gifts; he had, however, few close friends, and these -- Edmund Gurney, Henry Sidgwick and his wife, Oliver Lodge, the French physiologist Charles Richet, William James -- were mostly individuals whom he thought of as fellow workers in the great endeavour. 
Myers was about 5 feet 10 inches in height, tending somewhat to stoutness, with brown eyes, dark hair, later thinning and becoming grizzled, and a short beard. According to members of his family he was almost tone deaf and had little appreciation of music, a failing which is perhaps reflected in his poetry. In 1898, 1899, and 1900 Myers had severe attacks of influenza. He developed Bright's disease, with enlargement of the heart. Towards the end of 1900 he went abroad for his health. He died of pneumonia in a clinic in Rome on 17 January 1901. A memorial tablet was erected in the city's protestant cemetery. Myers was buried in the graveyard of St John's Church, Keswick, between his father's (more substantial) grave and a gateway into the garden of the house where he was born. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35178


Myers, Leopold Hamilton (1881-1944), novelist, was born at Leckhampton, Grange Road, Cambridge, on 6 September 1881, the eldest of the three children (two sons and a daughter) of Frederic William Henry Myers (1843-1901), writer and founder member of the Society for Psychical Research, and his wife, Eveleen Tennant (1856-1937) ['see under 'Tennant, Gertrude Barbara Rich], a renowned intellectual hostess and an experimenter with the early technology of photography. Myers was educated at Eton College, spent a year in Germany, and was then briefly at Trinity College, Cambridge, before his father's death in January 1901. He then accompanied his mother on a trip to the United States, where she was to have a pre-arranged 'after-death' meeting with her husband. The meeting failed to materialize. Myers met and proposed to Elsie (1873-1955), daughter of General William Jackson Palmer, founder of the city of Colorado Springs, Colorado. Elsie Palmer was nine years older than Myers, and he had to wait seven years before she agreed to marry him in 1908. The couple had two daughters and lived in Marlow in Buckinghamshire. 
Myers came to literature comparatively late and wrote slowly. His first published work was 'Arvat' (1908), a play in verse. During the First World War he worked in the trade department of the Foreign Office. His first novel, 'The Orissers' (1922), is an account of the relations between a poor aristocratic family and a family involved in the City. In 1925 he published 'The Clio' about the tensions among the passengers of a luxury yacht travelling up the Amazon. Myers's great work, however, is a sequence of novels set in India in the reign of Akbar. Focusing on a young prince's life and spiritual quest at the corrupt political centre of an empire, the series included 'The Near and the Far', 'Prince Jali', 'The Root and the Flower', 'Rajah Amar', and 'The Pool of Vishnu'. 'The Root and the Flower' won the Femina Vie Heureuse and James Tait Black prizes after its publication in 1935. The novels were collected in Britain in 1943 as 'The Near and the Far' and in the United States in 1945 as 'The Root and the Flower'. Although the series is set in sixteenth-century India, Myers was cavalier with historical facts and stressed that he was using a historical setting to address contemporary issues: 'It has certainly not been my intention to set aside the social and ethical problems that force themselves upon us at the present time. On the contrary, my hope has been that we might view them better from the distant vantage ground of an imaginary world.' Myers paid a great deal of attention to his public image; his manners and grooming were meticulous and his clothes expensively tailored. His character, however, was often painfully contradictory. A contemplative searcher for spiritual truths, he was nevertheless extremely sociable and active first in the Bloomsbury group (E. M. Forster found him 'chilly'), and then among the left-wing intelligentsia of the thirties (a friend of Orwell and J. D. Bernal). He could be a vicious snob and became very angry with his daughter for not marrying a peer. Myers read a great deal of philosophy while maintaining a strong prejudice against 'dry' academics. While he suffered from depression, he could, particularly as a young man, be gregarious and playful. He visited Egypt, Italy, Ceylon, and other countries, raced at Brooklands, flew in a balloon, and idled at social gatherings and fashionable restaurants funded by an inheritance he received from a godfather in 1906 which left him wealthy enough not to have to work. 
Myers's writing is often concerned with spirituality and religious philosophy. After the death of his father he had a mystical experience in a hotel bedroom in Chicago, and as he became older this became proof to him that experiences beyond the rational did occur. Yet he could never submit himself to the discipline of any specific religious faith. Instead he trawled widely through writings on Christianity, Hinduism, and Buddhism and on Freudian, Adlerian, and especially Jungian psychology. In later life he became a communist and, although he never visited Russia, he looked on it as a spiritual utopia, commenting in one letter, 'Stalin's birthday: God bless him' and in another, in reference to the Red Army general, 'our hearts are with Timoschenko, and our attitude: who dies if Russia lives?' Myers tried to express his new faith in a semi-sociological work that was abandoned before it was finished. Following this failure he managed to complete a class-conscious autobiography. Almost as soon as he had finished, he turned against it and rounded up all the copies he had distributed to his friends and publishers before destroying every one. 
During the Second World War, Leopold Myers became increasingly isolated and depressed. On the night of 7 April 1944 he committed suicide by taking an overdose of a commercial sedative, Veronal. He was found dead on the morning of the 8th at his home, Tylecotes, Oxford Road, Marlow-on-Thames, and was cremated without a ceremony on Saturday 15 April in Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 35179


Evans, Sir Guildhaume Myrddin- (1894-1964), civil servant, was born at Clynmawr House, Blaenau Gwent, Monmouthshire, on 17 December 1894, the second son of Thomas Towy Evans, a Baptist minister, and his wife, Mary James. He was educated at Llandovery and Christ Church, Oxford, where he obtained first-class honours in mathematical moderations in 1914, and took his BA degree in 1919. On the outbreak of the First World War he was commissioned in the South Wales Borderers, and served in France and Flanders. In 1917 he was invalided out of the army, and he then joined the prime minister's secretariat. Two years later he became assistant secretary to the cabinet, and for the next ten years he was an assistant principal in the Treasury. On 16 April 1919 he married Elizabeth (1889/90-1981), daughter of Owen Watkin, farmer, of Sarn, Caernarvonshire; there were two sons of the marriage. 
In 1929 Myrddin-Evans moved to the Ministry of Labour, and in 1935 became deputy chief insurance officer under the new 'Unemployment Acts'. Then, in 1938, he was appointed head of the international labour division of the Ministry of Labour. From this time until his retirement in 1959 he led nearly all the British delegations to international labour conferences, and it was at once the most congenial as well as the most successful period of his career. During the Second World War he served as head of the production executive secretariat, and he also acted as adviser on manpower problems to both the American and Canadian governments. He was a member of the British delegation to the San Francisco conference in 1945 which established the United Nations, and he served in the British delegation to the general assembly of the UN between 1946 and 1953. But his outstanding achievement was his work for the International Labour Organization (ILO). He had become the representative of the British government on the governing body of the ILO in 1945, and he was soon elected chairman. In the early months of 1946 negotiations began between the ILO and the UN; and the conclusions of these often difficult discussions, formally embodied in a detailed agreement, owed much to the tact, skill, and competence of the two respective chairmen: Myrddin-Evans for the ILO and Sir A. Ramaswami Mudaliar, of India, for the UN. Myrddin-Evans was chairman of the ILO for three periods of office -- a rare occurrence -- and he was the first civil servant ever to be elected president of the International Labour Conference. This was in 1949. 
Myrddin-Evans enjoyed great esteem within the ILO and was known all over the world for his remarkable knowledge of international labour conditions and problems. His contribution to the growth and development of the ILO was widely appreciated, and the warmth of his reception on his many visits to different parts of the world was a matter of deep personal satisfaction. On the eve of his retirement from the Ministry of Labour he was appointed chairman of the Local Government Commission for Wales. He greatly appreciated the compliment; and he showed himself once more as an admirable chairman: thorough, positive, always helpful, and able to win the respect and the affection of his committee. The commission's report was published in 1963, a year before his death. 
Myrddin-Evans was an active churchman all his life. For many years he was a member of the council of the Baptist Union, and for a time he served as secretary of the Bloomsbury Central Baptist Church in London. In 1934 he published, with Thomas Chegwidden, 'The Employment Exchange Service of Great Britain'. He was appointed CB in 1945 and KCMG in 1947. Myrddin-Evans died at his London home, 6 Chester Place, Regent's Park, on 15 February 1964. 
John Saville', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35180


Myres, Sir John Linton (1869-1954), archaeologist and historian, was born on 3 July 1869 at Preston, Lancashire, the only son of the Revd William Miles Myres (died 1901), vicar of St Paul's, Preston, and his first wife, Jane, daughter of the Revd Henry Linton. He won scholarships to Winchester College, thence to New College, Oxford, where he took first classes in honour moderations (1890) and 'literae humaniores' (1892). He had already shown a lively interest in antiquities and local history as an undergraduate, publishing articles, digging at Alchester, and organizing the local history museum at Aylesbury. As a fellow of Magdalen (1892-5) and Craven fellow (1892) he was able to visit the Mediterranean, travelling in the Greek islands, exploring Caria and the Dodecanese, and working with Arthur Evans. He travelled widely in Crete, collecting minor antiquities and copying inscriptions. These were the early days of excavation in the island and of the discovery of Minoan civilization, although Knossos itself had yet to be dug. By comparing Cretan vases with some vase fragments found by Flinders Petrie in Egypt, at Kahun, he found the first important link and correlation to be observed between the two ancient civilizations. He did not join Evans in the excavations at Knossos, but dug with the British School at Palaikastro, and, notably, at the hilltop shrine of Petsofa, the finds from which he soon published. 
It was to Cyprus and to Cypriot antiquities that much of his archaeological work was at first devoted, and he several times returned to the problems of its archaeology in his writings. He had conducted excavations in the island in 1894, at Kition; he wrote a catalogue of the Cyprus Museum (1899, with M. Ohnefalsch-Richter); and in 1914 published an exemplary catalogue of the rich Cesnola collection in New York. In these years he had been a student of Christ Church (1895-1907) and university lecturer in classical archaeology, and he went to Liverpool as professor of Greek and lecturer in ancient geography (1907-10). In his early teaching and writing his knowledge of the geography of the Aegean was put to good account and he had the happy gift of being able to elucidate problems of antiquity by modern analogies. Quite apart from his Greek studies, he wrote a schools' 'History of Rome' which was published in 1902. 
The creation of the new Wykeham professorship in ancient history took Myres back to Oxford in 1910 and he held this chair until his retirement in 1939. The title of his inaugural lecture -- 'Greek lands and the Greek people' -- set the theme of his future interests and these years saw the publication of several books on the various aspects of ancient history which his wide experience encompassed. 'The Dawn of History' (1911) was a semi-popular exposition of fundamental principles about the study of early civilizations and approach to ancient history. It displayed already the easy style of writing which informed all his work. To the 'Cambridge Ancient History' he contributed several chapters. 'Who Were the Greeks?' (1930) was his most brilliant and provocative work, based on the Sather lectures which he had been again invited to deliver in California in 1927 (the first time had been in 1914). On Sir Arthur Evans's death in 1941 he took on the task of editing the Linear B tablets from Knossos which, half a century after their discovery, were finally published (as 'Scripta Minoa II') in 1952, and he lived to applaud the decipherment by Michael Ventris of their language as Greek. Myres continued writing until his death -- a vivid and highly personal account, 'Herodotus: Father of History' (1953), and essays on 'Homer and his Critics', edited after his death by Dorothea Gray in 1958. To his collection of essays 'Geographical History in Greek Lands' (1953), he appended a select bibliography of his writings. The most valuable aspect of his work was probably not so much the new material or solutions which he presented -- although these were numerous -- but the challenging approach to the more conventional problems of ancient history which a scholar versed in geography, anthropology, and the classics could take. His services to scholarship were recognized by honorary degrees from Wales, Manchester, Witwatersrand, and Athens, and the Victoria medal of the Royal Geographical Society (1953). He was elected FBA in 1923 and knighted in 1943. 
Myres's interests were not confined to any narrow field of research in antiquity. When he went to Greece in 1892 one of his awards was the Burdett-Coutts geological scholarship. As an anthropologist he served the Royal Anthropological Institute as its honorary secretary, then president (1928-31); and in 1901 he had inaugurated its new monthly periodical, 'Man', which he edited in 1901-3, and again in 1931-46, and to which he regularly contributed on subjects often far removed from classical studies. As a Hellenist and archaeologist he was vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries (1924-9) and its gold medallist in 1942; president of the Hellenic Society (1935-8); chairman of the British School at Athens (1934-47), and organizer of its jubilee exhibition in Burlington House in 1936. He was librarian of New College, Oxford, up to 1946. He was general secretary of the British Association from 1919 to 1932, following its conferences to many parts of the world. His range in scholarship was matched by the variety and vigour of his other activities. As well as his concern for the administration and welfare of the various societies which he served, he was active in Oxford politics, in the establishment of new graduate degrees, and the promotion of new subjects, notably geography and anthropology. In the First World War he commanded small craft in raiding operations on the Turkish coast on the tug 'Syros' and then the former royal yacht 'Aulis'. In this his ingenuity and buccaneering spirit served him no less than his detailed knowledge of the geography and people of the Asia Minor coast. He ended the war as acting commander of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and was made OBE and appointed to the Greek order of George I. In the Second World War he used his great experience of the geography of Greece in editing handbooks for naval intelligence. 
Through most of his life Myres was troubled by his eyesight and at the end, although still writing, was quite blind. In appearance he was a handsome man, bearded and blue-eyed. In his dealings with younger scholars he was generous and kindly, and his work must be judged not only by what he wrote but also by what he inspired in others, by example or casual precept. He founded no school. In his lifetime he saw classical archaeology grow from a dilettante study to a discipline which has much to contribute to all departments of classical scholarship. His part in this development was to show how historian, archaeologist, anthropologist, and geographer should combine their skills in the study of antiquity. 
In 1895 Myres married Sophia Florence (died 1960), daughter of Charles Ballance, with whom he had two sons and one daughter. The younger son, John Nowell Linton Myres, was Bodley's librarian at Oxford (1948-65). Myres died in Oxford on 6 March 1954. 
John Boardman', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35181


Wodeyar, Krishnaraja (1884-1940), maharaja of Mysore, was born on 4 June 1884, the elder son of Maharaja Chamarajendra Wodeyar (1863-1894), and succeeded his father as ruler on 1 February 1895. With an area of 29,462 square miles and a population of 51/2 million (1901) Mysore ranked second in importance after Hyderabad among the princely states of India. During his minority, his mother, Maharani Kempananjammanni Avaru Vanivilas Sannidhana (1866-1934), ably served as regent and oversaw the expansion of social services and physical amenities in Mysore. The young maharaja was educated from 1896 to 1902 in a palace school with selected boys of his own age. Stuart M. Fraser, a prominent member of the Indian Civil Service who would later be the British resident in Mysore (1905-10), Kashmir, and Hyderabad, served as his tutor and guardian. In 1900 Krishnaraja Wodeyar married Pratapa Kumari Bai, the daughter of Rana Bane Sinjhi Jhala, the talukdar of Vana in Saurashtra. They had no children. 
After being invested on 8 August 1902 with full ruling powers, the maharaja quickly emerged as a distinctive synthesis of orthodox Hindu, modernizing administrator, and benevolent autocrat. He inaugurated a legislative council in 1907 and sanctioned several reforms of the Representative Assembly, established in 1882, but by 1940 only 2 per cent of the population had the franchise. Although the state administration did not provide adequate resources to support the implementation of a policy of compulsory primary education, Krishnaraja established the first university in princely India in 1916 and collaborated with the Tatas, a leading industrial family, in the inauguration of the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. He supported extensive hydroelectric projects on the Cauvery River which provided electricity for gold mining in Kolar, new industries, especially textiles, and municipalities, enabling Bangalore, the state administrative capital, to be the first city in India lit by electricity in 1905. This progressive ruler encouraged the industrialization policies of Sir M. Visvesvaraya, state engineer and 'diwan' (chief minister), until 1919 when it became evident that they were significantly beyond the state's financial resources. Contributions of more than 70 lakhs of rupees, and loans of about 65 lakhs, to the British war effort in the First World War, post-war price and exchange fluctuations, and the annual subsidy of 35 lakhs paid to the British government of India according to the treaty of rendition of 1881 diminished developmental funds. Eventually the subsidy was reduced to 241/2 lakhs in 1927, the same amount specified in the initial treaty of 1799 between the British and Mysore. 
In 1926 the maharaja appointed Sir Mirza Isma'il, a Muslim friend since boyhood, as 'diwan'. Isma'il aggressively promoted the Mysore model of development which has been characterized as incorporating 'a collaboration between state and private capital, a high value attached to political and economic autonomy, a strong emphasis on complementary industries and a paternal approach, combining authoritarianism with certain populist measures' (Hettne, 297). The people of Mysore gained significant powers in local government, secondary and collegiate educational institutions in urban areas, expanding medical services, a good railway system, and new industries, but the maharaja and his chief minister conferred little power on popular politicians. Still, both British officials and Indian nationalists acclaimed the maharaja as a model ruler. 
Krishnaraja Wodeyar was a modest, gentle, somewhat reclusive man who did not participate actively in imperial politics and as a devout, orthodox Hindu did not travel to Europe until 1936. He also adhered to a strict Hindu vegetarian cuisine and did not eat with Europeans. Simultaneously he cultivated diverse interests and personal contacts. He was a generous host to Europeans and Indians, especially during 'keddahs', the highly organized capture of wild elephants for training as work animals, and the week-long, elaborate celebrations of his birthday and of Dasara, the Hindu holiday marking the triumph of Ram, an ideal, divine ruler, over the villainous Ravan, on which occasion the maharaja was honoured as a deputy of the divinity. The maharaja served as the first chancellor of the Benares Hindu University from 1916 to 1922. A discerning patron of Indian music, he was also knowledgeable about European classical music, himself playing the violin. He welcomed Indian nationalist leaders to his state, including Mahatma Gandhi, while conceding little governmental responsibility to local Congress leaders. Even so, Gandhi characterized the maharaja's rule as like that of Ram. Krishnaraja was a supporter of federation with British India during the 1930s if it included an equitable resolution of financial issues and of the contested status of the British civil and military station in Bangalore. He magnanimously supported the British war effort during both the first and second world wars with contingents of troops as well as monetary contributions and loans. He was appointed GCSI in 1907 and GBE in 1917. 
After suffering a heart attack at the racecourse in Bangalore in July, the maharaja died in Bangalore on 3 August 1940. He was succeeded by Chamarajendra Wodeyar, his nephew, who was the only son of his younger brother, Narasimharaja Wodeyar who predeceased him on 11 March 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 35182


Nairne, Alexander (1863-1936), theologian and biblical scholar, was born at Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, on 17 January 1863, the eldest child of Spencer Nairne, rector of Hunsdon, and his wife, Marion Walker, daughter of John Marshall, first Lord Curriehill, and sister of John Marshall, second Lord Curriehill, both Scottish judges. His ancestors for several generations were Scottish ministers. 
Nairne was educated at Haileybury School and at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he was a scholar. He obtained first classes in the classical (1884) and theological (1886) triposes, two university prizes, and a university scholarship. He was a fellow of Jesus from 1887 to 1893 and again from 1917 to 1932, in which year he was elected an honorary fellow. He was ordained deacon in 1887 and priest in 1888, and was curate of Great St Mary's and vice-principal of the Clergy Training School at Cambridge from 1887 to 1889. In 1889 he married Ethel (died 1921), daughter of Lambert Campbell Edwards, vicar of Kingsbury, Middlesex. They had no children, and Nairne was celibate for at least some, and perhaps all, of his married life. After his marriage, Nairne worked successively as an assistant master at Harrow School (1890-92), curate of Hadleigh, Suffolk (1892-4), and rector of Tewin, Hertfordshire (1894-1912). 
From 1900 to 1917 Nairne was professor of Hebrew and 'Old Testament' exegesis at King's College, London, where he was able to demonstrate his real talents for the first time. His lectures, which combined information with poetic and mystical insights, were very popular. He also helped to gain for the 'higher criticism' of the 'Old Testament', already well established on the continent, a popular hearing in England. This 'higher' criticism, which sought to apply form, source, and redaction criticism to the 'Bible' in the hope of establishing a historically accurate description of its composition and authorship, had long been treated with suspicion in English universities. But Nairne was able to convey its message in a way which did not appear to harm the religious faith of his students. 
From 1914 to 1922 Nairne was a canon of Chester Cathedral, where the stimulating effect of his scholarship and his personality was warmly welcomed. In 1917 he returned to Cambridge as fellow and dean of Jesus College; he was vicar of All Saints' Church until 1919, and was made Hulsean lecturer at the University of Cambridge in 1919-20, and regius professor of divinity from 1922, a year after his wife's death, to 1932. 
Nairne ignored university politics and the business of the theology faculty, finding them of no interest; but he had a wide personal influence upon undergraduates and dons alike. His lectures were found stimulating and inspiring by many, though those who sought easy answers to examination questions were apt to be disappointed. His scholarship, love of literature, and his interest in artists, poets, as well as men of science, made his influence wide. He treated all undergraduates as his intellectual equals, and was generous in his assessments of supposed infidels such as the poet Shelley, the philosopher J. M. E. McTaggart, and James Frazer, author of 'The Golden Bough', who he thought were in touch with spiritual realities and therefore almost good Christians. He formed a society for undergraduates called the Clouds, which met once a week in his own rooms to read Plato. These sessions were crowded and, after some years, a book to which all had contributed and which was inscribed to 'Nephelegereta' (as used by Homer of Zeus, namely, 'cloudgatherer') was presented to him by the members of the Clouds. 
Nairne's books were not written for specialists but contained much fine scholarship and insight. Pedants were apt to be a touch scornful of his popular and accessible style, Hebraists saying that he did not know his grammar, and the 'higher' critics that he made no contribution to their studies. It was true that Nairne was suspicious of the work of the higher critics, but his scholarly instincts, poetic sense, and religious piety made his opinions valued by many. His intellectual honesty meant that he saw more deeply than most. His book on the epistle to the 'Hebrews', 'The Epistle of Priesthood' (1913), his Hulsean lectures, 'The Faith of the New Testament' (1920), and 'The Life Eternal: Here and Now' in particular represent his characteristic style. 
Nairne was a canon of St George's Chapel, Windsor, from 1921 until his death, which took place at his home, The Cloisters, Windsor Castle, on 15 March 1936. In 1931 the University of St Andrews had conferred upon him the honorary degree of DD. 
Uninterested in worldly affairs, Nairne was a man of radiant charm and kindness, of alertness, of sympathy, of a goodness which compelled almost all who met him not only to like him but to love him. He gave away every penny earned from his canonry, though he left effects to the value of over $6000 after his death. An etching by Francis Dodd of 1933, the only known portrait of Nairne, was left to Jesus College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 35183


Namier, Sir Lewis Bernstein (1888-1960), historian, was born on 27 June 1888 at Wola Okrzejska in Russian Poland. According to family testimony the baby was presumed dead and revived only at the last minute. His antecedents and life were complex. His parents had just moved from Warsaw to a family estate at Wola Okrzejska; when he was two they moved again, to Kobylowloki in Austrian Poland, and when he was six to Nowosiolka Skalacka. Of gentry stock, his family were Polonized Jews, who had embraced Catholicism. His father, Joseph Bernsztajn vel Niemirowski (died 1922), was a lawyer, descended from distinguished Talmudic scholars; his mother was Anne, daughter of Maurice Theodor Sommersztajn, owner of several Galician estates. The peasantry in Galicia, for whom Namier developed great respect, were Ruthenian or Ukrainian, and adhered to the Orthodox church. As Jews, his family had been forced to change their name, and Namier subsequently changed his twice more. Many commentators have seen in Namier 'a search for identity' (Winkler, 2). The biography by his second wife gives a vivid account of his childhood, much of it dictated to her in his last months. Namier grew up with two powerful antipathies -- towards the Austrian (German) authorities, and towards Jews who tried to hide their origins by assimilating with the countries in which they found themselves. 
It took Namier time to find a congenial habitat. He was soon on bad terms with his father, yet Namier could expect to inherit the country estate purchased at Koszylowce, south of Lwow (Lemberg), in 1906. In that year he began to study law at Lwow University, but was driven away by antisemitic jeers. He transferred to Lausanne, where he could get help for the medical problems which plagued him all his life, but he soon pined for wider horizons. With Paris vetoed by his father, Namier arrived in London in 1907, enlisted at the London School of Economics to study economics, joined the Fabian Society, and was soon persuaded that Oxford was his natural home and history his proper study. In October 1908 he arrived at Balliol, an exotic young man, unmistakably Jewish, with a heavy accent, but with a reputation for brilliance. 
At Balliol Namier, known as Bernstein, did well and decided that England would be his country. In 1910 he changed his name by deed poll to Naymier, and in 1913, to Anglicize it more, to Namier. He gained a first in modern history in 1911, but in November 1911 failed to obtain a fellowship at All Souls. A. F. Pollard, an examiner, wrote that Namier had been 'the best man by far in sheer intellect', but that 'the Warden and majority of Fellows shied at his race' (Namier, 101). To augment the allowance from his father he began writing for newspapers, drawing on his knowledge of eastern Europe. Fearing lest his son should become a perpetual student, Namier's father urged him to move to America and join Louis Hammerling, a fellow Galician Jew, president of the Foreign Language Press. Namier sailed for New York in May 1913 and used the opportunity to read and consult manuscripts in the United States. According to Berlin, Hammerling found Namier's increasingly outspoken dislike of Germany unacceptable, and the arrangement was terminated (Berlin, 224). Namier thought once more of taking up law, but returned to England in just under a year. 
Soon after his return, war broke out; Namier volunteered at once for the Royal Flying Corps but was rejected for poor eyesight. He then managed to join the Royal Fusiliers but within five months was transferred to help the war effort more profitably as an expert adviser in the Foreign Office. He began a small book, 'Germany and Eastern Europe', published in 1915, with a friendly preface by H. A. L. Fisher. Namier's influence in the political intelligence department was exerted in favour of the subject nations of the Austro-Hungarian empire. In 1917 he published two short pamphlets, 'The Case of Bohemia' and 'The Czecho-Slovaks: an Oppressed Nationality'. He felt great sympathy for the Ukrainian nationalists. His support for the Poles was more guarded, since he suspected that, finding themselves for once on the winning side, they were likely to embrace wild expansionism. To Isaiah Berlin Namier subsequently, with characteristic extravagance, claimed to have been personally responsible for the breakup of the Habsburg empire in 1918: 'I may say', he confided, 'that I pulled it to pieces with my own hands' (Berlin, 224). 
The year 1919 found Namier, like many other young men, trying to rebuild his life. The estate at Koszylowce had been looted and though restored to his family was now part of Poland: worse, when his father died in 1922 Namier discovered that he had been disinherited in favour of his sister: he never saw his mother or sister again. To add to his problems, he had embarked in January 1917 on marriage with Clara Edeleff-Poniatowska (died 1945), a widow who seemed curiously vague about her former life, and proved highly strung and depressive. Balliol found Namier a temporary lectureship in April 1920. He contributed a chapter on the downfall of the Austro-Hungarian empire to Harold Temperley's official 'Peace Conference in Paris' (1921), subsequently reprinted in 'Vanished Supremacies' (1958). But though he flung himself into tutorial work, there was little time for his book on the origins of the American War of Independence and the lectureship was not renewed in 1921. Instead, Namier took up an offer of a well-paid job in Vienna and Prague representing a Lancashire cotton firm, with the advantage that he could send articles to the 'Manchester Guardian' and other papers. He hoped to save enough to support his own historical research. The first outcome was that Clara left him, ostensibly to go off with another man. A. J. P. Taylor, a young colleague of Namier's at Manchester in the 1930s, met her towards the end of her life, and thought her 'a bewitching character', but was not surprised that she had found Namier heavy and that he had found her exasperating (Taylor, 167-8). Namier supplied Clara's place by forming an attachment to another difficult woman, Marie Beer, whom he had first met when he was sixteen. 
It is not clear whether the cotton firm benefited much from Namier's services in Prague, nor, indeed, what those services were. He made many acquaintances, including Benes, sent dispatches home and, through playing the stock exchange, amassed a modest competence. His stay on the continent revived an interest in Zionism, first kindled by meeting Chaim Weizmann, president of the World Zionist Organization from 1920. Namier's attitude towards the Jewish question was almost purely political, and derived from his understanding of nationhood. If Czechs and Poles could have their own nation state, why could not Jews? They would then not have to submit to the servility of assimilation. He had little interest in any religion, and scant respect for priests or rabbis. The task of Zionists was to hold successive British governments to the pledge given in the Balfour declaration of 1917 for a national home in Palestine. Namier greatly valued his friendship with Blanche Dugdale (Baffy), a niece of Balfour, which not only gave him entree to country houses, but offered a link, however tenuous, with Balfour himself, still with some influence as president of the council. 
After three years Namier returned to London, engaged a secretary, and resumed work on his American book. He existed partly on capital, partly on loans from friends, and partly on grants from the Rhodes trustees. Baffy arranged for him to meet Harold Macmillan, another Balliol man, Conservative MP, and partner in the publishing house which agreed to take his book. 'The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George III' came out in January 1929 and was followed in 1930 by 'England in the Age of the American Revolution'. 
The reception of these books was not unanimous. Sir Richard Lodge in 'History' was dismissive. The Newcastle papers had long been known as a 'dust-heap', from which Namier had rescued some interesting details, but the title of the first book was misleading and over-ambitious ('History', 14, 1930, 269); of the second, Lodge noted that much time had been employed 'clearing the site' and that the story had only reached December 1762: 'it is not easy to forecast -- probably Mr Namier himself cannot do so -- what will be the ultimate proportions of this model' ('History', 16, 1930, 173). But D. H. Winstanley wrote that 'no previous writer has ever made so thorough and gallant an attempt to discover the actual workings of the political system of the eighteenth century' ('EngHR', 44, 1929, 657). The review which had the most dramatic consequences was by G. M. Trevelyan, doyen of those whig historians for whom Namier had so little respect. Trevelyan wrote of the 'Namier way': 'Mr. Namier is a new factor in the historical world' (Trevelyan, 238). Reading the review at tea, Professor Jacob at Manchester telegraphed at once to offer Namier the vacant chair of modern history. He was always grateful to Trevelyan and, characteristically, claimed to have repaid his debt by refusing ever to review Trevelyan's books. 
Manchester rescued Namier from several predicaments. In spring 1929 he had written that he expected to devote the rest of his life to the Zionist cause, and Weizmann had persuaded him to take on the political secretaryship of the Zionist Organization. But the movement was convulsed by political and financial problems, Namier was disliked by Orthodox Jews, and the salary proposed was inadequate. Manchester, when he took up post in October 1931, treated him with great consideration. Though he took teaching and examining seriously, he did little administration. He retained his house in London, returning there most weekends, and during the week stayed outside Manchester. Nevertheless, the promised continuation of his investigation into the origins of the American War of Independence did not appear. Different explanations have been offered. Taylor thought that Namier became easily bored. John Brooke, a disciple after the war, believed that his work was inhibited by nihilistic gloom. Structural analysis, as Lodge had hinted, made extremely heavy demands on the practitioner. Namier was far from inactive, continuing his work for Zionism, reviewing widely (and selling the copies), and submitting articles. His way of life, including so much travelling and personal secretarial assistance, was expensive, and he continued to give financial help to both Marie and Clara. Scholarly work, as he frequently complained, did not pay well. The Ford lectures, delivered at Oxford on the cabinet in 1933-4, were not published. The only scholarly publication before the Second World War was a very slim volume in 1937 correcting the errors in Sir John Fortescue's first volume of the correspondence of George III. Even that was based on a review in the 'Nation and Athenaeum' in 1927 (Namier, 199). Yet it was, in some ways, his most important service to historical scholarship, helping to raise the standard of editing throughout the profession, even if many people thought Namier's strictures severe. 
The outbreak of war found Namier preparing for a sabbatical year. Instead he was released by the university to act as liaison officer between the Jewish Agency and the government and spent the rest of the war in London. Much of his energy was devoted to attempting to persuade the government to authorize an independent Jewish fighting force: many ministers were afraid that it would be used to seize power in Palestine after the war, and demurred. Zionists quarrelled among themselves, and Isaiah Berlin's bleak judgement was that politically Namier was 'as great a liability as an asset' (Berlin, 223). 
The eight years between the end of the war and Namier's retirement from Manchester in 1953 saw his reputation at its height. His two eighteenth-century books were being taken on board by his fellow historians, rather than walked round as in pre-war days, and a stream of books of essays made his name known to a far wider public, as both sage and historian -- 'Conflicts' (1942), 'Facing East' (1947), 'Diplomatic Prelude' (1948), 'Europe in Decay' (1950), 'In the Nazi Era' (1952), and 'Avenues of History' (1952). The post-war world, recovering from fascism yet still afflicted by communism, was peculiarly receptive to his distaste for ideology: 'what shams and disasters political ideologies are apt to be' ('Human nature in politics', 'Personalities and Powers', 1955, 7). Recognition came at last and in abundance. The British Academy elected him a fellow in 1944. His Raleigh lecture, '1848: the revolution of the intellectuals' (1944), was followed by the Waynflete lectures on the German problem (1946-7); the Creighton lecture, 'Basic factors in nineteenth-century European history' (1952); the Romanes lecture, 'Monarchy and the party system' (1952); the Royal Academy of Arts lecture, 'George III: a study in personality' (1953); and the Enid Muir lecture at Newcastle, 'Country gentlemen in politics' (1954). Balliol elected him an honorary fellow in 1948 and he was knighted in 1952. Durham's honorary DLitt in 1952 was followed by honorary degrees from Oxford and Cambridge. 
Namier brooded that he had been passed over for chairs at Oxford, Cambridge, or London but even his private life took a turn for the better. Clara had died in 1945, and in 1947 he married a Russian emigree, Julia de Beausobre, 'nee' Kazarina (1893-1977), a widow, who devoted herself to his welfare and offered unstinted admiration. His conversion to Anglicanism, undertaken for his marriage, caused a painful breach with Weizmann who regarded it as an act of flagrant apostasy. 
As soon as he retired, Namier plunged into editing the modern volumes of the 'History of Parliament', taking particular responsibility for the period 1754-90. The project had got off to a false start in the 1930s when Josiah Wedgwood's volumes on the fifteenth century had been badly received ('EngHR', 53, 1938, 503-6). It was revived in 1951 and Namier settled down at the Institute of Historical Research with a small band of assistants to prepare the 1964 biographies and 314 accounts of the constituencies, grinding work cheered by tea-time reminiscing with his friend and fellow editor Romney Sedgwick. His zeal exposed him to further rebuffs when visits to Oxford and Cambridge revealed among fellow historians a marked lack of enthusiasm to join his great collective endeavour. He remained at his desk, conscious that his energy was ebbing fast, until the night before his death at St Mary's Hospital, London, on 19 August 1960. He was cremated at Golders Green on 24 August. 
Namier's achievements were greatly praised during his lifetime and unduly disparaged subsequently. On his chosen ground, the accession of George III, he made important and probably irreversible corrections to the traditional whiggish account. The king was cleared of the charge that he was a tyrant presiding over an orgy of corruption, though at the cost of portraying him as a naive and immature youth. Later on Namier was not so much repudiated as outflanked, by critics who pointed to the narrowness of his concerns, and his lack of interest in anything but political history. The technique of structural analysis, with which his name was inextricably linked as 'Namierism', offered, in his view, an escape from voluminous narrative. Though the attacks upon it, particularly by Herbert Butterfield in 'George III and the Historians' (1957), may seem hysterical, its limitations are very evident. There are great swathes of history where, for lack of evidence, structural analysis can hardly be applied. Even where it can, there is no guarantee that it will, in itself, generate interesting and important questions. It is by no means apparent how much the 135 pages devoted by Namier in 'England' to the relationship between Newcastle and Bute illuminate the problem of the American War of Independence. 
As Brooke pointed out, Namier's output was but 'a mere fragment' of what he had planned. His investigation of America was abandoned. The essays on modern European diplomacy, though historical journalism of a high order, were no substitute for the volume of European history he hoped to write. Both the 'History of Parliament' (1964) and the biography 'Charles Townshend' (1968) were left to Brooke to finish. Even in his best work, such as the 'Revolution of the Intellectuals', one is conscious of a lack of control. Explanations are not hard to find. Namier suffered from chronic ill health, including bad eyesight, increasing deafness, a damaged right hand, breathing difficulties, debilitating insomnia, and, at times, fear of insanity. In the face of these afflictions, his resilience was heroic. 
To the world Namier was a hard, combative man; yet he was vulnerable and saw himself ringed by enemies. There are innumerable testimonies, of which those by Berlin and Toynbee are the most charitable, to his awesome loquacity, which could empty any common room. He found life hard. His childhood, he told Lady Namier, had been 'a mental register of unforgettable rebuffs', and in old age an encounter at Manchester with a surly ticket-inspector was enough to set him brooding on the collapse of civilized values (Namier, 16, 300-01). Taylor found him 'a strange mixture of greatness and helplessness' (Taylor, 112), and Trevelyan, who had helped him to his chair, muttered, in his terse way, 'Great research worker, no historian' (Plumb, 18). 


@@@@@


doc= 35184


Narbeth, John Harper (1863-1944), naval architect, was born at Pembroke Dock, Wales, on 26 May 1863, the son of John Harper Narbeth and his wife, Anne Griffiths. He was the fourth child in a family of eight children. His father, after serving at Pembroke dockyard as a shipwright apprentice and writer, became a timber merchant. 
Narbeth's interest in the sea began at an early age, and his pastimes of boating and yachting led him to study the behaviour and designs of ships and small craft. He was indentured as shipwright apprentice at the dockyard in 1877, and in 1882, after a competitive examination, took a course of higher training at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. Three years later he was appointed to the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors, and became an assistant constructor at Portsmouth Dockyard. In 1888 he married Aquila Elizabeth (died 1931), daughter of W. J. Anstey, foreman shipwright, of Portsmouth. They had two sons, one of whom, John Harper Narbeth, also became a chief constructor at the Admiralty. 
In 1887 Narbeth was transferred to the staff of William H. White, director of naval construction at the Admiralty. After demonstrating his skill at design work he was eventually entrusted with the preparation of warship designs of gradually increasing size and importance, ultimately resulting in three types of battleship: 'King Edward VII' class (of which eight ships were built), 'Lord Nelson' class, and, most famous of all, the 'Dreadnought'. These ships were described by him in a paper read in 1922 before the Institution of Naval Architects. All were larger and more powerful than their forerunners. The 'Dreadnought' also embodied revolutionary changes recommended by a powerful committee over which Sir John Fisher had presided. They included an armament of all big guns, higher speed, turbine propulsion, and underwater protection. Sir Philip Watts, who had succeeded White at the Admiralty and was a member of the committee, prepared, with Narbeth's assistance, a number of alternative designs; the Board of Admiralty selected one which became the 'Dreadnought'. Narbeth completed the detailed design, finding solutions to the many problems encountered with such an innovative vessel. 
On promotion in 1912 to be a chief constructor, health reasons prompted Narbeth to request a change of duties, and he was made directly responsible to the director for the design and construction of minor war vessels; these included high-speed motor boats, oil-carrying ships, mine-sweepers, and sloops. He made improvements in the design of each of these widely differing types of vessel. He became joint secretary to the royal commission on fuel and engines under the chairmanship of Fisher. During the First World War Narbeth designed the 'Flower'-class sloops, with special design measures and procedures to allow for these vessels and mine-sweepers to be built in large numbers in small shipyards in record time. 
Improvements in aircraft during and after the war and their widening use in warfare led to demands from the navy for special ships to carry them. Sir Eustace Tennyson-D'Eyncourt, who had succeeded Watts as director, arranged for Narbeth, who from 1919 was assistant director, to deal with the new designs involved. A few seaplane carriers were first obtained by modifying merchant ships: then, by converting warships, notably the fast battle cruisers of 'Courageous' class, carriers were produced with a deck suitable for landing or launching aircraft. Narbeth again contributed many innovative ideas to these projects, and worked closely with a joint Admiralty and Air Ministry technical committee over which he presided (1918-23), resulting in ships which when completed were satisfactory to pilots and naval officers alike. 
Narbeth retired in 1923. He was remembered for having an absolute fearlessness in confronting authority on matters of principle and a complete stubbornness if he believed he was right. In later years he became regarded as the 'father' of the Institution of Naval Architects. His services were recognized by appointment as MVO (1906), CBE (1920), and CB (1923). During his retirement he qualified as a Methodist local preacher. He died at 63 Elmbridge Road, Gloucester, on 19 May 1944 and was cremated on 23 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 35185


Nares, Sir George Strong (bap. 1831, d. 1915), Arctic explorer, was born at Clytha, Monmouthshire, and baptized on 22 May 1831 at the nearby church of St Bridget, Llansanffraid, the third son and sixth child of Commander William Henry Nares RN (1788/9-1867) and his first wife, Elizabeth Rebecca Gould (1796/7-1836), daughter of John Dodd, of Redbourn, Hertfordshire. He entered the navy in 1845 from the Royal Naval School, New Cross, as prize cadet. After serving as a midshipman in HMS 'Canopus', Nares joined the 'Havannah' on the Australian station, 1848-51. He showed courage in the attempted rescue of a man overboard. The future hydrographer G. H. Richards, a passenger in the 'Havannah' on her return voyage, suggested, when Nares was looking for work after passing the lieutenant's examination early in 1852, that he apply to join the Franklin search expedition preparing to sail under Sir Edward Belcher. Nares was appointed mate on HMS 'Resolute'. From winter quarters at Dealy Island, to the south of Melville Island, he took part in several sledge journeys. 
After returning to England in 1854 Nares was promoted lieutenant and specialized in gunnery. He served for two years in the Mediterranean in the 'Conqueror' before joining the staff of the training ship 'Illustrious' in 1858. On 22 June in the same year he married Mary (died 1905), eldest daughter of William Grant, banker of Portsmouth. They had four sons and six daughters. The 'Illustrious' was succeeded by the larger 'Britannia' in 1859. Nares wrote 'The Naval Cadet's Guide' (1860) which, under the title 'Seamanship', ran to several editions and was regarded as the best such manual of its day. In 1862 he was promoted to commander and in September 1863 took command of the training ship 'Boscawen'. 
In July 1865, Nares's seagoing career took a further turn with his appointment to the paddle steamer 'Salamander' on the east coast of Australia. His duties there included surveying. In 1868 he took command of the 'Newport' for hydrographical work in the Mediterranean, which included a survey of the Gulf of Suez via the Suez Canal (opened November 1869). He was promoted to captain in December 1869. In the 'Shearwater' (1871-2) he did similar work, including oceanographic research on the Gibraltar currents in collaboration with W. B. Carpenter. It was this work that led to Nares's appointment as captain of HMS 'Challenger', a steam-assisted corvette of 2306 tons dispatched by the government in December 1872 on a three-year voyage of circumnavigation devoted to oceanographic exploration. 
Nares commanded this influential expedition, the first to undertake systematic investigation of the deep ocean for scientific purposes, for two years. His officers were all naval surveyors, and there was also a team of civilian scientists, led by Charles Wyville Thomson, on board. The methods employed to sample the life and conditions of the deep sea owed much to surveying techniques recently developed in connection with submarine telegraphy, and the expedition's work had practical as well as scientific objectives. The first year was spent in the Atlantic. Early in 1874, between Cape Town and Australia, the 'Challenger' made a southerly detour, calling at Marion, Kerguelen, and Heard islands, and continuing to 66 degree 40' S, 78 degree 22' E, before being turned back by ice -- being the first steam vessel to cross the Antarctic circle. The dredging of glaciated rock fragments in the deep-sea muds helped in the revival of interest in geographical exploration of Antarctic regions towards the end of the century. 
Nares's leadership was an important factor in the expedition's success. The arduous and repetitive nature of the deep-sea operations, and the potential conflicts of interest between the different sections of the shipboard community on such a voyage, could have led to friction but he was perceived as a fair as well as a firm commander. The smooth running of the project made it possible for the new Conservative government to recall him in November 1874, when the expedition still had 18 months to run, to lead the British Arctic expedition of 1875-6, in the vessels 'Alert' and 'Discovery', the chief aim of which was to reach the north pole. Reports of the American expeditions of Isaac Israel Hayes, 1860-61, and C. F. Hall, 1870-73, had revived the belief in an open polar sea and suggested that land extended far to the north, west of Robeson Channel. Both these theories proved to be wrong, but at the time they indicated the Smith Sound route as the best line of advance to the pole. The vessels sailed on 29 May 1875 and reached winter quarters on the coast of Grinnell Land (Ellesmere Island), the 'Discovery' in latitude 81 degree 44' N., and the 'Alert', with Nares, in latitude 82 degree 27' N 'the most northerly point hitherto reached in the Canadian Arctic' (Levere, 281). The following spring sledge parties were sent out. That led by Lieutenant Pelham Aldrich of the 'Alert' explored the north coast of Ellesmere Island westwards. They reached its most northerly point (Cape Columbia) and continued to Cape Alfred Ernest (Alert Point) before turning back, having charted some 400 km of new coastline (Hattersley-Smith, 121). Lieutenant Lewis A. Beaumont of the 'Discovery' followed the coast of Greenland northwards to Sherard Osborn Fjord. Meanwhile, a party led by Commander A. H. Markham of the 'Alert' struck out over the ice in an attempt to get to the pole. They reached 83 degree 20' N, a heroic achievement considering that the pack ice was extremely rough, and also drifting south almost as fast as they were travelling northwards. Their experience and an outbreak of scurvy affecting both ships led Nares to call off the entire expedition and return home early, in the late summer of 1876. 
This was a morally courageous action which undoubtedly prevented further loss of life. Nares was a humane man, but acting within the rigid structures of the Victorian navy. When one of the sub-lieutenants shot a seal (a vital source of fresh food for the scurvy sufferers) he 'was reprimanded by Nares for disturbing the ship's company at divine service. However, he was later congratulated in the wardroom by the captain on his marksmanship' (Hattersley-Smith, 124). It would be unfair to blame Nares alone for mistakes in planning the expedition, though he was responsible for the low priority given to scientific work (perhaps a reflection of his experiences in the 'Challenger'.) In spite of this, valuable scientific as well as geographical results had been obtained. Nares wrote a narrative of the expedition, 'A Voyage to the Polar Sea' (1878). 
An Admiralty committee of inquiry subsequently blamed Nares for the outbreak of scurvy, on the grounds that the sledging parties had not been carrying lime juice. That this was due to the logistical difficulties involved was in their eyes no excuse. In spite of this slur on his competence, which was unfair in that the expedition's experience did not bear out this over-simplistic conclusion, Nares, who had been elected FRS in 1875, was created KCB in 1876, and received the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1877 and a gold medal from the Geographical Society of Paris in 1879. In 1878 he was again in command of the 'Alert' during the survey of the Strait of Magellan. From 1879 to 1896 he was employed in the harbour department of the Board of Trade, having retired from active service in 1886. From 1896 to 1910 he was a conservator of the River Mersey. He was promoted rear-admiral in 1887 and vice-admiral in 1892. 
Nares was an able and conscientious naval officer who wished to rise in the service. His search for promising openings, rather than great personal enthusiasm for science and exploration, explains the several changes in direction taken by his naval career, but he contributed to both, especially through his competent leadership of the 'Challenger' expedition, whose findings presented the first substantial body of scientific information on the interior of the ocean. As a young officer he had dark hair and beard, but began to go bald in his twenties. He was described as quiet and reserved, with an equable disposition, but also as a man of action, backed by 'sound sense and good judgment' ('GJ', 257). Nares died at his home, 10 Uxbridge Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 15 January 1915 and was buried in Long Ditton churchyard on 19 January. His name was given to Nares harbour in the Admiralty Islands, the Nares deep in the north Atlantic, Nares Land in northern Greenland, two capes in the Canadian Arctic, and Mount Nares in Victoria Land (Antarctica). The seaway dividing Ellesmere Island from Greenland is now called Nares Strait. 
Two of Nares's sons entered the navy: Lieutenant George Edward Nares died in 1905; Vice-Admiral John Dodd Nares (1877-1957) became assistant hydrographer of the navy and director of the International Hydrographic Bureau at Monaco. 


@@@@@


doc= 35186


Nash, Paul (1889-1946), painter, was born in London on 11 May 1889, the elder son of William Harry Nash (died 1929), barrister and recorder of Abingdon, and his first wife, Caroline Maude (died 1910), daughter of Captain Milbourne Jackson RN. His father's family came from Buckinghamshire farming stock, his mother's belonged to the navy, for which he was at first intended. But, with the capacity of any artist to fail where his heart is not engaged, Nash did not pass the entrance examination and so returned to finish his schooling at St Paul's School, London, which he left at seventeen. He avoided the alternative careers of architecture and banking, and pursued his interests in black and white illustration. After a short time at Chelsea Polytechnic school of art (1906-8) and then at night school at Bolt Court (the London County Council School of Photo-Engraving and Lithography), Nash went, with the encouragement of William Rothenstein, to the Slade School of Fine Art in 1910. He learned little there and left after a year. His earliest work was from his imagination, stimulated by the art and poetry of William Blake and Dante Gabriel Rossetti, the work of later Pre-Raphaelites, the early W. B. Yeats, and the plays of Gordon Bottomley, who encouraged him and became his friend. Nash earned modest fees from designing bookplates in a late arts and crafts style, and tried his hand, without obvious success, as a poet. 
Unlike some of his contemporaries at the Slade School -- Mark Gertler, C. R. W. Nevinson, William Roberts, and Edward Wadsworth -- Nash remained uninfluenced by the two post-impressionist exhibitions organized by Roger Fry in 1910 and 1912. One day the painter Sir William Richmond said to him, 'My boy, you should go in for Nature' (Nash, 105). He did, looking at it more directly, and drawing it on the spot. The 'nature' that he went in for, although usually without human beings, was always peopled, if not by the 'star-inwrought' visions of his youth, then by what Nash himself many years later called the 'genius loci': something which was not at first formal, but evanescent, a quality of light and imagination, and which later developed a fantastic, tangible personality expressed most fully by the monoliths and monster trees of his later work. 
Nash had his first one-man show, of ink and wash drawings, at the prestigious Carfax Gallery, London, in 1912, and in 1913 shared an exhibition at the Dorien Leigh Gallery with his brother, John Northcote Nash. In 1914 Nash married Margaret Theodosia (died 1960), daughter of Naser Odeh, formerly priest in charge of St Mary's mission and the pro-cathedral, Cairo; there were no children. At the outbreak of war he enlisted in the Artists' Rifles; in 1916 he was commissioned in the Hampshire regiment and by March 1917 was in the Ypres salient. After four months he was invalided home as the result of an accident, but during those months he had spent all his time making drawings which were shown at the Goupil Gallery. Strongly recommended by supporters including William Rothenstein and Edward Marsh, Nash was appointed an official war artist under the newly initiated scheme run by the department of information under John Buchan (later Lord Tweedsmuir). Nash returned to the front as an official artist in November 1917 in the immediate aftermath of the battle of Passchendaele. The drawings he made then, of shorn trees in ruined and flooded landscapes, were the works that made Nash's reputation. They were shown at the Leicester Galleries in 1918 together with his first efforts at oil painting, in which he was self-taught and quickly successful, though his drawings made in the field had more immediate public impact. From April of that year until early in 1919 Nash was engaged on paintings commissioned by the department of information for the newly established Imperial War Museum, of which the largest and most famous is 'The Menin Road'. Nash, who had also worked alongside the Canadian forces at Vimy Ridge, was among the select group of artists which was also commissioned to make a large painting for the Canadian war records ('A Night Bombardment', National Gallery of Canada). His poetic imagination, instead of being crushed by the terrible circumstances of war, had expanded to produce terrible images -- terrible because of their combination of detached, almost abstract, appreciation and their truth to appearance. 
Nash's first note for his autobiography for the years following 1918 was 'Struggles of a war artist without a war' (Nash, 218). Disoriented, at first, and uncertain how to capitalize on success gained as a result of events people wanted to put behind them, Nash, over the following years, illustrated books, designed costumes and scenery for Sir James Barrie's 'The Truth about the Russian Dancers', was for a short time an instructor in design at the Royal College of Art, and became a leader of the revival of wood-engraving. Two important British illustrated books of the decade were Nash's 'Places' (1922), landscape wood-engravings accompanied by brief prose poems, and his 'Genesis' (1924) for the Nonesuch Press. It was in this decade that Nash evolved his characteristic watercolour style, his debts to Cezanne in no way concealing the depth of his kinship with the British watercolour tradition back to the eighteenth century. As an oil painter Nash developed differently, assimilating now the lessons of post-impressionism that had passed him by earlier on, as well as more recent achievements of the Paris school. But his sharp and often high-keyed colours are his own, and though Nash felt now the need to broaden his understanding of contemporary painting, he never permitted his own personality to become obscured. 
In 1919 Nash moved to Dymchurch in Kent, beginning his well-known series of pictures of the sea, the breakwaters, and the long wall that prevents the sea from flooding Romney Marsh. Dymchurch wall and the marsh extending as far behind as the eye could see, with its dykes, culverts, and sheep pens, made an indelible impression on him, and he returned as late as 1937 to rework major Dymchurch designs such as 'Winter Sea' (York City Art Gallery) and 'Dymchurch Steps' (National Gallery of Canada). Nash also continued to paint the friendlier landscapes of his native territory, the Chilterns. He developed the flower-like forms that distinguish his later pictures, and also the study of trees, especially beechwoods, whose sun-crossed verticals inspired the structure of his near-abstract work, then just begun but in the next decade to be explored further. A second exhibition at the Leicester Galleries in 1924 confirmed Nash among the two or three leaders of British painting, while a third and particularly successful show at the same gallery in 1928 stimulated this increasingly self-critical artist to recognize that the formulae developed since 1918 would become a handicap unless he took greater risks, set himself new tasks, and explored areas of modern continental art that had bypassed England in the atmosphere of post-war cultural retrenchment. 
From 1929 changes were evident in Nash's painting that were to lead him further towards abstraction, a direction Nash ultimately admitted he was unsuited to. He also explored the metaphysical art of the Italian Giorgio de Chirico, a highly productive encounter which was to lead him towards his own personal version of surrealism. His understanding of modern art in Paris was greatly stimulated by incursions into art criticism, writing in the early thirties for the 'Listener' and the 'Week-End Review'. Though he soon tired of regular criticism, Nash became a distinguished essayist, writing for the 'Architectural Review', 'Country Life', and other journals up to the outbreak of the Second World War. His eye for the quirky character of out-of-the-way places, and the expression in his articles of feeling for the severe classicism of the best British design, connecting Adam and Chippendale with the modern movement, reflect his keen perception of the character of British taste. Nash's 'Shell Guide' to 'Dorset' (1936), one of the first to be commissioned by John Betjeman for the series he edited for Shell-Mex, showed Nash's skill in reading the past through architectural survivals and the lineaments of the landscape. 
The ten years from 1929 to the Second World War brought a new freedom in the different areas of Nash's many activities. He travelled to America (as British representative on the jury of the Carnegie International Exhibition, 1931) and in Europe (though his English roots seem to have left him always a little uneasy abroad). In 1933 Nash founded Unit One, the group of experimental painters, sculptors, and architects which included Henry Moore, Ben Nicholson, Barbara Hepworth, and Wells Coates among others. He was president of the Society of Industrial Artists, 1932-4, on the committee of the first International Surrealist Exhibition (London, New Burlington Galleries, 1936), had exhibitions at the Redfern and Leicester galleries, and showed at the Venice Biennale in 1938. During all this time he designed fabrics, posters (notably for Shell-Mex), book jackets, endpapers, and so on, the execution of which he always supervised with scrupulous care. Nash began using a camera in 1931 both as a way of recording ideas for possible pictures and as images and compositions that gave pleasure in themselves. During this time he struggled with increasingly serious ill health due to asthma, for which he tried living at Rye, Swanage in Dorset, and in Hampstead, where he stayed until the outbreak of war. In 1930 he had begun his illustrations for Sir Thomas Browne's 'Urne Buriall' and 'The Garden of Cyrus'. Sir Herbert Read has stressed how much Browne and Nash were akin in spirit. It was Nash's metaphysical wit combined with his odd, rather bookish sense of visual incongruities that led him to adopt his highly personal attitude to surrealism. For him, surrealism was less an international movement than a licence to paint as he chose within the terms of modern practice. Because he was neither mordant nor rebellious his work had none of the shock tactics of continental surrealism but retained the sweetness of the English landscape, the uncertainties of the English weather, and the whimsicalities of a cultivated English mind. His excursions into abstract painting had the same personal characteristics. 
Nash was fascinated by evidence of prehistory, stones and mounds in fields, and in the personalities of natural stones and flowers and twisted tree roots, and dwelt upon them both in his painting and in his writing. He started in 1937 an autobiography which was published posthumously, in 1949, as 'Outline'. It traces the course of his life only to 1914; it is much concerned with the magic of childhood, and the travails as well as the excitements of growing up and facing the world. He saw 1914 and the war as a caesura, the close of an era. 'Outline' is a perfect vignette and it is not perhaps surprising that Nash never took the story further. He wrote with elegance and heart; his observations of himself and others were shrewd, humorous, and searching. He was a witty man who could also inspire wit in others since his rapturous reception of remarks sharpened people's intelligence when talking to him. No nuance was lost. 
When war broke out in 1939 Nash, though already a very sick man, was unwilling to forgo the kind of public role he had had in the First World War, or to retreat from positions of leadership which he felt it the duty of the experienced and successful to offer to younger men. He moved to Oxford, living at 106 Banbury Road, opened a bureau to help artists find the least wasteful kinds of work for their capabilities, and became a war artist to the Air Ministry, later transferring to the Ministry of Information. This war disturbed Nash but did not change his art as the last one had. His style and his habits were formed, and in the new war he treated his new subjects as he had treated those he had been thinking about for so long. His late paintings, both oils and watercolours, are alternately brilliant and sombre in colour with the light of setting suns and rising moons spreading over wooded and hilly landscapes. Not many of his new war paintings bear any relation to the desolate wastes of 1917, among the few being 'Totes Meer' (Tate collection), a sea of broken, twisted German aeroplane wrecks on a dump outside Oxford. The disparity was partly due to the different nature of the wars, but much more to the fact that in 1917 the whole of his outraged inexperience was at the service of the war, whereas in 1940 the war was made to serve his experience. Aeroplanes were domesticated to his canvas as tree trunks or stones had been between the wars. Such an attitude was by then an artist's only remedy, his only chance of survival. On the whole, his official patrons were disappointed by his poetical aeroplanes. His last works were of flowers, in particular sunflowers, and landscapes, and giant flowers dominating landscapes. 
Nash had a noteworthy sense of order and of the niceties of presentation; his pictures were beautifully framed, drawings mounted, his studio precisely and decoratively tidy, and oddments which he collected were worked up into compositions (found objects). In his life his sense of fitness extended, even on the most ordinary occasions, to his clothes. His scarf and dressing gown in the morning would be fit for a play; his suits and his ties, matched, brushed, and pressed as though by a valet. All this with his black hair, brilliant blue eyes, and fine profile made him seem a very exquisite person. But his features never stayed put, to be admired; they were mobile, sensitive to atmosphere and -- this was his saving grace -- ironical. Nash died at 35 Boscombe Spa Road, Bournemouth, on 11 July 1946 and was buried on 17 July in Langley church, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 35187


Nash, Sir Walter (1882-1968), prime minister of New Zealand, was born at 93 Mill Street, Kidderminster, Worcestershire, on 12 February 1882, the son of Arthur Alfred Nash (died 1913), a wool weaver and dyer, and later a clerk, and his wife, Amelia Randle (died 1919), also a weaver. He had four elder brothers and one younger sister. Nash was educated at St John's church school in Kidderminster, beginning at the age of three. He soon revealed an exceptional memory and won a scholarship to King Charles I Grammar School, but the family could not afford the required uniform, so he left school when he was eleven. Thereafter he had a variety of jobs, from messenger boy to an analysis clerk in the Ariel bicycle works in Birmingham, where the family had moved about 1896. Then he opened two sweet and tobacco shops in Selly Oak, where on 16 June 1906 he married Lotty May (1880?-1961), head assistant at the Selly Oak post office and the daughter of Thomas Eaton, a plumber. They had three sons. 
Apart from helping his father, a Conservative Party agent, on election days, and showing a keen interest in land taxation, Nash revealed little concern for politics in England. He began, however, the very extensive reading which assisted his later political career. 
His wife wanted to travel, and in 1909 Nash sold his business and sailed for New Zealand with about $800. He settled in Wellington and entered a partnership in a firm of tailors. One of his partners misled him about the firm's debts and Nash lost what money remained after furnishing a house. Then he became a commercial traveller in cloths for suits, and proved a very successful salesman. 
In Wellington, Nash became very active as a fund-raiser for the Church of England Men's Society, until the bishop discovered that he thought usury a sin and had refused to deposit the funds at interest. Through a radical parson he met the leaders of the political labour movement, Harry Holland and Peter Fraser. He was angry at the brutal actions of special police (mounted farmers) during the 1913 strike, and he joined the New Zealand Labour Party, formed in 1916. His socialism was not Marxist. He was, rather, a Christian socialist, whose thought was chiefly influenced by reading John Ruskin, William Morris, F. D. Maurice, and Lev Tolstoy. In 1916 he became a partner (and accountant) in a firm of tailors in New Plymouth, where he started the first Labour Party branch, and where in 1919 he stood with other Labour candidates unsuccessfully in the municipal elections. His introduction of profit sharing in his firm led to trouble with the chief partner (and suggested that he was not perhaps born to make profits). 
Nash set off for England, where he acquired the New Zealand agencies for several publishers. He represented the New Zealand Labour Party at the Second Socialist International in Geneva in 1920. There he met Sidney Webb, F. W. Jowett, and other famous socialists. He spoke once only, criticizing Webb's report on socialization as disguised capitalism. 
After returning to New Zealand, Nash opened a bookshop and publisher's agency in Wellington -- work more to his taste than selling cloths or suits. But in 1922 he was elected secretary of the Labour Party, and by the mid-1920s this took up all his time. Nash was a near perfect secretary. He (and Fraser) made the Labour Party into a national organization. Nash introduced efficient office methods, raised funds, and opened branches. He remembered every detail -- indeed his memory for facts, figures, and names of people was extraordinary. Most of the other Labour leaders had trade-union, and some of them revolutionary, socialist backgrounds. Nash brought an element of middle-class and Christian respectability. 
As well as working for the party Nash helped start the Institute of International Affairs and the Institute of Pacific Affairs. He represented New Zealand at conferences of the latter in Hawaii and in Canada, where he met many leading figures and gained in confidence. His knowledge of world affairs was exceeded by only a handful of people in New Zealand. 
After two unsuccessful attempts, in a by-election in 1929 Nash was elected to parliament as the member for Hutt in Wellington, though he also continued as party secretary until 1932. While neither was the leader (Holland and then M. J. Savage held the official position), Fraser and Nash played the biggest part in formulating the policies which, in time of depression, led to the election of the first Labour government in 1935. Nash wrote the election manifesto. He became minister of finance, customs, and later marketing in Savage's ministry (1935-40) and minister of finance and deputy prime minister under Peter Fraser (1940-49). He and Fraser (whose intelligence and political shrewdness Nash greatly admired) made an outstanding team. Nash's contribution to the extensive reforms of 1935-8 was very great. He introduced a system of guaranteed prices for dairy produce. Although caucus rejected his own income-related contributory scheme of pensions, he played a major role in formulating and (as minister of social security) piloting through parliament in 1938 the great system of pensions, child allowances, and free medicine which was the most extensive system of social security in the world at that time. 
In 1936-7 Nash spent months in England unsuccessfully trying to negotiate a new trade agreement whereby Britain would buy virtually all New Zealand's exports at agreed prices and New Zealand would import an equivalent value of British goods. In 1939 he again visited London trying to raise funds to redeem a maturing loan. New Zealand was suffering from over-importing as a result of local inflation, and Nash reacted rather belatedly by introducing import licensing. To this British leaders objected. Nash was given a rough time and succeeded in raising funds only on most arduous terms. Ironically, within a few months New Zealand was at war on Britain's side and Britain was taking New Zealand exports under a bulk purchase agreement. 
By 1940 it was clear that the British could not defend New Zealand against attack. In November 1941, just before Pearl Harbor, Nash was appointed minister to Washington -- New Zealand's first diplomatic representative in a foreign country. In the United States he was an outstanding success at his chief task, getting New Zealand known. He was a member of the Pacific war council and, for a time, of the war cabinet in London. He retained his cabinet rank in New Zealand and returned temporarily to present his 1943 budget. 
Much of Nash's time was taken up with post-war planning. In 1944 he chaired a meeting of the International Labour Organization; he attended the international meetings at Bretton Woods, Geneva, and Havana at which the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were created. At these meetings he took an active part. Their aim was to improve post-war economic conditions and to decrease the risk of future depression and war. The Labour caucus refused to agree to New Zealand joining the IMF -- and opposition leaders such as Sidney Holland agreed with the Labour majority. The IMF was criticized, among other reasons, for involving restrictions on New Zealand's independence. 
In 1949 the Fraser government lost office. Peter Fraser died in 1950 and Nash became leader of the opposition, to be confronted almost immediately with one of the greatest crises in his career. A wage dispute involving the partly communist-led Waterside Workers' Union in January 1951 encouraged the National Party government to declare a state of emergency and take a range of draconian actions against the unionists and their families. Nash spoke in support of the rights of the workers, but he was much criticized by an anti-union (and cold war) public for saying that his party was 'neither for nor against' the strikers. Labour was defeated in a snap election in 1951 and again in 1954, when many voters cast protest votes for Social Credit, not Labour. 
At last, in 1957, at the age of seventy-five, Nash became prime minister, elected on a policy which included increased family benefits and pensions, easier access to housing loans, and a tax rebate of up to $100 when the pay-as-you-earn method of tax collection was introduced. On the day he took office he was informed that overseas funds had dropped disastrously because of over-importing. It seemed like 1939 all over again. This time the government probably overreacted with its severe 'black budget' and import controls. In the circumstances of economic severity, and with a parliamentary majority of only one, the government's scope was restricted. It did abolish compulsory military training, introduce equal pay in the civil service, and carry out the reforms mentioned above. It also promoted industrial development. But the public recalled with disappointment the contrast between Labour's promises and the financial stringency which followed. The party was defeated in the 1960 election. 
Nash was less impressive as prime minister than as minister of finance. Although he was quite extraordinarily energetic, he was almost equally dilatory in making decisions. He attended endless petty functions from which a prime minister could have been excused for more exacting duties. He seemed too absorbed in details rather than in broad policy decisions. He was, as always, in some respects, inconsiderate of his assistants. He himself needed only four or so hours' sleep (plus catnaps) and he expected others to be available as required at almost all times. Increasing fame was paralleled by vanity. He amassed the largest private collection of papers in New Zealand, which filled his garage and, after culling, weighed 10 tons. Every scrap referring to his career -- even air tickets -- was filed away. 
While prime minister Nash travelled abroad constantly, talking to Khrushchov, de Gaulle, Macmillan, Eisenhower. The British high commissioner in New Zealand, Sir George Mallaby, wrote that he was the only New Zealand politician with 'some pretensions to being a world figure' and that 'other world statesmen were ready to listen' (Mallaby, 78). Nash led New Zealand delegations to every conceivable conference. He continued as leader of the opposition until 1963 and was an MP until his death. His active sympathy for the underdog remained undiminished to the end, as did his hatred of militarism. In 1965 he spoke vehemently at the first two teach-ins against the Vietnam War. 
Nash was sworn of the privy council in 1946 and was appointed CH in 1959 and GCMG in 1965. He received honorary doctorates from Cambridge, Victoria University of Wellington, Tufts College, and Temple University. He entered Hutt Hospital, Wellington, after a heart attack on 21 May 1968 and died there on 4 June. His remains were cremated at Karori crematorium, Wellington, on 7 June. 
Keith Sinclair', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35188


Nathan, Harry Louis, first Baron Nathan (1889-1963), lawyer and public servant, was born at 36 Bassett Road, North Kensington, London, on 2 February 1889, the elder son of Michael Henry Nathan ('b'. 1852) and his wife, Constance (died 1949), daughter of Louis Beaver, jeweller and silversmith, of Manchester. For reasons of health his father retired from his business as a fine art publisher when he was about fifty but continued his activities as a justice of the peace and as a keen Liberal in politics. 
Nathan was educated at St Paul's School, London, where he was a cadet lieutenant in the corps, of which the future Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery of Alamein was a member, and vice-president and treasurer of the Union Debating Society. It was perhaps due to his numerous extra-curricular activities that he failed to obtain a scholarship at Balliol, and he decided not to go up to Oxford as a commoner, a decision he often regretted later. Instead, he became an articled clerk, was admitted a solicitor in 1913, and became junior partner to Herbert Oppenheimer, a brilliant lawyer with a good commercial practice. 
As an original territorial officer Nathan reported for duty with the Royal Fusiliers when war broke out in August 1914. He served in Malta and then in Gallipoli, and was promoted captain, then major, and as lieutenant-colonel commanded his battalion, a unit of the 29th division, during the evacuations at both Suvla Bay and Helles. Subsequently the battalion was sent to France in time for the first battle of the Somme in July 1916. Shot through the back of the head by a sniper, Nathan was in hospital for eighteen months but made a remarkable recovery, although the after-effects lasted for many years. 
After returning to his firm Nathan was introduced to Sir Alfred Mond, who became a client. This opened up a new field of interest as Mond was an enthusiastic supporter of the Zionist movement. Nathan became legal adviser to the Zionist Organization, to the economic board of Palestine, and later to Pinhas Rutenberg who founded the Palestine Electric Company and to Moses Novomeyski who formed the Palestine Potash Company in 1930 to extract potash from the Dead Sea. During the Second World War it supplied half the potash needed by Great Britain. 
As a power in the Liberal Party, Mond was helpful to Nathan in his political career also. Unsuccessful as the Liberal candidate for Whitechapel and St George's in 1924, Nathan won North-East Bethnal Green in 1929. In his maiden speech he attacked the government proposal to authorize the Treasury to guarantee loans of $25 million without stating the precise nature of the public utility schemes to be aided. He was soon recognized by the house as an expert on economic and financial matters. 
When Ramsay MacDonald formed his National Government in the summer of 1931 Nathan followed Sir Herbert Samuel, the leader of what was left of the Liberal Party, in supporting the new government on the ground that its immediate function was to put the national finances on a proper basis. After the general election in October in which the Conservatives gained an overwhelming majority, Nathan was disappointed by the course taken by the new government, stating that it was a fraud under a false alias. He crossed the floor of the house in February 1933 and sat as an independent Liberal for eighteen months before joining the Labour Party. He was bitterly attacked for betraying the Liberal Party but his action was a courageous one, both from the political standpoint and from that of his private interest, because a Labour solicitor might not be popular with the business people who were his clients. 
At the general election of 1935 Nathan fought South Cardiff in the Labour interest, but did no more than reduce his opponent's majority -- a failure due in part to a libel published by the 'Western Mail' on the morning of the election for which the newspaper subsequently made a public apology to Nathan in court and paid a substantial sum by way of agreed damages. In April 1937 at a by-election Nathan was returned to the house as Labour member for Central Wandsworth. He became chairman of a committee known first as the territorial army public interest committee and later as the national defence public interest committee, formed to encourage recruiting first for the territorials, then also for the Auxiliary Air Force, and finally also for civil defence. Before war broke out Nathan had realized that soldiers would need help with their home problems and with the agreement of the authorities the Army Welfare Service was built up in the early days of the war. Nathan became command welfare officer of eastern command and of London district, relinquishing the former in 1941. When in 1943 the Army Council put welfare in London under an assistant adjutant-general it thanked him for his 'outstanding part in welfare work', of which he was the pioneer. 
While Neville Chamberlain was still prime minister Attlee asked him to recommend Nathan for a peerage so as to strengthen Labour representation in the Lords. Before this could be done Churchill had succeeded Chamberlain. Nathan was created a baron in June 1940 and Ernest Bevin was elected member of parliament for Central Wandsworth. The suggestion that Nathan's peerage was used to make a place for Bevin was not correct. Nathan chose as his motto in his heraldic arms the words 'Labor nobilitat'. 
When Attlee became prime minister in 1945 Nathan went to the War Office as under-secretary of state and therefore vice-president of the Army Council. In October 1946 he was promoted to be minister of civil aviation and sworn of the privy council. This was an entirely new field: he had many problems to tackle, notably the development of the state corporations set up under the 'Civil Aviation Act' of 1946. 
In May 1948 Nathan was obliged to resign from the government owing to the advanced age of his senior partner. He continued active in public affairs and in 1950 became chairman of the charitable trusts committee whose report in 1952 on necessary changes in the law became the foundation of the 'Charities Act' of 1960. In 1957, in collaboration with A. R. Barrowclough, he published 'Medical Negligence'. He had served as crown representative on the British Medical Council, was for many years chairman of the governors of the Westminster Hospital group, and chairman of the executive of the British Empire Cancer Campaign. He was also chairman of the Wolfson Foundation, president of the Royal Geographical Society, and chairman of the Royal Society of Arts. 
As a young man Nathan had been one of the managers of the Brady Street Club in Whitechapel, the oldest of the London Jewish boys' clubs. Throughout his life he continued his interest in training for the young, such as the Maccabian associations which stressed the importance of rendering Jewish youth capable of self-defence. In 1950 he was president of the European organizing committee when the third Maccabiah games were held at Tel Aviv. It was then that he inspected the Israeli defence forces, noting that they were 'the most formidable, the best trained and the most resolute in the Middle East'. 
Nathan's especial qualities have been summed up as loyalty, warm-hearted humanity, and creative imagination. To these might be added enthusiasm and capacity for hard work in regard to anything he undertook to do. 
Nathan married on 27 March 1919 Eleanor Joan Clara (1892-1972), daughter of Carl Stettauer, leather merchant. She was of notable assistance to her husband in his political life. A Cambridge graduate and a governor of Girton College, she was for many years a member of the London county council and in 1947-8 its second woman chairman. They had one daughter, who married Bernard Waley-Cohen, and one son, Roger Carol Michael ('b'. 1922), who also became a solicitor and who succeeded to the title when his father died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 23 October 1963. 
A. L. Goodhart', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35189


Nathan, Sir Matthew (1862-1939), civil servant and colonial governor, was born in Paddington, London, on 3 January 1862, the second son of Jonah Nathan and his second wife, Miriam, daughter of Lewis Jacobs. His father descended from Jewish immigrants from Dessau and was a partner in a firm manufacturing paper goods. Nathan was brought up in west London and educated by private tutors. Encouraged by his mother he competed successfully in examinations and entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1878, graduating first in his class with prizes, and was commissioned as a subaltern in 1880 at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham, passing out as a lieutenant of the Royal Engineers. He was selected by his former commandant, Colonel Andrew Clarke, an inspector-general at the War Office, to prepare plans for colonial fortifications. His Whitehall base and influential contacts with members of the colonial defence committee resulted in a tour of Sierra Leone in 1883 to prepare defences; secondment to General Wolseley's Sudan expedition in 1884-5; three years as a fortification specialist in India and Burma; and a posting on a punitive expedition on the north-east frontier which earned him a service medal and promotion to captain. In 1895 he was appointed secretary to the colonial defence committee. 
In 1898 with the rank of major Nathan was sent by the Colonial Office as interim administrator to Sierra Leone, following a 'hut tax' rebellion. He upheld direct taxation in the colony and protectorate, put down a riot in Freetown, and pushed through building and health regulations. At the end of 1899 he was back in the War Office with a sound reputation. Accordingly, Joseph Chamberlain offered him the governorship of the Gold Coast in July 1900 with orders to re-establish control over Asante. He refrained from extracting tribute from the reconquered states, but he did not restore the exiled Asantehene. He restructured Asante and the southern colony into provinces and districts under commissioners and stipended chiefs, as a measure of decentralization, and kept to direct military rule in the northern protectorate. Relations with commercial and mining representatives were improved by gold claims registration and completion of a railway to Kumasi, but Nathan encountered Aborigines' Rights Protection Society opposition to land purchases and destooling chiefs. 
By 1904 his good standing earned Nathan the first-class governorship of Hong Kong, where he moved with caution, avoiding offence to Peking (Beijing) from the local press and supporting a concession for the Kowloon-Canton (Guangzhou) railway construction in the face of foreign competition. Despite this success, he was transferred in 1907 to Natal where he was caught between liberal policies and pressures from responsible government politicians for extension of martial law and the execution of Zulu rebels. Agreeing under protest to Natal ministers' demands, he kept his reputation for coolness under political fire and came to agree with settler views concerning racial segregation and the Indian franchise. Nathan can be counted as one of the midwives of the South African 'Act of Union' by encouraging Natal's inclusion and by his support for entrenched clauses safeguarding the South African protectorates. 
Unable to secure another governorship, Nathan became secretary to the General Post Office in 1909 and chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue in 1911. A lifelong Liberal, he was introduced to Herbert and Margot Asquith and their circle. Asquith and Lloyd George picked him as under-secretary for Ireland in July 1914, where he played a dutiful second to the secretary, Augustine Birrell, and reluctant confidant to Lord Lieutenant Wimborne. He supported the Liberal policy of conciliating Irish parliamentary nationalists and opposed Irish military conscription. But he failed to foresee the Easter rising of 1916, a responsibility he shared with Birrell and Wimborne. Resigning along with his superiors he returned briefly to the Royal Engineers and then acted as secretary of the Ministry of Pensions in 1919. From there he was sent by Lord Milner as governor to Queensland in 1920-25, to conciliate a Labor government which swamped the legislative council with its nominees, moved to abolish it in 1921, and threatened the independence of the judiciary. Nathan reported on this spectacle, but refrained from urging disallowance of government bills, sponsoring instead research on the Great Barrier Reef and serving as chancellor of the University of Queensland from 1922 to 1926. 
In retirement Nathan served on the special commission on the constitution of Ceylon in 1927-8, and he was chairman of the colonial secretary's advisory committee on rubber from 1926 to 1928. He was appointed CMG in 1899, KCMG in 1902, and GCMG in 1908. Settling in West Coker he was high sheriff of Somerset in 1934 and devoted himself to the study of local history. He died at his home, the Manor House, West Coker, on 18 April 1939 and was buried in the Jewish cemetery of Willesden, London. A careful imperial broker rather than an innovator, Nathan survived the change from civil service promotion by patronage to selection by examination, as an outsider who became a professional administrator. Not averse to the companionship and affection of women, he remained a confirmed bachelor. 


@@@@@


doc= 35190


Ranjitsinhji Vibhaji, maharaja jam sahib of Navanagar (1872-1933), ruler in India and cricketer, was born on 10 September 1872 in Sarodar, a village on the Kathiawar peninsula in north-west India, the first son of Jiwansinhji, a farmer, and his second wife. The family was related to ruling houses in the region -- including Navanagar, in whose territory Sarodar lay -- but had fallen on hard times. Ranjitsinhji was physically frail and suffered from smallpox as a child; his father sought relief in alcohol and tyrannizing those around him. Perhaps because of this, Ranjitsinhji was lodged as a small boy with an uncle, the raja sahib of Dhrangadhara, who gave him the rudiments of his education. Ranjitsinhji was six when he experienced a great, though short-lived, stroke of fortune. It proved the seminal event of his life. He was selected as temporary heir to his distant relative Vibhaji, the jam sahib of Navanagar, as a precaution against the ruler's failure to produce a successor. However, Vibhaji and Ranjitsinhji's father soon fell out and the jam sahib shrank from formally endorsing the adoption. Four years later an heir, Jaswantsinhji, was born and the matter, as far as the ruler was concerned, was at an end. 
It was not at an end for Ranjitsinhji's family, who had almost been within a heartbeat of the throne. They sought to discredit the alliance between Vibhaji and Jaswantsinhji's Muslim mother and gathered the support of Hindu fundamentalist relations in nearby states. The seeds of a dispute were sown, a dispute that underpinned much that Ranjitsinhji later did. The need to prove that he would have been a worthy heir found expression in his determination to make himself the prince of cricket; the need to extract reparation for what had been denied him found a less pleasant outlet in his brazen accumulation of debts and relentless pursuit of the Navanagar throne. Fully formed, Ranjitsinhji's personality was complex. A steely resolve was wrapped in clothes of charm. Some who dealt with claimant and ruler thought him ruthless and uncompromising; many who encountered the famous batsman found him enchanting and generous. Pleading poverty to some, he lavished gifts on others. Essentially, he was a solitary man. His childhood was rootless and lonely, his formative years in England scarred with racial injustice, and the facts told in his emotional insecurity. He achieved his broader aims but not happiness, as fear at offending sensibilities prevented him from following Vibhaji into forming a mixed marriage, in his case to a Westerner. 
All hopes might have been derailed had Ranjitsinhji not enjoyed a second stroke of fortune. Even after the jam sahib fell foul of his father, Ranjitsinhji was allowed to continue his education along lines set out by the ruler. It was a demanding and friendless routine, but one that benefited him. From the age of six he spent eighteen months living and receiving personal tuition in a Rajkot bungalow before entering the princes' college, Rajkumar College, at Rajkot. He showed sporting and academic promise at the college, run by an Englishman, Chester Macnaghten, on the lines of an English public school, and by the time Ranjitsinhji left in 1888 Macnaghten, who said that 'a better or manlier boy has never resided within this college', had arranged for him to go to Cambridge, supported by an allowance from the Navanagar state. 
Ranjitsinhji entered Trinity College in November 1889. Concentrating his energies on sport, he became fascinated by cricket, which he had learned in Rajkot from the age of eleven. He joined the university club but few took his early, faltering steps seriously and for three summers he played mainly for local clubs on Parker's Piece. After hours of practice against some of the best bowlers in the country, and armed with a stroke of his own invention, the leg glance, he scored heavily for town sides in 1892. In the following year he forced his way into the Cambridge eleven, where he proved a valuable team member with his capable batting and outstanding fielding. He became the first Indian to win a cricket blue. Though there is no contemporary evidence supporting the claim that he once scored three centuries in three matches on the same day, his enthusiasm was apparent and he won the hearts of fellow undergraduates. Their interest was heightened by the impression, which he did nothing to scotch, that royal blood coursed his veins (Ranjitsinhji had attached the princely prefix Kumar Shri after reaching England). It was at this time that he gained his lasting nickname, Ranji. 
Ranjitsinhji had been expected to return to India after sitting bar examinations but, burdened by debt, left Cambridge in 1894 and chose to stay in England, even though his Navanagar allowance was stopped. He was friendly with some Sussex cricketers and began playing for the county in 1895, despite not having fulfilled the two-year residential qualification. His first appearance, against MCC at Lord's, was such a sensational success -- with audacious strokeplay he scored 77 not out and 150 -- that no one made an issue of the matter. The season was a triumph, as he amassed 1775 runs at an average of 49.31, exceeded by only three players. Ranjitsinhji's sporting rise was now swift, testimony to his mastery of the art of batsmanship. Within five years of first playing seriously, he had become the world's leading batsman and forced a general reappraisal of tactics. In 1896 he scored 2780 runs, then a record for an English season, and his average of 57.91 was the highest of the summer. His ten centuries -- two of which, uniquely, came on the same day of the match against Yorkshire at Brighton -- equalled the existing record. Controversially, he was chosen for England against Australia in the second test match at Old Trafford after being omitted, no less contentiously, from the first at Lord's. The team was then selected by ground authorities and opinion was divided as to whether he should be regarded as eligible. The brilliance of his batting again silenced debate as he narrowly failed to turn the match in England's favour with innings of 62 and 154 not out. 
The following year Ranjitsinhji published a technical treatise, 'The Jubilee Book of Cricket', which rapidly went through several editions and survives with its reputation intact. Ranjitsinhji's explanation of the book's production in the 'Windsor Magazine' (October 1897) suggests later speculation that he was substantially assisted in the project was incorrect. Publicly, Ranjitsinhji built on his reputation steadily over the following years, continuing to set new standards in run-scoring which were unsurpassed until the era of Donald Bradman and Walter Hammond. He never finished outside the top five in the averages between 1895 and 1904, when he stopped playing regular county cricket. He visited Australia with Andrew Stoddart's team in 1897-8 and on an unsuccessful mission was one of the few individual successes, amassing 1157 runs, 457 of them in the five tests. He scored 189 in his first match against South Australia and a heroic 175 in the first test in Sydney (December 1897) while recovering from illness. He did not play in 1898 but in 1899, when he became Sussex captain, became the first player to score 3000 runs in a season and repeated the feat in 1900 (when his average was 87.57), at which stage the three highest aggregates stood to his name. His nearest rival was C. B. Fry, a close friend and Sussex team-mate, with whom he formed one of the most effective and famous sporting partnerships. 
Ranjitsinhji's approach to the Englishman's summer game was significantly different from that of his predecessors. He felt no compunction to follow convention or style. Like Arthur Shrewsbury, the Nottinghamshire and England professional, but unlike W. G. Grace, who had set standards that appeared unbeatable, he based his technique on back-foot play, which he felt inherently safest. Other key components were placement, control of the strike, and economy of effort, which more than compensated for his lack of physical robustness (he stood about 5 feet 10 inches). The lateness with which he executed his swift, explosive cuts and glances caused general wonder -- batsmen had not scored runs behind the wicket with such facility before -- and gave life to the legend of an oriental magician. 'No man now living has ever seen finer batting than Ranjitsinhji showed us in this match', the 'Manchester Guardian' (20 July 1896) reported after his England debut. 'Grace has nothing to teach him as a batsman; and none of the men of renown of 30 years ago could have exhibited a more thorough mastery of every point in the game'. He became more orthodox later, as opponents countered his original methods. 
Ranjitsinhji's achievements were the greater for the fact that he played, for the most part, on the brink of poor health and penury. But the man who put India on the map for many Englishmen knew that sporting success would assist his prospects of successfully contesting the Navanagar throne. He thought his chance had come after the tour of Australia in 1897-8, when he formally applied to the government of India for a review of his case, but after much debate -- and questions in the House of Commons -- his application was rejected. Four years later the struggle had nearly got the better of him. He only narrowly avoided being declared bankrupt and the strain showed during the 1902 season, when his batting wore a distracted air and he contributed only 19 runs in four test innings against Australia before being dropped. He had played fifteen times for England but never appeared again. With help from friends and relations he bought himself two years' grace but in 1904 was forced to return to India, where he was kept by threats of legal action from an old schoolfriend who had given him $10,000. 
Then, in August 1906, Ranjitsinhji had his third and greatest stroke of luck -- or was it luck? -- when Vibhaji's son, who had become the new jam sahib on the death of his father in 1895, died mysteriously and unexpectedly, without an heir. His death was attributed in some quarters to typhoid but there were rumours of foul play. With the assistance of Devisinhji, a half-brother, Ranjitsinhji had long prepared for such an opportunity and after an inordinate six months of deliberations was chosen ahead of other claimants by the government of India as the next jam sahib. As ruler, he took to terming himself Ranjitsinhji Vibhaji; years later, after lobbying, he was permitted by the government to use the term maharaja. 
Ill-equipped for his new role and having spent little time in his native land since his youth, Ranjitsinhji found the early years of his reign demanding. As ruler of a small princely state, he was expected to exhibit loyalty towards Britain, and was disposed to do so, but in return wanted licence to live extravagantly. That Navanagar was crippled by drought, poverty, and disease did not deter him and he made full use of an agreement that he could visit Europe every four years. Both in 1908 and 1912 he delighted his cricket admirers by turning out for Sussex and, despite his increased weight by the second occasion, showing glimpses of his old magic, but created intense ill feeling by using diplomatic privilege to renege on debts. His levels of spending led the government of India to attach an administrator, Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Berthon, to his court. The British authorities encouraged Ranjitsinhji to stabilize his regime by marrying and producing an heir, but his talk on this subject came to nothing. Unbeknown to them, he had since 1902 been engaged tacitly, if not formally, to Edith Borissow (1873-1942), one of the daughters of his guardian at Cambridge, and their relationship continued clandestinely and possibly incompletely for long afterwards. It was eventually broken off by her a few years after the death in 1917 of her father, Louis Borissow, a clergyman, whose feelings had been one of the chief reasons for their secrecy. Late in life Ranjitsinhji embarked on another relationship with an Irish woman. In the absence of children, he took under his wing his many nephews and nieces. 
When war came in Europe in 1914 Ranjitsinhji put the resources of his state at the empire's disposal. These included a house in Staines, purchased for $30,000 two years earlier, that was converted into a hospital for wounded officers. Ranjitsinhji went to the front but, like other Indian princes, was given frustratingly little to do. It was during one of several spells of leave that, on the last day of August 1915, he lost his right eye in a shooting accident on the Yorkshire moors. He returned to India a few months later and did not revisit Europe until the war ended; he played his last game for Sussex in 1920. His career figures in first-class cricket (1893-1920) were 24,692 runs scored (average 56.37), including seventy-two centuries; as a slow right-arm bowler he took 133 wickets (average 34.59). He was appointed KCSI in 1917, GBE in 1919, and GCSI in 1923. 
Under Berthon's stewardship, and with Ranjitsinhji growing into his responsibilities, Navanagar slowly moved towards prosperity. Irrigation schemes were put in place, railways laid, and a rebuilding programme undertaken in the capital, Jamnagar. Most importantly, a port was developed at Bedi, which the British launched by suspending its customs line. Bedi proved so successful at taking trade from the imperial ports of Bombay and Karachi that the line was reinstated, causing a long-running dispute, but Bedi remained highly profitable. Thus were the conditions of his people improved and Ranjitsinhji guaranteed his opulent lifestyle, if one more in tune with occident than orient. At one time or another he owned in India two main palaces in Jamnagar -- he invariably lived in the smaller one, Vibha Villas -- a summer house and shooting lodge; in Britain he had a house in Staines and a lakeside castle at Ballynahinch, on the west coast of Ireland, ideal for another of his hobbies, fishing. He also possessed a yacht. He delighted in entertaining friends from the tweedy British aristocracy and his preferences were further apparent when he encouraged Duleepsinhji, the best cricketer among his nephews, to play for England rather than help India to form its first national team. 
This was not a time to invite resentment among fellow Indians, and as one of the British empire's best-known figures Ranjitsinhji presented an easy target for Congress in its campaign for a democratic and independent country. In 1927 it issued a pamphlet attacking his performance as ruler. Alive to the threats, Ranjitsinhji played an active part in the formation and affairs of the chamber of princes, formed in 1920; he twice represented India at the League of Nations assembly at Geneva, and was a delegate to the earlier sessions of the round-table conference (1930) on the government of India. He also published detailed but unconvincing defences of his record in India and England. One of these was a biography, commissioned shortly before his death, in which he was closely involved. Written by Roland Wild and published in 1934, it told a fanciful account of the route by which he came to his throne. His incomplete adoption and his father's true character were ignored, and his financial misdemeanours suppressed. It was accepted as the definitive biography for more than fifty years. 
Ranjitsinhji died of heart failure on 2 April 1933 in Vibha Villas, five days after returning from Delhi. He had suffered from heart and bronchial trouble for several years but his final illness was sudden; preparations for a trip to Britain were advanced. Later in the day, the people of Jamnagar lined the 4 mile route to his funeral pyre; five months later his ashes were scattered on the Ganges near Allahabad. He was succeeded by another nephew, Digvijaysinhji. His bedroom in Vibha Villas is preserved as it was the day he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 35191


Nehru, Jawaharlal (1889-1964), prime minister of India, was born in Allahabad on 14 November 1889, the eldest child of the lawyer and politician Motilal Nehru (1861-1931), and of his second wife, Swarup Rani. He had two younger sisters, the elder of whom was Vijayalakshmi Pandit (1900-1990). Nehru was doted on by his parents and brought up in luxury. 
From his mother Nehru learned Hindu legend and folklore, while a Muslim retainer told him stories of the uprising of 1857. But his father wanted for him the best that British education could offer and in 1905 took him to England and had him admitted to Harrow School. Joe Nehru, as he was known, was a good pupil but not specially distinguished in any way. After two years he moved to Trinity College, Cambridge, where again he made no mark. In 1910 he obtained a second class in part one of the natural sciences tripos and joined the Inner Temple. On being called to the bar in 1912 he returned to India and for the next four years led an aimless life in Allahabad. He accompanied his father to the high court but had no interest in a legal career. In politics, too, he had no deep involvement. 
Nehru married in Delhi on 8 February 1916 a bride selected by his father. Kamala ('c'.1899-1936), daughter of Jawaharmal Kaul, the owner of a flour mill in Delhi, was a Kashmiri Brahman, as was Nehru -- hence the caste honorific pandit (Brahman), which was often used but which he disliked. Ten years younger than her husband, Kamala lacked a Western education and in the Nehru household felt bitterly conscious of her inadequacies. In November 1917 a daughter, Indira ['see 'Gandhi, Indira], was born. Kamala's health was poor, and by 1920 she showed incipient signs of tuberculosis. 
In June 1914 Nehru was drawn into active politics by Annie Besant. His first public speech was to protest against the demand that Mrs Besant give pecuniary security for good behaviour under the 'Press Act'. He withdrew his application to join the Indian Defence Force, constituted on the lines of the Territorial Army, and became one of the secretaries of the Home Rule League in Allahabad. He also helped to run 'The Independent', the newspaper started by his father in 1918 to express the viewpoint of the Indian National Congress. 
In 1919, when Mahatma Gandhi launched his campaign of civil disobedience, Nehru at last found a cause meriting his full dedication. Gandhi seemed to offer effective leadership in contrast to other Indian politicians. The response of British public opinion to the shooting of an unarmed crowd in Amritsar in April 1919 cast doubt on British goals for India, and the worth of the proposed constitutional reforms. Nehru accepted without reserve Gandhi's moral preoccupations and, though he later moved away from many of them, the deep personal bond between him and Gandhi remained unbroken until Gandhi's death in 1948. 
In 1920 Nehru by chance found himself involved in peasant unrest in the United Provinces, his home province. He encouraged the peasants to organize themselves and formulate their demands. He was impressed by their stoicism, though he was not as yet fully aware of their economic wretchedness. In December 1921 he was arrested for unlawful activity and, though sentenced to prison for six months, was released after three months on technical grounds. Baffled by Gandhi's having called off civil disobedience in February 1922, after a mob had caused the deaths of several constables by setting fire to a police station, he yet remained a loyal campaigner and organized spinning, boycott, and picketing in his province. In May 1922 he was back in prison, this time for eight months. Released in January 1923 through a general amnesty in the province, he found the Congress divided, with his father the leader of a group wishing to return to electoral politics and Gandhi opposed to this strategy. His inclinations were with Gandhi and, torn by the conflict of loyalties, he supported the compromise which permitted members to contest the elections to the legislative council without leaving the party. Drawn against his will into municipal politics, he won widespread respect during his two years as chairman of the Allahabad municipal board from April 1923. In December 1923 he was appointed a general secretary of the Congress. 
Kamala lost an infant son in 1924 and her health was deteriorating. So in March 1926 Nehru accompanied her to Europe with their daughter to seek medical treatment, and settled in Geneva. Kamala's health showed little improvement, but Nehru took advantage of his stay to read widely and to make contact with left-wing movements in Europe. In February 1927 he attended, as the representative of the Indian National Congress, the International Congress against Colonial Oppression and Imperialism in Brussels. He now gave emphasis to the economic side of imperialism, developed contacts with nationalists in China and Latin America, and gained an international perspective. Joined by his father, in November 1927 he visited the Soviet Union, where he was impressed especially by what he saw of rural reconstruction and the fight against illiteracy. 
In November 1927 Nehru returned to India with pronounced radical views and, at the December session of the Congress, forced through a resolution proclaiming independence rather than dominion status as India's objective. He also formed the Independence for India League as a pressure group within the Congress to work for political freedom and economic change. But both the resolution and the League amounted to little. Nehru was more effective in organizing a boycott of the statutory (Simon) commission appointed (without any Indian members) by the British government to consider the working of the 1919 constitutional reforms. At Lucknow in November 1928 Nehru, participating in a procession protesting against the arrival of the commission, was beaten up by the police. He also found time during this year, while wandering around the country, to try to educate his daughter by writing to her about the early history of humanity. These letters were published in 1929 as 'Letters from a Father to his Daughter'. 
In November 1929 Nehru presided over the annual session of the All-India Trade Union Congress at Nagpur and the next month at Lahore over the annual session of the Congress, which was now, after a year's notice, committed to independence and civil disobedience. In his presidential address he asserted that he was a republican and a socialist, and would like the Congress to commit itself to ending the domination of any class; but he recognized that the immediate task was to acquire political power. 
Early in 1930 Congress again launched a non-violent campaign of resistance under Gandhi's leadership. Its initial thrust was against the official salt monopoly. Nehru took charge of the civil disobedience campaign to manufacture salt in Allahabad district and sold packets of contraband salt. In April 1930 he was arrested and sentenced to simple imprisonment for six months. Lodged in Naini gaol, he was released in October but was arrested again after a week and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years plus five months in default of fines. In prison again, he took up the writing of letters to his daughter, tracing the history of humanity. 
In January 1931 Nehru was released, along with other leading Congressmen, to facilitate the effort at a settlement between Gandhi and the viceroy, Lord Irwin. Bereft of the support of his father, who died on 6 February 1931, he was disillusioned with the terms of the truce reached in March 1931. But he loyally accepted Gandhi's decision and devoted his attention to the agrarian crisis caused by the current economic depression in the United Provinces. The harassment or eviction of tenants by Indian landlords for their inability to pay rents led him to consider a no-rent campaign. He was arrested in December 1931 and sentenced to imprisonment for two years. 
In gaol, mostly at Dehra Dun, Nehru recommenced writing to his daughter; the letters were published in 1933 as 'Glimpses of World History'. He was released in August 1933, but arrested in February 1934 for sedition and sentenced to simple imprisonment for two years. Lodged first in a prison in Calcutta and then shifted to Dehra Dun gaol, he was released for eleven days in August 1934 as Kamala's health had worsened. He was then taken to Almora gaol, which was near the sanatorium to which she had been admitted. He wrote in these months his autobiography, which was published in 1936 and became a best-seller in Britain. 
In May 1935 Kamala proceeded to Europe for treatment and, her condition becoming critical, Nehru's sentence was suspended to enable him to join her. She died at Lausanne on 28 February 1936. Elected in his absence as president of the Congress, Nehru returned to India to lead the party in the elections to the newly powerful provincial legislatures created by the 'Government of India Act' of 1935. He campaigned throughout the country, travelling over 50,000 miles in five months, presided over the sessions of the Congress at Lucknow in April and at Faizpur in December 1936, and did more than any other individual to ensure an overall Congress victory. But he did not favour the acceptance of office which followed in eight provinces. 
In the summer of 1938 Nehru visited the republican side of the battle-front in the Spanish Civil War, met politicians of all parties in Britain, and declined to meet Nazi officials in Germany, but went to Prague to demonstrate solidarity with the Czech government in their resistance to Hitler. The next year he visited China. The only activity within India at this time which gave him satisfaction was the chairmanship of the national planning committee set up by the Congress. He regarded this work as paving the way for the creation of a socialist economy within a democratic structure in free India. His priorities created tensions with other Congressmen, and with Gandhi himself; but Nehru was not prepared to divide the Congress on 'socialist' issues. 
On the outbreak of war in September 1939 Nehru's sympathy was with the allies, and he was eager that Britain should make it possible for the Indian people to join the war against fascism. But the expected response was not forthcoming. Instead, he was arrested in October 1940 for anti-imperialist speeches and sentenced to imprisonment for four years. In Dehra Dun gaol he started to write a second volume of his autobiography, but this was later incorporated into an analysis of India's past. In December 1941 he was released following an official decision to release all political prisoners. In March 1942 he was the principal spokesman of the Congress in discussions with Sir Stafford Cripps, who went to Delhi as the emissary of the British cabinet to seek to end the political deadlock and to gain Indian political co-operation in the war. Nehru was keen on a settlement which would enable the Congress to co-operate in the war effort, but the Cripps mission was a failure. Thereafter Nehru was unable to prevent a collision between the Congress and the government. Gandhi planned a Quit India movement of renewed civil disobedience, and on 9 August 1942 Nehru, along with other senior Congress leaders, was arrested. The Congress working committee was detained at Ahmednagar Fort without communication with the outside world. Here Nehru completed 'The Discovery of India' (1946), a survey of India's history emphasizing the composite culture which in his view had held the country together over the years. He was released on 15 June 1945. He had spent altogether almost nine years in prison. 
In the subsequent negotiations for the transfer of power from British to Indian hands, with M. A. Jinnah and the Muslim League now claiming a separate homeland for India's Muslims, Nehru hoped that, if the right to secede were granted, the Muslims would shed their fears and not in fact exercise that right. But the situation increasingly seemed to be one of insoluble conflict and escalating violence. In September 1946 Nehru became vice-president of the executive council in the provisional government. He held the external affairs portfolio and in that capacity he convened in March 1947 at New Delhi an Asian relations conference to enable the leaders of Asia to come together. (Here he asserted that a free India would develop an active concern in world affairs and would pursue an independent policy compatible with her own national interests. Self-respect demanded consideration of every issue on its merits and commitments only to the principles of anti-colonialism and racial equality and to the promotion of peace.) The provisional government meanwhile was unable to function normally once the representatives of the Muslim League joined it, and Nehru and the Congress recognized that partition of the country had become inevitable. (The degree of inevitability, the nature of Muslim demands, and Congress's response remain one of the most disputed aspects of India's recent history, however.) He worked closely with the last viceroy, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, and in May 1947 he persuaded Mountbatten to revise his current plan and avoid the danger of India being fragmented. The two dominions of India and Pakistan came into being on 15 August 1947. Mountbatten stayed on in India as governor-general. Lady Mountbatten became Nehru's close friend and, until her death in January 1960, helped to mitigate his loneliness. 
Nehru was sworn in as prime minister in 1947 and held the office until his death. His first task was to subdue the turbulence in India caused by the large-scale massacres and migrations which followed partition. The climax of communal violence was the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi by a Hindu fanatic in January 1948. Nehru denounced Hindu chauvinist feeling and insisted that in a free India Muslims should be treated as equal citizens. 
Relations with Pakistan were also tense. The ruler of Kashmir, a former princely state, delayed acceding to either India or Pakistan. To force the issue, tribesmen from Pakistan entered the state and advanced on Srinagar, the capital. The ruler now acceded to India and Indian troops were flown out to push back the tribesmen. Nehru secured the appointment of Sheikh Abdullah, a popular leader with secular views, as chief minister. He also offered to hold a plebiscite, after law and order had been restored, to ascertain the views of the people on the future of Kashmir, and referred the issue of Pakistan's perceived aggression to the United Nations. Although disappointed by the failure of the Security Council to reach a quick decision, Nehru agreed on 31 December 1948 to the ceasefire suggested by a commission sent out by the United Nations. This left a third of Kashmir in Pakistan's hands. 
In August 1953, on Sheikh Abdullah's own position vacillating in favour of an independent Kashmir, Nehru permitted him to be dismissed and subsequently imprisoned. Nehru reconciled himself to the holding of a plebiscite and the possible loss of Kashmir to Pakistan, but reversed his position in 1954, when Pakistan concluded a military alliance with the United States. Nehru's contention was that this brought the cold war to south Asia and that Pakistan was seeking to settle the issue with superior American arms. Nehru was of Kashmiri descent himself, but many Indians recognized that the issue of Kashmir, and its presence with a Muslim majority in the Indian Union, was a vital and visible proof that India was a secular and not a Hindu state. 
Nehru saw the political advantages of India remaining in the Commonwealth, and in April 1949 persuaded the Commonwealth prime ministers to agree to continued Indian membership even after she became a republic on 26 January 1950. Nehru found the Commonwealth a useful multiracial association for the exchange of views, and he resisted demands in India from time to time, and especially during the Suez crisis in 1956, that India withdraw from the Commonwealth. In 1961 he was among those responsible for securing South Africa's withdrawal by warning of the dangers of the Commonwealth disintegrating if apartheid were tolerated. 
Nehru established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and appointed his sister Vijayalakshmi Pandit as India's first envoy to the USSR. He did not align India with either the United States or the Soviet Union, but at the start his sympathy was with the Western powers. In September 1948 he conveyed to the United States that there was not the least chance of India lining up with the Soviet Union in war or in peace. In October 1949 he visited the United States and emphasized repeatedly that detachment in the cold war did not imply indifference on basic issues such as freedom, justice, and aggression. He was well liked by the American public, but his discussions with President Truman and senior officials at Washington, where Vijayalakshmi Pandit was now ambassador, were not fruitful. Relations were soured by what Nehru regarded as the American tilt towards Pakistan and by American dislike of Nehru's support for the recognition of the People's Republic of China. 
Nehru's sponsorship of mainland China was not born of any sentimental pan-Asian considerations. He thought that China's admission to the United Nations would make it easier for her to function normally in world affairs rather than as an outlaw state. Containment through friendship was also for India a preferable alternative to heavy expenditure incurred in building defences in the Himalayas. When, in 1950, China occupied Tibet, Nehru protested because he felt that India, while recognizing China's suzerainty over Tibet, had a right to express an interest in the maintenance of Tibet's autonomy. On China objecting to such intervention, Nehru avoided an open breach and discouraged the Dalai Lama from fleeing to India. In 1954 he concluded a treaty with China providing for the abandonment by India of all extra-territorial privileges in Tibet. But he missed the opportunity this provided for securing Chinese recognition of what was now a long common boundary defined for the most part, in India's view, by custom, usage, and tradition. To the Soviet Union Nehru was driven closer by circumstances. He tried to keep the problem of Kashmir out of the cold war; but from January 1952 the Soviet Union exercised its veto in the Security Council on all resolutions on Kashmir which were slanted against India. Nehru visited China in September 1954 and the Soviet Union in June 1955. He found his hosts eager to please, but Nehru retained his critical sense. 
This non-aligned approach provided Nehru in the 1950s with a pivotal role in the world. His leadership enabled India to arrange in 1953 for the repatriation of prisoners taken in the Korean War and to implement the peace settlements in Indo-China in 1954. He was forthright in opposing racial discrimination in Africa and resisted, in all ways short of war, attempts to hold on to empire or to promote domination by settlers. He gave the lead at the Asian-African Conference at Bandung in Indonesia in April 1955 and facilitated the acceptance of the People's Republic of China by most of the participating countries. Relations with the United States also improved at the time of the Suez crisis in October 1956, when both India and the United States condemned the Anglo-French invasion of Egypt. In December 1956 he visited Washington, and, despite the feeling that he had been tardy in condemning Soviet action in Hungary, he was given a warm welcome by President Eisenhower. 
Within India, Nehru's main achievement was the establishment on firm grounds of parliamentary democracy. He made sure that the constitution which came into effect when India became a republic provided for adult suffrage, and toured the country incessantly to explain issues to a largely illiterate people and to teach them the value of the vote. In his time three general elections were held: in 1952, 1957, and 1962. He created the machinery of cabinet government and built up healthy traditions in the two houses of parliament. He strengthened a free press and enabled the judiciary to function with independence and full authority to protect the fundamental rights laid down in the constitution. Under Nehru's guidance India transformed herself from a traditional and passive into an open and participant society. 
To buttress the parliamentary system at the local level Nehru elaborated schemes of community development and planned the setting up in all groups of villages of a council, a co-operative, and a school. In October 1952 fifty-five community projects covering about 17,000 villages were inaugurated; and in 1953 national extension services to provide trained workers were set up. By 1956 community development covered over a quarter of rural India. This policy did not succeed in improving the economic condition or strengthening the self-reliance of the peasant, but it helped in promoting political awareness. 
In building a democratic system, Nehru utilized the Indian National Congress, which had a network of committees and cadres reaching down to every town and village. His relations with the deputy prime minister, Vallabhbhai Patel, were not without friction, but after Patel's death in December 1950 Nehru repulsed a challenge from within the party in 1951 to his secular approach. He was president of the party from 1951 to 1954, and even thereafter his control of the Congress was unquestioned. Throughout his years as prime minister the party was in office at the centre and, except for the two years 1957 to 1959 in the southern state of Kerala, in all the provinces. So relations between the central and the state governments caused Nehru no problems. He allowed the Congress parties in the states to choose their leaders and permitted these chief ministers to exercise autonomy. He utilized the Congress as a cementing force and to secure wide support for his policies. He himself functioned as a national rather than as a party leader. His bona fides were accepted by left-wing parties, and after 1951, when the Indian Communist Party renounced violent methods and agreed to work the parliamentary system, Nehru, approving of many of the party's objectives, permitted it to function and in 1957 to form a ministry in Kerala after it had secured a majority in the elections. He dismissed it two years later with reluctance as he believed that it had lost popular support, but he did not regard the Communist Party with its new tactics as posing a threat to the democratic process. On the right he regarded the Conservative Party which was formed in 1959 with contempt. The only political party which he regarded as threatening the unity of India was the Hindu Communal Party, and he gave it no quarter. 
In internal administration Nehru had to act against his will in 1956, when he was obliged by public opinion to agree to the redrawing of provincial boundaries on the basis of languages. He regarded this as a marginal problem which merited low priority, but saw that the passions roused in all parts of the country by the love of local languages would, if not appeased, weaken the sense of community in India. He also gave way on the question of the continuation of English as an all-India language. While himself fluent in English and a sensitive writer of English prose, he believed that Hindi, spoken over a large part of northern India, and not English, known only to a small minority, should be the language linking the whole country. He therefore favoured the gradual abandonment of the use of English as an official language and its study only as a second language. In line with this, the constitution of 1950 stated that English would be used as an official language, in addition to Hindi, only until 1965. But, faced with agitation in southern India against the imposition of Hindi, Nehru realized that it endangered Indian unity and recognized the fear of the non-Hindi-speaking people that a ban on English would handicap them in the search for employment. So in 1959 he pledged that there would be no imposition of any language by decree and English would remain an associate, additional language for an indefinite period; the final decision on the replacement of English by Hindi would rest with those sections of the Indian people who did not know Hindi as a local language. In 1963 he translated this assurance into permissive legislation, providing that English 'may' continue to be used after 1965, in addition to Hindi, for the official purposes of the Union and in parliament. He was unwilling to provide an explicit commitment that English would continue as an official language for ever, as this seemed to him unnecessary and even constitutionally improper; but he ensured that the protagonists of English need have no cause for concern. The use of English as an official and a linking language continues to this day. 
One of the greatest problems facing independent India was economic development. Nehru recognized that it was an essential condition of genuine national freedom, and the only way eventually to meet the legitimate aspirations of India's peoples. In the late 1930s he had begun to concern himself with planning for India's economic future, and in March 1950 he constituted a planning commission, and from 1951 initiated a series of five-year plans, considerably influenced by the Soviet example. The objective was to create a self-reliant, self-generating modern economy, with a strong public sector in heavy and strategic industries, and a regulated private sector. The plan was to produce capital goods and growth through industrialization and import substitution: the state was to play the dominant role, controlling strategic and basic production, but leaving some space in other areas for a tightly controlled private sector. Following his personal commitment to furthering 'the scientific temperament', Nehru also encouraged India's atomic industry and the harnessing of her great rivers for energy production through several large dam projects. This broad range of planning undoubtedly helped to transform the economy in a way the imperial government neither wished nor would have been able to do. It provided the technological base for industrial development, created the facilities required for modern manufacture, and in the first decades of independence greatly increased industrial production, consumption of energy, and access to a broader range of consumer goods. Simultaneously India developed its capacity for conventional defence and raised a large corps of scientists, engineers, and technicians, despite the heavily arts-oriented educational system inherited from the British raj. It soon became clear, however, that Nehru's economic strategy was failing to address problems of large-scale poverty and poor agricultural production, problems which in turn hampered industrial growth, limiting domestic savings and the home market, and making India even more dependent on foreign aid and food imports. Consequently, by the end of the 1950s a new emphasis was given to family planning, in response to a now rapidly increasing population, and to bolstering agricultural production by various means. In the longer term it also became evident that tight state control of the economy was hampering growth and producing what came to be known as a 'licence-permit raj'. In the late 1980s Nehru's grandson Rajiv Gandhi began dismantling the Nehruvian system, a process furthered by his successors in the 1990s after India's near international bankruptcy. However, it should be remembered that Nehru was dealing with the burdensome economic inheritance of an imperial regime at a time when the main examples of radical economic change and growth were the industrialization patterns of the Western world and of the Soviet Union, long before the dramatic successes of the export-led economies of south-east Asia in the later twentieth century provided alternative models. 
Nehru's economic strategy emphasized growth rather than issues of distribution of goods and resources. However, in 1955 he committed the Congress to the creation of a 'socialistic pattern of society'. His socialism was always more an ethical pledge than a doctrinal belief, reflecting the need to raise standards of living and provide more equality of opportunity rather than to further any dogma. He had realized by the mid-1950s that industrial growth had to be accompanied by an increase in agricultural productivity. Part of this new concern for agriculture was his decision to promote service co-operatives in every village as a prelude to co-operative farming over the next three years. The latter part of his strategy petered out; and none of Nehru's rural plans really tackled the fundamental investment and technological constraints on agricultural production. One of India's essential rural problems was still that of radically unequal access to land. Nehru had expedited the abolition of the largest landed estates soon after 1947, but had not ensured that this was followed up by redistribution of land to the peasantry, with security of tenure. Here the democratic process itself proved a hindrance, as the powerful and landed sector contrived to block truly radical land reform. 
On social reforms, too, Nehru did not act quickly and fully: again he was hampered by widespread social conservatism and vested interests. He secured the statutory abolition of untouchability in 1955, and made its public practice a criminal offence. But the law by itself was not enough to ensure equality and opportunities for the most deprived and degraded in Hindu society. He assiduously proclaimed the need for a 'scientific temper' in modern society, for the prevalence of reason and logic to ensure civilized behaviour. But, while he gave emphasis to the promotion of higher education and set up five institutes of technology and several national laboratories in various branches of pure and applied sciences, he failed to give priority to the directive in the constitution that free education should be provided by 1961 for every child up to the age of fourteen. 
Entrenched obscurantism also stood in the way of the creation of the fully secular society to which Nehru attached prime importance. He wished religion to play no part in public life, and embedded this principle in the constitution. But his implementation of secular principles was incomplete. He failed to act, because of legal difficulties, on the resolution of 1948 of the constituent assembly banning political parties which exploited religion. He was opposed to the banning of cow slaughter, but allowed it to be included among the directive principles of state policy in the constitution. Above all, while in favour of a uniform civil law for all Indians as recommended in the constitution, he did not sponsor legislation imposing it. He had recognized from before independence the need to elevate the status of Indian women. But he did not wish to hurt the prejudices of Muslims immediately after partition by revising their personal laws. In 1951 he sponsored changes in the civil law only as regards Hindus. Monogamy was enforced on Hindu men, and rights of divorce, inheritance, and property were granted to Hindu women. But the lack of a uniform civil law in India has been a major hindrance to the development of an equal and secular society. 
From 1956, when Nehru's reputation in India and the world was at its peak, problems and relations with other countries became more pressing. Believing that China had accepted India's stand that her northern boundary was established and not negotiable, he was surprised at Chinese incursions at three points across the border between Tibet and the Indian province of Uttar Pradesh and by the building of a road traversing Aksai Chin in Kashmir which linked Sinkiang (Xinjiang) with western Tibet. Nehru regarded these not as unfriendly acts but as matters for discussion. But the problem broadened in March 1959 with his humanitarian act of granting asylum to the Dalai Lama, who fled to India from Tibet. China's vituperative criticisms were not toned down by Nehru's directive to the Dalai Lama to refrain from political activity. In September 1959 China asserted that the whole boundary was unsettled and claimed about 40,000 square miles of what India regarded as her territory in Kashmir and in the north-east. Nehru decided that this could no longer be a matter for confidential correspondence between governments and informed parliament. The public reaction was intense and limited Nehru's scope for manoeuvre. It also drew India closer to the United States, and President Eisenhower was received cordially when he visited Delhi in December 1959. 
Nehru was convinced that India's boundary was a firm one, sanctified by history, but he was anxious to avoid hostilities with China and willing to negotiate any minor rectifications that she might desire. He invited the Chinese prime minister, Zhou Enlai, to Delhi, but their talks in April 1960 were inconclusive. Thereafter China stepped up her incursions. Nehru persisted in his policy of avoiding confrontation, sending out patrols and establishing posts in Indian forward areas not taken over by China, and awaiting negotiations for a final settlement. He acted on the assumptions that China would not mount a large-scale offensive and that, if she did, Indian armed forces would be able to resist effectively and that such a war between India and China would not be confined to the border areas and would involve other countries. 
Nehru had prevailed on Zhou to agree to officials on both sides examining the evidence pertaining to the boundary; and in the time thus gained he was able to turn his attention to other problems. In September 1960 he visited Pakistan to sign the agreement which had been reached on the distribution of the Indus Canal waters. The public goodwill created by this visit could not be translated into progress on the Kashmir question. Nehru's proposal that the ceasefire line, with a few adjustments, be converted into an international frontier was not acceptable to Pakistan. Later that year he went to New York to attend the session of the general assembly of the United Nations and sought to promote talks between the United States and the Soviet Union on disarmament. He also supported the intervention of the United Nations in the Congo and, at a time when India needed her troops at home, dispatched, at the request of the secretary-general of the United Nations, a brigade to the Congo. This was testimony of both his belief that the United Nations was an indispensable international organization and his commitment to freedom in Africa. 
In September 1961, at the Conference of the Non-Aligned Countries in Belgrade, Nehru's influence was the decisive factor in giving priority to the urgent issue of disarmament over the receding issue of colonization. He criticized the Soviet resumption of nuclear testing, and this dampened the enthusiasm of his hosts when he proceeded from Belgrade to Moscow. But he did prevail on the Soviet authorities to be more responsive to suggestions for nuclear disarmament. In November 1961 he went to the United States to meet President Kennedy. Their personal meeting was not a success. Nehru was uncertain of Kennedy's resolution and popular backing, while Kennedy felt that Nehru was aloof, indifferent, and tired. But the relations between the two countries continued to be cordial. At Kennedy's request Nehru used his influence in Hanoi and Moscow to secure a ceasefire in Laos. 
On his return to India, Nehru was confronted with a crisis developing over the Portuguese settlement of Goa, in western India. After the British withdrawal from India in 1947 and the transfer of the French settlements in 1954, the only foreign possessions in India were the pockets of Portuguese territory. No solution short of merger with India was acceptable to Nehru, but he sought to secure a peaceful transfer and to avoid the use of force as long as possible. Now, with reports of increased Portuguese repression and fading hopes of internal revolt or international intervention, especially by the United States, Nehru sanctioned the occupation of Goa by Indian troops in December 1961. It weakened Nehru's standing abroad as a champion of peaceful methods. 
In 1962 China, attaching no importance to the reports of the officials who assessed the evidence regarding the border, continued to spread into Kashmir, and in September made an incursion south of the boundary east of Bhutan, which had been formalized by a treaty in 1914. The next month her troops moved across both the western and the eastern sectors of the boundary in large numbers. Though the Soviet Union, involved in the Cuban crisis, expressed for the first time sympathy for the Chinese position, and India appeared to be isolated, Nehru's morale was unshaken. He took direct charge of the defence portfolio and secured military supplies from western Europe and the United States. But to make it easier for the Soviet Union to revert to its earlier position friendly to India, he did not declare war on China or even break off diplomatic relations, refer the issue of Chinese aggression to the United Nations, or seek to form any military alliance. But his hopes of the Indian army drawing the Chinese onto the plains and holding them there were dashed. Indian resistance was instead offered on the mountain tops and was easily dispelled. In this critical situation, on 17 November he appealed to Kennedy for the dispatch of fighters to protect Indian cities from attack from the air, for assistance to the Indian Air Force in air battles, and for the loan of bombers to enable India to strike at Chinese bases and airfields. Kennedy promised to be as responsive as possible. But on 21 November the Chinese declared a unilateral ceasefire and withdrew from Indian territory in the eastern sector. 
To Nehru the Chinese aggression was a personal as well as a national betrayal. He had extended his friendship and sponsored China's cause in the world; and for China to have given the impression to him and the Indian people that she recognized India's northern boundary and expected only some rectifications, to have crept gradually and by stealth into inaccessible and sparsely populated Indian territory, and then to have challenged the validity of the whole boundary and mounted large-scale offensives was to him a breach of faith. But he utilized the military setbacks to draw the people closer together. He accepted the proposals of Ceylon and five other non-aligned countries that a demilitarized zone be created in the western sector by the Chinese withdrawing 20 kilometres from their advanced position; and talks on the boundary recommenced thereafter. The Chinese rejection of these proposals strengthened Nehru's diplomatic position. 
Nehru's health, sustained for years by regular yoga exercises, began to decline from April 1962, when a viral infection of the urinary tract brought on low intermittent fever, which he took nearly a month to shake off. But he never fully got rid of the infection and from this time a slight puffiness round the eyes was always noticeable. Recognizing that the end could not be far off, he took the first step in preparing for the succession by persuading the Congress Party in 1963 to direct all its leading members except himself to withdraw from office in order to devote themselves to organizational work. On 6 January 1964, at the Congress session in Bhubaneswar in Orissa, he suffered a mild stroke on the left side, and he inducted back into office Lal Bahadur Shastri, his henchman in Uttar Pradesh, ostensibly to assist him in his work, but in fact making clear whom he wished to replace him. 
Nehru also took steps to settle, if possible, the Kashmir problem. In 1963 he had agreed, on the initiative of Britain and the United States, to resume talks with Pakistan. His objective was still a final settlement of Kashmir along the ceasefire line, and Pakistan's insistence on the transfer of almost the whole state led to the collapse of the talks. In 1964 he had Sheikh Abdullah released, and approved of his going to Pakistan to assess ways of reaching a settlement. Nehru himself was thinking in terms of a confederation of India, Kashmir, and Pakistan. But no tangible progress had been made when in Delhi, in the early hours of 27 May 1964, Nehru suffered a rupture of the abdominal aorta and died that afternoon. He was cremated the next morning on the bank of the Jumna River. The site has been planted with trees to form Shanti Vana (Wood of Peace) as a memorial to him. 
To have resisted imperialism, denounced fascism, transformed the nature of the Commonwealth and saved it from possible disintegration over South Africa, stood up for the rights of the African people, and shown the way for countries to steer clear of the cold war while being concerned with the problems of the world, places Nehru among the leading statesmen of the twentieth century. The shadows are created by his failure to stabilize India's relations with Pakistan and the deterioration of her relations with China. Seeking to eliminate in India the influence of religion in public life, he could not concede that Kashmir should be a part of Pakistan merely because the majority of its inhabitants were Muslims. The impact of the cold war in south Asia precluded in his opinion the possibility of a plebiscite; and his imaginative idea of a confederation was foreclosed, even if at all acceptable to Pakistan, by his death. The uneasy peace with China he sought to maintain with friendly, patient, and pragmatic diplomacy; but China was not to be deflected by such an attitude. 
Within India Nehru consolidated a nation, established a democratic system and trained the people to work it, constructed a model for economic development, and set the country on the path to growth. But his belief in a phased approach led him to neglect agriculture until the late 1950s, and he gave social justice a low priority. He did not enforce land reforms, introduce universal primary education, or improve the status of all Indian women. He did not recognize that the growth of the population, unless controlled, would nullify every aspect of economic development. He insisted that India, as a whole, was not very heavily populated and family planning was only a part of the larger movement for raising the people's standard of living; and this would be attained by education and economic planning. But offsetting all the shortcomings of Nehru's policies was his provision of objectives -- unity, democracy, secularism, the self-respect of developing nations -- which have become, thanks to his hold on the public mind, which is second only to that of Mahatma Gandhi, part of the general consciousness of the Indian people. 
Nehru was a handsome man, 5 foot 7 inches in height, and of a light, olive complexion. His premature baldness was usually concealed under a Gandhi cap. He discarded Western clothes in 1950 and dressed in a buttoned-up tunic with a red rose in the buttonhole and tight-fitting breeches. During summers in India he wore what is now known as a Nehru jacket. Entirely different from his mentor and confidant Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru none the less had great charisma, felt by the millions of his own compatriots and those many from abroad who found in him a profoundly attractive personality, and a sensitive interpreter of different cultures to each other. 


@@@@@


doc= 35192


Nehru, Motilal (1861-1931), lawyer and Indian nationalist, was born at Agra on 6 May 1861, the posthumous son of Ganga Dhar Nehru, a minor police official in Delhi under the Mughal ruler until the latter was deposed by the British in 1858. Taught Arabic, Persian, and Urdu at home, Nehru studied at the government schools at Allahabad and Cawnpore, and the Muir Central College at Allahabad. He left before graduation and, passing the 'vakil''s (lawyer's) examination, set up legal practice at Cawnpore in 1883. Three years later he moved to Allahabad, where there was a high court. He had married in 1882, after his first wife died, Swarup Rani Thussu, and had a son, Jawaharlal Nehru, and two daughters, the elder of whom was Vijayalakshmi Pandit. 
Specializing in various branches of the civil law, Nehru soon became one of the leaders of the Allahabad bar, and lived in lavish style, entertaining a wide circle of friends, British and Indian. He visited England in 1899 and was excommunicated from his Brahman caste for refusing to do penance for travelling overseas. Throughout his life he firmly repudiated caste restrictions. He took a vague interest in politics and from 1888 to 1892 attended the annual sessions of the Indian National Congress. In 1907 he presided over the United Provinces provincial conference and three years later was elected to represent Allahabad in the legislative council of the province. 
Nehru at this time believed in constitutional agitation for political reforms. In 1910 he became chairman of the board of directors of 'The Leader', a newspaper started in Allahabad to give voice to moderate opinion, and the next year he attended the imperial durbar at Delhi. But in 1917 he was persuaded by Annie Besant to become president of the Home Rule League in Allahabad. He also was drawn to Mahatma Gandhi, who had already won over Jawaharlal Nehru. The son had a strong influence on the father. Nehru was critical of the reforms proposed by the British government in 1918. Disappointed with the attitude of 'The Leader', he started his own newspaper, 'The Independent', which lasted three years. 
In 1919 Nehru served as a member of the committee set up by the Congress to assess the consequences of the action of General Dyer in firing on an unarmed crowd at Amritsar and the imposition of martial law in the Punjab. Later that year he presided over the annual session of the Congress at Amritsar. In 1920 he participated in the campaign of civil disobedience led by Gandhi, and changed his way of life. He handed over his palatial residence to the Congress and built a smaller home for himself, took to wearing 'khaddar' (homespun cotton), abandoned his legal practice, and resigned from the legislative council. In December 1921 he was arrested and sentenced to prison for six months. 
Critical of Gandhi for calling off the civil disobedience campaign in February 1922 because of a mob setting fire to a police station, Nehru, on his release from Naini gaol, helped to form the Swaraj (Freedom) Party within the Congress to work for entry into the legislative councils enlarged and reformed in 1919, wherein opposition would embarrass the government. The Congress permitted this deviation from non-co-operation. In 1923 Nehru was elected to the central legislative assembly and became the leader of the opposition. A skilled parliamentarian, he organized the defeat or delay of the finance and other official bills. But Nehru agreed to serve on the committee for considering ways and means of recruiting Indian officers for the army, and this opened the door for others to go further and join the government. So in March 1926 Nehru put forward a 'national demand' for the immediate drafting by a representative conference and enactment by parliament of a constitution conferring full dominion status on India. When this was rejected by the assembly Nehru and his colleagues walked out. 
This was virtually the end of the Swaraj Party and Nehru returned to the mainstream of the Congress under Gandhi's leadership. He had resumed legal practice in 1926 but supported the boycott of the statutory (Simon) commission into the working of the 1919 reforms. As the constructive side of the boycott, an all-party group was formed with Nehru as chairman to determine the principles of a constitution for India. The Nehru report, published in August 1928, stated that dominion status was the immediate objective, with 'full responsible government' transferred to the people of India. Instead of Muslims having separate electorates as enacted in the reforms of 1909 and 1919, whereby they voted for Muslim candidates, there should be reservation of seats for ten years for minorities in provinces, or a common electorate voting for candidates of a certain religion. 
In December 1928 Nehru presided over the annual session of the Congress at Calcutta, and it was resolved that if the British government did not accept the Nehru report by the end of 1929 the Congress would revert to the demand for independence and resort once more to a campaign of non-violent non-co-operation. Efforts in 1929 at a compromise proved futile, and in March 1930 Gandhi initiated civil disobedience. Nehru was sentenced in June to imprisonment for six months and joined his son in Naini gaol. Together they were taken in August to see Gandhi in Yeravda gaol in Poona for talks which might lead to a settlement; but these came to nothing. Back in Naini gaol, Nehru was released in September on grounds of ill health. He died of pulmonary emphysema in Lucknow on 6 February 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 35193


Neil, Robert Alexander (1852-1901), classical scholar and orientalist, was born on 26 December 1852 at Glengairn manse, Glengairn, near Ballater, Aberdeenshire, the second son of Robert Neil, minister of the 'quoad sacra' parish of Glengairn, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Reid. Both parents were from Aberdeenshire families which had produced many clergymen and medical men. Robert was educated at the local school, but was taught classics by his father. In 1866, while only thirteen, he entered Aberdeen University, having obtained a small scholarship at the annual bursary competition. At the end of the session he was first prizeman in William Geddes's class. In 1870 he graduated at Aberdeen with first-class honours in classics, and shared the Simpson Greek prize. 
The following winter Neil acted as an assistant in the university library and next year studied anatomy and chemistry with the intention of graduating in the medical faculty. He soon changed his mind and in 1873 he was elected a classical scholar of Peterhouse, Cambridge. Under the tuition of J. S. Reid, A. W. Verrall, and Richard Shilleto, he made such rapid progress that in 1875 he won the Craven scholarship, as well as obtaining a college prize; and in 1876 graduated as second classic. He was also highly distinguished in the year's examination for chancellor's medals. Soon afterwards he was elected a fellow of Pembroke College, where until his death he was a classical lecturer, although his public lectures were given for many years at Peterhouse. The following year he published 'Notes on Liddell and Scott' in the 'Journal of Philology' (7, 1877, 200-05); but his teaching work left him little time for writing, which his cautious and fastidious nature made a laborious task. 
Soon after completing his degree Neil began to read with the university's first professor of Sanskrit, Edward Byles Cowell. For the rest of his life Neil spent one or two afternoons a week in term time working with Cowell. In the earlier years they read parts of the 'Rig-Veda', Indian drama, grammar, and philosophy, but gradually they turned their attention to Buddhist literature. Under their joint names there eventually appeared 'The Divyaavadana: a collection of early Buddhist legends now first edited from the Nepalese Sanskrit MSS in Cambridge and Paris' (1886), founded on the collation of a number of Sanskrit manuscripts which were supplied to the editors from the libraries of Cambridge, Paris, and St Petersburg. After the publication of this work Neil took up the study of Pali, and formed one of the band of scholars who under Cowell's superintendence translated into English 'The Jataka, or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births' (6 vols., 1895-1907). Neil's own contribution forms part of volume 3 (1897; 151-286). 
During these years Neil was also busy with classical work. His 'Knights of Aristophanes' was published posthumously in 1901, the only substantial evidence of his classical scholarship. It concentrates much scholarship and delicate observation of Aristophanic Greek, evident less in the editor's text-critical acumen and solution of unusually difficult passages than in the nicety of his lexical definitions (see, for example, Appendix 1, 'The particle 'ge''), the wide-ranging provenance of his literary comparisons (see, for instances, the introduction, x, xiii, xiv), and his careful treatment of ordinary questions and small matters: the net result being, as one early reviewer noted (Richards, 354), good commentary on little touches characteristic of Aristophanes and on issues of contemporary Attic life. Neil frequently lectured on the history of Greek comedy, Pindar, and Plato; and on these subjects he accumulated much knowledge. He was also familiar with all work done in the comparative philology of the classical languages, Sanskrit, and Celtic. His emendation of a corrupt word, 'asageuonta', in Bacchylides into 'aoteuonta' was at once accepted by the Greek scholar Richard Jebb. 
Besides his professional work as a classical lecturer, as university lecturer on Sanskrit (a post to which he was appointed in 1883), and as the university instructor in that language for the Indian Civil Service (1886-89; 1892-1901), Neil took much interest in architecture and knew intimately the cathedrals of western Europe. He was interested in women's education, and before his college work became very heavy he lectured at both Girton and Newnham. Especially in work with individual students, his kindliness, care, and quiet humour attracted even the less scholarly. The sensitivity and breadth of his literary interest, which extended to much contemporary language and literature, ensured that he expounded prescribed texts in an engagingly humane manner, thereby complementing the strict linguistic demands of the classical tripos. He was popular in Cambridge society, and amid his duties regularly spared time to solve difficulties for his friends. As a long-standing syndic of Cambridge University Press, he helped many young scholars with advice as their work passed through the press. He also served for four years on the council of the senate. 
Neil evidently retained a lifelong affection for Aberdeen University, encouraging its abler classical students in their quest for admission to Cambridge, notably James Adam. In 1891 Aberdeen University conferred upon him the honorary degree of LLD. Neil took a keen interest in Scottish history and literature, and was for long a member of the Franco-Scottish Society. In 1900, on the death of C. H. Prior, he became senior tutor of Pembroke. He died after a brief illness on 19 June 1901, and was buried in the churchyard at Bridge of Gairn, not far from his birthplace. He was unmarried. In appearance Neil was a little over average height and strongly built, with brown hair and large expressive eyes. 


@@@@@


doc= 35194


Neil, Samuel (1825-1901), schoolmaster and writer, born in Edinburgh on 4 August 1825, was the second of the three sons of James Neil, an Edinburgh bookseller, and his wife, Sarah Lindsay, a connection of the Lindsays, earls of Crawford. On the death of James Neil from cholera in 1832, the family went to live in Glasgow. After education at the old grammar school there, Neil entered the University of Glasgow; while an undergraduate, he assisted the English master in the high school and worked for the 'Glasgow Argus' (of which the poet Charles Mackay was editor), and other newspapers. On 7 April 1848 he married Christina Gibson, the youngest daughter of Archibald Gibson, who had served in the navy and had been with Nelson at the battle of Trafalgar. For a time Neil was a private tutor, and then master successively of Falkirk charity school in 1850, of Southern Collegiate School, Glasgow, in 1852, and of St Andrew's School, Glasgow, in 1853. Finally he was rector of Moffat Academy from 1855 to 1873. 
Neil combined much literary activity with his work in education. He promoted in 1857, and edited during its existence, the 'Moffat Register and Annandale Observer', the first newspaper published in Moffat, and he wrote regularly for other Scottish periodicals and educational journals. In 1850 he planned, and from that date until 1873 edited, the 'British Controversialist' (40 vols. in all), a monthly magazine published in London for the discussion of literary, social, and philosophic questions. He himself contributed numerous philosophical articles, many of which he subsequently collected in separate volumes. Of these his 'Art of Reasoning' (1853) was praised for its clarity and conciseness by John Stuart Mill, George Henry Lewes, Archbishop Whately, and Alexander Bain. Other contributions to the 'British Controversialist' were published independently, under the titles of 'Elements of Rhetoric' (1856), 'Composition and Elocution' (1857), and 'Public Meetings and how to Conduct them' (1867). 
On resigning his rectorship of Moffat Academy in 1873 Neil settled in Edinburgh, devoting himself to English literature, and especially to Shakespeare. He founded and was president of the Edinburgh Shakespeare Society, and gave the annual lecture from 1874 until his death. To the 'British Controversialist' in 1860 he contributed a series of papers which he reissued in 1861 as 'Shakespeare: a Critical Biography'. The work enjoyed a vogue as a useful epitome of the facts, although Neil accepted without demur the forgeries of John Payne Collier. It was translated into French and German. Neil, who was a frequent visitor to Warwickshire, issued a guide to Shakespeare's birthplace at Stratford upon Avon as 'The House of Shakespeare Described' (1871), and he edited the 'Library Shakespeare' (3 vols.) in 1875, besides several separate plays for school use. His other publications included 'British History' (1856), 'Student's Handbook of Modern History' (1857), 'Martin Luther' (1863), and 'The Art of Public Speaking' (1867). Neil edited and compiled a large part of 'The Home Teacher: a Cyclopaedia of Self-Instruction' (6 vols., 1886). 
Neil took a leading part in educational and philanthropic affairs in Edinburgh, where he was on intimate terms with professors John Stuart Blackie, Henry Calderwood, John Veitch, and David Masson. He helped to found the Educational Institute of Scotland for granting fellowships to teachers. He compiled a book of poems by and about blind people, entitled 'Dark Days Brightened', for the Craigmillar School for the Blind in Edinburgh, which he managed for some years. 
In 1900 Neil's health failed. He died on 28 August 1901, while on a visit at Sullom manse, Shetland, the residence of his son-in-law, the Revd Charles Davidson, and was buried on 1 September in Sullom churchyard. His wife predeceased him on 26 January 1901. They had three sons and five daughters, of whom one son and three daughters, all married, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35195


Neilson, George (1858-1923), historian and antiquary, was born at Horseclose Farm, Ruthwell, Dumfriesshire, on 7 December 1858, the only child of Edward Neilson (1830-1861), captain in the mercantile marine, and his wife, Janet Paterson (1831-1903). His father died in Buenos Aires, and Neilson was brought up at Horseclose Farm, which belonged to his mother's family. He was educated at Cummertrees parish school and, from January 1872 to Christmas 1873, at King William's College, Isle of Man. After serving an apprenticeship at a writer's office in Dumfries, he attended the Scottish law class of Professor Robert Berry at Glasgow University in 1879-80, gaining first place in the class. In 1880-81 he again distinguished himself in the conveyancing class. He qualified as a solicitor in 1881 and in 1884 became a principal in Messrs Stodart and Neilson, writers, at 58 West Regent Street, Glasgow. He was appointed procurator fiscal of police in Glasgow on 6 November 1891. He also became fiscal of the Glasgow dean of guild court on 2 November 1899, and on 29 December 1909 he was appointed the first stipendiary police magistrate of Glasgow. He held this office until May 1923, when he resigned on grounds of ill health. He also made an unsuccessful application for the chair of Scottish history at Edinburgh University in 1901. 
Neilson married on 24 June 1892 Jane Ann Richardson (1859-1945), daughter of Thomas Richardson, cattle dealer, of Hexham, and his wife, Ann Short. They had one son, who died aged three on 14 March 1894, and one daughter. 
Neilson possessed an alert mind and a keen enthusiasm for research. He was eager to direct the attention of others to subjects that interested him and often placed at their disposal the fruits of his own studies. Beginning with studies of his native south-west Scotland, by his thirtieth year he had gained a firsthand knowledge of the sources of early Scottish history and of the antiquities of Scottish law and became a charter scholar and expert paleographer. His combination of charter scholarship with the study of records, chronicles, place names, and topography blazed a trail for Scottish medieval studies. The reading of 'Bracton's Notebook', edited by Frederic William Maitland in 1887, led him to send to Maitland in 1889 the manuscript of a study that he had made of the origin and early history of the duel. Maitland was enthusiastic, and Neilson's 'Trial by Combat', dedicated to his teacher Robert Berry, was published at Glasgow in 1890. It was favourably received and remains valuable. Terse, pointed, and illuminating, it was a pioneering examination of an obscure field, in particular making clear the distinction between the judicial duel and the duel of chivalry. 
Up to the date of his death in 1906, Maitland was in close correspondence with Neilson, although they met only twice. Maitland constantly applied to him for guidance and information on questions of Scottish law and history. Neilson formed similar, though less intimate, relations with other scholars, especially Mary Bateson, J. H. Round, Andrew Lang, F. J. Haverfield, H. C. Lea, and F. Liebermann. In the field of medieval studies he came to represent Scotland in the eyes of students south of the border. Scholarly and enthusiastic, he devoted much time to solving the problems of others. In 1894 he published 'Peel: its Meaning and Derivation' and in 1899 'Annals of the Solway', both admirable examples of the work of a learned antiquary. An active interest in Romano-British archaeology led to 'Per lineam valli' (1891), which opened up new lines of inquiry about Hadrian's Wall, while he also edited 'The Antonine Wall Report' of the Glasgow Archaeological Society (1899). 
Neilson devoted many years to the study of middle Scots verse. He sought to claim for John Barbour the authorship of a series of alliterative poems and, in his 'Huchown of the Awle Ryale, the Alliterative Poet' (1902), to identify Huchown with Sir Hugh of Eglinton and to assign certain poems to him. He carried on a controversy about these matters in the pages of 'The Athenaeum' and elsewhere for years, and in the course of it became friendly with Henry Bradley, F. J. Furnivall, W. P. Ker, W. W. Skeat, and others. These relationships were always extremely amicable, as Neilson inspired liking even in his opponents. His arguments for the thesis that he maintained were ingenious but no longer command support. It may be claimed, however, that his writings and the replies that they called forth revived an interest in an area of literature that had fallen into neglect. 
In 1902, on the invitation of the University of Glasgow, Neilson delivered a course of lectures on early Scottish literature, and in 1903 the university conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD. Latterly he returned to legal and feudal history. In 1912, at the invitation of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland (of which he was then a vice-president), he delivered the Rhind lectures in archaeology on 'Scottish feudal traits'. In 1918, after delay owing to the First World War, the record commissioners issued the 'Acta dominorum concilii, 1496-1501', edited by Neilson and Henry Paton. The substantial introduction was Neilson's work. It contains many interesting suggestions and speculations, and was the stimulus for much subsequent work on the origins of the Court of Session. 
From 1903 to his death, much of Neilson's time was devoted to the 'Scottish Historical Review', founded in that year; every issue of the journal included some form of contribution, signed or anonymous, from his pen, and he had a large share in its direction. 
After suffering for more than a year from a malignant disease of the stomach and bowel, Neilson died at his home, Wellfield, 76 Partickhill Road, Partick, Glasgow, on 15 November 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 35196


Neilson, Julia Emilie (1868-1957), actress and theatre manager, was born in Tottenham Court Road, London, on 12 June 1868, the only child of Alexander Ritchie Neilson, a silversmith and jeweller, and his wife, Emily Davis, who was one of an unusually gifted Jewish family of five sisters, no fewer than seven of whose offspring became professional actresses. Her widowed mother later married William Morris, a solicitor; his deceased first wife had been the actress Florence Terry, member of an even more illustrious theatrical dynasty and elder sister to the actor Fred Terry, who was by then Julia's husband. 
Educated initially at two local private schools but showing little scholastic aptitude, Julia was sent to Germany at the age of twelve to be 'finished' at a cosmopolitan boarding establishment in Wiesbaden, where she learned French and German and discovered a pronounced talent for music. After returning to London three years later she was enrolled at the Royal Academy of Music, at first to study the piano; before long, however, she was found to possess a fine mezzo-soprano voice and was advised to concentrate on singing with a view to a career in opera or on the concert platform. Having already won several prizes she made her first public appearance, while still a student, at the St James's Hall on 1 April 1887, but after gaining some experience of amateur dramatics she was given an introduction to W. S. Gilbert, who auditioned her and encouraged her to abandon music for the theatre. It was he, too, who arranged for her to make her acting debut as Cynisca, the jealous wife, with Mary Anderson as Galatea in a charity matinee of his 'Pygmalion and Galatea' at the Lyceum Theatre on 21 March 1888, and then to play Galatea opposite Lewis Waller in a similar matinee at the Savoy on 16 May. 
Thanks to Gilbert's coaching, to which Neilson always acknowledged a profound debt, these performances helped to secure a formal engagement with Rutland Barrington at the St James's Theatre for the 1888-9 season, following which she was invited by Beerbohm Tree to become a member of his company, initially on tour and subsequently at the Haymarket Theatre -- a meteoric rise to prominence for a young woman of twenty-one after little more than twelve months in the profession. She remained at the Haymarket for five years, creating such leading roles as Drusilla Ives in Henry Arthur Jones's 'The Dancing Girl' (1891), Lady Isobel in his 'The Tempter', and Hester Worsley in Oscar Wilde's 'A Woman of No Importance' (both 1893). She married Fred Terry (1863-1933), a fellow artiste in the company, in 1891. After a brief engagement at the Adelphi Theatre she returned to the Haymarket, now under the management of Lewis Waller, in January 1895 to become the first Lady Chiltern in 'An Ideal Husband'; in December she accompanied John Hare on a five-month tour of the United States, opening at Abbey's Theater in New York as Agnes in the American premiere of Arthur Wing Pinero's 'The Notorious Mrs Ebbsmith'. On her return she joined George Alexander at the St James's to portray Princess Flavia in Anthony Hope's 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (1896), staying with him for two years and playing, among others, her first Shakespearian roles, Rosalind in 'As You Like It' (1896) and Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1898). After rejoining Beerbohm Tree, now at Her Majesty's Theatre, she appeared as Constance in 'King John' (1899) and Oberon in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1900). 
The same year saw Neilson take a fateful step which did much to determine the remainder of her career, when, following a tour of 'As You Like It', she embarked upon London management with her husband. They mounted their first joint production, Paul Kester's 'Sweet Nell of Old Drury', at the Haymarket on 30 August. Not only did this inaugurate an acting and managerial partnership which lasted for thirty years, but it established a model for their subsequent offerings, mostly historical romances or comedy melodramas that made few intellectual demands on the spectator but ravished the eye with exquisite costumes and stylish period settings. Among the most successful were 'The Scarlet Pimpernel' by Baroness Orczy and J. M. Barstow (New Theatre, 1905) and 'Henry of Navarre' by William Devereux (New, 1909), which, with 'Sweet Nell', became their mainstay for many provincial tours and one to the United States in 1910; others, like 'For Sword or Song' by Robert Legge and Louis Calvert (1903), 'Dorothy o' the Hall' by Paul Kester and Charles Major (1906), 'The Popinjay' by Boyle Lawrence and Frederick Mouillot (1911), 'Mistress Wilful' by Ernest Hendrie (1915), 'The Borderer' (1921), 'The Marlboroughs' (1924), and William Devereux's 'The Wooing of Katherine Parr' (1926), were equally capable of drawing large and extraordinarily loyal audiences. Each provided both actor-managers with a prime role in which they could shine, but which scarcely challenged their creative resources, a fact which makes it difficult to assess the true calibre of Julia Neilson's acting. She possessed a compelling stage presence, admirable diction, a vibrant personality, and striking physical beauty which aged gracefully. If not a great actress, she was certainly highly accomplished and dearly loved by the thousands to whom she gave so much pleasure. 
After her husband's death in 1933 Neilson appeared twice more on the stage, in the farce 'Vintage Wine' by Seymour Hicks and Ashley Dukes at Daly's in 1934 and Heron Carvic's 'The Widow of Forty' at the Q in 1944, and was guest of honour at a testimonial luncheon held in London in 1938 to mark her fiftieth anniversary as a performer. She died in hospital in Hampstead, after a fall at her home, on 27 May 1957, and was cremated at Golders Green two days later. Her son, Dennis (1895-1932), and daughter, Phyllis Neilson-Terry (1892-1977), also enjoyed distinguished theatrical careers. 


@@@@@


doc= 35197


Eliza Nelson (1827-1908), singer and actor, daughter of Sydney Nelson, the composer, and his wife, Sarah, took the leading female role. In November 1851 the two were engaged by Lloyd of Edinburgh for the Theatre Royal company, Craven as principal stage director. They were married in Edinburgh on 12 May 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 35198


Nelson, Sir Frank (1883-1966), intelligence officer, was born at Bentham, Gloucestershire, on 5 August 1883, the son of Henry Ellis Hay Nelson, general manager of the Army and Navy Auxiliary Co-operative Supply, and his wife, Catherine Haviland. After education at Bedford grammar school and Heidelberg, he went to India to work in a mercantile firm in Bombay in which he rose to become senior partner. In the First World War he served in the Bombay light horse. Subsequently he was chairman of the Bombay chamber of commerce and its representative on the Bombay legislative council (1922-4) and president of the associated Indian chamber of commerce (1923). In 1924 he was knighted and returned to England. He was Conservative member of parliament for Stroud from 1924 to 1931 when the depression forced him to resign to concentrate on his business interests. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Nelson was employed on intelligence work in Basel, but this came to an end with the fall of France when he returned to England. Even before 1939 it had been recognized that the government would have to weaken any potential enemy by political subversion, sabotage, and other clandestine operations. When war broke out the work suffered from lack of co-ordination, for it was split up among several bodies, responsible to different authorities. By 1940, when the British were left to fight the axis powers alone, co-ordination was more than ever essential. The war cabinet consequently decided on 16 July 1940 that all these functions were to be put in the charge of a new body, the Special Operations Executive (SOE), with Hugh Dalton, who continued to be minister of economic warfare, at its head. Dalton records that the prime minister then said to him, 'And now set Europe ablaze'. He at once divided SOE into three bodies -- SO1 for underground propaganda, SO2 for unacknowledgeable action, sabotage, and the support of resistance in enemy-occupied territory, and SO3 for planning. In August 1940 Dalton appointed Nelson to be head of SO2. The functions of SO3 were assumed by SO2 in January 1941, and in the following August those of SO1 by a separate body called the political warfare executive. From that point Nelson was responsible for all the remaining activities of SOE. 
Nelson had a formidable task. Not only was there not a single agent in enemy-occupied France, but SOE was a new body for which no precedent existed. As such it incurred the suspicion and jealousy of the established secret organizations of the Foreign Office and the service ministries, all of which were professional bodies which had existed for many years and which were concerned by the inevitable amateurishness at first displayed by SOE. Another difficulty was recruitment, for by the autumn of 1940 most men of ability were employed elsewhere. Above all Nelson found he had to obtain for SOE facilities, such as secret wireless sets, aircraft for parachute training and getting agents into Europe, and special devices for sabotage. But it was no easy task to get these scarce resources unless SOE could show results, and without the resources there could be no results. Finally, he had somehow to gain the confidence of Whitehall and the services. 
Nelson set to work at once with tireless energy, and surrounded himself with a group of able people, notably Colin Gubbins, who at first took charge of the important job of training and operations and was to finish the war as head of SOE. Gradually Nelson overcame the difficulties by his unshakeable integrity of purpose. It was a disappointment to him when in early 1941 the chiefs of staff ruled against supplying secret armies in Europe by air in favour of the bombing offensive. But he persisted, and by the winter of 1941 SOE was in touch with agents and supporters in most of the countries of occupied Europe. Above all, Nelson made people believe that, given facilities, results could be achieved. In less than two years SOE had become an established force with the confidence of the chiefs of staff, and was recognized in every theatre of war. It is no disparagement of his successors to say that he created the groundwork without which SOE's later successes in Europe and the Far East would have been impossible. 
But Nelson was never physically strong, and in 1942 his health began to fail. He resigned in May, was appointed KCMG, and subsequently held appointments as an air commodore in Washington and Germany. He had married in 1911 Jean, daughter of Colonel Patrick Montgomerie; they had one son. She died in 1952 and he then married Dorothy Moira Carling. He died in Oxford on 11 August 1966. His second wife survived him. 
B. Sweet-Escott', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35199


Nelson, George Horatio, first Baron Nelson of Stafford (1887-1962), electrical engineer and company manager, was born at 102 Church Road, Islington, London, on 26 October 1887, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of George Nelson, textile merchant, of Muswell Hill, Middlesex, and his wife, Emily Walsh Lewis. He was educated at City and Guilds Technical College, where he worked under Silvanus Thompson. After gaining a diploma and the Mitchell exhibition, he moved on, with a Brush studentship, to the Brush Engineering Company at Loughborough. He then joined the British Westinghouse Company in Manchester, becoming chief outside engineer at Trafford Park in 1911, and chief electrical superintendent in 1914. In 1913 he married Florence Mabel 
(Jane; 1888-1962)
, only daughter of Henry Howe JP, for Leicestershire. They had one son and one daughter. 
At Westinghouse, Nelson was responsible for the manufacture and installation of steam and hydro-electric power equipment and electric traction equipment in various parts of the world. He remained with the same company when it joined the Metropolitan Vickers Group, becoming manager of the Sheffield works of Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Company in 1920, and stayed at the works, which specialized in electric traction, for ten years. Sir Holberry Mensforth, who had been works manager at Trafford Park, and who had subsequently joined the English Electric Company, then persuaded Nelson to become English Electric's managing director. When Mensforth retired in 1933 Nelson was appointed chairman and managing director. 
Nelson set the English Electric Company on its feet, expanding the work force, handling men and contracts with great skill, and fully understanding the engineering aspect of his company. In 'clearing the decks' he made some bold, far-ranging, and usually correct decisions which were to alter and broaden the whole concept of the business. When the rearmament programme began he spent many months trying to persuade service chiefs of the contribution his organization could make, and finally won a contract for seventy-five Hampden bombers. These were followed by 2470 Halifax bombers and 2730 tanks. By the end of the war, English Electric was undertaking the production of the Canberra bomber to its own design, which was one of the most successful of its time. 
In 1942 Nelson went to the United States and Canada as chairman of the United Kingdom tank mission to discuss a joint policy for tank production. He served on the heavy bomber group committee of the Air Ministry from 1939 to 1945, on the reconstruction joint advisory council in 1943-4, on the higher technological education committee in 1944-5, and was chairman of the census of production committee in 1945. He was president of the Federation of British Industries in 1943-4, a most difficult period. 
After the war, English Electric acquired Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company, which increased Nelson's responsibilities. He also found time to develop his interest in technical education. His own companies provided much technical training, and he served on the governing body of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, on the court of governors of Manchester College of Science and Technology, and on the governing body of Queen Mary College, London. He was president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1955, and of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1957-8. He served as prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1960. In 1955 Imperial College made him an honorary fellow and granted him an honorary diploma. In 1957 he received an honorary LLD from Manchester. The previous year he received the freedom of Stafford. 
Nelson received a knighthood in 1943, a baronetcy in 1955, and was raised to the peerage as first Baron Nelson of Stafford in 1960. Nelson died at the premises of the English Electric Company, in Stafford, on 16 July 1962 and was succeeded by his son, Henry George Nelson (1917-1995), who became chairman of the General Electric Company Ltd from 1968, chancellor of Aston University, and a member of the court of the Bank of England. 
C. S. Nicholls', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35200


Nelson, Sir Hugh Muir (1833-1906), politician and pastoralist in Australia, was born at Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, Scotland, on 31 December 1833, the son of William Lambie Nelson LLD (died 1887), a Presbyterian minister and sheep farmer, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Muir. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and Edinburgh University, where he did not graduate, but came under the influence of Professor John Wilson, a contributor to the tory 'Blackwood's Magazine' under the pseudonym Christopher North. Nelson emigrated to Queensland with his family in 1853, and became a storekeeper's clerk in Ipswich. Later he took farming work and managed sheep stations for his father and others, including Eton Vale from 1862 to 1872. In August 1870 he married Janet, the daughter of Duncan McIntyre, at Toowoomba, and they eventually settled on the 40,000 acre Loudon estate near Dalby, which Nelson acquired with his brother-in-law Watts. They prospered, and sold out for $60,000 just before the financial crash of 1893. 
Nelson entered Queensland politics as chairman of the Wambo divisional board in 1880, and was elected to the state legislative assembly for Northern Downs in 1883, having unsuccessfully contested the same electoral district in 1879. Following the boundary reorganization of 1888 he represented the subdivision of Murilla for the remainder of his active political career. He became secretary for railways in June 1888 in the ministry led by his political mentor Sir Thomas McIlwraith, and continued as secretary for railways and public works under the premiership of Boyd Dunlop Morehead until August 1890. He was leader of the opposition throughout 1891. Under the 'Griffilwraith' coalition he was briefly vice-president of the executive council and acting colonial treasurer, and he served McIlwraith as treasurer from March 1893 before succeeding him as premier in October 1893. He combined this office with those of vice-president of the executive council and colonial president (until August 1896), chief secretary (from March 1895), and treasurer (August 1896 to March 1898). 
Nelson's premiership came at a time of economic and social upheaval, to which he reacted with political caution and budgetary austerity. Twice, in May 1893 and in February 1896, he intervened to save the Queensland National Bank, by which means he rendered 'his greatest and shrewdest service to colonial capital and bourgeois society' ('AusDB'). The 'Peace Preservation Act', which he originated during the failed shearers' strike of 1894, became a cornerstone of the future conduct of industrial relations. Nelson won contemporary repute as a constitutional authority, and opposed the federation of the Australian states. 
Nelson was created KCMG in 1896, and represented Queensland at the diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1897; while in England he was sworn of the privy council and received honorary degrees from Oxford and Edinburgh. He resigned the premiership on 13 April 1898 and his seat in the assembly soon afterwards. From 29 July 1898 he served as president of the legislative council, and from 1904 to 1905 was lieutenant-governor of Queensland. He founded the Royal Agricultural Society of Toowoomba and the Austral Association and was president of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia (Queensland), the Colonial Political Association, and the Queensland Club. He took an interest in New Guinea, to which he made several visits. 
Nelson died at his residence, at Gabbinbar, Middle Ridge, Toowoomba, on 1 January 1906, and was buried in Toowoomba cemetery after a state funeral under Presbyterian rites. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and three daughters. A physically imposing man, Nelson was a ruthless and effective politician, who could none the less be both humorous and reflective in private. 


@@@@@


doc= 35201


Nettleship, Edward (1845-1913), ophthalmic surgeon, was born on 3 March 1845 at the family home in Gold Street, Kettering, Northamptonshire, the fourth of the seven children of Henry John Nettleship (1807-1870), solicitor, and his wife, Isabella Ann (1818-1898), daughter of the Revd James Hogg, vicar of Geddington, Northamptonshire. As he did not possess the remarkable aptitude for the classics of his brothers, Henry Nettleship, John Trivett Nettleship, and Richard Lewis Nettleship, his early education was confined to Kettering grammar school (until 1860). His enthusiasm for natural history suggested a vocation for farming and he was sent to the Royal Agricultural College at Cirencester. Study there (1861-3), and his subsequent courses in London, simultaneously at the Royal Veterinary College and King's College Hospital, proved his academic ability. He graduated MRCVS and as a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1867. 
For some months Nettleship returned to the Royal Agricultural College as a lecturer, before deciding to concentrate on human medicine, influenced against his own preference by his family. In 1868 he obtained the membership of the Royal College of Surgeons and, two years later, its fellowship. He had the good fortune to attract the patronage of the polymath Jonathan Hutchinson, initially as his assistant at the London Hospital and the Blackfriars Hospital for Skin Diseases. In 1869 Nettleship published the first description of the skin disorder urticaria pigmentosa. 
On 22 January 1869 Nettleship married Elizabeth Endacott Whiteway ('b'. 1843/4) from Compton in Devon, daughter of Richard Whiteway, a farmer, and the sister of a college friend; there were no children. To secure his professional future, they considered emigration to New Zealand, but experience as Hutchinson's assistant at Moorfields Eye Hospital encouraged Nettleship to specialize. By so doing he deviated from his mentor's teaching; nevertheless, their association matured into lifelong friendship. Nettleship's choice of ophthalmology was facilitated by his appointment as librarian and curator of the museum at Moorfields (1871-3). He seized this opportunity for research, and subsequent publications established his credentials as a meticulous scientific investigator, initially on eye pathology and later on a wide range of clinical topics. 
Nettleship left Moorfields for the post of medical superintendent at the Ophthalmic School at Bow (1873-4). This difficult work, with pauper children in isolation because of ocular infections, resulted in a Local Government Board commission for him to report on conditions in the metropolitan poor-law schools. Thereafter his career prospered, with staff appointments at the South London Ophthalmic Hospital (1873-8), St Thomas's Hospital (1878-95), Great Ormond Street Hospital (1880-81), and Moorfields (1882-98). 
Contemporaries regarded Nettleship as a sound diagnostician and a methodical, if not brilliant, surgeon. The popularity of his textbook 'The Student's Guide to Diseases of the Eye' (1879) reflected his teaching ability, and from 1888 to 1891 his workload was increased by appointment as dean of the St Thomas's medical school. 
Nettleship's stature in the speciality was recognized by both colleagues and patients. A founder member of the Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom, he was chosen as its president (1895-7). His private practice, begun in 1875 and conducted from 5 Wimpole Street, London, flourished. In May 1894, under the scrutiny of considerable press interest, he operated on the former prime minister William Ewart Gladstone, to extract a cataract. Two years later Nettleship examined Queen Victoria for the same condition, but advised against surgery. 
Nettleship retired from clinical practice in 1902 and concentrated on the application to his speciality of the developing science of genetics. His former colleagues and students marked his retirement by founding the Nettleship medal 'for the encouragement of scientific ophthalmic work'. Nettleship's pioneering series of papers on inherited eye disease inspired a school of successors and was acknowledged in 1912 by fellowship of the Royal Society. 
The early influence of his authoritarian mother and the absence of children of his own may have contributed to the austere, reserved facade that Nettleship presented to outsiders. This was particularly apparent in 1907, when he was embroiled in the dispute over the care of the children of his late niece, Ida, and Augustus John, their unconventional father. His pupils, patients, and friends were aware, though, of the underlying warmth and generosity of his character, which complemented the energy and determination he applied to his researches. Born into a staunch Church of England family, Nettleship joined the positivists in 1873. In later life he actively supported the eugenics movement, while engaged on a study of albinism with Karl Pearson. 
Prostatic surgery in 1911 led to distressing complications, and Nettleship's recovery was interrupted by the development of cancer of the lower bowel. Despite treatment with radiotherapy, he died at his home, Longdown Hollow, Hindhead, Surrey, on 30 October 1913; after cremation at Woking on 3 November, his remains were interred at St Stephen's Church, Shottermill, on 4 November. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35202


Nettleship, John Trivett (1841-1902), animal painter, was born at Kettering, Northamptonshire, on 11 February 1841, the second son of Henry John Nettleship, solicitor, and brother of Henry Nettleship, Richard Lewis Nettleship, and Edward Nettleship. His mother was Isabella Ann, daughter of James Hogg, vicar of Geddington and master of Kettering grammar school. Music was hereditary in the family, and Nettleship was for some time a chorister at New College, Oxford. Afterwards he was sent to the cathedral school at Durham, where his brother Henry had preceded him. Having won the English verse prize on 'Venice' in 1856, he was taken away comparatively young in order to enter his father's office. There he remained for two or three years, finishing his articles in London. Though admitted a solicitor, and in practice for a brief period, he decided to devote himself to art, for which he had shown an aptitude from childhood. Accordingly he entered himself as a student at Heatherley's and at the Slade School in London, but to the last he was largely independent and self-taught. His first work was in black and white, not for publication, but to satisfy his natural temperament, which always led him to the imaginative and the grandiose. However, none of the designs conceived during this early period was ever properly finished. They include biblical scenes, such as 'Jacob Wrestling with the Angel' and 'A Sower Went Forth to Sow', which show the influence of William Blake. Nothing was published under his own name except a poor reproduction of a 'Head of Minos' in the 'Yellow Book' (April 1904). But the illustrations to 'An Epic of Women' (1870), by his friend Arthur William Edgar O'Shaughnessy, are his; and his hand may likewise be traced in a little volume, 'Emblems', by A. Cholmondeley (1875), where his name erroneously appears on the title-page as 'J. J. Nettleship'. On 15 April 1876 he married Adaline Cort, daughter of the otologist James Hinton; she survived him with three daughters. The eldest, Ida, studied at the Slade School and was married to Augustus John; she died in Paris in 1907. 
Nettleship delighted in physical activity: he rode to hounds as a boy, took boxing lessons from a famous prize-fighter when he went to London, is reputed to have walked to Brighton in a day, and accompanied a friend, Henry Cotton, on a mountaineering expedition to the Alps, for which they trained barefoot. It was this delight in physical prowess and in wild life that now induced him to become a painter of animals. He made studies, almost daily, in London's zoological gardens; and for twenty-seven years (1874-1901) exhibited large-scale paintings of lions, tigers, and so on at the Royal Academy and for most of the period at the Grosvenor Gallery. 'Puma Devouring a Peacock', in many respects 'his strongest and most characteristic' work (Bryan, 'Painters', 4.14), was exhibited at Burlington House. Though always noble in conception and often effective in grouping and in colour, these pictures failed somewhat in technique. At one time more than a dozen of them were exhibited together in the Corn Exchange at Gloucester; but a scheme for purchasing the collection fell through, and they were dispersed. In 1880 Nettleship was invited to India by the Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda, for whom he painted a cheetah hunt as well as an equestrian portrait; he was thus able to observe animals in their natural habitat. In his later years he worked in pastel, and, painting his old subjects on a smaller scale, acquired a wider measure of popularity. 
Nettleship's interests were not confined to painting. In 1868 he published a volume of essays on Robert Browning's poetry (enlarged third edition published as 'Robert Browning: Essays and Thoughts', 1895). The book prompted an intimate friendship between the poet and his critic. Another book that shows both his power of literary expression and his opinions about his own art is 'George Morland and the Evolution from him of some Later Painters' (1898). He illustrated a number of books, including 'Natural History Sketches among the Carnivora' by A. Nicols (1885) and 'Icebound on Kolguev' by A. B. R. Trevor Battye (1895). 
After a long and painful illness Nettleship died at 33 Beaumont Street, London, on 31 August 1902, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. A memorial tablet in bronze, designed by Sir George Frampton, with the aid of two fellow artists who were born in the same town as Nettleship, Sir Alfred East and Thomas Cooper Gotch, has been placed in the parish church at Kettering. 


@@@@@


doc= 35203


Neubauer, Adolf (1832-1907), Hebrew scholar, was born at Bitsche, Kotteso, Trentsen, in northern Hungary, on 7 March 1832, the son of Jacob Neubauer, a Jewish merchant and Talmudic scholar, and his wife, Amalie, 'nee' Langfelder. Intended by his father to become a rabbi, Neubauer was taught Hebrew by his cousin, Moses Neubauer, also a Talmudic scholar. About 1850 he taught at the Jewish school at Kotteso; soon afterwards he left for Prague, where he attended the lectures of the critical rabbinical scholar S. J. L. Rapoport, learned French, Italian, and Arabic, studied mathematics, and finally, on 15 December 1853, matriculated at Prague University. Between 1854 and 1856 he studied oriental languages at the University of Munich. 
In 1857 Neubauer moved to Paris, where he resided until 1868, except for visits to various libraries to examine manuscripts, and a period in Jerusalem, where he held a post at the Austrian consulate. In Paris he discovered the manuscript room at the Imperial Library and met orientalists and Judaeo-Arabic scholars, such as Salomon Munk, Joseph Derenbourg, and Ernest Renan. It was at Paris that Neubauer found as his life's vocation the study, description, and publication of medieval Jewish manuscripts. In 1861-2 he began his scholarly career by publishing in the 'Journal Asiatique' (vols. 18-20) extracts and translations from a tenth-century lexical work of David ben Abraham, of Fez, whose manuscripts he had found in a Karaite synagogue in Jerusalem. In 1866, after a visit to St Petersburg, he published 'Aus der Petersburger Bibliothek', which consisted of excerpts from related manuscripts held in the library there. 
Neubauer pursued his interests in Palestine, and in 1863 he won the prize offered by the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres for a critical exposition of the geography of Palestine, as set forth in the two 'Talmuds' and other post-biblical Jewish writings. His first important work, 'La geographie du Talmud: memoire couronne par l'academie', appeared in 1868, and placed its author in the first rank of rabbinical scholars, despite its occasional errors. 
Neubauer had visited Oxford in 1866 in order to examine the collection of Hebrew manuscripts held in the Bodleian Library. Although the printed Hebrew books held in the library had been catalogued shortly beforehand (between 1852 and 1860) by Moritz Steinschneider, the manuscript collection was still untouched. In 1868 the curators invited Neubauer to catalogue the Hebrew manuscripts, and Oxford became his home until 1901. The catalogue which eventually appeared in 1886 contained descriptions of 2602 manuscripts (many consisting of between twenty and fifty distinct works). It was accompanied by an atlas of forty facsimile plates, illustrating the Hebrew palaeography of different countries and periods. 
Despite his involvement with Hebrew manuscripts, Neubauer still found time for other literary work. He was appointed sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library in 1873, and he greatly expanded foreign collections and added especially to the oriental department of the library's holdings. Neubauer was in 1890 the first to recognize the value for Jewish literature of the genizah or depository attached to a synagogue, in which manuscripts no longer in use were put away. He eventually obtained for the Bodleian as many as 2675 items from the genizah at Old Cairo. These consisted frequently of several leaves, and many were of considerable interest and historical value. Neubauer began to catalogue these fragments, with very detailed descriptions, publishing a preliminary volume in 1886, but the work was completed and published by his successor, A. E. Cowley, in 1906. 
During 1875 Neubauer also edited from a Bodleian and a Rouen manuscript the Arabic text of the eleventh-century Hebrew dictionary (the 'Book of Hebrew roots') of Abu- 'l-Walid; this was a work of extreme importance in the history of Hebrew lexicography (which had been known before only through excerpts and quotations). Edward Pusey encouraged Neubauer to publish in 1876 a catena of more than fifty Jewish expositions of 'Isaiah' 53, which was followed in 1877 by a volume of translations. In the same year there appeared, in the twenty-seventh volume of 'L'histoire litteraire de la France', a long section entitled 'Les rabbins francais du commencement du XIVe siecle', which (though its literary form was due to Renan) was based throughout upon materials collected by Neubauer. A continuation of this work, 'Les ecrivains Juifs francais du XIVe siecle' (in volume 31 of 'L'histoire litteraire', 351-802), based similarly on materials supplied by Neubauer, appeared in 1893. These two volumes on the French rabbis remained the most important result of Neubauer's industry and learning. They include information drawn not only from Hebrew and German journals, but also from unpublished manuscripts in the libraries of Oxford, Paris, the south of France, Spain, Italy, and other countries. 
In 1884 Neubauer was appointed reader in rabbinic Hebrew at the University of Oxford. In 1887 he published a Hebrew volume of medieval Jewish chronicles and chronological notes (a second volume appeared in 1895). He also issued, in 1878, a previously unknown Aramaic text of the book of 'Tobit', from a manuscript acquired in Constantinople for the Bodleian Library; and in 1897 he edited the original Hebrew of ten chapters of 'Ecclesiasticus' from some manuscript leaves which had been discovered in a box of fragments from the Cairo genizah. A frequent contributor to learned periodicals, Neubauer wrote four articles entitled 'Where are the ten tribes?' for the 'Jewish Quarterly Review' (1888-9), and contributed essays to the Oxford 'Studia Biblica' in 1885, 1890, and 1891. 
In 1890 Neubauer's eyesight began to fail him. He resigned from the library in 1899 and from the university in 1900. He continued to live in Oxford until 1901, when he moved to live with his nephew, Dr Adolf Buchler in Vienna. Buchler, who was also a rabbinical scholar, returned to England in 1906, when he was appointed vice-president of Jews' College, London. Neubauer died (unmarried) in the following year, on 6 April 1907, while living in London with Buchler at 18 Tavistock Square. 
Neubauer's careful scholarship and integration into Oxford University life, helped perhaps by his failure to observe Jewish practices, ensured that he was accepted in English society. He was created MA of Oxford by diploma in 1873, and he was elected an honorary fellow of Exeter College in 1890. He received an honorary PhD from the University of Heidelberg, was made an honorary member of the Real Academia de la Historia at Madrid, and became a corresponding member of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 35204


Neville, (Thomas) Henry Gartside (1837-1910), actor, was born at Manchester on 20 June 1837. He was the son of John Neville (1787-1874), the manager of the Queen's Theatre, Spring Gardens, and his second wife, Marianne, the daughter of Captain Gartside of Woodbrow, Saddleworth, Yorkshire. He was the twentieth child of a twentieth child, both being the issue of a second marriage. A brother, George, was also an actor. 
At the age of three Neville was brought on the stage in his father's arms as the child in 'Pizarro'. He forfeited all help from his father by refusing to join the army like other members of the family, and in 1857, at Preston, under Edmund Falconer, he took to the stage as a profession. When John Vandenhoff made his farewell performance on 29 October 1858, at the Theatre Royal, Liverpool, Neville played Cromwell to the tragedian's Cardinal Wolsey in 'King Henry VIII'. Following a stern noviciate in the north of England and in Scotland, he made his debut in London at the Lyceum Theatre, under Madame Celeste, on 8 October 1860, as Percy Ardent in a revival of Boucicault's 'The Irish Heiress'. After further provincial engagements he spent four years at the Olympic under Robson and Emden (1862-6). The experience proved the turning point in his career. In May 1863 he was the original Bob Brierley in Tom Taylor's 'The Ticket-of-Leave Man', a character in which he made the success of his life. He played it in all some 2000 times. In May 1864, while Taylor's play was still running, Neville also appeared as Petruchio in the afterpiece 'Catherine and Petruchio', and was highly praised for his speaking of blank verse. In October 1866 he was the first professional to take the part of Richard Wardour in Wilkie Collins's 'The Frozen Deep', a character originally performed by Charles Dickens. 
Neville's impassioned and romantic style of acting, which gave a character to the Olympic productions, contrasted with the over-charged, highly coloured style then current at the Adelphi. But early in 1867 he migrated to the Adelphi, where he was the original Job Armroyd in Watts Phillips's 'Lost in London' and the original Farmer Allen in Charles Reade's version of Tennyson's 'Dora'. In August 1867, on Kate Terry's farewell, he played Romeo to her Juliet, and the following December he was the original George Vendale in Dickens and Collins's 'No Thoroughfare'. In November 1868 'The Yellow Passport', Neville's own version of Victor Hugo's 'Les miserables', was produced at the Olympic with himself as Jean Valjean. At the Gaiety in 1869 he played an important role in W. S. Gilbert's first comedy, 'An Old Score'. 
From 1873 to 1879 Neville was lessee and manager of the Olympic Theatre. After experiencing failure in 1873 with H. J. Byron's comedy 'Sour Grapes' and James Mortimer's 'The School for Intrigue', he scored numerous successes through his acting of Lord Clancarty in Taylor's 'Lady Clancarty' and with John Oxenford's 'The Two Orphans' in 1874, and also in the part of Franklin Blake in Wilkie Collins's 'The Moonstone' in 1877. From 1879 he played for two years at the Adelphi, opening there as Perrinet Leclerc in Clement Scott and E. Mavriel's 'The Crimson Cross'. He proved a popular Charles Surface in a successful revival of 'The School for Scandal' at the Vaudeville in February 1882. A little later he was supporting Madame Modjeska in the provinces as the Earl of Leicester in Lewis Wingfield's 'Mary Stuart' and as Jaques in 'As You Like It'. 
Thereafter Neville confined himself chiefly to playing romantic heroes in melodrama. In September 1885 he was the original Captain Temple in Pettitt and Harris's 'Human Nature' at Drury Lane, and after playing in many similar pieces he went to America in 1890 with Sir Augustus Harris's company to appear as Captain Temple. He opened at the Boston Theatre and performed in the role for 200 nights (the play had been renamed 'The Soudan'). He was in London again at the Princess's in 1892. During the succeeding fourteen years he continued, with occasional interruptions, to originate prominent characters in the autumn melodramas at Drury Lane. His last appearance on the stage was at His Majesty's at a matinee on 29 April 1910, when he played Sir Oliver in Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree's revival of 'The School for Scandal', which was also the last great engagement of Lionel Brough and Hermann Vezin. 
Neville's art reflected his buoyant, breezy nature and his generous mind. He believed that the principles of acting could be taught, and in 1878 established a dramatic studio in Oxford Street, in whose fortunes he continued to take an interest for many years. In 1875 he published a pamphlet giving the substance of a lecture on 'The Stage, its Past and Present in Relation to Fine Art', which was later published as a book. He also wrote half a dozen plays, including 'The Violin-Maker', 'The Duke's Device', and 'The Great Metropolis', the last in collaboration with William Terriss. 
Although he lived for the theatre, Neville was a man of varied accomplishments. He was a prominent freemason. He painted, carved, and modelled, took a keen interest in sport, and was a volunteer and crack rifle shot. He was also a man of sound business capacity, and long managed the George Hotel at Reading. He was a freeholder in Berkshire, Lancashire, Kent, and Middlesex. 
Neville died at 4 Esplanade, Seaford, Sussex, on 19 June 1910, from heart failure as the result of an accident, and was buried at Denshaw, Saddleworth, Yorkshire. He was survived by the four sons from his marriage to Henrietta Waddell. 


@@@@@


doc= 35205


Nevinson, Christopher Richard Wynne (1889-1946), painter and journalist, was born on 13 August 1889 in John Street, Hampstead, London, the only son of Henry Woodd Nevinson (1856-1941), writer, journalist, and foreign correspondent, and Margaret Nevinson, nee Wynne Jones (1858-1932), a leading suffragette and a writer. He was educated at University College School, Hampstead, and then at Uppingham School, Rutland (1904-7), where excessive bullying caused his early departure. He returned to London and began to study art, first at the St John's Wood School of Art (1907-8), and then at the Slade School of Fine Art (1908-12), where Mark Gertler, Dora Carrington, Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, and David Bomberg were among his contemporaries. He began to exhibit regularly, painting in an impressionist style, and gained the interest of older artists, including Charles Ginner, Harold Gilman, and Spencer Gore, but not that of the assistant professor, Henry Tonks, who advised him to quit art. Nevinson left the Slade School in the summer of 1912 and travelled to Paris. There he befriended the Italian futurist painter Gino Severini and soon afterwards introduced the fragmented imagery of futurism into his own paintings, with mixed results. In due course Severini introduced him to Filippo Marinetti, the futurist leader and polemicist, already well known in England for his bombastic performances. When Marinetti visited London in 1913, he was enthusiastically welcomed by Nevinson, and also by Wyndham Lewis, the self-appointed spokesman for nearly every young independent abstract artist then comprising the English avant-garde. Lewis was eager for radical artistic change, and futurism was a noisy, freely available, anti-establishment aesthetic; but by the spring of 1914 Lewis had changed his mind: he feared an Italian takeover of abstract art in England. When -- on 7 June 1914 -- Nevinson and Marinetti published 'Vital English Art', a brash futurist manifesto wrongly claiming the support and signatures of nearly all the British independents, Lewis pounced, incensed. Vilifying Marinetti and Nevinson in print, he announced vorticism, an art movement of 1914-15 which attacked British aesthetic values in semi-futurist terms through the pages of his own magazine 'Blast' -- whose name Nevinson had coined. The ensuing furore denied Marinetti a voice in Britain and, temporarily but seriously, discredited Nevinson among the English avant-garde. 
It is arguable that Nevinson made his greatest contribution to futurism -- and to his own reputation -- in his very vocal role as Marinetti's proselytizing acolyte, and not through his paintings. His work was often uneven and owed too much of its style to Severini. However, his retreat from pure abstraction worked in Nevinson's favour, for, in the wake of 'Blast', he gave the press an accessible form of contemporary art to debate. Critics and readers alike tended to accept his paintings, whereas they were unable or unwilling to come to terms with the icy abstraction of vorticism. Nevinson called himself a futurist until late in 1915, even using the name in the vorticist exhibition catalogue of the same year. Thereafter, until his death in 1946, he was outspoken in his rejection of all group affiliations. 
In 1915 Nevinson married Kathleen Mary Knowlman; they had one son, who died in infancy. He experienced the First World War at first hand as a Red Cross orderly (1914-15), and with the Royal Army Medical Corps in France and Flanders (1915-16) before illness led to his military discharge in 1916. From 1915 he executed and exhibited several harshly emotive images of the war in a futurist idiom, including 'La mitrailleuse' (exh. London Group, 1915; Tate collection), whose merits were argued by well-placed admirers and detractors alike (Cork, 'A Bitter Truth'). By the end of 1915 Nevinson had completely disavowed futurism (to Lewis's delight) but did not mention this when he requested employment as an official war artist from the Ministry of Information in April 1917: official correspondence shows that Britain's head of propaganda, C. F. G. Masterman, was disappointed with the non-futuristic outcome of Nevinson's official commission. Instead, his work at, and derived from, the western front after the end of June 1917 (such as 'Paths of Glory', 1918) was a form of painterly journalism, respected by many artists and by a wide public following an exhibition at the Leicester Galleries, London, in 1918. This, and the publication of two illustrated books ('British Artists at the Front: C. R. W. Nevinson', 1918; 'The Great War: Fourth Year: Paintings by C. R. W. Nevinson', 1918), meant that, by the armistice of 1918, Nevinson's reputation in Britain, France, and the United States was assured. However, his peacetime painting lacked the bite of his wartime images, and it was soon criticized: he may have entered journalism in self-defence, but in doing so he found an alternative metier. Nevinson's popularity as an outspoken artist gained him easy access to the features columns of many newspapers, and he was a frequent contributor to the 'Daily Express' and the 'Daily Mail'. From 1920 until 1940 they carried his strident, maverick diatribes, aimed at society at large, and at the establishment in all its forms -- for example, 'Women growing more and more beautiful' ('Daily Mail', October 1929) and 'Once more, this ridiculous Royal Academy' ('Daily Express', May 1930). He also wrote regularly for other journals such as the 'New Statesman', the 'Strand Magazine', and 'Harper's Bazaar', and the variety, salacity, and often uncompromising savagery of his egocentric articles remains enormously entertaining. However, his autobiography, 'Paint and Prejudice' (1937), is marked and marred by a strong undercurrent of confrontational right-wing xenophobia, and some of his private correspondence in the Imperial War Museum in London is explicitly racist: true signs of the times to which he was such a conspicuous contributor. 
A series of strokes in 1942 and 1943 ended Nevinson's career as a painter, and his unjustly neglected prints form his last continuous body of work. Many views of London, New York (1919-21), and southern England, including several executed for London Transport, are outstanding, but his last major commission -- as an official war artist in 1940 -- completely lacked his former vigour. Variously viewed by his contemporaries as charming, aggressive, and neurotic, he was the only artist among the young, pre-1914 British avant-garde who had adopted wholeheartedly the bellicose ideals of Italian futurism. Nevinson died of heart disease on 7 October 1946 at his home, 1 Steeles Studios, Haverstock Hill, Hampstead, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35206


Nevinson, Henry Woodd (1856-1941), social activist and journalist, was born at 5 South Fields Place, Leicester, on 11 October 1856, the second son of George Nevinson, a solicitor, and his wife, Maria Jane, 'nee' Woodd, who raised him in a strictly evangelical atmosphere. In 1872 he won a scholarship at Shrewsbury School and later a junior studentship at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 10 May 1875. He was placed in the second class in both classical moderations (1877) and 'literae humaniores', graduating BA in 1879. He retained an interest in the classics, especially Greek drama. 
After taking his degree, and spending a short time at Westminster School teaching Greek, Nevinson studied German literature during two sojourns in Germany (mainly at Jena). His first book, 'A Sketch of Herder and his Times' (1884), was followed by a volume on Schiller (1889) and, many years afterwards, by another on Goethe (1932). As a child Nevinson had developed a keen interest in military affairs, which led him, as a young man, to study the German army, to advocate conscription, and, after training, to command a company of cadets in the East End of London. Although he grew to hate war, he never lost his academic interest in military history. 
At Oxford, Nevinson had been deeply influenced by the principles of Christian socialists and the impressive personality of John Ruskin, and after returning to England from Germany he worked at Toynbee Hall, settling in Whitechapel in London. He also lectured on history at Bedford College, and acted as secretary to the London Playing Fields Committee. He gradually became more radical through his exposure to the miseries of poverty, and by 1889 had joined the Social Democratic Federation of H. M. Hyndman; Marxism, however, was never congenial to him. As an agnostic who disliked all dogmatic systems, his ethical and political outlook was similar to that of his friends Peter Kropotkin and Edward Carpenter. On 18 April 1884 Nevinson married Margaret Wynne Jones (1858-1932) ['see 'Nevinson, Margaret Wynne], with whom he had one daughter and one son, the painter Christopher Richard Wynne Nevinson. After her death he married, on 18 January 1933, Evelyn Jane Sharp (1869-1955), suffragette and novelist. He spent time living among the working classes and depicted the life of the labouring people in 'Neighbours of Ours' (1895), which was written in cockney dialect. In later years he joined the Labour Party. 
In 1897 Nevinson was made the 'Daily Chronicle''s correspondent in the Graeco-Turkish War. For the next thirty years he chronicled, mainly through eyewitness reports, most of the wars and civil disturbances of the day. He was sent by the 'Daily Chronicle' to report on the South African War, visited Russia during the abortive revolutionary movement of 1905-6, went to India for the 'Manchester Guardian' in 1907-8, and was with the Bulgarians during the First Balkan War. During the First World War he was a correspondent on the western front and at the Dardanelles, where he was wounded. He published 'The Dardanelles Campaign' in 1918. In 1926, at the age of seventy, he went to Palestine, Syria, and Iraq to report for the 'Manchester Guardian'. 
As a war correspondent Nevinson was always scrupulously careful in gathering his facts, and his writing often inspired those struggling towards freedom. However, writing was not his only form of service. He helped to organize relief for the Macedonians (1903) and the Albanians (1911), and worked with his son for the Friends' Ambulance Unit in Flanders in late 1914. When incensed at the outrages of the Black and Tans in Ireland he used the platform as well as the printed page in order to rouse public protest. The most difficult, however, of all his crusades was that which he conducted against what he saw as the virtual slavery of bonded labourers in Portuguese Angola. After a journey into the interior in 1904-5 he returned to the malaria-infested plantations of Sao Tome and Principe, encountering skeletons of perished slaves along the way. His writings aimed to make clear to the consciences of his fellow Englishmen the human price of their taste for cocoa. Eventually the leading cocoa firms boycotted the produce of those islands; some of the slaves were repatriated, and, after prolonged controversy, the accusations which he had made in 'A Modern Slavery' (1906) were confirmed by the government's white paper published in 1914. Nevinson suffered from a painful tropical disease for many years after the journey. 
A strong supporter of female suffrage, Nevinson was friends with the suffragette Evelyn Sharp for many years before they married. In 1907 he was a founder member of the Men's League for Women's Suffrage and two years later he helped to found, and became chairman of, the more militant Men's Political Union for Women's Enfranchisement. In the same year he resigned from the 'Daily News' (along with his colleague Henry Brailsford) as a protest against its stance on the forcible feeding of women prisoners. 
Nevinson wrote good and clear prose. His 'Plea of Pan' (1901) was perhaps his most accomplished piece of writing. From 1907 to 1923, while Massingham was editing 'The Nation', Nevinson, whenever he was in England, contributed 'middle' articles (essays written to order and to a prescribed space). He wrote well on an astonishing variety of topics, ranging from humour to grave commentary on history and life. His travel articles appeared throughout his more than thirty published works, of which the best-known were 'Essays in Freedom' (1909), 'Essays in Rebellion' (1913), 'Between the Wars' (1936), and 'Running Accompaniments' (1936). He also published two books of poetry. A selection of his work was published posthumously as 'Essays, Poems and Tales of Henry W. Nevinson' (1948). His personal experiences were recorded in three autobiographical volumes: 'Changes and Chances' (1923), 'More Changes, More Chances' (1925), and 'Last Changes, Last Chances' (1928); the latter two volumes were abridged by Ellis Roberts in 'Fire of Life' (1935). 
Nevinson was a handsome man, who carried himself with a noble air which earned him the nickname of the Grand Duke. His blend of humanity, compassion, and daring made him a popular figure in his own lifetime. Twice in his old age friends arranged a banquet in his honour and made him a presentation. In 1937 he was president of the English PEN Club; he received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Liverpool in 1935, and that of LittD from the University of Dublin in 1936. In 1939 he was elected an honorary student of Christ Church, Oxford. In October of the following year the Nevinsons' house in Hampstead was bombed and the couple moved to the vicarage at Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire. It was here that Nevinson died, aged 85, on 9 November 1941. His funeral was held at Golders Green crematorium and was followed by a memorial meeting at Caxton Hall, London, on 11 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 35207


Newall, Dame Bertha Surtees (1877-1932), educationist and Scandinavian scholar, was born in Bedford on 25 October 1877, the second of three daughters of James Surtees Phillpotts (1839-1930), headmaster of Bedford grammar school, and his wife, Marian Hadfield Cordery (1843-1925). She was the fifth of six children to survive childhood. She apparently had little formal education, but with the extramural aid of the masters of her father's school she managed to win the gold medal of the Societe Nationale des Professeurs de Francais en Angleterre in February 1897. Gaining a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, where she studied between 1898 and 1901, she won a first in French and German in the medieval and modern languages tripos. Cambridge degrees were at that time closed to women so she took an MA degree from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1905 (subsequently becoming DLitt there). In the years before the First World War she worked intensively on developing her knowledge of Scandinavian history and archaeology and increasing her firm grasp of the Scandinavian languages. She showed a particular flair for Icelandic, for which she had the personal tutorage of the eminent Icelandic scholar Eirikur Magnusson (1833-1913), then under-librarian at the University Library, Cambridge. Phillpotts proceeded to win the Pfeiffer scholarships to Girton in 1903-4 and 1905-6, before becoming librarian of Girton (1906-9) and secretary to Baron Anatole von Hugel at the museum of archaeology and ethnology at Cambridge (1909-13). In 1913 she was elected the first Lady Carlisle fellow of Somerville College, Oxford. There she made the influential acquaintance of Gilbert Murray. 
In 1903 Phillpotts made her first trip to Iceland, spending the summer learning Icelandic in the household of high court judge Jon Jensson. During a further year of study in Copenhagen she encountered other important Icelandic scholars, including Finnur Jonsson and Sigfus Blondal. Attracted since childhood to outdoor pursuits such as walking and sailing, she also made visits to Iceland mainly for walking holidays in 1905, 1909, 1910, 1912, and 1914. On these largely unguided trips across the harsh Icelandic landscape she was usually accompanied by female friends from college. Her expeditions, and especially that undertaken in 1909 when she walked a total of about 500 miles around the country, wearing out several pairs of shoes on the way, astounded even the Icelanders (the Icelandic newspaper, 'Isafold', 28 Aug 1909). 
Of all the Europeans involved in Scandinavian studies during this time, Phillpotts probably had the most first-hand knowledge of the countries involved: she was certainly the first woman to enter the male realms of Scandinavian studies on an academic basis, and in 1911 became only the second woman to be elected as fellow to the Society of Northern Antiquities in Copenhagen. She also worked continuously to improve the opportunities and status of other women students. She visited other Nordic countries, spending the war years working as a clerical assistant at the British legation in Stockholm, where she later served as private secretary to the minister, Sir Esme Howard. For this she was appointed OBE in 1918. 
On her return to England in 1919 Phillpotts became the principal of Westfield College, London, and was a member of the consultative committee of the Board of Education. In 1922 she succeeded her aunt, Katharine Jex-Blake, as mistress of Girton, a position she held until 1925 (during which time Girton at last received its charter). She then stepped aside to give more time to her ailing father. In 1926, however, she accepted a lecturing position in Scandinavian studies at the University of Cambridge, and subsequently became director of Scandinavian studies and head of other foreign languages. She was the sole female member of the statutory commission for the University of Cambridge (1923-7), and was also a member of the statutory commission for the University of London (1926-8). 
Bertha Phillpotts was not a prolific author, but her main works have exerted continuing influence. Her first book, 'Kindred and Clan in the Middle Ages and after' (1913), concerning the clan society of the medieval Germanic peoples, is still regularly quoted by historical anthropologists, and her final work, 'Edda and Saga' (1931), has only recently been replaced as one of the best general introductions to early Icelandic literature. Phillpotts's most daring and original work, 'The Elder Edda and Ancient Scandinavian Drama' (1920), which proposed a dramatic origin for some of the Eddic poems, has been under-rated. By the end of the twentieth century, the inspired and far-sighted arguments expressed in this book at last appeared to be gaining some vindication (see, for example, Terry Gunnell, 'The Origins of Drama in Scandinavia', 1995, and Ursula Dronke, 'The Poetic Edda', 2, 1997). 
Phillpotts was made a DBE in 1929 and two years later married her friend Hugh Frank Newall (1857-1944), emeritus professor of astrophysics at Cambridge. She died of cancer at their home, Madingley Rise, Madingley Road, Cambridge, on 20 January 1932, and was buried in the Tunbridge Wells cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35208


Newall, Cyril Louis Norton, first Baron Newall (1886-1963), air force officer, was born on 15 February 1886 at Mussooree in north-west India, the only son and the second child of Captain (later Lieutenant-Colonel) William Potter Newall, of the Indian army, and his wife, Edith Gwendoline Caroline Norton. He was educated at Bedford School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned in the Royal Warwickshire regiment on 16 August 1905. He went with his regiment to India, transferred to the Indian army, and served from September 1909 on the north-west frontier with King Edward's Own Gurkha rifles. During an exercise, he and his Gurkhas were 'annihilated' while still at breakfast by a force led by Hugh Dowding, who later achieved greater fame as head of Fighter Command (1936-40). 
While on leave in England in 1911 Newall learned to fly at Larkhill, Salisbury Plain, and instructed in India before returning permanently to England in 1914. He joined the Royal Flying Corps as a captain and instructed at the Central Flying School, Upavon, Wiltshire. In March 1915 he was promoted major and from September prepared 12 squadron for service in France, under his command. Although he was not yet thirty, he gave up flying and concentrated on efficient management -- a skill much needed by so new a service. His pilots and observers regarded him with limited respect until 3 January 1916, when he faced up to a challenge on the ground with as much courage as any man could show in the air. Noticing smoke emerging from a wooden shed where some 2000 bombs were stored on his airfield at St Omer, Newall ordered hoses to be brought up, walked calmly into the shed (followed by three corporals), dragged several bombs to safe places, and helped put out the fire. An eyewitness recalled 'a dirty and blackened figure, very unlike his usual immaculately turned-out self', busily rolling 'red-hot bombs out of harm's way' (Pollard, 25). He was awarded the Albert medal (first class, gold) on the personal recommendation of General Trenchard, head of the Royal Flying Corps in France; those who helped him received the second-class (bronze) version of that medal. 
Newall returned to England in February 1916 on promotion to lieutenant-colonel to command a training wing. In December he went back to France as head of 9 wing (seven squadrons), and during 1917 he organized numerous long-distance reconnaissances and raids. 41 wing (later renamed 8 brigade, with five squadrons) was formed under his command at Ochey, near Nancy, in October 1917 to specialize in raids on Germany. That brigade, led by Newall as a brigadier-general from December, joined Trenchard's independent bombing force after May 1918. Its actual achievements were small, but both Trenchard and Newall became convinced that the morale impact of bombing on Germans had been devastating. 
Granted a permanent commission as a group captain in August 1919, Newall served as deputy director of personnel (1919-22), commander of the school of technical training (for apprentices) at Halton, Buckinghamshire (1923-5), and head of operations and intelligence in the Air Ministry (1926-31). He was promoted air commodore in January 1925 and air vice-marshal in January 1930. From 1931 to 1934 he fulfilled his one and only overseas posting -- to Cairo, as head of RAF Middle East. In January 1935 he became air member for supply and organization, a newly created position in which he was responsible for aircraft supply, bases, and stores at a time of rapid expansion. It has often been alleged that he had reached the limit of his capabilities when he was promoted air marshal in June 1935 and knighted (KCB) in July. 
In September 1937, however, and much to the surprise and disappointment of Dowding, Sir Edgar Ludlow-Hewitt, and Sir Wilfrid Freeman -- all of whom have been supposed to be his superiors in every respect -- Newall was appointed chief of the air staff on the recommendation of Lord Swinton, secretary of state for air, as successor to Sir Edward Ellington. Dowding and Freeman were probably too abrasive and too severe on senior colleagues of ordinary ability to thrive in that appointment, but it may be that Ludlow-Hewitt possessed all Newall's qualities, in addition to a stronger grasp of bombing capabilities in particular and air force organization in general. Trenchard and Salmond, though retired, remained influential and soon regretted their failure to oppose Newall's elevation -- which brought with it promotion to air chief marshal and a GCB in 1938. 
Sir John Slessor, who worked closely with Newall in the late 1930s, described him as 'the prime architect of the wartime air force' (Slessor, 241); this high praise is not echoed by other contemporaries or subsequent historians, but Slessor was certainly one of the RAF's shrewdest high commanders. Newall was an orthodox disciple of Trenchard, who believed that a powerful bomber force would probably deter an aggressor; if not, it would certainly wreck his economy very quickly; and no effective fighter defence was possible. In fact, just such a defence -- based on radar and heavily armed monoplane fighters -- was then being developed in Fighter Command (under Dowding), while in Bomber Command Ludlow-Hewitt was bluntly informing the Air Ministry that a Trenchardist 'knock-out blow' lay far in the future. 
Newall, though ignorant of modern bomber or fighter issues, and lacking the staff college experience -- as pupil or teacher -- that might have broadened his mind, failed to remedy his ignorance. On the other hand, he played a key part in the decisions to order Hurricane and Spitfire fighters and to construct 'shadow' factories, where aircraft were produced in quantity at a time of urgent need, and when the administrative machinery for aircraft development and production was reorganized in 1938. He rejected accepted wisdom that there would be no special demand for an aircraft repair organization if war came, and just such an organization did in fact play a vital part in boosting aircraft supply to the RAF, not only during the battle of Britain but throughout the war. 
Instead of spending time with Dowding and Ludlow-Hewitt, his principal commanders, Newall remained in his office, vainly resisting the government's growing emphasis on fighters rather than bombers. He learned nothing from the Luftwaffe's conduct of operations during the Spanish Civil War and even asserted that its adroit support of ground forces was a gross misuse of air power. He therefore resisted demands for similar support of British and French soldiers in the event of (and then in the face of) a German invasion of France. He failed to realize that his bombers could cause significant damage to German targets only if they operated from French bases. When German forces occupied the channel coast, and the Luftwaffe prepared to attack targets in south-east England, he still thought it best to employ bombers against 'strategic' targets far behind the front line. As Sholto Douglas (a senior assistant) observed, Newall was 'an absolute bag of nerves' by 1940. 'He worked at his desk in the Air Ministry during the day, and he had a cell underground where he used to work and sleep at nights. He never left the place' (Douglas to Wright, 2 July 1963). 
Newall certainly did more in May and June 1940 than some admirers of Dowding have admitted to resist Churchill's readiness to send British fighters to assist the French in an obviously lost cause. Newall had sacked Ludlow-Hewitt in April and wished to get rid of Dowding also, but Churchill's objection -- and a succession of desperate crises -- thwarted him. From May onwards he was himself under growing pressure. A memorandum composed by Wing Commander Edgar Kingston-McCloughry (a member of the Air Ministry's directorate of war organization), and circulated anonymously, castigated Newall as 'A Weak Link in the Nation's Defences': his mental capacity was inadequate, his practical experience was limited, his character and personality were weak, and he lacked judgement and foresight (Ritchie). Whatever his merits as a diligent manager, it was clear by mid-1940 that Newall was unable to galvanize the Air Ministry, regarded by Churchill as 'a most cumbersome and ill-working administrative machine', into the alertness required in wartime. 
Lord Beaverbrook (appointed minister of aircraft production by Churchill in May) eagerly backed the campaign against Newall, partly because he agreed with Kingston-McCloughry and partly because Newall opposed many of the actions of the new ministry. By September Beaverbrook was receiving powerful support from Trenchard and Salmond, director of armament production in that ministry. They recognized Newall's general weakness, but they also had two particular fears: that he would prove unable to resist growing pressure for the creation of an Army Air Corps to give direct support to ground forces, and that he no longer believed absolutely in the bomber doctrine. Unlike Trenchard and Salmond, Newall had come to recognize that his bomber force was quite incapable, at least in the near future, of causing serious injury to Germany and was more usefully employed helping Fighter Command to prevent an invasion of Britain. Trenchard went over Newall's head on 25 September, writing directly to Churchill to urge that Bomber Command be used solely against 'strategic' targets in Germany. Churchill agreed on 2 October that Newall should go, and Portal replaced him on 25 October 1940. 
After three hard years, made harder by Britain's unreadiness for war, by France's shockingly sudden collapse, and by increasingly bitter criticism from powerful, unscrupulous men, Newall was more than ready to go. Promotion to marshal of the RAF and appointment to the Order of Merit at the end of 1940, plus a nice long rest as governor-general of New Zealand from February 1941 to April 1946 (rewarded by a barony in June 1946), consoled him. He took no further part in public affairs, wrote no memoirs, and made no speeches. At the close of the twentieth century no historian had yet closely examined his work in the critical years 1935-40. 
In 1922 Newall married May Dulcie Weddell, who died on 29 September 1924. He then married, on 16 April 1925 in Cannes, Olive Tennyson Foster, the only daughter of Mrs Francis Storer Eaton of Boston, Massachusetts. They had a son and two daughters. A slim man, always neatly dressed, Newall was even-tempered and had a ready smile and a pleasant voice: he was at his best in small gatherings, where he listened more than he spoke. He died at his London home, 37 Welbeck Street, on 30 November 1963, and was survived by his wife; his son, Francis ('b'. 1930), succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 35209


Newall, Hugh Frank (1857-1944), astrophysicist and educational benefactor, was born at Ferndene, near Gateshead, on 21 June 1857, the youngest of six children of Robert Stirling Newall (1812-1889), engineer, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Hugh Lee Pattinson FRS (1796-1858), metallurgical chemist and astronomer. At the London Exhibition of 1862 R. S. Newall acquired two discs of crown and flint glass, which Thomas Cooke (1807-1868) the following year contracted to figure and mount as a 25 inch refractor. The task took longer than anticipated, but the telescope was finally completed and mounted at Ferndene in 1871; this instrument shaped Hugh Newall's life and work. 
After attending J. M. Furness's private school, Newall was educated at Rugby School (1872-1876), then entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1876 as a pensioner. In 1880 he obtained a junior optime in the mathematical tripos, and a second class in the natural sciences tripos. At Rugby Newall fell in love with (Susannah) Margaret (1850-1930), seven years his senior, daughter of his house master, the Revd Charles Arnold (died 1878). Despite his parents' reservations, they married on 21 June 1881. An appointment in 1881 as assistant master at Wellington College was terminated in 1884 by Newall's poor health. He spent the next three years partly abroad and his first three papers, written in those years, indicate interests in natural phenomena; the last, written jointly with J. J. Thomson (1856-1940), induced an invitation in 1886 to become his personal assistant and demonstrator in experimental physics at the Cavendish Laboratory, and in 1887 Newall became senior demonstrator, with special interest in laboratory spectroscopy. 
In March 1889 Newall senior offered his refractor to Cambridge. For the impecunious university and observatory, the offer presented real problems, especially the recurring expense of staff. R. S. Newall died in April before the offer was accepted, and to implement his father's wish, Newall offered to work the 'Newall telescope' from 1890 for five years without stipend, an offer renewed several times; he also contributed to its removal to a separate building on the observatory site. The Newalls built Madingley Rise, a fine house, next to the observatory; it became famed for gracious hospitality and as a cultural centre drawing astronomers, scientists, and music lovers of many nationalities. 
Astrophysics was changing from small-scale sampling to quantitative collection of high-quality photographic observations. Great ingenuity was needed to adapt the telescope for photography and faint star spectroscopy. Newall designed a one-prism slit spectrograph, in 1895 began to study stellar spectra, and from 1896 pioneered in this country work on radial velocities. He then designed a four-prism spectrograph (1899). Those years of work and delicate observations yielded the independent discovery that Capella was a binary star (1899). Despite having only one assistant, paid by himself, Newall competed with H. C. Vogel at Potsdam and W. W. Campbell at Lick Observatory and proved 'that high-precision stellar spectroscopy was possible... in Britain' (Milne, 'Nature', 456). In 1895 Newall deduced descending currents at the sun's surface near spots. He took part in six eclipse expeditions after 1898, and specialized in studying the solar corona. From 1906 he undertook a long study of sun-spot cycles to derive how the rotation of the sun differed from rigid body models. In 1916 he shared the identification of hydrocarbons in the solar spectrum, and in 1918 obtained the spectrum of Nova Aquilae. 
Newall's researches introduced new fields of enquiry to the observatory and thereby established astrophysics at Cambridge. In 1892 he refused to direct the Cambridge observatory, thus maintaining his freedom to research. The new director and Lowndean professor was Robert S. Ball (1840-1913), who did very little observing but divided his time between official duties, lecturing, mathematical researches, and popular lecturing and writing. Newall became assistant director in 1904; at that time he was unencumbered by university duties and, through his continued presence and successful astrophysical research, attracted several excellent students who won the Isaac Newton studentships, established in 1890 by Frank McClean (1837-1904), and then sought research opportunities. Newall's scientific responsibilities soon increased. In 1904 a bequest from McClean 'to the Newall Observatory' (Stratton, 14) brought $5000 for equipment, which Newall invested in solar apparatus. Crucially, however, he maintained his broader contribution to astrophysics by instigating and partly funding a new graduate post, an assistantship in astrophysics. These initiatives made Newall's observatory a natural beneficiary in 1908 of the Royal Society's donation of William Huggins's twin telescopes and spectroscopes. They were accommodated in the Astrophysical Building provided by Newall where they were re-mounted. Other gifts followed including E. H. Grove-Hills's valuable solar apparatus in 1909. 
In 1882 J. Norman Lockyer (1836-1920) became the controversial beneficiary of government funding for a new lectureship in physical astronomy at the Board of Education's new Normal School of Science at South Kensington. In 1887 he became professor, and director with a budget and staff for the separate Solar Physics Observatory (SPO) there. The government's annual grant to the observatory was its principal regular subsidy for solar research. In 1906 the board needed the site, and decided to relocate the SPO. Newall's work had established the potential of Cambridge as an alternative location and in mid-1909 the board stunned Lockyer by announcing negotiations with Cambridge, where Newall had already in January been elected a fellow of Trinity College, then to a new chair of astrophysics established for him (which he occupied without stipend until his retirement in 1928). The coincidence of Newall's academic rise and the board's announcement suggests intrigue. Joseph Larmor (1857-1942), Lucasian professor of mathematics and a member of the board's committee, had manoeuvred the Cambridge interest: their friend Thomson at the Cavendish Laboratory was building a great school of experimental physics, and spectroscopy was crucial; John Strutt, third Baron Rayleigh (1842-1919), who had been Cavendish professor of experimental physics in 1879-84, latterly with a special interest in physical optics, in 1908 became chancellor of the university; the ground was fertile. Newall was enabled to negotiate that the board make a sufficient capital grant for buildings, and transfer instruments and an enhanced SPO annual grant of $3000 to Cambridge. When this was effected in 1913, merged with Newall's installations it became the separate and independently constituted Solar Physics Observatory, Cambridge; Newall directed it and had a staff of six. On his retirement in 1928 Newall endowed his chair, thereby consolidating astrophysics as an academic subject, especially since PhD degrees had meanwhile become available at Cambridge, in 1920. 
Cambridge had not felt the need for a formal school of astronomy. The subjects were examined within the faculties of mathematics or physics, and especially since the early 1900s graduate students had a range of research opportunities under two directors at the observatory. In 1909 Newall founded the Observatory Club to promote interaction and access between all staff and students, and regular meetings became a tradition; in 1910 he published an elementary book on spectroscopy. Newall's initial generosity had made it possible to accept the 'Newall telescope'. His successful research, and development of facilities often at his own expense, precipitated a major shift first of private and then of government resources which established astrophysics as an academic discipline at Cambridge, which university then dominated observational astrophysics in Britain until 1935. 
Newall was elected FRS in 1902, and a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1891; he served on its council continuously for forty-three years from 1893, as secretary from 1897 to 1901, and as president from 1907 to 1909. He was president of the Cambridge Philosophical Society in 1914-16. Between 1883 and 1927 he published sixty-three papers, principally in the journals of those three societies and the 'Astrophysical Journal', of which he was on the editorial board. He was awarded an honorary degree of LLD by Durham. Newall was very active in the International Union for Cooperation in Solar Research, and in 1919 served on committees of the new International Astronomical Union of which in 1925 he was vice-president. 
Newall was a natural philosopher of the old school, with no frontiers between his broad interests in science and art. He could afford not to press his many scientific projects to a conclusion; he loved the mysteries in science and nature, but disliked modern theories that explained them away. His colleague E. Arthur Milne emphasized that 'the coming of astrophysics to Cambridge... was almost entirely due to [Newall's] personal work and striking character' ('Obits. FRS', 727). Mechanically skilful, an expert in optical design, he hated mechanical music, typewriters, or transport, and persisted with his brougham and pair. The Newalls gardened, farmed 50 acres, and travelled as widely as they read and entertained. Newall was profoundly influenced by his lifelong friendship with the American astrophysicist George Ellery Hale, who shared his wide interests. 
Margaret Newall was a distinguished pianist who gave concerts in Cambridge, and accompanied and assisted her husband in his eclipse expeditions. After her death, childless, in 1930, Newall in June 1931 married their close friend Dame Bertha Surtees Phillpotts (1877-1932), Scandinavian scholar and sometime mistress of Girton College, who was already seriously ill and died seven months later. Newall's career was much more significant than his published work. By his marked contributions to stellar and solar spectroscopy and then the institutional development of his observatory, and nurturing of graduate students, he earned his rank as 'one of the fathers of astrophysics in Great Britain' (Milne, 'Nature', 457). He died peacefully at Madingley Rise on 22 February 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 35210


Newberry, Percy Edward (1869-1949), Egyptologist, was born in Islington, London, on 23 April 1869, the younger son of Henry James Newberry, a woollen warehouseman, of Lewisham, and his wife, Caroline Wyatt. He was educated at King's College School and King's College, London. As a child he had a particular interest in botany, which he studied in London and at Kew. He was a gifted artist and illustrator who came to archaeology through these skills. Unlike his contemporary Howard Carter, of Tutankhamun fame, Newberry lacked natural ability, but he became an expert copyist. While still a young student he was introduced to the Egyptologist Reginald Stuart Poole of the British Museum, who served as a mentor. From 1884 to 1886 Poole enlisted Newberry to help with the administration of the newly founded Egypt Exploration Fund (later to become Society). The work brought the young Newberry into contact with such Egyptological luminaries as Amelia Edwards, Flinders Petrie, and F. L. Griffith. As a result he made Egyptology the focus of his life and studied it intensively. Petrie made use of Newberry's botanical expertise to identify the botanical remains found during his excavations in the Fayyum Depression. Newberry presented a paper to the British Association on the plant species in the excavations in 1888, as well as contributing chapters to Petrie's monographs on Hawara (1889) and Kahun (1890). 
In 1889 Newberry's mentor, Griffith, advocated an archaeological survey of Egypt to be conducted under the aegis of the Egypt Exploration Fund. The fund adopted the scheme in 1890. As part of this ambitious project, Newberry was sent out to the Nile valley to head an expedition to investigate the tombs of Middle Kingdom nomarchs at Beni Hasan and El Bersha from 1890 to 1894. Much of the work involved copying tomb paintings, in which he was joined by Howard Carter. Newberry was uncompromising in his requirements. 'Mechanical exactitude of facsimile-copying is required rather than freehand or purely artistic work', read the survey's instructions. Newberry followed them to the letter, unlike the more gifted Carter, who believed in observing 'the fundamental Laws of Egyptian Art'. Newberry was conservative in his copying, but produced an impressive body of work. In 1893-4 he published his two-volume monograph 'Beni Hasan', which remains a definitive account of the tombs there. His competence established after five years with the fund, Newberry operated as a freelance excavator in the Theban necropolis from 1895 to 1901. His patrons included Lord Amherst, the marquess of Northampton, and the American excavator Theodore Davis. 
On the strength of this fieldwork and his broad experience, Newberry was appointed the first Brunner professor of Egyptology at the University of Liverpool in 1906, where he took an MA in 1909. On 12 February 1907 he married Essie Winifred (1878-1953), daughter of William Munn Johnston, a Liverpool shipowner, of Bromborough, Cheshire. There were no children of the marriage. He held the Brunner chair until 1919, when he was nominated university reader in Egyptian art. During those years he was an influential member of the faculty. He was active in many learned societies and elected a fellow of King's College, London, in 1908. He was appointed OBE in 1919. In 1923 he served as president of the anthropology section of the British Association. His association with the Egypt Exploration Society lasted for sixty-five years. He was elected vice-president shortly before his death. He was vice-president of the Royal Anthropological Institute in 1926. In 1929 he accepted the chair of ancient Egyptian history and archaeology at the University of Egypt in Cairo, a post he held for four years. 
Newberry's publications included a noteworthy series of monographs, among them the Archaeological Survey volumes on Beni Hasan, 'El Bersheh' (2 parts, 1895), 'The Amherst Papyri' (1899), 'The Life of Rekhmara', a vizier of the pharaohs Tuthmosis III and Amenhotep II (1900), and 'Scarabs' (1906). His 'Short History of Ancient Egypt' (1904), written with John Garstang, was widely read. Newberry also compiled three volumes of the great 'Catalogue general' of the Cairo Museum. Throughout his career Newberry wrestled with a backlog of unpublished work, which he never completed. His unfinished manuscripts, notebooks, and papers were presented by his widow to the Griffith Institute at Oxford University. 
A gentlemanly, urbane man, who never achieved the fame of Flinders Petrie or Howard Carter, Percy Newberry was an important figure in Egyptology who influenced several generations of young Egyptologists. He devoted much of his career to fostering others' researches through the Egypt Exploration Society and played an important part in organizing the society's work at the pharaoh Akhenaten's capital at Tel el Amarna in the 1930s. He was responsible for recording many heavily damaged tombs, of which his copies are often the only record. He died at his home, Winkworth Hill, Hascombe, near Godalming, Surrey, on 7 August 1949. 


