@@@@@


doc= 35211


Newbold, Sir Douglas (1894-1945), colonial governor, was born on 13 August 1894 at Tunbridge Wells, the seventh and youngest son of William Newbold (died 1900) of Warwickshire and his wife, Eleanor Isabel Ferguson (died 1942). His father's business interests took him frequently to the USA and Mexico. His mother was the daughter of Colonel David Ferguson of the American army, and she presided over their large family after her husband's death in 1900. In Tunbridge Wells, Newbold was the prankster and the favourite in the family of six brothers and four sisters, and his mother became the dominant influence in his life until her death. He never married. Within his close family in rural Kent, Newbold absorbed a romantic fascination with ancient archaeology that remained with him throughout his life in the more remote regions of the Middle East and the Sudan. In 1907 he followed his brothers to Uppingham School as a scholar. There his insatiable curiosity was strengthened by a deep appreciation of the human condition, symbolized by a fierce individualism that never left him. His success at Uppingham sent him to Oriel College, Oxford, in 1913 as a classical scholar, but his career was interrupted in 1914 by the outbreak of the First World War and a commission in the Dorset yeomanry and the cavalry machine-gun corps. He served in Mudros in Greece, in Egypt against the Senussi in 1915, and also in Palestine, where he was wounded at Zeitun after the fall of Gaza in November 1917. His time in the Middle East, supported by a thorough knowledge of the 'Bible', also proved to be of scholarly interest that led to his study of the classical and Arab medieval geographers. 
After the war Newbold returned to Oxford and Oriel for another year before joining the Sudan political service whose administration in the remote regions of the Nile basin appealed to his romantic temperament. He arrived in the Sudan in 1920 and was sent to the Kordofan province as an assistant district commissioner where, aided by his Arabic studies, he began to fulfil his ambition to explore the remote regions of the country. He undertook exploration by camel and car into the Libyan desert in 1924, 1927, and 1930 in search of the legendary oasis of Zerzura. His experience and success among the nomads of the west resulted in his transfer to the Beja of the Red Sea hills in eastern Sudan, after a brief sojourn in Khartoum as deputy assistant civil secretary in 1924-5. His fascination and fondness for the nomadic Beja (Rudyard Kipling's 'Fuzzy-Wuzzy') thereafter became the paramount interest of his life. His most happy years were those spent as district commissioner, nomad administrator, and deputy governor, Beja, from 1926 to 1932. His return to Kordofan as governor in 1933 made him the chief administrator of the nomadic peoples he had known as a young district commissioner. He was made an OBE in 1933. Promoted deputy civil secretary in 1938, he was also made a CBE. He was appointed civil secretary the following year, and remained in this post -- the chief administrative officer of Sudan -- until his death. 
Newbold's years as civil secretary were devoted to war and political transition in the Sudan, during which he never lost his composure or his concern for the Sudanese. As a district commissioner and governor he had protected the Sudanese from commercial and political exploitation. In war he now defended them from foreign invasion and attempted to create institutions to satisfy their growing political aspirations without sacrificing the social benefits and individual liberties bestowed by paternal but autocratic imperial rule. During his early years he had established a close bond of affection and trust with the great tribal sheikhs which as civil secretary he had greater difficulty in retaining when challenged by younger, educated Sudanese aspiring for greater political control of Sudanese affairs. The Second World War and Newbold's death prevented progress towards self-government. As the chief executive officer of Sudan, he had to organize its defence and the campaigns against the Italians in Ethiopia and Libya, while continuing civil administration in the Sudan with limited human and material resources, all of which intruded upon his ideas for imperial reform and political innovation in which Western representative institutions were perhaps not the solution. Despite being made a KBE in 1944 in recognition for his service to the empire this conundrum troubled him deeply and was only partially resolved in 1945 by the convening of the advisory council for northern Sudan. 
Newbold was an intellectual, but also an imperial and pragmatic administrator. An insatiable and prolific writer of letters, he was the author of many articles on exploration and archaeology which were published in 'Antiquity', the 'Geographical Journal', and 'Sudan Notes and Records'. A selection of his letters, papers, and lectures were published in 1953 under the title 'The Making of the Modern Sudan'. In these Newbold expressed his enthusiasm for education, not only to instil greater professionalism in British colonial administration, but also to lay the foundation for a new Sudan. He perceived 'a golden chance to use all our powers, moral, intellectual and physical, for the benefit of some of the finest people in the world' ('DNB'). He never lost sight of the need for educational advance as a condition of popular government and a responsible civil service. He was one of the most influential founders of the Khartoum University College. 
Newbold did not recover after being thrown from his horse during an outing in Khartoum. Exhausted by the demands of war, the politics of the coming peace, and an abscess in his hip brought on by years of growing osteoarthritis, he died in the Khartoum Hospital on 23 March 1945 and was buried at Khartoum the following day. He left his library to Gordon Memorial College, now the University of Khartoum, where his portrait hangs. 


@@@@@


doc= 35212


Newbolt, Sir Henry John (1862-1938), poet and writer, was born at St Mary's vicarage, Bilston, Staffordshire, on 6 June 1862, the elder son and eldest of the three children of Henry Francis Newbolt (1823/4-1866), vicar of St Mary's Church, Bilston, and his second wife, Emily (died 1921), second daughter of George Bradnock Stubbs, of Walsall and Blymhill, Staffordshire. Newbolt was educated at Clifton College and in 1881 was awarded a scholarship at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he took a first in classical moderations (1882) and a second in 'literae humaniores' (1885). In 1887 he was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn, London. He practised law for twelve years, contributing largely to the 'Law Digest'; but during this time he was steadily tending towards literature. On 15 August 1889 Newbolt married Margaret Edina ('b'. 1867/8), fourth daughter of the Revd William Arthur Duckworth of Orchardleigh, Frome, Somerset (an estate which later formed the scene of Newbolt's romance 'The Old Country', 1906). Both courtship and marriage were unconventional, as Margaret originally refused him on the basis of her close relationship with her cousin Ella Coltman; her consent was obtained only by Newbolt's assurances that Ella would not be deserted. Ella became in effect a third member of the household, and about two years after the wedding Newbolt and she became lovers, with Margaret aware of the arrangement, and Ella moving into the house. 'Neither woman appeared jealous of the other, perhaps because their lover was careful to divide his favours equally' (Chitty, 91), to the extent of keeping a careful 'account sheet' (ibid.) of the number of nights in a month that he slept with each. Newbolt and Margaret had two children: Celia ('b'. 1890), and Francis ('b'. 1893). The details of this unconventional domestic life seem at variance with Newbolt's standard reputation as a latter-day Victorian, and suggest that he was a more complex figure than is usually supposed. 
Newbolt's first book, 'Taken from the Enemy', appeared in 1892 and was followed by 'Mordred', a tragedy in blank verse, published in 1895; in the following year Andrew Lang printed six of Newbolt's poems in 'Longman's Magazine', and 'Drake's Drum', immediately famous, appeared in the 'St James's Gazette'. Newbolt himself relates how after reading this poem his friend Robert Bridges declared, 'It isn't given to a man to write anything better than that'. It was included in 'Admirals All' (1897), four editions of which raced into circulation within a fortnight. Many books followed from 1898 to 1932, various in theme, but consistent in the fastidious care expended on their making. Newbolt also edited the 'Monthly Review' during its brief lifetime (1900-04). 
During the First World War Newbolt served at the Admiralty and the Foreign Office, and was finally controller of wireless and cables. In 1923 he undertook the completion in two volumes (4 and 5) of the official 'History of the Great War: Naval Operations', the first three volumes of which had been written by Sir J. S. Corbett. He was conscientious in honorary service: he served on many commissions and committees, and on bodies such as the Royal Literary Fund and the Royal Society of Literature. He was a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery from 1928 to 1937. In 1915 he was knighted and appointed CH in 1922. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Bristol, Glasgow, St Andrews, Sheffield, Toronto, Oxford, and Cambridge, and in 1920 he was elected an honorary fellow of his college. 
Newbolt's name will always be associated with the Edwardian heyday of empire. His poetry is now little read, although it still figures in anthologies, and the late twentieth century saw something of a revival of critical interest in his work, with a selected edition (1981), a critical study (1994), and a biography (1997). Poems like 'Drake's Drum' and 'Vitai lampada' (with its famous refrain of 'Play up, play up, and play the game') have always remained popular. These stirring expressions of a certain sort of Englishness remain in the national memory, alongside similar things by Kipling and Elgar. Many of Newbolt's best-known poems, like 'Clifton Chapel', are rooted in the ethos of the public school, though his later verse is less robust and can even be dreamy. The poets who influenced him most were Shelley, Keats, D. G. Rossetti, and William Morris. Modern poetry, even after the war, for him meant the Georgians. 
Newbolt lived and worked in a literary world that naturally overlapped with the world of public affairs. He divided his time between his Wiltshire country house and his London base at the Athenaeum, devoting as much energy to public duties as to writing. He was known as a patriot but he was not a jingoist. In one poem he praises the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as a record of Englishmen who 'keep the Nelson touch' but in a letter of 1916 he complains that the word 'patriot' 'ought to be forbidden'. He came to regard his call to 'play the game' as a 'Frankenstein's Monster that I created'. W. B. Yeats told him in April 1902 that his patriotism was of the finer sort 'that lays burdens upon a man, & not the patriotism that takes burdens off' ('Collected Letters', 63). His chairing of the government committee which produced the Newbolt report (1921) on the teaching of English in England was innovative at the time and remains a landmark in discussions of the question. 
Walter de la Mare recalled of Newbolt: 'His faith in Christianity and the influence of tradition, social, historical, and literary, was paramount in his mind and work. He was haunted too by the seductive problem of time, not that of the clock but of the self within, and by a 'sense of the past' allied to the idea of the supreme consciousness, contained in a poem included in 'A Perpetual Memory' (a collection of his later poems published posthumously in 1939). 'Pre-incarnation', so to speak, is indeed the theme of his 'Aladore' (1914) -- love-allegory, fantasy, reverie, fairy-tale; so simple and limpid in its imposed archaic style that it may conceal its depth and its full meaning. In part for this reason it was his Benjamin among his own books.' Newbolt was a lucid speaker and a lively conversationalist. He was not a born story-teller, but his romances have a grace of their own. In his criticism he held true to tradition, but was too urbane to be dogmatic. He was a zealous admirer of Thomas Hardy, though being himself an enthusiast by nature, who could hardly avoid a tendency to optimism. Spare in figure, aquiline in face, with a finely moulded head and a dominant nose, alert in speech and laughter, he surveyed the world from grey-blue eyes at once intent and contemplative. In spite of so many pursuits that called him away from it, poetry was his inmost and lifelong devotion. Henry Newbolt died at his London home, 29 Campden Hill Road, Kensington, on 19 April 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 35213


Newbolt, William Charles Edmund (1844-1930), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born on 14 August 1844 at Somerton, Somerset, the fourth and youngest son of the Revd William Robert Newbolt (1801/2-1857), rector of Somerton, and his wife, Ann Frances Dorrien, daughter of Magens Dorrien Magens, of Hammerwood, East Grinstead. As a small boy Newbolt enjoyed 'playing at church' (Newbolt, 14) in the nursery. He attended Somerton grammar school, then a small preparatory school at Weston-super-Mare. In 1857 he went to Uppingham School, Rutland, where the headmaster, Edward Thring (1821-1887), exerted the first significant spiritual influence on his life. In 1863 he went to Pembroke College, Oxford. There he came under the influence of Edward Pusey, Henry Liddon, and Edward King of Cuddesdon, and adopted their Tractarian principles. Never a distinguished scholar, he graduated with a second class in classical moderations (1865) and a third in 'literae humaniores' (1867): BA (1867), MA (1869). He had a further year reading at Oxford but no professional clergy training. 
In 1868 Newbolt was ordained deacon and in 1869 priest and for two years (1868-70) worked as a curate in one of the then foremost Tractarian parishes at Wantage, Berkshire, under its vicar, William John Butler (1818-1894). In 1870 he married Fanny Charlotte (died 1923), fourth daughter of William Weld Wren of 27 Gower Street, London; they had one son and two daughters. On his marriage he was nominated as vicar of Dymock, Gloucestershire, by Frederick Lygon, sixth Earl Beauchamp (1830-1891), high-church layman and Conservative politician, and in 1877 Beauchamp nominated him for the parish of Malvern Link, Worcestershire. In both parishes he applied the principles of parochial management he had learned at Wantage. 
At Malvern Link Newbolt was in close touch with Worcester. In 1886 the dean of Worcester, Lord Alwyne Compton (1825-1906), became bishop of Ely, and in 1887 invited Newbolt to succeed Dr Herbert Mortimer Luckock (1833-1909) as principal of Ely Theological College. This was for Newbolt the beginning of the most important work of his life. The theological college had been founded in 1876 by Bishop James Russell Woodford (1820-1885) on the pattern of Samuel Wilberforce's college at Cuddesdon, Oxfordshire, and opened in 1881 with the aim of providing for ordinands a spiritual and professional training in accordance with Tractarian ideals of the priestly life. In 1856 and 1857 Dr Henry Parry Liddon (1829-1890) had published in the periodical 'Ecclesiastic and Theologian' an essay, 'The priest in his inner life', which suggested the lines along which the devotional life of the clergy should be developed, and it was on these lines that Newbolt worked at Ely. He brought to his task the knowledge of and sympathy with human nature gained by his pastoral work, besides the example of his own strong and disciplined character. 
On the death in 1890 of Liddon, Lord Salisbury asked Liddon's brother whom he thought Liddon would have wished to succeed him as canon of St Paul's. The answer was 'the Principal of Ely'. In that year Newbolt was installed canon of St Paul's, and he held the canonry until his death. St Paul's then held a great place in the religious life of London and England generally -- Newbolt wrote, 'there was a glamour about St Paul's at this time' (Newbolt, p. 171) -- with Richard William Church (1815-1890), Henry Scott Holland (1847-1918), and Robert Gregory (1819-1911) notable among the clergy, and Sir John Stainer (1840-1901) the organist. Newbolt entered enthusiastically into the spirit and plans of the chapter; he wished to make the cathedral the central church of London, the spiritual home of the metropolis and the empire, where the Anglican liturgy was perfectly rendered throughout the year. 
Newbolt was a fluent and facile, but painstaking, preacher. His sermons were carefully prepared; excellently phrased, and delivered with ease and grace; interesting and fresh, and showed wide reading and generous culture. For many years they reached a wide public through the 'Church Times'. He made no attempt to grapple with the intellectual and social problems of the time; he was content to commend goodness and faithfulness and the Tractarian piety which he had known all his life. He was an unswerving champion of Tractarian orthodoxy, and of views about the inspiration of the 'Bible' and Sunday observance which were considered obsolete. 
In 1893 Newbolt founded the St Paul's Lecture Society to provide lectures and retreats for the young men employed and living in the surrounding businesses. Later he also founded the Amen Court Guild which had about 400 members and associates: sixty of its members were killed in the First World War, and are commemorated in the crypt of St Paul's. 
Arguably Newbolt's greatest achievement was his work for the spiritual life of the clergy. At St Paul's he continued and developed the ministry he had begun at Ely. Every year he conducted retreats for priests and heard their confessions; he published many books of counsel and admonition containing the meditations which he had given in retreat. 'Speculum sacerdotum' (1893) was the most characteristic and successful of these. He also edited, with Dr Darwell Stone, the 'Oxford Library of Practical Theology'. Newbolt's theological standpoint changed very little during his long life, remaining true to the ideals of Butler and Liddon. He was so convinced of the excellence of the religious life implied in the prayer book of 1662 that he felt some hesitation in following recent developments which went beyond what the prayer book enjoined. In his prime he was a leading speaker in convocation, and for some years he was returned at the head of the poll as representative of the London diocese clergy in convocation and the church assembly. In 1921 he published his memoirs, 'Years that are Past'. 
His final years were overshadowed by his wife's mental illness during her last thirty years. He died on 12 September 1930 in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 35214


Newman, Ernest (1868-1959), music critic, was born William Roberts in Everton, Lancashire, on 30 November 1868, the only child of Seth Roberts, a tailor, and his second wife, Harriet Spark, whose first married name was Jones. Both parents also had families by their first spouses. William Roberts was brought up in the Anglican faith which he later violently rejected. From an early age he studied the piano and as a boy became interested in vocal music, especially opera. He attempted some composition and studied harmony and counterpoint without formal instruction. He quickly became acquainted with a large quantity of music, including all the Wagner operas, through reading scores, a practice he later advocated with enthusiasm. From St Saviour's School in Everton he won a scholarship to the middle school of Liverpool College and graduated as a student at University College, Liverpool, in 1886, having studied English literature, philosophy, and art. He intended to pursue a diplomatic career, but due to ill health he was unable to take the examinations for the Indian Civil Service before reaching the age limit of nineteen. Instead he became a clerk in the Bank of Liverpool (1889-1903), meanwhile contributing to a number of progressive journals, not only on music but on literature, religion, and philosophical subjects. 
Newman became president of the Liverpool branch of the National Secular Society in 1894 and began contributing to Charles Bradlaugh's journal, the 'Nationalist Reformer'. It was at the National Secular Society that he met J. M. Robertson and initiated a friendship that continued until Robertson's death in 1933. Robertson's writings, especially his 'New Essays towards a Critical Method' (1897), exercised a decisive influence, reflected in his lifelong study of the philosophy of criticism and in the preface to his first book, 'Gluck and the Opera' (1895), which he wrote as Ernest Newman. The pseudonym was intended to signify his outlook as a 'new man in earnest', but it corresponded to some psychological need, since he thereafter adopted it in private as well as public life, although he never legally ratified the change. In 1897 he published 'Pseudo-Philosophy at the End of the Nineteenth Century', a criticism from the point of view of 'aggressive Rationalism' of writings by Benjamin Kidd, Henry Drummond, and A. J. Balfour, under the name Hugh Mortimer Cecil, but he did not use this name again. This volume was a penetrating and cogent refutation of mock scientific writing and subjective theological speculation. It displayed the three most prominent characteristics of his critical thought: scepticism, dialectic skill, and passion for accuracy. 
Although Newman had often referred to music in his writings on other subjects, it was not until 1894 that he began to write regularly on the subject. His first articles were written for Granville Bantock in his 'New Quarterly Musical Review'. He also owed to Bantock commissions to write programme notes for his concerts and later (in 1903), when Bantock was principal of the Birmingham and Midland Institute school of music, an invitation to join the staff. In 1905 Newman published his 'Musical Studies' and left Birmingham to become music critic of the 'Manchester Guardian'. His trenchant pen and independence of view sometimes upset the Halle committee and Hans Richter, but established his critical reputation as a champion of Bruckner, Sibelius, Strauss, and Elgar. 
From the very start of his career as a music critic Newman tackled head-on the most perplexing aesthetic issues of the day. He convincingly challenged accepted notions and the opinions of renowned philosophical thinkers -- as when, for example, during the course of his second book, 'A Study of Wagner' (1899), he denounced Herbert Spencer's theories of the origin and function of music. In 1906 the 'Birmingham Post' recalled him to Birmingham, where he remained until 1919. During these years he wrote studies of Wagner (1899 and 1904), Strauss (1908), Elgar (1906), and Hugo Wolf (1907). This last book remained for thirty years the best monograph on its subject and was translated into German. In 1914 came 'Wagner as Man and Artist', which showed Newman's analytical powers, his independence -- it was critical of 'Mein Leben' and consequently not well received at Bayreuth -- his appreciation of the Wagnerian music drama, and his extreme care over documentation. In the second chapter Newman makes his position regarding the composer's philosophical intentions unequivocal, writing of 'one of the most curious of Wagner's hallucinations -- the idea that the musical stage can be the dispenser of profound philosophy' ('Wagner as Man and Artist', 19). Here for the first time is the expression of Newman's inability to accept the ideological framework of Wagnerian music drama; he may have abandoned rationalist propaganda, but not the tenets of his philosophical position. This book led him on to his great work: 'The Life of Richard Wagner', in four volumes published between 1933 and 1947. This in turn gave rise as a by-product to a study, 'The Man Liszt' (1934). In counteracting the false portrait of Liszt built up by earlier biographers Newman went to the other extreme. His rationalist perspective prejudiced him against accepting Liszt's religious conviction, which in turn blinded him to other qualities. Making a case through carefully selecting information was a feature of Newman's criticism which could be as misleading as it was persuasive; 'The Man Liszt' tarnished his critical integrity. 
In 1919 Newman moved from Birmingham to London, where he had been appointed music critic of the Sunday newspaper, 'The Observer'. He joined the 'Sunday Times' in 1920 and remained with that newspaper until his retirement in 1958 (but had a five-month stint in 1923 as guest critic of the 'New York Evening Post'). During these years he not only wrote regular reviews and a more substantial weekly article, but also a large number of programme notes, weekly articles for the 'Manchester Guardian' (1919-24) and the 'Glasgow Herald' (1924-8), and a huge number of articles for music periodicals. From 1930 he made weekly broadcasts on music for the BBC, as well as writing a sporting column for the 'Evening Standard'. 
Newman's lack of sympathy for the main trends in contemporary music, and his disillusionment with the apparent chaos of criticism in responding to it, led him to attempt a philosophy of criticism in his 'A Musical Critic's Holiday' (1925). In an age in which the past and future of music seemed irreconcilable it was natural for a rationalist to try to discern standards that maintained continuity in order to give criticism an objective basis. While his attempt to provide a physiology of criticism in 'The Unconscious Beethoven' (1927) had no lasting impact, his efforts to bring a psychological perspective to the biography of composers were more significant. 
A collection of his articles was published in 1919 entitled 'A Musical Motley', and from the 'Sunday Times' two other selections were made by Felix Aprahamian in 1956 and 1958. These serve to show Newman's great range, which was sometimes overlooked because of his undoubted predilection for the nineteenth century and for opera. On the latter he published his most enduring and widely read works: 'Opera Nights' (1943), 'Wagner Nights' (1949), and 'More Opera Nights' (1954). He had translated most of Wagner's opera texts by 1912 and he translated Felix Weingartner's 'On Conducting' (1906) and Schweitzer's 'J. S. Bach' (1911). 
Newman was married twice: first, on 3 February 1894, to Kate Eleanor Woollett (died 1918), daughter of Henry Woollett, an artist descended from the engraver William Woollett; second, in 1919, to Vera Agnes Hands, daughter of Arthur Hands, a Birmingham jeweller. There were no children of either marriage. 
Newman rigidly refused all honours until in extreme old age he no longer had the energy to decline them. Finland conferred on him the order of the White Rose in 1956; Germany the Grosse Dienstkreuz in 1958; and the University of Exeter the DLitt in 1959. In 1955 he was presented with a Festschrift, a collection of essays by colleagues and admirers: 'Fanfare for Ernest Newman', edited by Herbert van Thal, who later edited a further selection of Newman's writings in 'Testament of Music' (1962). A large collection of Newman's notebooks, correspondence, and other papers was donated to the Lila Acheson Wallace Library at the Juilliard School, New York, in 1976 by Walter Legge. 
Ernest Newman died at Tadworth, Surrey, on 7 July 1959 and was cremated two days later. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35215


Newman, Sir George (1870-1948), medical officer of health, was born on 23 October 1870 at 14 Broad Street, Leominster, Herefordshire, the fourth child and second son of Henry Stanley Newman, a Quaker and for many years editor of 'The Friend', and his wife, Mary Anna, 'nee' Pumphrey. He began his education at a local dame-school before becoming a boarder at Sidcot School in Gloucestershire in 1881, then at Bootham School in York, 1885-8. At the age of twelve he resolved to become a missionary, though his father, himself the founding secretary of the Friends' Foreign Missionary Society, favoured a career in the Indian Civil Service. Some time in 1886, however, Newman read John Lowe's 'Medical Missions' and decided that medicine was his calling. He sat and failed the matriculation examination of Edinburgh University in October 1887, but passed on his second attempt six months later, and began his studies at the university in May 1888. 
Newman's early years as a medical student were undistinguished. He devoted much of his energy to religious activities, reviewing books for 'The Friend' and joining the University Christian movement. Here he fell under the spell of the liberal evangelical Henry Drummond, who subsequently became a close friend and a model for Newman's own increasingly rationalistic faith. During his second year in Edinburgh Newman began holding weekly services in a lodging house in the Cowgate, experiencing for the first time the circumstances of slum life. He was equally shocked by the moral laxity of his fellow medical students, among whom he preached temperance. In 1890 he became one of the secretaries of the Medical Students' Christian Association. By 1892 he was applying himself more conscientiously to his medical studies, winning distinctions in medicine, surgery, obstetrics, and public health in the spring of that year, and graduated MB. 
Shortly thereafter Newman moved to London. He became assistant physician to the London Medical Mission in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields in December 1892, but found the institution deficient in Christian spirit and resigned four months later. He continued to be involved in running a girls' club in the neighbourhood, however, and late in 1893 he became the warden of Chalfont House, a Quaker settlement in Bloomsbury. By this time his evangelical energies were increasingly being channelled into public health work, which he had studied in Edinburgh under Sir Douglas Maclagan. While at the medical mission he had addressed public meetings on temperance, and in February 1893 he began lecturing on hygiene and ambulance work for Essex county council. He also spent two years working part time for the medical officer of health to the Strand board of works, Francis Allan, collecting evidence for Allan's inquiry into the living conditions of the local population. In autumn 1894 Newman began studying at King's College, London, for the Cambridge diploma in public health, which he obtained in October 1895. Also in 1895 he took the Edinburgh MD and gold medal with a historical dissertation on the decline of leprosy in England and India, which he studied in the library of the prominent Quaker surgeon Jonathan Hutchinson. The dissertation won the university's Alison prize for medical jurisprudence and public health, and was published by Hutchinson's New Sydenham Society. 
In January 1896 Newman was appointed part-time demonstrator at King's College, London, at a salary of $100 per annum, teaching practical classes under the professor of bacteriology, Edgar Crookshank. The post also provided him with the opportunity to conduct bacteriological research, which resulted in the publication of a book, 'Bacteria', in 1899 and, with Harold Swithinbank, 'The Bacteriology of Milk' in 1903. In March 1896 Newman applied unsuccessfully for the post of medical officer of health to Clerkenwell. Later that year he was offered a position as a medical inspector to the Local Government Board to oversee the practice of vaccination, but Newman wished to pursue a wider perspective on public health and turned it down. In January 1897 he was appointed part-time medical officer to the Holborn board of guardians. In April that year he became engaged to Adelaide Constance, the daughter of Samuel Thorp of Alderley Edge. An accomplished artist, she was herself a member of the Society of Friends, and the couple met through their common involvement in the Frideswide Girls' Club. They married in August 1898 and moved into a home in Woburn Square, Bloomsbury, though Newman retained the wardenship of Chalfont House. Meanwhile he was becoming increasingly involved in the liberal wing of the Society of Friends, though he did not always find favour among more conservative Quakers; in February 1900 a group of Friends publicly criticized him as a vivisectionist. He began editing 'The Friends' Quarterly Examiner' at the end of 1899, and continued to do so anonymously for the next forty years; he took particular pleasure in the lively leaders that he wrote from 'The House of the Four Winds'. 
Newman's career in public health was by this time beginning to gain momentum. In October 1897 he was offered the post of government bacteriologist to the India Office to study and advise on the control of plague, but he was increasingly of the view that Britain's public health needs must come before those of the dominions, and he declined the appointment. On 1 April 1900 he was appointed part-time consulting medical officer for Bedfordshire at a salary of 50 guineas. Also in April 1900 he was made temporary medical officer of health to Clerkenwell, whereupon he resigned from the wardenship of Chalfont House and from his demonstratorship at King's College. In June 1900 he secured his first permanent full-time position as medical officer of health to the new metropolitan borough of Finsbury, a poor and overcrowded area of London with a growing immigrant population and very high death rates, especially among children. 
Newman's first real test as a public health doctor came with an outbreak of smallpox in the summer of 1901. He initiated a policy of intensive surveillance, isolation, and investigation of contacts, to which he attributed the comparatively small number of deaths in the area under his jurisdiction. He was also concerned at the very high death rate from tuberculosis in the borough, to combat which he instituted strict inspections of food outlets including dairies, ice-cream parlours, and the meat trade, and established a scheme of voluntary notification and inspection of cases coupled with instruction in healthy living habits. These initiatives secured him a position on the council of the National Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis, but had little impact on the incidence of the disease in Finsbury. Increasingly Newman was coming to the view that tuberculosis and other infectious diseases were as much an index of moral as of physical ill health, and must be countered by moral education as much as medical intervention. This view informed his campaigns against infant mortality in particular. In 1904, with charitable funds, he opened a milk depot under the control of the Finsbury Social Workers Association. Here nursing mothers received not only clean milk, but also education in infant management and the maintenance of a hygienic home environment. The milk depot was officially taken over by the borough council in 1906. In the same year Newman published 'Infant Mortality: a Social Problem', which described his work in Finsbury and the philosophy behind it. During this period he also served as a smallpox consultant, lecturer, and examiner to the Royal Sanitary Institute; as a member of the council of the Society of Medical Officers of Health; and from 1905 as lecturer in public health to St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school. He collaborated with Sir Arthur Whitelegge on a thoroughly revised edition of the latter's 'Hygiene and the Public Health', which appeared in 1905, and in 1907 his own book on 'The Health of the State' was published. 
In 1906 Newman was contacted by Beatrice Webb, who had recently been appointed a member of the royal commission on the poor laws. Webb was keen to use the commission as a forum in which to argue for the creation of a universally available state medical service under the control of the public health authorities. Newman sympathized with her ideas and presented evidence to the commission that became a key source for many of the arguments she incorporated into her minority report of 1909. Most importantly, he put forward the view that under an appropriately organized system of state medicine the provision of personal health care by general practitioners might be oriented to the work of preventive as much as curative medicine. Through his association with Webb, Newman also met her friend and ally Sir Robert Morant, permanent secretary to the Board of Education. It came as a surprise to Newman when, presumably through Morant's advocacy, in August 1907 he was offered the new post of chief medical officer to the Board of Education, with responsibility for setting up a new school medical service. He took up the post in December, at a salary of $1200. Newman's appointment met with outspoken hostility from many in the medical profession, who feared that the school medical service represented an encroachment of state medicine on private practice, and from the London county council, who initially refused to implement the scheme of medical inspection that Newman drew up. In recognition of his work for the service Newman received a knighthood in the new year's honours list for 1911. 
In 1911 the government passed the 'National Insurance Act', which provided, among other things, for the establishment of a system of national health insurance to provide free medical care to a significant proportion of the working population. This scheme, which eventually came into being in 1913, fell far short of the vision of a state medical service that Webb had sketched for the royal commission on the poor laws. Nevertheless, the act of 1911 created opportunities for further expansion in specific aspects of public health medicine. Most notably, it made special provision for the treatment of tuberculosis cases, and in 1912 a departmental committee chaired by Lord Astor was appointed to recommend an appropriate scheme of services. Newman served on this committee, where he helped to ensure that tuberculosis treatment was brought under the aegis of the public health authorities and was expanded to cover not just the insured but the entire population. The committee also considered how best to make use of the penny per insured person that the 'National Insurance Act' set aside for medical research, and in June 1913 its recommendations resulted in the establishment of the Medical Research Committee (later Council). Five months later Newman was offered the post of secretary to the new committee. He was tempted to accept, in the hope that the committee would provide a base from which to further his aim of creating a state medical service, but in the end he decided that he would be able to do more for public health if he remained with the Board of Education and the school medical service. 
The outbreak of war led to serious delays in the development of the school medical service as government funds were reallocated, local education authorities cut back their inspection programmes, and doctors enlisted in the forces. Newman's energies, too, were diverted into war-related work. In May 1915 he was appointed medical officer to the central control board for liquor traffic, established under the defence of the realm regulations to minimize manpower wastage due to alcohol. In this capacity he was able to give practical expression to his temperance sentiments, particularly by promoting the establishment of factory canteens as an alternative to the attractions of the public house. Four months later he was also appointed chairman of the Health of Munition Workers Committee of the Ministry of Munitions, which oversaw research into a variety of problems including industrial fatigue, TNT poisoning, and other conditions. He also undertook war work in a voluntary capacity. In autumn 1914 he became involved in the establishment of the Friends' Ambulance Unit, which provided medical care for soldiers and civilians in the war zone, and following the introduction of conscription in 1916 he helped to negotiate exemptions for Quakers serving with the ambulance unit. With all this on his plate he felt unable to continue his lectureship at St Bartholomew's Hospital and resigned in January 1916. His contribution to the national effort was officially acknowledged when he was appointed KCB in 1918. 
By 1916 the government was beginning to give serious thought to the problems of post-war reconstruction. Among the schemes under consideration was the creation of a new Ministry of Health which would unify responsibility for the various medical services scattered around different departments of government. For the next three years Newman worked closely with Morant, who from 1911 had overall charge of the national insurance administration, and Christopher Addison, the minister for reconstruction, to draw up a scheme for combining the medical functions of national insurance and the Local Government Board in a single administrative department. Fulfilment of this scheme was delayed by political resistance from poor law and insurance interests, but on 1 April 1919 Newman was appointed chief medical officer to the Local Government Board, and two months later the new ministry was constituted with Newman as chief medical officer, Morant as permanent secretary, and Addison as minister. They envisaged a new kind of ministry in which the medical staff would be given parity of status and remuneration with the lay officials, in contrast to the distinctly subordinate position of technical experts in the old Local Government Board. They were only partially successful in securing this aim, however. Newman was given a salary of $2100, subsequently raised to $2300 in June 1921, but not the official rank of permanent secretary that he hoped for; although he was given the right of direct access to the minister this was an 'ad hominem' concession and did not attach to the post of chief medical officer. 
Newman's influence within the ministry was subsequently undermined when Morant died suddenly from influenza in March 1920, to be replaced by the far more conservative figure of Arthur Robinson, and again when Addison was forced to resign as minister in the following year. Though Newman remained in post until retirement in 1935, when he was appointed GBE, he was unable to effect any further major reforms in medical administration. Much of his energy was devoted to summarizing the state of the nation's health in a series of monumental annual reports to the ministers of health, and to reiterating his personal vision of preventive medicine in a wide range of official memoranda and public lectures, including the annual oration to the Hunterian Society in 1926; the Dodge lectures, 'Citizenship and the survival of civilization', at Yale University in 1926-7 (published in 1928); the Charles Hastings lecture of the British Medical Association in 1928; the Linacre lecture at Oxford University in the same year; the Halley Stewart lectures, 'Health and social evolution', in 1930; the University of London's Heath Clark lectures, 'The rise of preventive medicine', in 1931; and the Harveian oration to the Royal College of Physicians in 1932. He also served as crown nominee on the General Medical Council, 1919-39, and was latterly its senior treasurer. He enjoyed good relations with leading medical men -- the patrician culture in which they moved evidently appealed to him -- and he did much to persuade them that the concerns of private practice could be reconciled with the demands of state medicine. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1928, and subsequently of the New York Academy of Medicine; he received the Bisset-Hawkins gold medal from the Royal College of Physicians in 1935, and the Fothergill gold medal from the Medical Society of London in the same year. 
As well as serving as chief medical officer to the Ministry of Health Newman retained the post of chief medical officer to the Board of Education until his retirement, with the aim of ensuring co-ordination between the school medical service and other health services. He oversaw renewed expansion of the school medical service after provision of treatment by local education authorities was made compulsory under the 'Education Act' of 1918, but in the context of inter-war economic depression his privileging of health education over more material forms of provision provoked frustration among many public health doctors. He also used his position at the Board of Education to pursue reforms in medical education, which he saw as another means of reorienting doctors towards the practice of preventive as well as curative medicine. In particular he was firmly of the view that control of clinical training should be taken away from the elite private practitioners who dominated the work of the teaching hospitals at the start of the twentieth century and handed over to university based academic teachers. 
In 1908, when the Board of Education had begun to award grants to medical schools, Newman had acquired the leverage to start nudging clinical teaching into more academic channels. Then in 1913 the royal commission on the University of London urged that clinical teaching in several of the metropolitan medical schools should be brought entirely under university control. Working first through the Board of Education then subsequently, from 1919, as medical assessor to the new University Grants Committee, Newman was largely responsible for the negotiations which led to the establishment of full-time university chairs of medicine, surgery, and gynaecology in a number of schools. He also played a major part in drafting the 1921 report of the Athlone committee on postgraduate medical education, which paved the way for the establishment of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in 1924. 
Thereafter, however, the initiative in the reform of medical education passed increasingly to the Medical Research Council, and Newman's distinctive view that medical training should serve the needs primarily of general practice and preventive medicine tended to be forgotten. The universities appreciated his efforts, however, and his honorary degrees included a DCL from the University of Durham (1919), a DSc from Oxford (1936), and the LLD from London, Edinburgh, McGill, Toronto, Glasgow, and Leeds. 
Newman was rather short in stature, but made up for this by his vivacious and dramatic manner in conversation and his eloquence in lectures. As a politician and administrator, he inclined towards an evangelical faith in the power of the written word, as his enormous literary output attests; as a result he was most effective when working with others more pushy than himself, and by far his most fruitful period was marked by his partnership with Morant. He largely withdrew from public life after his retirement, though he found the time to publish 'The Building of a Nation's Health' in 1939, and to speak at the centenary of the Quaker journal, 'The Friend', in 1943. His wife died in April 1946; they had no children. Newman himself died at The Retreat, York, on 26 May 1948, and was buried in the historic Quaker burial-ground at Jordans. 


@@@@@


doc= 35216


Newman, William Lambert (1834-1923), ancient historian and philosopher, the second son of Edmund Lambert Newman, solicitor, of Cheltenham, was born at Cheltenham on 21 August 1834. He was educated at Cheltenham College (1846-51) and at Balliol College, Oxford, which he entered as a scholar in 1851 and where his tutors were Benjamin Jowett, James Riddell, Edwin Palmer, and Henry Smith. He won the Hertford scholarship (1853) and the Ireland scholarship (1854), obtained first classes in classical moderations (1853) and in 'literae humaniores' (1855), and while still an undergraduate was elected a fellow of his college (1854). 
As lecturer in history for the schools of 'literae humaniores' and of law and modern history from 1858 to 1870, Newman exercised a unique influence on the teaching of history and political philosophy at Oxford; those who attended his lectures described them with great unanimity as the best they ever heard. There was then no regular system of inter-collegiate lectures, but Balliol was constantly asked by other colleges to permit their students to attend Newman. Among those who heard him were the philosophers T. H. Green (afterwards his close friend and colleague), Thomas Case, Edward Caird, and R. L. Nettleship; the historians J. L. Strachan-Davidson and Evelyn Abbott; the lawyers R. T. Reid and W. R. Anson; and, among others, Andrew Lang, John Addington Symonds, F. Y. Edgeworth, and the earl of Kerry. In spite of frequent absences owing to ill health, and of a weak voice and rapid delivery, Newman's importance as a teacher was quite equal to that of Jowett and Green: he was effectively the founder of a new school of ancient history. His treatment of the subject in his lectures was novel in its independence and imagination, in the wide range of modern history and law from which he drew his illustrations, and in the connection between history and philosophy which he always maintained and which became characteristic of 'literae humaniores'. He was a reformer in university politics, outlining his ideas for strengthening the professoriate on German lines in his evidence to the select committee on Oxford and Cambridge university extension (July 1867). His mentor, Jowett, acknowledged his learning and genius, though doubted his judgement, and considered him 'to be absolutely without the religious sense' ('Dear Miss Nightingale', 99). 
In 1868 Newman was appointed university reader in ancient history, but in 1870 ill health obliged him finally to leave Oxford. From that time he lived in retirement at Cheltenham, preparing the edition of Aristotle's 'Politics' which was his principal monument, reading everything that bore upon the subjects of his interest, making endless notes on odd scraps of paper in his tiny handwriting, and corresponding with other scholars. Although partially lame, he took his country walk almost daily, and was a keen observer of birds. 
While at Oxford Newman published only an essay on the land laws in the manifesto of the university liberals, 'Questions for a Reformed Parliament' (1867), having been called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in the same year. Newman's essay, which expounded the view of many mid-Victorian radicals that the social evils of the time could be attributed to the concentration of land ownership into a few hands, was a masterpiece of noble English. While he had always in view the ethical principles which should govern the tenure of land, he never overlooked historical and practical considerations; in thus holding the balance between philosophy and practice this early work exhibited a notable quality of his edition of the 'Politics', of which the first two volumes were published in 1887. The first was occupied by an introductory essay which was virtually a treatise on political philosophy. The third and fourth volumes appeared in 1902. The whole work belonged to the grand, leisurely type of scholarship, in which even notes have a literary quality, and the views of others (sometimes even when they did not deserve it) were discussed with courteous fullness. The hurried or perfunctory student found little in Newman's work to encourage him; the minute pedant who had no sense of proportion might have spoken slightingly of it. But for soundness of interpretation, copiousness of illustration, and mature wisdom its value was permanent. The degree of honorary LittD was conferred on him by Cambridge University in 1900. 
Newman died at the Imperial Nursing Home, Cheltenham, on 3 May 1923. He was unmarried. He retained his fellowship of Balliol until his death, but for many years refused to accept the stipend, and left a considerable benefaction to the college in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 35217


Newmarch, Charles Henry (1824-1903), Church of England clergyman and author, born at Burford, Oxfordshire, on 30 March 1824, was the second son of George Newmarch, solicitor, of Cirencester, and his wife, Mary. After studying at Rugby under Dr Arnold from August 1837, following in the footsteps of his elder brother, George Frederick, who had joined that school in 1830, Newmarch spent some time in the merchant navy, travelling in the East. In 1847 he published 'Five Years in the East' under the pseudonym of R. N. Hutton. It attracted favourable reviews, and was followed in 1848 by 'Recollections of Rugby, by an Old Rugbeian' and a novel, 'Jealousy'. Settling in Cirencester, Newmarch showed keen interest in local antiquities, and in 1850 wrote with James Buckman (1814-1884) 'Illustrations of the Remains of Roman Art in Cirencester'. In 1851 he was instrumental in the foundation of the 'Cirencester and Swindon Express', which was soon amalgamated with the 'Wilts and Gloucester Standard'. He was joint editor of the paper and, until the end of his life, a regular contributor under the name of Rambler. In 1868 he published with his brother an account of the Newmarch pedigree. 
Newmarch matriculated at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1851, graduating BA in 1855. On 6 February 1855 he married, at Leckhampton, Anne Straford of Cheltenham and Charlton Kings; the couple had two sons and three daughters. After taking holy orders in 1855, he was from 1856 to 1893 rector of Wardley-cum-Belton, Rutland, and rural dean of the district from 1857 to 1867. He was greatly interested in agricultural matters, contributing much to 'Bell's Life' on the subject; he championed the cause of village labourers, who in turn defended him against the attacks of Joseph Arch, when Arch visited Belton in his tour of the village districts in 1872. Newmarch took an active part in the building of churches in Rutland, and restored the chancel of his parish church. Increasing deafness led to his retirement in 1893 to 37 Upper Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells, where he died on 14 June 1903. One daughter survived him. A tablet to his memory was erected in Belton church in 1912. 


@@@@@


doc= 35218


Newnes, Sir George, first baronet (1851-1910), newspaper proprietor and politician, born on 13 March 1851 at Glenorchy House, Matlock, was the youngest of the six children of the Revd Thomas Mold Newnes (died 1883), Congregational minister, and his wife, Sarah (died 1855), daughter of David Urquhart of Dundee. He was educated at Silcoates School, Yorkshire, Shireland Hall, Birmingham, and for two terms at the City of London School. At sixteen he was apprenticed to a wholesale haberdasher in the City, subsequently travelling in haberdashery and managing a shop in Manchester. In 1875 Newnes married Priscilla, daughter of the Revd James Hillyard. 
On 24 August 1881, reading the 'Manchester Evening News', Newnes's attention was arrested by an item, 'A runaway train'. In that moment he conceived the idea of a journal made up entirely of entertaining and interesting anecdotes -- 'tit-bits' as he called them. He failed to obtain outside financial backing for his idea, but scraped together sufficient to produce the first number of his weekly journal, which appeared on 22 October 1881. Within two hours he had sold 5000 copies. 'Tit-Bits' was to be the matrix of twentieth-century popular journalism. A man of business, all bustle and energy, by bold innovation -- prize competitions, free insurance schemes, and treasure hunts -- and an unerring sense of the prejudices and preferences of his lower middle-class readers, Newnes ensured his journal's commercial success. But he sought also to improve the literary diet of the masses. It was his earnest hope that readers of 'Tit-Bits', saved at least from reading the worst, might develop an interest in better forms of literature. A token of his earnestness was the way he scrutinized every line printed, and he would remove anything he thought unduly lurid, sensational, or smutty. As the contents improved so did the sales. Within a decade 'Tit-Bits' provided Newnes with an annual income of $30,000. 
W. T. Stead, the most celebrated journalist of the day, who had been Newnes's contemporary at Silcoates, agreed to edit a new digest of journals, to be called the 'Sixpenny Monthly'. Before its first appearance, in January 1890, it had metamorphosed into the weekly 'Review of Reviews'. Two such very different men were never likely to work comfortably together. Newnes distrusted Stead's judgement, fearing writs for libel and even imprisonment. After six months the partnership was dissolved by mutual agreement, Stead buying out Newnes for $3000, 'a fair and reasonable price'. Newnes, always concerned about the welfare of his employees, retained the extra editorial staff he had engaged for the 'Review of Reviews'. He was contemplating a new kind of magazine to employ them. On style and typography he was undoubtedly influenced by American journals, but it was H. Greenhough Smith who gave Newnes the idea that was to become the 'Strand Magazine' -- a monthly, each issue complete in itself, like a book, all stories and articles lavishly illustrated. The first number appeared in January 1891, and the print of 300,000 sold out completely. Monthly sales were soon to exceed half a million, and the 'Strand' became a perennial best-seller. The magazine exercised an important and beneficial influence upon English short-story writing. It also created and enhanced the reputations of many graphic artists, like Sidney Paget (1860-1908), the first illustrator of Conan Doyle's immortal detective, Sherlock Holmes. 
In 1885 Newnes entered parliament as Liberal member for Newmarket; he held the seat for ten years. When defeated in the 1895 election he took it with very good humour. Almost immediately he was offered the safe Liberal seat of Swansea, which he held from 1900 until his retirement in January 1910. His single distinction as an MP was to be nominated one of the best-dressed men in the house. If he said little, he was particularly valued by Lord Rosebery as a press magnate prepared to buy and maintain newspapers favourable to the Liberal cause. Newnes was duly rewarded in 1895 with a baronetcy 'for political services', a euphemism for subsidizing Liberal newspapers. The citation, however, also acknowledged Newnes's 'good work... in the cause of healthy popular literature'. 
In 1892, when W. W. Astor bought, in the tory interest, the previously Liberal 'Pall Mall Gazette', Newnes seized the opportunity to found a new Liberal paper. 'The scheme will find favour with the leading men of the party,' he correctly told E. T. Cook, who became the first editor of the 'Westminster Gazette'. From 1896, under J. A. Spender's editorship, the 'pea-green incorruptible', as 'Punch' dubbed the 'Westminster Gazette', was unchallenged as the honourable, influential, Liberal, heavyweight newspaper. But its circulation was never better than 25,000, and with an advertising revenue of a mere $40,000, the 'Westminster' was a commercial flop. Newnes would not have it cheapened or vulgarized to increase sales, for nothing should imperil its influence among serious readers. In time the ever mounting debt of the 'Westminster' wearied even Newnes. In 1908 it was at last sold to a Liberal syndicate headed by Sir Alfred Mond (1868-1930), but continued to lose money. 
Newnes's publishing company was one of the first to receive a stock exchange quotation. When the company was restructured in 1897, Newnes was appointed permanent governing director. He was joined on the board by his son, Frank, straight down from Cambridge and more interested in and knowledgeable about golf than publishing, who replaced Lewis Tomalin. The other key board member was Edward Hudson. The Newnes publishing empire expanded to include 'Country Life' (1897), 'Woman's Life' (1898), the first women's weekly magazine, and the 'World-Wide Magazine' (1898), the offspring of an excess of travel and adventure stories submitted by 'Strand' readers. But not all was success; some new journals were short-lived, artistic and commercial failures. There was the imaginative and original four-coloured twopenny weekly, 'The Million'. A morning penny newspaper, the 'Daily Courier', edited by Newnes himself and designed to compete with Harmsworth's new, halfpenny 'Daily Mail', crashed within four months. There was also a disastrous venture in Sunday newspapers when Newnes acquired the venerable 'Weekly Dispatch'. Newnes's religious scruples would not allow him to employ the same means as the 'Dispatch''s main rivals, the 'News of the World' and 'Lloyd's Sunday News', to win and boost circulation. Eventually he was forced to sell out to Harmsworth for $25,000. 
Newnes's capacities as an editor had always been limited. 'Tit-Bits' exercised a strong sentimental grip and he never altogether rid himself of his delight in scraps of information. His business sense, however, was always acute until, from the mid-1890s, it was undermined and finally overthrown by the ravages of diabetes and alcohol. Public displays of hopeless drunkenness probably cost him elevation to the peerage. As his condition worsened, he would disappear from home, sometimes for weeks at a time. He lost a fortune speculating wildly on oil and rubber. In the City remaining confidence in his business acumen was destroyed, and his company's share quotation and dividends plummeted. In the end his estate was entirely swallowed by debt. 
As a son of the manse, Newnes had appeased his conscience about his sudden and enormous wealth by demonstrations of practical concern for the welfare of the less fortunate, public benefactions, and service in parliament. His gifts included a fine library for the citizens of Putney, where he had his London residence; a cable railway for his birthplace, Matlock; and a cliff railway at Lynton where he had his country house. Newnes and his wife had two sons; the death of the elder boy, aged eight, devastated him. The second son, Frank Hillyard (1876-1955), served as a Liberal MP from 1906 until 1910 and was involved in publishing and a range of commercial concerns. Newnes died at Lynton on 9 June 1910, where he was buried. His last years had been tragic for him, his family, and the managers of his various business interests. He deserves, however, to be remembered as the masterful head of a great publishing company, genial, generous, and inspiring. He was the supreme innovator in an industry that succeeded by imitating success. That others imitated him so successfully and made fortunes from his ideas, pleased rather than annoyed Newnes. It had been his enterprise that forged the means to assail illiteracy and gratify the first mass reading public. He believed it was enough 'to give wholesome and harmless entertainment to hard-working people craving a little fun and amusement'. If this was, in his own words, 'no great ambition', none could deny that he succeeded in it completely. 


@@@@@


doc= 35219


Newsam, Sir Frank Aubrey (1893-1964), civil servant, the third son of William Elias Newsam and his wife, Alice Mary Chambers, was born on 13 November 1893 in Barbados, where his father held a modest civil service post. From Harrison College, Barbados, he went to St John's College, Oxford, in 1911, with an open scholarship in classics. After taking his degree in 1915, with second classes in classical moderations and 'literae humaniores', he was commissioned in the Royal Irish regiment and later served with the 1st battalion 30th Punjabis. He saw active service in Ireland (where he was wounded in the Easter rising), Belgium, France, the Punjab, and Afghanistan. He was awarded the MC and was mentioned in dispatches. On demobilization he taught classics at Harrow for a short time; and then in July 1920, having passed the civil service examination, he joined the Home Office. 
Newsam began in the children's division. Although this was perhaps the one division in the Home Office least suited to his taste, his energy and strong personality soon made an impression. His career followed an unusual pattern. In 1924 the permanent under-secretary of state -- the formidable Sir John Anderson -- chose him as his private secretary, came to trust him, kept him in that post for three years after his promotion to principal in 1925, and then appointed him as principal private secretary to the home secretary. Newsam held this key post for five years, serving Sir William Joynson-Hicks, J. R. Clynes, Sir Herbert Samuel, and Sir John Gilmour. As Anderson, who was clearly destined for greater things, devoted more and more of his time to non-Home Office matters, and as he was succeeded in 1932 by a Treasury nominee who knew little of the Home Office, Newsam became a powerful and authoritative figure at the centre of the office. He also learned a good deal about the ways of politicians and parliament. 
Newsam at last returned to ordinary divisional duties in 1933 as assistant secretary in charge of a new division. For a start, he handled the controversial bill which became the 'Betting and Lotteries Act 1934', but his main task was to address the problems caused by the disorders resulting from the activities of the British Fascists. He had a large responsibility for the 'Public Order Act 1936', which proved to be effective. In 1938 he moved to head the criminal division and set about preparing a major criminal justice bill, which in the event had to be put off until 1948. 
At the beginning of the war Newsam, now an assistant under-secretary of state, went for a few months to Tunbridge Wells as the principal officer to the regional commissioner located there, but was brought back to take overall charge of the criminal and aliens divisions. Then in April 1941 he was promoted to be the deputy under-secretary of state with special responsibility for security. The permanent under-secretary of state, Sir Alexander Maxwell, was totally unlike Newsam in character, but they worked well together, especially over the detention of suspect British subjects and aliens under defence regulation 18B and the wartime aliens order. When the Americans came into the war Newsam took the lead in negotiations about handling criminal offences by members of the US forces, resulting in the 'United States of America (Visiting Forces) Act 1942'. Finally, as the war came to an end, he worked hard and effectively on the restoration of the Channel Islands after the German occupation. 
The police service, however, was becoming Newsam's prime interest. There were too many small police forces unable to provide the specialist services which were increasingly needed. Following some rolling up under wartime powers, the 'Police Act 1946' abolished, at a stroke, nearly all non-county borough forces, and made provision for further amalgamations. Separate from this, Newsam headed a committee of police and local authority representatives studying the whole future shape of the service. In particular he secured agreement on new schemes of training for all recruits and on setting up a new national staff college, this last project becoming something of a personal crusade. It gave him great satisfaction to secure for the college's permanent home a magnificent house at Bramshill, near Hartley Wintney, with enough land for new buildings. In 1947 he was the first chairman of the board of governors, and kept this post for the rest of his career. 
In 1948 Newsam succeeded Maxwell as head of the office. The home secretary at the time was Chuter Ede. He had already seen a good deal of Newsam, and concurred in his promotion. But the two men were utterly unlike, and Ede did not altogether trust Newsam's judgement. Although there was no open falling out Ede saw to it that he remained firmly in charge, and the relationship, for three years, was a somewhat uneasy one. Newsam got on well with three other home secretaries under whom he served -- Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, Gwilym Lloyd-George, and R. A. Butler. Newsam was a man of action, and ready when necessary to give tough advice and to take tough decisions. But on the fundamental issue which underlies so much of the work of the Home Office -- the balance between public order and individual liberty, between the powers of the state and the interests of the citizen -- in the end, like his predecessor, he would always tend towards seeking a liberal solution. 
A principal concern throughout was advising the home secretary on capital cases. Newsam was gravely concerned when Maxwell-Fyfe, contrary to his recommendation, decided to let the law take its course in the case of Derek Bentley. He was also shaken by the discovery in 1953 that a convicted murderer, Christie, might have committed the crime for which Timothy Evans had been hanged in 1950. He worked out a distinction between capital and non-capital murder, and saw his concept embodied in the 'Homicide Act 1957'. But it did not last -- unlike the provision in that act which introduced into English law the defence of diminished responsibility. 
Newsam was not greatly interested in organization, but he was a born leader. He chose people he could trust, without much regard for rank, and gave them considerable authority. He tended to concentrate his own energies on the aspects of the Home Office which particularly appealed to him -- notably crime and criminal law, prison administration, emergencies, and especially the police, with occasional bursts of activity in the aliens department. One spectacular intervention was when it came to be known that an individual who was claiming political asylum was being forcibly detained on a ship in the Thames. Newsam sent his lawyers to obtain a writ of habeas corpus from the lord chief justice, and the commissioner of police then led a boarding party of 120 policemen to rescue the individual. 
Newsam chaired (with some enthusiasm) the state management districts council, and also the fire brigades advisory council. But he really came into his own as chairman of the official committee on emergencies. Most of the problems arose from strikes, when it was a question of doing everything possible to maintain essential supplies and services. There was, though, one grave emergency of a different kind. The east coast floods in 1953 killed 300 people and affected 25,000 houses. Newsam sat at the centre directing the activities of large numbers of troops and civilians on repairs and defences, R. A. Butler later writing that 'Newsam had almost literally taken charge of the country... and secured achievements that would have surprised Canute' (Butler, 199). 
Newsam contributed to one embarrassing heritage. On his advice the home secretary, Lloyd-George, authorized an intercept on the telephone of a known criminal in order to help the bar council in an inquiry into the professional conduct of a barrister. The row which erupted when it became known that an intercept had been used for this purpose led Butler, who had succeeded Lloyd-George, to set up the Birkett committee inquiry into the scope of telephone tapping. 
Newsam retired in 1957, well beyond the normal age. He had never served outside the Home Office, apart from his few months in Tunbridge Wells which were, technically, under the Ministry of Home Security, and had never had much to do with other permanent secretaries and the central departments. Within his own field, though, he had been an extremely effective operator. Quick to go to the heart of a problem, a superb chairman of a meeting, an eloquent (if not very witty) speaker, he had a strong personality and tremendous drive. If at times he showed impatience with those who differed from him, he would in the end always listen. Quite good-looking, with a touch of the Caribbean, he had about him an aura of power and authority. In conversation, he would sometimes come out with an unexpected bit of knowledge, or quote by heart some passage from Aeschylus. But he also drank quite a lot, was an inveterate gambler on horse-racing, and enjoyed dancing and social occasions. Butler summed him up as 'an original'. 
On 28 December 1927 Newsam married Natalie Janet Elsie 
(Jean; 'b'. 1898/9)
, daughter of James McAuslin, monumental mason of Pietermaritzburg, South Africa. When the war came she went to live in Wylye, Wiltshire, developed a taste for country living, and rarely went to London. Newsam went to Wylye most weekends, but not all, and continued to live in London after he retired. She survived him. Although they did not see much of each other they remained on good terms. There were no children. 
Newsam was appointed CBE in 1933, KBE in 1943, KCB in 1950, and GCB in 1957. He was a commander in the Norwegian order of St Olaf. He published 'The Home Office' in 1954. His health had begun to deteriorate during his last year or two in office, and his only major commitment in retirement was to serve as a highly regarded member of the newly formed police committee of the British Transport Commission. He died of cancer at his London home, 25 Blomfield Road, Paddington, on 25 April 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 35220


Newsholme, Sir Arthur (1857-1943), public health official and epidemiologist, was born on 10 February 1857 in Haworth, Yorkshire, the fourth son of Robert Newsholme (died 'c'.1861), wool stapler or merchant, and his second wife, Phoebe, daughter of John Binns, wool comber, of Haworth. Robert Newsholme had been Patrick Bronte's churchwarden, but after Newsholme's death, when his son Arthur was four years old, Phoebe raised the children in a stricter Wesleyan environment. Newsholme attended a Wesleyan Sunday school and a free grammar school in Haworth before spending a year at Keighley grammar school. He aspired to a position in the Indian Civil Service, but in 1873 he was forced to withdraw from University College, London, because of family problems, probably financial. He returned to Bradford where his mother was then living. Only then did he consider medicine as a career, and he began a medical apprenticeship in Bradford. In the autumn of 1875 he returned to London and entered St Thomas's Hospital medical school, with the aid of a small inheritance he was permitted to take before his majority. He had a brilliant career as a medical student, winning prize money every year. He became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries in 1876, took his MB in 1880, and earned his MD and a gold medal in 1881. He held resident posts at St Thomas's, Tottenham Hospital, and at the Evelina Hospital for Children, London. 
In 1881 Newsholme married Sara (died 1933), daughter of William Mansford, farmer, of Marlborough, Lincolnshire; there were no children. Newsholme established a general practice on High Street, Clapham, in 1883, and supplemented his income by tutoring medical students and editing a series of science textbooks for schoolchildren. He first took an interest in public health in 1882, when he began lecturing on basic physiology and hygiene to teachers at elementary schools whose pupils would face questions on these subjects in the Department of Science and Art's examinations. Newsholme wrote his first books to exploit this market; 'Hygiene: a Manual of Personal and Public Health' (1884), 'School Hygiene: the Laws of Health in Relation to School Life' (1887), and 'Lessons on Health: Containing the Elements of Physiology and their Application to Hygiene' (1890) all sold very well and went through several editions. In 1884 he became part-time medical officer of health for Clapham and earned his diploma in public health from London University the following year. He was not formally trained in vital statistics or epidemiology. He learned these subjects in his years at Clapham by studying the annual reports of William Farr and John Simon. Newsholme soon prepared a practical textbook on vital statistics. 'The Elements of Vital Statistics' (1889) became a standard textbook for medical officers of health and was issued in a revised edition as late as 1923. 
Newsholme made public health his sole occupation in May 1888, when he was appointed full-time medical officer of health for Brighton. During his twenty years in the town he built a model local authority public health programme -- first by more rigorously pursuing established preventive strategies in environmental sanitation and in inspection of meat and food; and then by expanding the work of the sanitary department into newer areas: the prevention of infant diarrhoea, housing reform, the notification of infectious diseases and case tracing, and a much expanded use of hospital isolation of infectious diseases. His best-known work in Brighton was probably the tuberculosis programme he helped to develop, which relied on voluntary notification of cases and municipally financed institutional treatment. Between 1905 and 1908 Newsholme published a series of studies on the epidemiology of tuberculosis, which culminated in his monograph, 'The Prevention of Tuberculosis' (1908). In this work he attempted to show that institutional segregation of those suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis, most often in poor-law institutions, was the prime reason for the decline in tuberculosis mortality. While in Brighton, Newsholme also undertook important epidemiological studies of scarlet fever, diphtheria, epidemic diarrhoea, and rheumatic fever. His studies of the latter three diseases in the middle and late 1890s attempted to identify environmental factors which could account for the epidemic pattern of these diseases which, he was convinced, contagion alone could not explain. His investigation of scarlet fever not only helped to clarify the etiology of this puzzling disease, it also led to a highly effective municipal system of surveillance and response to milk-borne outbreaks of the illness. 
In February 1908 Newsholme became the medical officer of the Local Government Board, a position he held until 1919. He was thus the central health authority's medical adviser during a period that saw important changes in the nation's health programmes: national health insurance was initiated and national programmes were established to combat tuberculosis, venereal disease, and infant mortality. Newsholme opposed important portions of Lloyd George's 'National Insurance Bill', fearing that they would compromise public health work in local authorities, particularly on tuberculosis. Between 1909 and 1913 he was the major force behind the orders from the Local Government Board that required the notification of tuberculosis cases and that encouraged local authorities to take steps to prevent the disease. Newsholme also played an important role in designing and implementing the venereal disease service that was hastily put in place following the final report of the royal commission on venereal disease in February 1916. His most important epidemiological studies at the Local Government Board were his five reports of infant, childhood, and maternal mortality, which appeared between 1910 and 1916 as supplements to his annual reports. These were the most comprehensive empirical studies of these subjects in English to date. By the time the final report appeared, the Local Government Board was locked in bitter competition with the Board of Education for the control of the nation's emerging programme to promote infant and child health. Newsholme resigned in March 1919 to avoid serving in the new Ministry of Health under his rival in this conflict, George Newman, chief medical officer of the Board of Education. 
Newsholme had a very active retirement: he lectured on public health administration at the newly created School of Hygiene and Public Health at Johns Hopkins University between 1919 and 1921; he wrote and delivered public addresses on a variety of public health topics on both sides of the Atlantic; and he undertook for the Milbank Fund a major study of European health-care systems. His three-volume series, 'International Studies on the Relation between the Private and Official Practice of Medicine' (1931), presented a detailed description of conditions in individual nations, whereas his 'Medicine and the State: the Relation between the Private and Official Practice of Medicine' (1932) offered a synthesized discussion accessible to a more general reader. In August and September 1932, Newsholme visited the Soviet Union with John Kingsbury, secretary of the Milbank Fund. The result was their book, 'Red Medicine: Socialized Health in Soviet Russia' (1933). In his remaining ten years of life Newsholme wrote a two-volume autobiographical history of public health, 'Fifty Years in Public Health' (1935) and 'The Last Thirty Years in Public Health' (1936). He was widowed in 1933 and then suffered a lengthy decline in his own health. He died on 17 May 1943 at his home, the White House, Durrington, Worthing, Sussex, at the age of eighty-six. 
Newsholme was a prolific writer. His bibliography contains twenty-five book titles, several of which appeared in subsequent editions, over 160 articles and book chapters, some three dozen annual reports and supplemental reports, and numerous pamphlets. He was a leading figure in the public health world, serving as a council member of the Society of Medical Officers of Health, as president of the society (1900-01), and twice as editor of its journal, 'Public Health' (1892-6 and 1906-8). He was a regular examiner for the diploma of public health at London, Oxford, and Cambridge universities. He became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1893, served as the college's Milroy lecturer in 1895, and became a fellow in 1898. In 1907 he was president of both the Royal Society of Medicine's section on epidemiology and the British Medical Association's section on state medicine. In 1912 he was made CB, and in 1917 advanced to KCB. 


@@@@@


doc= 35221


Newton, Alfred (1829-1907), zoologist, was born on 11 June 1829 at Les Delices, Geneva, the fifth son in the family of six boys and four girls born to William Newton (1782-1862) of Elveden, Suffolk, plantation owner and MP, and Elizabeth (1789-1843), daughter of Richard Slater Milnes of Fryston, MP for York. The family, of Lincolnshire origin, moved to Elveden in 1813 from their sugar plantations in St Croix in the West Indies, which they retained. William Newton was MP for Ipswich; he was also a JP in Norfolk. Alfred was born as they returned from a holiday in Italy. His closest family relationship was with his younger brother, Edward, who shared his lifelong interest in birds and to whom he wrote almost daily in his adult years. A childhood fall from a table in Elveden Library caused a permanent lameness in Alfred's right leg, necessitating his use of a stick. In 1882 he ruptured the tendon in his left leg and thereafter remained, in his words, 'a four-legged man' (Wollaston, 279-80). 
Newton entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1848, won two successive annual English essay prizes, and graduated BA in 1853. Election to the Drury travelling fellowship allowed him ten years of ornithological study. With John Wolley, he visited northern Scandinavia (1855) and went to Iceland (1858) in search of the last nesting place of the great auk. He visited the West Indies and North America in 1857 and Madeira in 1862. In the latter year he abandoned his long-held intention to take holy orders, a decision he never regretted. He was already at the forefront of ornithology, having played a leading role in founding the British Ornithologists' Union (1858) and its journal 'Ibis'. He drew attention to Wolley's studies after the latter died in 1859 and began to catalogue the collection of eggs which Wolley bequeathed to him. The first volume of the massive 'Ootheca Wolleyana' was published in 1864 but so cautious and painstaking were Newton's working methods that further volumes did not appear until 1902, 1905, and 1907. 
In 1864 Newton visited Spitsbergen. Thereafter his travels were confined to summer voyages around the coasts of the British Isles in search of seabirds with Henry Evans. This was largely due to his appointment as professor in the new chair of zoology and comparative anatomy at Cambridge in March 1866; he held this office until his death. At Cambridge he took seriously the task of developing this embryonic discipline into a rigorous science. It is unlikely that a better candidate could have been found. Always resident during term-time, he was prominent in university affairs and greatly expanded the university's zoological museum by his personal patronage. He presented both his own and Wolley's extensive collections of birds' eggs, partly perhaps because the cotton wool in which they were stored aggravated his hay fever. He knew himself to be one of the worst lecturers, reading from notes in a desperately dry fashion (and later appointing William Bateson to lecture for him). However, he encouraged every undergraduate with any interest in natural history and the informal Sunday evening talks in his rooms became a fond memory for many renowned zoologists. Among his plain furniture, threadbare carpets, and drab wallpaper, surrounded by piles of books and papers in which he could readily find any item he sought, he was always ready with a humorous story or with considered advice and opinion given with the admirable clarity of expression which also marked his writings. 
Newton contributed to many journals and books, including the article on ornithology in the ninth edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He edited 'Ibis' from 1865 to 1870, after which other work curtailed his active involvement in the British Ornithologists' Union; the 'Zoological Record' (1871-3), for which he declined payment, so concerned was he to see it succeed; and volumes 1 and 2 of Yarrell's 'British Birds' (1871 and 1882). His methodical insistence on accuracy frustrated the publishers and, refusing to be rushed, he relinquished responsibility for the final two volumes. Preparation of his greatest work was also ponderous but the four-volume 'Dictionary of Birds' (1893-6) was a precise, thorough, and succinct exposition of contemporary ornithology. 
Newton took particular interest in extinct species such as the dodo and the great auk, and the great bustard which had recently disappeared from Britain, so it was as natural that he should have championed protective legislation as it was that his leadership should have been so level-headed, treading a line between his sympathy for egg collectors and his wariness of misguided sentimentalists. His paper to the British Association at Norwich in 1868 led directly to the first of many protective acts, the 1869 'Sea Birds Preservation Act'. He served on the council of the British Association and chaired its committee for studying bird migration (1880-1903). He was vice-president of the Zoological Society and the Royal Society, being elected FRS in 1870 and receiving its medal, and that of the Linnean Society, in 1900. He provided the fledgeling Society for the Protection of Birds with its first guinea in 1889. 
Despite his two sticks, Newton was noted for his strong, lofty build, alert countenance, and bushy side whiskers. His outward lack of emotion and sometimes grim exterior hid a warm heart and a kind, courteous, and faithful personality with a deep affection for and understanding of others. He disliked untruthfulness and prevarication, and could not abide inaccuracy. He was critical in the best sense of the word. Fiercely independent both in contending with his physical disability and in his thoughts, he was utterly opposed to change in many things, expressing his opinions forcefully, for example, on alterations to dining practices at Magdalene and the introduction into the college chapel of both women and music. Yet he took defeat with grace and good humour and never indulged in subsequent criticism or recrimination. He was perhaps more liberal, though never incautious, in scientific matters. He quickly embraced Darwin's theory of evolution and Michael Foster's experimental methods in physiology. His wisdom and inspiration had a lasting impact on the science of ornithology. He never married. On 7 June 1907, in his rooms in the Old Lodge at Magdalene, his heart failed following a bout of dropsy. He was buried in St Giles's cemetery, Huntingdon Road, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 35222


Newton, Ernest (1856-1922), architect, was born in London on 12 September 1856, the fourth son of Henry Newton, then resident agent for the Sturt property in Hoxton, and his wife, Mary Lockyer. Educated at Uppingham School, Rutland, under Edward Thring, he entered the office of Richard Norman Shaw in June 1873, and after three years as an assistant began to work independently in 1879. In Shaw's office he came into contact with E. S. Prior, Mervyn Macartney, G. C. Horsley, and, later, W. R. Lethaby. The early meetings of this group for discussion of architectural matters ultimately developed into the Art-Workers' Guild, the most important and enduring of the groups and guilds of the arts and crafts movement. To Shaw himself, and particularly to Philip Webb, Newton owed a conception of architecture as art, as a mode of personal expression rather than an exercise in archaeology or a professional occupation. That his mature work was marked by a serenity and a simplicity is due to his own interpretation of the work of Webb and Lethaby rather than to the somewhat dramatic vigour of his master's work. 
Like other pupils of Shaw, Newton passed into private practice with the help of a major piece of work in the House of Retreat, Lloyd Square, Clerkenwell (1880-83), and possibly also a small development at Grove Park in south-east London for the earl of Northbrook (1879), now mostly demolished. Both were in the Shaw manner. For the first ten years of his career he was working mainly on small suburban houses, particularly in the Chislehurst and Bickley areas of Kent, showing how orderliness of plan and unity of materials could give an effect of breadth to minor works -- a lesson not lost upon the next generation of architects. Like many architects starting out on their careers he published his work in two books, 'A Book of Houses' (1890) and 'A Book of Country Houses' (1903), thereby illustrating a number of his earlier houses for a wider public. He married in 1881 Antoinette Johanna, the eldest daughter of William Hoyack, merchant of Rotterdam; they had three sons. 
Bullers Wood, Chislehurst, Kent (1888-9), was Newton's first large work (later altered). Here an earlier stuccoed house was encased and enlarged to form what was in effect a new house, carefully combining liveliness of elevation with a quiet dignity which was to be his hallmark. It is thought of in terms of wall and window, roof and chimney, while other architects were still thinking in terms of style and period. This is important, because it throws light on all Newton's subsequent work. Lethaby, the former colleague who was one of his oldest friends and who took over charge of works at the church of St Swithun, Hither Green ('c'.1890-1895), during an illness, wrote that Newton was 'aiming rather at sound and expressive building than at style imitations' ('The Builder', 122, 3 Feb 1922, 19). He was using traditional elements and materials but not designing in a way which copied any specific style. It could be said that, although he fully agreed with Webb's and Lethaby's more philosophical approach to design in architecture, his contribution was to make of it a domestic architecture for every day. 
The houses of the two decades either side of 1900 were Newton's main achievement. He was extraordinarily stable in his method of designing, and usually produced variations on single themes, such as the very similar pair, one in a free neo-Georgian -- Luckley, Wokingham, Berkshire (1906) -- the other much more vernacular -- Ludwick Corner, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire (1907). Such houses could be built at the scale of a country house, as at Flint House, Goring, Oxfordshire (1913). He also favoured a more compact type of house, often, however, quite large and usually in a free neo-Georgian style, from Redcourt, Haslemere, Surrey (1894), and Steep Hill, Jersey (1899), to Dawn House, Winchester, Hampshire (1907), Feathercombe, Hambledon, Surrey (1910), Lukyns, Ewhurst, Surrey, (1911), and Norsbury House, Sutton Scotney, Hampshire (1919). Like many arts and crafts architects he also carried out works to older buildings, restoring and extending houses such as Upton Grey Manor House, Hampshire (1907; with a Gertrude Jekyll garden), The Greenway, Shurdington, Gloucestershire (1910), and, one of his major works, Oldcastle, Dallington, Sussex (1912), where he extended a medieval house of the Sussex Weald. 
Newton's work outside the domestic field was limited, but he designed the church of St Swithun at Hither Green, Kent ('c'.1890-1895), and added the tower to the church of St George, Bickley, Kent (1904-5), as well as the little Roman Catholic chapel of Sts Gregory and Augustine, Oxford (1911), and, executed by his son W. G. Newton, also an architect, the memorial shrine and hall at Uppingham School, Rutland (1921), the elevation of the latter of which is based on the hall of the Elizabethan Kirby Hall in Northamptonshire. 
Ernest Newton was elected president of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1914. In 1916 he voluntarily undertook onerous public work in connection with the issue of building licences, to the detriment of his health. In 1918 he was awarded the royal gold medal of the RIBA on the recommendation of its council. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1911 and Royal Academician in 1919, and created CBE in 1920. He died at his home, 17 Blomfield Road, Maida Hill, London, on 25 January 1922. 
As a man Newton had a facility for making friends in every walk of life and at various time keenly pursued the study of the Dutch language, the violin, acting, French conversation and literature, and the technique of watercolour. He had a notably candid mind and an unusually frank admiration for attainments which he lacked himself. He had a very great facility for taking pains, and a candid dislike of pedantry and fanaticism, all of which were reflected in his architecture. 


@@@@@


doc= 35223


Nichols, Robert Malise Bowyer (1893-1944), poet and playwright, was born at Shanklin, Isle of Wight, on 6 September 1893, the elder son of John Bowyer Buchanan Nichols (1859-1939) of Lawford Hall, Essex, artist and author and a descendant of John Nichols, the eighteenth-century antiquary. His mother was Catherine Louisa Pusey (1872-1942), daughter of Captain Edward Bouverie Pusey RN of Manningtree, Essex, a nephew of the theologian Edward Bouverie Pusey. Nichols's brother, Sir Philip B. B. Nichols (1894-1962), was ambassador to the Netherlands (1948-51); his sister Irene (1896-1977), married the educational administrator George Gater and a younger sister, Anne Sadelbia Mary (1902-1988), married the lawyer and politician Henry George Strauss (later Lord Conesford). Educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Oxford (1913-14), Nichols asserted that he owed most to his own unmethodical private reading. The outbreak of the First World War cut short his university career. Nichols joined the Royal Field Artillery and, as a second lieutenant, went to France on 20 August 1915, moving to the frontline on 16 September. His medical record notes that 'From the first' Nichols 'began to present Symptoms of Insomnia', that he collapsed on 26 September, and that he was 'invalided home with Nervous lack of Control' (12 Jan 1916; TNA: PRO, WO 339/18193). He returned to England in October 1915 and, following three months' leave, was judged to be still suffering from a 'nervous state' (ibid.). Declared permanently unfit for general or home service, he spent several months in hospital. In 1917 he was attached to the Foreign Office and in the following year went with the British mission (Ministry of Information) to New York. 
Having begun to write verse at school, Nichols became one of the soldier-poets of the First World War; his 'Invocation' (1915) and 'Ardours and Endurances' (1917) were widely read and quoted and established him as one of the more highly acclaimed younger poets of the day. He was regarded as a sort of new Rupert Brooke, and in E. B. Osborn's noted collection 'The Muse in Arms' (1917) he was represented more copiously than any other writer. Like his friends Siegfried Sassoon and Robert Graves, Nichols wrote graphic records of the battlefield, but his poetry was inherently more idealistic. 
In 1921, after haunting Oxford for a time as a poetical personality, Nichols accepted the chair of English at Tokyo Imperial University. The opportunity of a closer view of Japanese art and culture suited his aesthetic habits. As a professor he sought to train new men of letters rather than competent academics. Illness disturbed his programme, but his lectures were amusing and invigorating. He became a busy and zealous essayist in the 'Japan Advertiser', writing on an abundance of subjects; among his papers there a series of articles on contemporary English novelists was the most considerable. He also translated the poems of the seventeenth-century Japanese poet Chikamatsu Monzaemon into English. On 11 July 1922, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, he married Norah Madeline (1892-1960), daughter of Frederick Anthony Denny, of Horwood House, Winslow, Buckinghamshire, and niece of the composer Roger Quilter. They had no children. In 1924 Nichols resigned his professorship and went to Hollywood, where he acted as adviser to Douglas Fairbanks senior in his film-making. 
Nichols regarded himself as a writer of plays; he wrote in other genres -- prose fiction in 'Fantastica' (1923) and 'Under the Yew' (1928), and metrical satire in 'Fisbo' (1934) -- but the drama 'Guilty Souls' (1922), stirring but unconvincing, announced his principal object, never successfully realized. 'Twenty Below' (with Jim Tully, 1927) and 'Wings over Europe' (with Maurice Browne, 1932), though striking, had little success in the theatre; and his vast project 'Don Juan', about which he constantly talked, was never completed. Drama took precedence over lyrical poetry, where his promise had been first recognized; the volume 'Aurelia' (1920), containing among other things a Shakespearian sonnet series, was the last of its kind from him. After 1926 he lived in England, at first at Winchelsea in Sussex, finding his pleasures in music, the fine arts, conversation, and letter-writing. In response to the Second World War he published an 'Anthology of War Poetry, 1914-1918' (1943) containing a characteristic discourse in which he generously recalled the soldier-poets of his earlier years. 
Nichols was tall, thin, and impulsive in movement, with a face in which the wit and the poet found expression by turns. His talk was rapid and humorous, but tending towards the defence of the lofty Romantic attitude of which he saw himself as a protagonist. His long list of heroes, often recommended to his listeners and correspondents, included Goethe and Berlioz. He wished to be a bohemian character in modern life. Confident of his powers, he was nevertheless an example of unselfish activity on behalf of the work of other authors, new or old. The discovery of the work of the American poet Vachel Lindsay was one of his great successes. As a poet he was probably hindered rather than helped by his preoccupation with world literature; at all events he did not fulfil his ambitious or visionary schemes. In 1942 he published a selection of his poems entitled 'Such was my Singing'. Nichols died at Cambridge on 17 December 1944 and was buried in Lawford, near Manningtree, Essex. He was survived by his wife, who died on 9 June 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 35224


Nicholson, Sir Charles, first baronet (1808-1903), educationist and politician, was born in Cockermouth, Cumberland, on 23 November 1808. He was the only surviving child of Charles Nicholson of London, merchant and agent to Lord Egremont, and Barbara, youngest daughter of John Ascough of Bedale. 
After graduating MD at Edinburgh University in 1833, Nicholson emigrated to Australia, and settled on some property belonging to his uncle near Sydney in May 1834. Here for some time he practised as a physician. He was also a successful businessman, buying land and stock and forming sheep stations. A good classical scholar, well read in history and science, an able writer, and a lucid speaker, he soon became prominently identified with the social and political interests of the colony. In June 1843 he was returned to the first legislative council of New South Wales as one of the five members for the Port Phillip district (later the state of Victoria). In July 1848, and again in September 1851, he was elected member for the county of Argyle. From 2 May 1844 to 19 May 1846 he was chairman of committees of the legislative council. In 1846 he was chosen speaker. He was twice re-elected and retained the office until the grant to the colony of responsible government in 1855-6, when he became for a short time a member of the executive council. When in 1859 the district of Moreton Bay was separated from New South Wales and formed into the colony of Queensland, Nicholson was nominated on 1 May 1860 a member of the legislative council of the new colony, and was president during the first session, resigning the office on 28 August 1860. 
Nicholson was from the first a powerful advocate of popular education in New South Wales. He was a member of the select committee to inquire into the state of education in the colony moved for by Robert Lowe and appointed in June 1844. His name, however, is more closely associated with the foundation of the University of Sydney. In December 1850 he was nominated to the original senate of the university. He was a generous donor to its funds, and endowed it with many valuable gifts, including the museum of Egyptian, Etruscan, Greek, and Roman antiquities, which he collected with much personal exertion and at considerable cost. Between 1856 and 1859 he visited England to raise funds for the university. He was instrumental in obtaining a grant of arms from the Heralds' College in 1857, and the royal charter from Queen Victoria in 1858. On 3 March 1851 he was unanimously elected vice-provost, and delivered an inaugural address at the opening of the university on 11 October 1852. He was chancellor from 13 March 1854 until 1862, when he left Australia permanently for England. 
Nicholson was knighted by patent on 1 March 1852, and was the first Australian to be created a baronet (of Luddenham, NSW, on 8 April 1859). He was made honorary DCL of Oxford in 1857, honorary LLD of Cambridge in 1868, and honorary LLD of Edinburgh in 1886. He married, on 8 August 1865, Sarah Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Archibald Keightley, registrar of the Charterhouse, London. They had three sons of whom the eldest, Charles Archibald Nicholson, succeeded to the baronetcy and the youngest, Sir Sydney Hugo Nicholson, founded the Royal School of Church Music. After his return to England, Nicholson chiefly resided in Hadleigh, Essex, actively occupied as a magistrate, as chairman of the Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance Company, and as director of other undertakings. He was a leading member of the Royal Colonial Institute, the Royal Society of Arts, and the British Association. He continued to pursue Egyptian, classical, and Hebrew scholarship. Preserving his vigour until the end, he died on 8 November 1903 at his residence, The Grange, Totteridge, near Barnet, Hertfordshire, and was buried in Totteridge churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 35225


Nicholson, Sir Charles Archibald, second baronet (1867-1949), architect, was born at 26 Devonshire Place, London, on 27 April 1867, the eldest son of Sir Charles Nicholson, first baronet (1808-1903), educationist and politician, and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth Keightley (died 1923). Sir Sydney Hugo Nicholson (1875-1947), the organist and church musician, was a younger brother. Charles was educated at Rugby School and at New College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1889 with a third class in modern history. He entered the architectural profession as a pupil in the office of J. D. Sedding, and to his training under this master of the Victorian Gothic style he owed much of his skill and enthusiasm for church design in structure as well as fittings and adornment. Subsequently he worked with Henry Wilson, another of Sedding's pupils, and in 1893 set up in practice for himself. In that year he won the Tite prize given for architectural design by the Royal Institute of British Architects, of which he was elected a fellow in 1905. 
From 1895 until 1916 Nicholson was in partnership with Major Hubert Christian Corlette (died 1956). In 1927, when the see of Portsmouth was founded, Thomas Johnson Rushton joined him in the adaptation and enlargement of the parish church of St Thomas a Becket, to form the new cathedral. This association continued until Nicholson's death. In the course of his career Nicholson was appointed consulting architect to seven cathedrals -- Lincoln, Wells, Lichfield, Llandaff, Sheffield, Portsmouth, and Belfast -- and diocesan architect to the sees of Wakefield, Winchester, Portsmouth, and Chelmsford. 
Nicholson's skill and ingenuity were nowhere better shown than in the very large number of new parish churches which he designed and built. Besides these he refashioned, augmented, or furnished a much larger number of existing churches. The close of the Second World War brought him memorial work from many quarters, and one of the first memorial chapels was that built for his own school at Rugby. Another school chapel, at Clifton College, is much admired for its handling of the hexagonal lantern. Nicholson's Anglican cathedral work included the new east chapel at Norwich, the west front of Belfast (with memorial western porches, a new chapel of the Holy Spirit, and baptistery), various additions to Chelmsford, and the reconstruction of Portsmouth. Internal work and restoration were carried out at Brecon, Carlisle, Exeter, Leicester, Lichfield, Lincoln, Llandaff, Manchester, Salisbury, Wakefield, Wells, and Winchester. Nicholson used the English Gothic style with complete freedom, conceiving, in common with his contemporaries, that his work was not the less original in employing its idiom. Resourceful and creative, he delighted in the constructional problems which each task offered. Although practical and realistic, he was always an artist: a finished draughtsman, he had a delight in colour and used it frequently and with great effect in his decorative design. For secular buildings Nicholson could lay aside his Gothic style: Burton Manor, in the Wirral, is a distinguished classical house, and at Kingston, Jamaica, he produced a striking design for the government buildings in reinforced concrete, anticipating the later development of this material. Both these undertakings were carried out in partnership with Corlette. 
Nicholson, who succeeded to the baronetcy in 1903, shunned publicity and found his chief recreation in travel. He was twice married: first, on 1 October 1895 to Evelyn Louise (died 1927), daughter of the Revd Henry Arnold Olivier, and sister of Sydney Haldane Olivier (1859-1943). They had one son, John Charles ('b'. 1904), who succeeded his father as third baronet, and two daughters. Nicholson married second, on 10 June 1931, Catherine Maud, daughter of Luckham Warren, of Winchfield, Hampshire. He died on 4 March 1949 at Headington, Oxford, and was buried at South Benfleet, Essex. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35226


Nicholson, Charles Ernest (1868-1954), yacht designer, was born at Gosport on 12 May 1868, the second son in the family of three boys and five girls of Benjamin Nicholson, naval architect, and his wife, Sarah Watson. Educated at Mill Hill School, he joined the family firm of Camper and Nicholsons Ltd in 1886 and at the age of twenty-one became the firm's chief designer, a post which he filled until his death. Later, he was chairman and managing director, to the age of seventy-two. In 1895 he married Lucy Ella (died 1937), daughter of William Edmonds, a solicitor. They had two daughters and three sons, the second of whom, John, followed his father in the firm and became chairman in 1940. 
Nicholson rapidly made his presence felt in the firm and soon sailing yachts of all kinds from his board were challenging those of G. L. Watson, the acknowledged master of the time. Nicholson, a rare combination of artist, technical genius, and businessman, was undoubtedly one of the greatest and most versatile yacht architects of all time. His skill as a helmsman contributed in no small measure to his success. He built up the greatest yacht yard in this country at Gosport and later a second at Southampton. Both had difficulty in keeping pace with the designs of yachts of all conceivable kinds which flowed in a steady torrent from his imaginative brain. 
Nicholson designed sailing craft of all sizes from a 12 foot dinghy for his grandchildren to J-class America's Cup challengers of which he built four, notably 'Shamrock IV' in 1914 and 'Endeavour' in 1934, both potential winners; that they failed to win the cup was due to extraneous circumstances and no fault of Nicholson's. In 1939, which marked the end of the pageant of big-class yacht racing, the 12 metre fleet was almost entirely of Nicholson's design and construction. By the mid-thirties ocean racing was becoming popular and inevitably Nicholson was commissioned to design and build a suitable vessel. Not limited by cost, he produced the cutter 'Foxhound' in 1935, 45 feet on the waterline, about the same size as a 12 metre. Nothing comparable had been built in this country. She was followed by the yawl 'Bloodhound' and 'Stiarna', a cutter, of similar design. These yachts were highly successful and throughout long careers stood up to the hard punishment of offshore racing; and, in the 1960s, were still in commission, 'Bloodhound' being then owned until 1969 by Elizabeth II and the duke of Edinburgh. Nicholson designed cruising yachts of all kinds from 5 tons up to such vessels as the 699 ton schooner 'Creole' (1927). 
Nicholson was always a jump ahead. He was the first yacht designer to see the possibilities of Bermuda rig and in 1921 re-rigged the 23 metre 'Nyria', which he had designed and built in 1906, with a jib-headed mainsail. This brought a storm of derision characteristically and rightly ignored by Nicholson. She proved a great success and revolutionized the rig of all modern yachts. 
In between the sailing vessels came steam and motor yachts, enough of them alone to constitute a man's life-work. About 1911 Nicholson produced two beautiful traditional clipper-stem steam yachts, 'Marynthea' (900 tons) and 'Miranda'. He then turned his attention to diesel yachts, the first being 'Pioneer' (400 tons), and, in 1937, 'Philante' (1612 tons), the largest motor yacht until then built in Britain. She later became the Norwegian royal yacht. These fine vessels were of a type quite different from the traditional steam yacht. Entirely 'Nicholson' in conception, they were excellent sea boats, with fine accommodation and a wide radius of action. 
In the First World War, as a separate venture, Nicholson designed and built flying-boat hulls in wood. In the same period he formed, as a separate firm, the Laminated Wood Ship Company, to design and build wooden cargo vessels of 1000 tons dead weight to help the urgent need for tonnage to replace losses due to enemy submarine action. The method of construction was original, based on a longitudinal system of framing with multi-skin planking and deck, and planned to use home-grown timbers such as oak, fir, and larch. Some of these ships were still in commission many years after the war. As a further example of his versatility, Nicholson designed a training ship, 'Sebastian de Elcano' (3000 tons), for the Spanish government. She was a fore-and-aft four-masted schooner. The drawings included the minutest detail so that she could be built in Spain. 
Nicholson's vast output was due not only to his tremendous capacity for concentrated thought and work but also to his ability and judgement in gathering to work under him a team of men each an expert in his own sphere. Unfortunately for students of Nicholson's work most of his drawings and plans were burned in a fire at the works in 1910 and again in 1941 when the yard at Gosport was virtually destroyed by enemy action. Fortunately Beken's matchless photographs are still available. 
Nicholson was the technical brain of the Yacht Racing Association from 1910 until the outbreak of war in 1939. He was also a member of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects. In 1944 he was awarded the diploma of royal designer for industry and in 1949 he was appointed OBE. Throughout his life he devoted much time to the Gosport War Memorial Hospital of which he became chairman in 1934; in that year he was made the first honorary freeman of the borough of Gosport. Nicholson died at his home at Faringdon, Hill Head, Hampshire, on 27 February 1954. 
E. F. Haylock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35227


Nicholson, Edward Williams Byron (1849-1912), librarian, was born on 16 March 1849 in Green Street, St Helier, Jersey, the only child of Edward Nicholson RN (1821-1850) and Emily Hamilton Wall (1821-1890), an actress. His father had left the navy in 1847 and died in California, a casualty of the gold rush, leaving his widow almost destitute. She moved with her son to Portsea, then to live with her mother at Llanrwst in north Wales, where Edward attended the grammar school from 1857 to 1859. After a term at Liverpool College, Nicholson was, from 1860, educated at Tonbridge School, Kent. In 1867 he went to Trinity College, Oxford, as a classical scholar; he gained a first in classical moderations in 1869 and a third in law and history in 1871. He won the Gaisford prize for Greek verse the same year and the Hall Houghton junior 'Greek Testament' prize in 1872. He was school librarian at Tonbridge and librarian of the Oxford Union, demonstrating at an early age a laudable application to cataloguing by producing published catalogues of each library. After a brief spell of teaching at the Rookery School in Headington, Oxford, Nicholson was appointed librarian of the London Institution in January 1873. 
The institution, founded in 1805 for the diffusion of knowledge by means of lectures and a circulating library, was by then almost moribund. With the support of its honorary secretary, the Revd William Rogers of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, Nicholson reorganized the society, increasing its membership and revenue, revitalizing its lectures, and greatly improving both the contents and the use of its library. In 1877, inspired by press accounts of a conference of American librarians, he was the prime mover in the organization of an international conference of librarians in London, at which, largely on his initiative, the Library Association of the United Kingdom and the Metropolitan Free Libraries Committee were formed. Nicholson was active in both associations, but resigned from the Library Association council in 1881, impatient with its reluctance to take a stand on major issues and its failure to instigate 'one single improvement however trifling in library-management or library-appliances' (Manley, 19-20). 
Nicholson had married on 1 February 1876 Helen Grant (1850-1938), daughter of the Revd Sir Charles Macgregor, third baronet. They had three daughters, Violet ('b'. 1877), Myrtle ('b'. 1881), and May ('b'. 1885). Keen to make his mark on the world and to improve his income, Nicholson contemplated literary work. Then in 1881 Bodley's librarian died and Nicholson put his name forward hesitantly, aware of his shortcomings as palaeographer, bibliographer, and linguist, but confident of the relevance of his practical experience and his proven capacity for hard work and organization. Departing from a long tradition of scholar-librarians, the library's governing body of curators, to the surprise of the university, elected him. He owed his election to the support of Benjamin Jowett and to a general feeling that the time had come to modernize the Bodleian. Under the benign direction of H. O. Coxe, librarian since 1860, it had on the strength of its collections maintained its reputation as one of the world's great libraries, despite its cramped accommodation, minimal staff, and inadequate catalogues. In a prescient leader on 6 February 1882 'The Times', while recognizing Nicholson's technical qualifications and thorough experience in the mechanics of librarianship, warned of the ordeal facing anyone chosen to succeed the courtly and scholarly Coxe. This view was echoed thirty years later in the 'Times' obituary: 'it was a difficult post to fill and a difficult time' ('The Times', 18 March 1912, 11). 
In 1888 Nicholson published a report on his first five years in office, describing them as 'a time of transition and reorganization' ('The Bodleian Library 1882', Bodl. Oxf., Library Records, d.34). It records many changes: the extension of the library into the remaining ground-floor rooms of the Old Schools quadrangle and into the basement of the Sheldonian Theatre; the introduction of new cataloguing rules and a classification scheme for current accessions; a great increase in the numbers of books acquired and of catalogue slips produced; the provision of open access to reference works in the Radcliffe Camera; and the enlargement of the staff by the employment of boys to undertake the more routine library tasks. 
The report glossed over the opposition provoked by the rapid introduction of so many changes. Several curators mistrusted such wholesale reorganization and sought to curb the excessive zeal of the brash young professional. Falconer Madan, the senior sub-librarian, who despised Nicholson's deficiencies of scholarship and venerated the memory of Coxe's antiquated administration, fuelled their opposition with secret reports on the librarian's shortcomings and with anonymous criticism of the new regime in 'The Library'. Nicholson, autocratic by nature, jealous of the dignity of his office, and impatient of criticism, went into battle on every issue. The result was a series of bitter conflicts which dogged his long term in office, broke his health, and masked the extent of his achievements, which were considerable. 
It was Nicholson's constant refrain that the Bodleian was 'underroomed, undermonied and undermanned' ('The curatorial election of February 1899', Bodl. Oxf., Library Records, d.43). Shortage of funds precluded new building or the enlargement of the established staff, but judicious recruitment, careful training, and meticulous organization -- at which Nicholson excelled -- made the most of limited resources. His staff were rigorously supervised, and their duties minutely detailed in the 'Staff Kalendar' which was published annually from 1902. The employment of boys freed library assistants to work on cataloguing, while training and incentives for promotion produced a steady supply of better-qualified staff. Unfortunately Nicholson's insistence on very detailed cataloguing and on the continuation of Coxe's subject-catalogue slowed down progress on the essential author-catalogue. His vigorous defence of the copyright privilege and enthusiasm for the preservation of ephemeral printing increased accessions but exacerbated the shortage of storage space. It was only in 1907 that, thanks to Thomas Brassey, funds became available to remedy some of the underlying problems. Extra staff were recruited to revise the old author-catalogue. The north range of the picture gallery was converted into an additional reading room. Work began on what was to be Nicholson's most lasting monument, the first specially constructed underground book store ever made, equipped with rolling bookcases, to a plan first mooted by him in 1899. 
By 1907 long years of overwork and of controversy had taken their toll on Nicholson's constitution. Heart disease was diagnosed as early as 1890. He suffered a breakdown in 1901 and twice collapsed in the street in 1907. His absences from work increased and he suffered a further relapse in 1909. Suspicious of the curators' motives, he resisted all their suggestions that he should take leave of absence until forced to do so late in February 1912. He died on 17 March 1912 at his home, 2 Canterbury Road, Oxford, and was buried on 20 March at Holywell cemetery. 
Nicholson's interests outside the Bodleian were varied. He was a devoted husband and father, an enthusiastic cyclist and swimmer, a chess player and composer of limericks. He published on a wide range of subjects including classical literature, comparative philology, and Celtic antiquities. He was a strong opponent of vivisection and supporter of the cause of women -- his last battle with his senior colleagues and curators was over the appointment of a woman to the permanent staff. In a memorial address to the annual meeting of the Library Association in 1913, Henry Tedder gave a graphic description of Nicholson, who was 5 feet 10 inches tall and of athletic build, with 'drooping moustache, small side whiskers, an ever-tumbling monocle, a straw hat worn summer and winter, a certain defect in one eye, a hurried and eager walk, and a general disregard for outward show' (Tedder, 108). His kindliness, consideration for their welfare, and total lack of malice towards his opponents were frequently recorded by his junior staff. G. W. Wheeler, who had known the Bodleian before 1882, summarized Nicholson's achievement in 1940 in a letter to R. H. Hill: 'I have always regarded him as almost the refounder of the Library' (Bodl. Oxf., Library Records, d.142). 


@@@@@


doc= 35228


Nicholson, George (1847-1908), gardener and botanist, was born at Ripon, Yorkshire, on 7 December 1847, the son of James Nicholson, gardener, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Burr. Initially trained under his father, he then worked for some time in the gardens of Messrs Fisher and Holmes at Sheffield, before spending two years at the municipal nurseries of La Muette, Paris. On his return to England he worked at the nurseries of Messrs Low at Clapton. In 1873 he was appointed clerk to John Smith, the curator at Kew; in 1886 he succeeded Smith as curator. In 1875 he married Elizabeth Naylor Bell; she died soon after, leaving him a son who become an engineer in the Royal Navy. Nicholson retired owing to ill health in July 1901, but continued his botanical researches at Kew as far as his strength allowed. 
A fluent speaker in French and German, Nicholson paid holiday visits to France and Switzerland, and travelled in Germany, northern Italy, and Spain. He was impressed with the value of a knowledge of foreign languages to young gardeners, and devoted much of his leisure to teaching some of them French. In 1893 he went to the Chicago Exhibition as one of the judges in the horticultural section; there he took the opportunity to study the forest trees of the United States. In 1902, the year after his retirement, he visited New York as delegate of the Royal Horticultural Society to the plant-breeding conference. 
Until 1886 Nicholson devoted much attention to the critical study of British flowering plants. His first published work, 'Wild flora of Kew gardens and pleasure grounds', appeared in the 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign', for 1875. In the same year he joined the Botanical Exchange Club, and to its reports and to the 'Journal of Botany' he contributed notes on such segregates as those of 'Rosa' and of 'Cardamine pratensis'. The 'Wild fauna and flora of Kew Gardens', issued in the 'Kew Bulletin' (additional ser. 5) in 1906 was largely his work. Out of 2000 fungi enumerated, 500 were found by Nicholson. His herbarium of British plants was presented, towards the end of his life, to the University of Aberdeen, through his friend James Trail, professor of botany there. 
When Sir Joseph Hooker was reorganizing and extending the arboretum at Kew he found an able assistant in Nicholson, who wrote on the genera 'Acer' and 'Quercus' and twenty articles on the Kew arboretum in the 'Gardeners' Chronicle', during 1881-3. A valuable herbarium which he formed of trees and shrubs was purchased by the Bentham Trust in 1889 and presented to Kew. His 'Hand-List of Trees and Shrubs Grown at Kew' (1894-6) demonstrated his knowledge of this class of plants. Nicholson's 'magnum opus' was 'The Illustrated Dictionary of Gardening' (4 vols., 1884-7; French edn, 1892-9; two supp. vols., 1900-01). This standard work of reference, most of which was not only edited but also written by Nicholson, became the forerunner of the Royal Horticultural Society's 'Dictionary of Gardening'. Although an expert on oaks and maples he never realized his ambition to write a standard work on hardy trees and shrubs. 
Nicholson's gentle, unselfish character, together with his reputation as a horticulturist, made him the obvious choice for first president of the Kew Guild, which was founded in 1893. He was elected an associate of the Linnean Society in 1886, became a fellow in 1898, and was awarded the Veitch memorial medal of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1894, and the Victoria medal of honour in 1897. In 1901 Udo Dammer named a Central American palm 'Neonicholsonia georgei' and C. E. Salmon named a moss, found on a tree-fern at Kew, 'Fissideus nicholsoni'. An athletic man, and a keen mountaineer, Nicholson died of heart trouble at his home, 37 Larkfield Road, Richmond, on 20 September 1908. His remains were cremated. The Royal Horticultural Society founded the Nicholson prize, awarded to students sitting the Wisley diploma examination, in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 35229


Nicholson, Joseph Shield (1850-1927), economist, the only son of the Revd Thomas Nicholson, Independent minister at Banbury, and his wife, Mary Anne Grant, was born at Wrawby, Lincolnshire, on 9 November 1850. His education began at a preparatory school at Lewisham. After attending classes at King's College, London, he matriculated there in 1867, and gained his BA with high honours in 1870. From 1872 to 1873 he studied at Edinburgh University. In 1873 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a first class in the moral sciences tripos in 1876. In 1877, the year of its institution, and again in 1880, Nicholson was awarded the Cobden (triennial) prize. The earlier of his prize essays, published in 1878 under the title of 'The Effects of Machinery on Wages', gained for him the Cambridge degree of ScD. In 1877 he was placed first in the London MA examination (philosophy branch) and obtained the Gerstenberg prize for special distinction in political economy. Subsequently, accompanied by his friend James George Frazer, he went to Heidelberg, where he attended lectures, chiefly on law, at the university. 
From 1876 to 1880 Nicholson was a private tutor at Cambridge; he lectured on English history at Trinity College, and took an active part in the extra-mural teaching of the university. For two years (1878-80) he lectured on political economy for the Association for the Higher Education of Women in Cambridge. In the early days of the Cambridge chess club (founded 1871) Nicholson was an outstanding player, and a member of the team which, in 1874, defeated Oxford for the first time. In later years he became widely known through the chess column of 'The Times' as a subtle composer and solver of chess problems. Nicholson was also devoted to boating and fishing, and he was an accomplished swimmer. His vacations at this period were usually spent in the north of Scotland, and his daring exploits in the seas around Cape Wrath and in the lochs of Sutherland became a tradition of the district. 
In 1880, before he was thirty, Nicholson was elected to the chair of political economy and mercantile law at the University of Edinburgh. He arrived in Edinburgh from Cambridge with a reputation as a hard worker and as a teacher of great ability, who could expound economic principles with lucidity and bring them into close and intelligible relation with the problems of the day. This reputation he fully justified throughout the whole period of forty-five years during which he held the chair. As professor he maintained the highest Scottish traditions. His teachings and his writings played a definite and important part in the formation of public opinion. On questions of imperial economic policy and of currency and banking he attained a position of exceptional authority. In the difficult period of war finance his counsel and consistent teaching did much to keep depreciation of currency within remediable limits. There were few teachers of his time in Scotland who did more to bring academic life into touch with that of the community. He was the pioneer of economic history in Scotland, and during his professorship his department grew until it included nearly half as many teachers as there had originally been students. 
Nicholson was fourteen years in writing his main work, 'Principles of Economics'. Even when he started, the subject's growing complexity and specialization were making the general treatise a difficult achievement. P. H. Wicksteed's 'Common Sense of Political Economy' (1910) excepted, Nicholson's was the last successful attempt to bring it off. The book also seemed old-fashioned by its omission of the marginal principle, which by then had come to dominate economics, at any rate at its academic leading edge. But its merits -- vitality, lucid style, and skilful interweaving of theory and historical evidence -- were immediately appreciated. To Nicholson himself, it was his political views, rather than his approach to economics, that were becoming obsolete. 'It is not pleasant', he told the Edinburgh chamber of commerce in 1893, 'for a man at my time of life to be accused of being reactionary, old-fashioned and fossilised.' Nicholson was referring to his hostility to trade unions, which he considered just another form of monopoly: but his economic liberalism in general had faded from fashion as reformers devised ever more tasks for the state to perform. But, however uncomplicated his ideology and aggressive his defence of it, he was never an inflexible doctrinaire on practical questions of economic policy. Indeed his ability to present with equal pungency, if not equal conviction, both sides of a question make his 'The Effect of Machinery on Wages' (1879), 'Essays on Present Monetary Problems' (1888), 'The Tariff Problem' (1903), and the policy-oriented sections of the 'Principles' among the most worthwhile economic writing of the age. Only the later work, 'Inflation' (1919), lapses into the empty rhetoric which disfigures much of his directly political writing. For the most part he was a conciliatory bimetallist, a moderate under-consumptionist, a pragmatic free-trader, and a subtle defender of the quantity theory of money. 
No estimate of Nicholson's personality would be complete without a reference to his literary activities of a lighter kind. His romance 'A Dreamer of Dreams' (1889) is very revealing as a human document, while the other two -- 'Thoth' (1888) and 'Toxar' (1890) -- in their allegorical undertones give many of his views on life and its problems. The link between these and his books on Ariosto -- 'Tales from Ariosto' (1913) and 'Life and Genius of Ariosto' (1914) -- is to be found in the position assigned to Ariosto as 'the father of modern romance'. 
Nicholson was an honorary LLD of the universities of St Andrews (1911) and Edinburgh (1916), FRSE (1884), FBA (1903), and medallist of the Statistical Society (1918). In 1885 he married Jeanie, daughter of William Ballantyne Hodgson, his predecessor in the chair of political economy at Edinburgh. They had one son (who died of wounds in the First World War) and two daughters. In 1925 Nicholson resigned his chair owing to an illness. He died at Edinburgh on 12 May 1927, following an operation. 
Nicholson's likes and dislikes were never anything but transparent. A clear mind, a warm temperament, and a forceful style make him the most readable of the economists of his day. Even his devotion to Adam Smith is attractive, loyal but not uncritical, admiring but not unctuous. When Nicholson died, 'The Times' wrote that 'he knew his 'Wealth of Nations' as thoroughly as the Scottish peasant knows his 'Bible', and believed in it almost as thoroughly'. Certainly, it would involve a long search to find a truer disciple of Adam Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 35230


Nicholson, Reynold Alleyne (1868-1945), orientalist, was born at Keighley, Yorkshire, on 19 August 1868, the eldest of the five children of Henry Alleyne Nicholson (1844-1899) and his wife, Isabella Hutchison, from Kirkcaldy in Fife. His father, then a practising surgeon, later became professor of natural history at the universities of St Andrews and Aberdeen. Nicholson went to school in these two cities and from Aberdeen University entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1887. After being awarded the Porson prize for Greek verse in his first year he became a scholar of his college, and in 1890 obtained a first class in part one of the classical tripos and again won the Porson prize. Although he dropped to a third class in part two (1891) he gained a first in the Indian languages tripos in 1892. 
Nicholson's interest in oriental languages was first stimulated in the library of his grandfather, the biblical scholar John Nicholson, from whom he inherited a collection of Arabic and Persian manuscripts. It was fostered by E. G. Browne, with whom he read Persian, and by short periods of study at Leiden and Strasbourg, where he read Arabic with Michael Jan de Goeje and Theodor Noldeke. His election to a fellowship at Trinity in 1893 opened the partnership with Browne which lasted until the latter's death in 1926. Except for one year's tenure of the chair of Persian at University College, London, in 1901-2, the whole of Nicholson's academic career was spent in Cambridge. He returned there to succeed Browne first as lecturer in Persian (1902-26), then in 1926 (when he was also re-elected fellow of Trinity) as Sir Thomas Adams's professor of Arabic. 
From the first, Nicholson was strongly attracted to the literature of Sufism. For his fellowship thesis he made a selection from the mystical odes of Rumi called 'Divani Shamsi Tabriz', the publication of which, with translation and annotation, in 1898 placed him at once in the front rank of oriental scholarship. Between 1905 and 1914 he published editions or translations of four major works on Sufism, two in Persian ('Attar's 'Tadhkiratu 'l-awliya', 2 vols., 1905-7, and 'Kashf al-mahjub' of Hujwiri, 1911) and two in Arabic (Ibn al- 'Arabi's odes, 'Tarjuman al-ashwaq', 1911, and 'Kitab al-lum' of al-Sarraj, 1914), besides various collaborations with Browne. In 1914 he summed up his studies in a manual for the general reader, 'The Mystics of Islam'. Meanwhile he had written his 'Literary History of the Arabs' (1907), a personal appreciation of Arabic literature, which became a standard text. He also issued an annotated series of Arabic readers (1907-11). 
Nicholson's publications resumed after the war with two important volumes, 'Studies in Islamic Poetry' and 'Studies in Islamic Mysticism' (both 1921), supplemented in 1923 by a small but significant work entitled 'The Idea of Personality in Sufism'. His major project in this period was a complete critical edition with translation and annotation of the 'Mathnawi' of Rumi, the greatest literary achievement of Persian mysticism. Eighteen years of sustained industry enabled him to issue between 1925 and 1940 the eight volumes he had planned; a final volume, intended to sum up Rumi's life and work and his place in the history of Sufism, remained unwritten. 
Nicholson's work on Sufism was considered the greatest single contribution made by a European scholar to the subject. He was responsible for opening up one of the major developments of human thought for both specialists and the lay reader, transforming the understanding of it by presenting its major products with rare imagination and literary taste, as well as with careful scholarship. He himself was gifted with poetic sensibility and talent. In earlier years he wrote light verse, some of which he reprinted in 'The Don and the Dervish' (1911), and in 1922 he published a volume of 'Translations of Eastern Poetry and Prose'. 
Nicholson was an honorary LLD of Aberdeen (1913), a fellow of the British Academy (1922), gold medallist of the Royal Asiatic Society (1938), and an associate member of the Persian Academy. In outward manner he was reserved and in public speech he was diffident, but as a teacher he was kind and sympathetic, and regarded with affection. His chief recreation was golf, and as an undergraduate he played in the Cambridge team against Oxford. In 1903 he married his first cousin, Cecilia, daughter of Thomas Varty, of Penrith; there were no children. After retiring in 1933 he continued to take an interest in the oriental school until in 1940 failing health and eyesight forced him into retreat in north Wales. He died at Fairholme Nursing Home, Woodlands Road, Saltney, Chester, on 27 August 1945. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35231


Nicholson, Sir Sydney Hugo (1875-1947), founder of the Royal School of Church Music and choral director, was born on 9 February 1875 at 26 Devonshire Place, London, the third and youngest son of Sir Charles Nicholson, first baronet (1808-1903), of Luddenham, and Sarah Elizabeth Keightley. His first name recalled his father's residence in Australia (1834-62). His brothers were the architect Sir Charles A. Nicholson, and the stained-glass artist Archibald Keightley Nicholson. He was educated at Rugby School and New College, Oxford, taking a third-class degree in English in 1897. He studied organ and composition for three years at the Royal College of Music, London, under Walter Parratt and Charles Villiers Stanford, took the Oxford BMus in 1902, and studied at the conservatory in Frankfurt am Main (1903-4). He was organist of Chipping Barnet parish church, Hertfordshire (1897-1903), briefly of the lower chapel of Eton College (1903), and acting organist of Carlisle Cathedral from 1904. Offered a post as organist of Canterbury Cathedral in 1908, he withdrew in favour of a similar post at Manchester Cathedral, and in 1919 became organist of Westminster Abbey. As well as officiating at many royal services he and the choir made the first broadcast of choral evensong on the BBC on 6 October 1926. By his own admission he was not an organist of the first rank, and this may have contributed to his decision to resign from the abbey in 1928. In 1927 he founded the School of English Church Music, and was its first director. He was appointed MVO in 1926, was awarded a Lambeth doctorate in 1928, and was knighted for his services to church music in 1938. 
An able organizer and administrator, not afraid of change and innovation, Nicholson made an impact at Carlisle, Manchester, and Westminster, though his musical taste was conservative. At Westminster Abbey he moved on most of the old lay clerks, introduced regular rehearsal, and doubled the number of boys to share the load of singing daily services. He also founded the large special choir with annual performances of Bach's 'St Matthew passion'. Earlier he had instituted a church choral union (Barnet) and diocesan music societies (Carlisle and Manchester) to bring parish church choirs together. Through the Church Music Society and the archbishops' committee on church music (1922) he became engaged with questions of musical standards in Church of England parish churches. Much of this background influenced the two parts of his new foundation: the residential College of St Nicolas to train church musicians and the School of English Church Music, a network of affiliated Anglican churches committed to raising standards of music in worship. 
Nicholson had considered turning his attention to these matters since at least 1925 or 1926. On 6 December 1927, at a meeting at Westminster Abbey, he founded the School of English Church Music, bought the first premises, Buller's Wood, Chislehurst, in October 1928, and became warden of the small College of St Nicolas in January 1929. Membership of the school expanded from 105 in 1928 to more than 2000 affiliates in Britain and overseas by the time of his death. The initial success of this ambitious enterprise depended almost entirely on Nicholson's enthusiasm and vigour, with financial support from 'Hymns Ancient and Modern'. He toured widely in Britain and throughout the empire. Early achievements included four enormous choral festivals (one of which involved 4000 voices at Crystal Palace in 1933), residential courses for boys, day courses, and a summer school for choirmasters and clergy. 
At the beginning of the Second World War the College of St Nicolas was closed and the school was relocated to St Michael's College, Tenbury, where Nicholson became acting organist and choirmaster until 1943, when he set up temporary quarters in Leamington Spa. In 1945 it was granted a royal charter and became the Royal School of Church Music. Both school and college were then re-established in Canterbury, and he continued as director of the school. Nicholson died at Ashford Hospital, Kent, on 30 May 1947 after several strokes; his ashes were interred in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey on 6 June. 
Nicholson's ideas were reflected in 'Church Music: a Practical Handbook' (1920), 'Quires and Places where they Sing' (1932), and, with G. L. H. Garner, 'A Manual of English Church Music' (1923). He wrote three musical dramatic pieces, including 'The Children of the Chapel', and a novel, 'Peter', which tells the story of a boy chorister through the ages. He guided much of the musical editing of 'Hymns Ancient and Modern' from the supplement of 1916 to the revised edition, which appeared in 1950. A small number of organ and choral works were published. 
An enthusiastic early motorist, Nicholson enjoyed sketching, carpentry, printing, and photography. His overall concern for the well-being of his boy choristers resulted in the establishment of a choir club and holidays at Carlisle and scout troops at Manchester and Westminster Abbey. His obituary in the 'Musical Times' (July 1947) reported 'a man of excellent presence' and 'courteous manner', 'a confirmed bachelor' who 'lived comfortably, though simply'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35232


Nicholson, William Gustavus, Baron Nicholson (1845-1918), army officer, the youngest son of William Nicholson Nicholson (born Phillips, in 1827 he assumed the surname and arms of Nicholson), deputy lieutenant and JP, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Abram Rhodes of Wold, Newton Hall, Yorkshire, was born on 2 March 1845 at Mansion House, Roundhay Park, Leeds. He was educated at Leeds grammar school and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, where he passed out first in his term and was awarded the Pollock medal. In March 1865 he was commissioned into the Royal Engineers, and from 1868 to 1871 served on Barbados. He volunteered for service in India and worked in the public works department at Hyderabad and as assistant engineer in the Punjab irrigation branch. In 1873 he transferred to the military works department. He married in 1871 Victoria, daughter of D. Dillon. They had no children, and she survived her husband. 
Nicholson accompanied the Kandahar field force in 1878 and the Kurram field force in 1879 during the Second Anglo-Afghan War. He served as a field engineer in Afghanistan, fighting in the engagements at the Shutar Gardan Pass, Charasia, and distinguished himself during the defence at Lataband. In 1880 he accompanied Sir Frederick Roberts from Kabul to Kandahar, fighting in the battle on 1 September outside the city. He was awarded a brevet majority for his services in Afghanistan, where he established a reputation as a skilled staff officer. Perhaps more importantly he attracted Roberts's attention. In 1880 he was appointed secretary to the defence committee responsible for examining coast and frontier defences in India. 
In 1882 Nicholson served with the Indian contingent during the Egyptian campaign, taking part in the battle of Tell al-Kebir. In 1884 he accompanied Sir Robert Sandeman and Sir Charles Metcalfe MacGregor on a reconnaissance mission in Baluchistan. From 1885 to 1890 he was assistant adjutant-general, Royal Engineers, in India, working with the defence committee. In 1886-7 he served in Burma as assistant adjutant-general, being mentioned in dispatches and awarded the brevet of lieutenant-colonel. He acted as military secretary to Roberts, the commander-in-chief, from 1890 to 1893, after which he worked for two years in the military works department as chief engineer on the north-west frontier. In 1895 he was appointed deputy adjutant-general of the Punjab command. He served as chief of staff with the Tirah expeditionary force in 1897-8, under Sir William Lockhart, carrying out punitive operations against the Afridis in Tirah. In 1898 he was created KCB for his services, and appointed adjutant-general in India. 
Roberts requested that Nicholson join him as military secretary following the initial disasters of the South African War. In February 1900 Nicholson was appointed director of transport, in which capacity he exerted an important influence on the campaign. He also participated in operations in the Orange Free State -- including Paardeberg, Poplar Grove, Driefontein, and the Vet and Zand rivers. He also took part in the fighting near Johannesburg, Pretoria, and Diamond Hill in the Transvaal. In November 1900 he returned to England, and for his services was twice mentioned in dispatches; in October 1900 he was promoted major-general. 
Following the appointment of Roberts as commander-in-chief, Nicholson was promoted lieutenant-general and offered in November 1901 the post of director-general of mobilization and intelligence at the War Office. He proved a great success, overseeing the preparation of detailed defence plans and the collection of intelligence, laying the foundations for a modern general staff despite strong opposition. Following the reorganization of the War Office in 1904, Nicholson was eventually appointed as chief British military attache with the Japanese army in Manchuria. In July 1904 he joined the Second Army, which he accompanied during the battle of Liaoyang and its later capture. Despite bad health he remained in the Far East until January 1905 before returning to England. 
Nicholson succeeded Sir Hubert Plumer as quartermaster-general in December 1905 and the following year was promoted general. In 1908 he succeeded Sir Neville Lyttelton as chief of the Imperial General Staff and the same year was made a GCB. During his tenure of office Nicholson played a crucial part in devising new strategic plans, in the reorganization of the British army, and in the consolidation of the Territorial Force and of a modern general staff. He was made an aide-de-camp general to George V in 1910, promoted field marshal in 1911, and raised to the peerage on retiring from the army council in 1912. Later the same year he was appointed chairman of the army in India committee, created to inquire into the role and cost of the Indian army. After a year in India examining evidence he returned home when its report was submitted in 1913. The outbreak of the war, however, prevented its controversial recommendations being implemented. 
Nicholson served on the committee of imperial defence during the war, participating in the commissions of inquiry into the Dardanelles and Mesopotamia campaigns. He also acted as chairman of the London Territorial Force Association and in October 1916 was made colonel-commandant of the Royal Engineers. He died on 13 September 1918 at his home at 51 Pont Street, Chelsea, London, and his body was interred four days later at Brompton cemetery. At his death the peerage became extinct. 
Nicholson enjoyed a brilliant yet rather unusual military career, mostly in India. He was a gifted staff officer and military administrator, but his career was dogged by a reputation for being difficult to handle: he was known as Old Nick. Despite never having personally commanded a unit or passed Staff College, exceptionally he rose to field marshal and held the office of chief of the Imperial General Staff through sheer hard work, personal intelligence, and ability. 


@@@@@


doc= 35233


Nicholson, Sir William Newzam Prior (1872-1949), artist, was born at 12 London Road, Newark-on-Trent, on 5 February 1872, the youngest child of William Newzam Nicholson (1816-1899), engineer, of the Trent ironworks, and later MP for Newark, and his second wife, Ann Elizabeth Prior (1839-1899), of Woodstock, Oxfordshire. Nicholson's disinclination, at an early age, for the normal routine of studies at Magnus Grammar School, Newark (1881-8), where he was at first a boarder, and the lively interest that he took in the lessons of the school's drawing master, W. H. Cubley, finally convinced his parents that it would be foolish to oppose his determination to become an artist. 
At the age of sixteen Nicholson passed the entrance examination to the school of art at Bushey run by Hubert von Herkomer. Here he met fellow student Mabel Scott Lauder Pryde (1871-1918), who was to become his first wife. She introduced him to her brother, the artist James Ferrier Pryde. Nicholson left Herkomer's in 1891 following what Herkomer termed 'a piece of Whistlerian impudence' (William had posed a nude model with an open umbrella) (Steen, 'William Nicholson', 44). In the autumn of that year Nicholson visited Paris and enrolled for a short time at the Academie Julian. After his marriage on 25 April 1893, he settled first at the Eight Bells, Denham, Buckinghamshire, where he and his wife were almost immediately joined by her brother, James Pryde. 
In 1894 Pryde and Nicholson, as J. & W. Beggarstaff, began to collaborate on a series of posters which were revolutionary in style with their boldness of outline, simplicity of treatment, and striking silhouettes, and their flat, pure colours. These included designs for 'Don Quixote' (made for the 1895 production of Sir Henry Irving but not used on the hoardings), 'Harper's Magazine' (1895), and 'Rowntree's Elect Cocoa' (1896). 
The Beggarstaff partnership was short-lived but the originality of their posters was widely recognized. In the following years Nicholson evolved out of the posters a personal style which he began to exploit through the medium of the woodcut. In this venture he had the good fortune to be encouraged by J. A. McNeill Whistler who recommended him to the publisher William Heinemann. The publications that followed established Nicholson's solo reputation. 'An Alphabet' and 'An Almanac of Twelve Sports', with verses by Rudyard Kipling, both appeared in 1897 (title-pages postdated 1898), 'London Types', with verses by W. E. Henley, in 1898, and 'The Square Book of Animals' in 1899. Nicholson also made a series of portrait woodcuts, the first of which was the irreverent, affectionate jubilee portrait of Queen Victoria (originally published in Henley's 'New Review' in June 1897), which brought him great success. These were collected in the two series of 'Twelve Portraits' (1899 and 1902), the first of which was awarded a gold medal at the 1900 Paris Exhibition. The Heinemann windmill colophon still used today was designed by Nicholson at this time. 
After the turn of the century Nicholson concentrated on painting, and portrait commissions were his main means of support. His subjects included many of the prominent figures of the period, and in 1909 he wrote of 'relays of sitters every twenty minutes' (Nicholson to T. W. Bacon, 26 May 1909, Whitworth Art Gallery, Manchester). He was best-known in his lifetime as a portrait painter. Among his finest portraits are those of Max Beerbohm ('c'.1903) and Gertrude Jekyll (1920), both in the National Portrait Gallery, London; of his friend Walter Greaves (1917) in Manchester City Galleries; and of George Saintsbury (1923) at Merton College, Oxford. Nicholson's real love, however, was landscape and still-life painting, and it is these works that are especially highly regarded today. His son Ben Nicholson admired -- and acknowledged a debt to -- their 'poetic spirit' (B. Nicholson, 73). Modest in scale, they have a tonal mastery, economy of means, sensitivity of touch, and acuteness of perception which is very distinctive. Nicholson had a special feeling for the English downlands, whether the Sussex downs around Rottingdean where he moved in 1909 or, later, the Wiltshire downs. Between the wars he also painted in France and Spain. His still-life compositions took as their subjects the silver, lustreware, jugs and mugs, vases, goblets, glass, flowers, fruit, mushrooms, and fish of his domestic surroundings. His repertory of still-life objects was a heritage Ben Nicholson prized. 
William Nicholson's painting has affinities with Whistler and Manet: he did not respond to later French painting. He had a great admiration for the work of Velazquez. In the 1920s his palette lightened and his handling became freer: these later paintings are more experimental and he learned from the younger artists of his own family -- his second wife, Edith (Edie) Stuart Wortley (1890-1958), daughter of Sir Lionel Phillips, first baronet, and widow of Lieutenant-Colonel John Stuart Wortley, whom he had married in 1919 after his first wife died of influenza, his son Ben, and Ben's wife, Winifred Nicholson ['see 'Nicholson, (Rosa) Winifred]. William was independent of any school of painting and refused election to the Royal Academy, at which he never exhibited. He was knighted in 1936 and had an important retrospective at the National Gallery, London, in 1942. 
Nicholson had a strong interest in the theatre and made designs for a number of productions. In 1904, for example, J. M. Barrie invited him to design costumes and scenery for the first production of 'Peter Pan' and in 1922 he contributed sets and costumes to Nigel Playfair's production of John Gay's opera 'Polly'. In 1925 he designed the decor and costumes for Leonide Massine's ballet 'The Rake' in the revue 'On with the Dance' mounted by C. B. Cochran and Noel Coward at the London Pavilion. Nicholson loved poetry and illustrated the works of his writer friends (such as W. H. Davies and Siegfried Sassoon) and others. Together with the writer and poet Robert Graves, who married Nicholson's daughter Nancy in 1918, he edited the review 'The Owl'. His natural sympathy with children produced work of great charm such as 'The Pirate Twins' (1929), written and illustrated by Nicholson, and his illustrations for Margery Williams's 'The Velveteen Rabbit' (1922). 
In figure Nicholson was slight and graceful and very agile. His friend Gordon Craig described him as 'skilful beyond words in handling anything where eye and hand and brain have to be under perfect control, and in absolute harmony' (G. Craig, 'Woodcuts and some Words', 1924, 8). He dressed with meticulous but unconventional fastidiousness. His wardrobe was famous for its delicately spotted shirts and dressing gowns, canary-yellow waistcoats, and immaculate white trousers -- worn also for painting. His distinctive taste was evident in his homes, for example The Grange at Rottingdean and his London studio-residence at Apple Tree Yard. He had a very particular sense of humour and a fondness for puns. He was companionable and would paint unperturbed while a stream of visitors passed through his studio. Ben Nicholson observed: 'Behind his personality lay a very simple direct painterly approach' (B. Nicholson, 71). He did not like to talk about art and eschewed art theory. 
Nicholson's singular achievement rests on three diverse strands of work: the pioneering and influential posters and woodcuts made when he was still in his twenties, the portraits of distinguished contemporaries, and the poetic landscapes and still-lifes. His best work has a subtlety, virtuosity, and individual voice that places it with the finest of its period. 
With his first wife, Mabel, Nicholson had four children, Ben, Tony, Nancy, later a fabric designer, and the architect Christopher (Kit). Tony was killed on active service in France in 1918 a few months after his mother's death. With his second wife, Edie, Nicholson had a daughter, Liza, who was born in 1920. The writer Marguerite Elena May Steen (1894-1975) was Nicholson's companion from 1935 until his death. Nicholson died at his home, Little Triton, Blewbury, Berkshire, on 16 May 1949. He was cremated on 19 May and his ashes were buried at Newark on 22 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 35234


Nickalls, Guy (1866-1935), oarsman, was born at Horton Kirby, Kent, on 12 November 1866, the third son of Tom Nickalls (1828-1899) of Horton Kirby and afterwards of Patteson Court, Nutfield, Surrey, and his wife, Emily Quihampton. His father, a stockbroker, was an original member of the London Rowing Club. Like his younger brother Vivian, also a prominent oarsman, he was educated at Eton College (1877-87) and Magdalen College, Oxford (1887-90), where he took a pass degree in 1890. In early youth he was considered to be of delicate constitution, but after he had been at Eton a short time he began to develop the physique and stamina that eventually made him an outstanding oarsman. He took the advice he later gave both his sons, which was 'not to sit back on the side-lines' (G. O. Nickalls, 'Rainbow in the Sky', 40), and had many other interests in life, especially in connection with sport. 
It was on account of his remarkable successes in boat-racing that Nickalls was best known. He rowed for Eton two years, winning the ladies' plate in 1885, and five years for Oxford (1887-91), being a member of the winning crew the last two years. Over the Henley course he rowed in all 81 races, of which he won 67 and lost 13, one being a dead heat. This extraordinary achievement included the following victories: five diamond sculls, six goblets or pair-oared races, seven stewards' or four-oared races, four grand challenge cups, one Olympic eights, and one ladies' plate. Probably the most notable of all these achievements was his rowing, at the age of forty-one years and eight months, at number 4 in the Leander eight which won a gold medal at the 1908 Olympic games. In writing of them in his autobiography he commented: 'I do not wish for a moment to take any credit to myself.... Nature has endowed me with a fairly strong body, a constitution of iron, and a will power or stubbornness above the average. These I have tried my best not to abuse, and any man so built and constituted, given my opportunities, could no doubt have done the same. (G. Nickalls, 'Life's a Pudding', 205)' From 1891 to 1922 Nickalls was a member of the stock exchange. He married in 1898 Ellen Gilbey (died 1935), daughter of Henry Gold JP of Hedsor, Buckinghamshire, and sister of Sir Harcourt Gilbey Gold, also a notable oarsman. An enthusiast in all things, Nickalls forced his way into the army at the age of forty-seven without previous military experience. He went to France in 1917 as superintendent of the physical and bayonet training of a division (afterwards increased to three divisions), and remained abroad until the end of hostilities. Later in life he devoted a considerable amount of his time to work on behalf of the Worcester College for the Blind, and was successful in collecting a considerable sum as the foundation of a permanent endowment fund. 
On 7 July 1935, while travelling north for his annual fishing holiday in Scotland, Nickalls was involved in a car accident, and died from his injuries, on 8 July 1935, at Leeds General Infirmary. His widow died in the following month. Of their two sons, the elder, Guy Oliver Nickalls (1899-1974), was chairman of the Amateur Rowing Association and senior steward of Henley royal regatta. 


@@@@@


doc= 35235


Nicol, Erskine (1825-1904), genre painter, son of James Main Nicol, assistant to a wine merchant, and Margaret Alexander, was born in South Leith on 25 July 1825, the eldest of a family of five sons and one daughter. At an early age he was employed as a house painter in Leith but an interest in fine art led him also to enter the Trustees' Academy in Edinburgh in 1838. He studied there under Sir William Allan and Thomas Duncan, and in 1843 he progressed to the recently formed Royal Scottish Academy life school. While still a student he had his first painting, 'Fruit', accepted for a Royal Scottish Academy annual exhibition in 1841. Later, during the early 1840s (probably while he was attending the evening classes in the academy) he was appointed drawing master at Leith high school. 
In 1846, having resigned from his teaching post, Nicol travelled to Dublin where he remained until about 1850. He found employment there both as a teacher and as a portrait painter. However, it was Nicol's keen observation of Irish everyday life and humour that fed his imagination and supplied the material for most of his painting for the rest of his career. While in Ireland he had the good fortune to find a patron in a Mr Armstrong of Rathmines; this enabled him to send two paintings back to Edinburgh for the 1849 and 1850 Royal Scottish Academy annual exhibitions, both of Irish subjects. 
Nicol settled back in Edinburgh in 1850 and very quickly established his reputation. On 10 June 1851 he married Janet Watson; they had one son and a daughter before she died in 1863. In 1855 Nicol was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy and only four years later, in 1859, he became an academician. As well as being a successful exhibitor at the Royal Scottish Academy until 1885 Nicol also exhibited at the Royal Academy on a regular basis between 1851 and 1893. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1866. In common with many of his Scottish contemporaries with ambition, Nicol turned his attention from Scotland to London. In 1862 he first rented a studio in St John's Wood and from 1864 he lived at Clonave Villa, 24 Dawson Place, Pembridge Square, in Bayswater. On 20 April 1865 he married Margaret Mary (1831/2-1919), daughter of Thomas Wood, a merchant; they had two sons and a daughter. In addition to his London base, Nicol also built himself a studio in Ireland, at Clonave, Deravaragh, in co. Westmeath. This enabled him to continue working closely with his preferred subject matter until ill health forced him to stop travelling over to Ireland. Instead, Nicol found an alternative studio in a disused church in Pitlochry in Perthshire: thus Scottish rural life became the focus of his attention, although by this time he was producing little actual work. 
Erskine Nicol's art education in Edinburgh links him firmly to the tradition of David Wilkie and Scottish narrative painting. Rather than assimilating any artistic influences during his stay in Dublin, the importance of these years lay in his collection of subject matter. On his return to Scotland he immediately settled down to producing large numbers of Irish cottage scenes, many full of wit and even caricature. From 'Paddy's Toilet' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy 1851) to 'The Day after the Fair' (1860; Royal Scottish Academy) even the titles demonstrate his comic presentation of the rural poor, ironically just a few years after the devastating effects of the Irish potato famine. Nicol's Royal Scottish Academy diploma work, for example -- 'The Day after the Fair' -- presents a cottage interior in which the head of the household sits bandaged and suffering from a hangover while his less than stoical wife prepares him a cup of tea. This painting combines the delicate qualities of light and shadow with the sharply drawn characters in the subject; extraneous detail is kept to a minimum. A slightly later work, 'The Rent Day: Signing the New Lease' (1868; Leicester City Museums), recalls very closely Wilkie's 'The Letter of Introduction' (1813; National Gallery of Scotland) both in the arrangement of the figures and their setting. Nicol's work may also be compared with that of Thomas Faed, but whereas Faed's painting tends to be highly finished and somewhat sentimental, Nicol's brushwork remains direct and although he treats his subject with gentle humour he does not idealize it. In his later paintings, Nicol turned to more serious subjects and, in common with many of his Scottish contemporaries such as Thomas Faed and William McTaggart, explored such themes as immigration, emigration, and shipwreck as for example in 'The Missing Boat' (1876; Royal Holloway College). 
Despite the humour of many of Nicol's paintings he was a serious, shy, and reserved man. A photograph of about 1859 (Royal Scottish Academy) presents him in a thoughtful pose, his face partially hidden behind a thick, black beard. In 1885, after a serious illness, Nicol officially retired; he moved out of London to The Dell in Feltham, Middlesex. He also had a Scottish home, Torduff House in Colinton, then a village on the outskirts of Edinburgh. On 8 March 1904 Erskine Nicol died at The Dell; he was buried at Rottingdean in Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35236


Nicoll, Sir William Robertson (1851-1923), journalist, was born on 10 October 1851 at Lumsden, Aberdeenshire, the elder son of the Revd Harry Nicoll (died 1891), Free Church of Scotland minister of Auchindoir, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Jane Robertson. Nicoll acquired his lifelong love of books in his father's copious library of 17,000 books, to which much of his salary was devoted. He attended the parish school of Auchindoir and Aberdeen grammar school. At fifteen, he entered Aberdeen University, graduating MA in 1870. After four years' training at the Free Church Divinity Hall, he was ordained to his first charge at Dufftown, Banffshire, in 1874. He was already writing regularly for the 'Aberdeen Journal', by the age of twenty earning $100 p.a. from journalism. In September 1877 he was inducted minister of the Free Church, Kelso, and the next year, on 21 August in Edinburgh, he married Isa, only child of Peter Dunlop, a prosperous Berwickshire farmer; their son and daughter were born in the manse at Kelso. Witnessing Gladstone's first Midlothian campaign captured Nicoll for the Liberal cause. While in Kelso, he began to edit 'The Contemporary Pulpit' for Swan, Sonnenschein, and 'The Expositor', which he directed until his death, for Hodder and Stoughton. Nicoll visited Germany and Norway, where he caught typhoid in 1885. Pleurisy and the fear of tuberculosis, which had killed his father, brother, and sister, ended his promising preaching career, and he moved to Glenroy, Highland Road, Upper Norwood, London, to devote himself to journalism. With his wide intellectual base, his liberal political and theological enthusiasms, and his clerical experience, Nicoll was ideally positioned to write for the huge nonconformist constituency, hitherto rather narrowly served by journalists. Hodder and Stoughton began publication on 5 November 1886 of the 'British Weekly: a Journal of Social Progress', a penny weekly with Nicoll as editor. It quickly became a success, with J. M. Barrie, S. R. Crockett, and John Watson ('Ian Maclaren') as regular contributors; for thirty years he was assisted on it by Jane T. Stoddart. Nicoll often wrote as 'Claudius Clear', his letters under that name being later republished (1901, 1905, 1913). He portrayed his abandoned, rural Scotland in a number of rather sentimental pieces, and may be said to have founded the 'kailyard school' of Scottish writing by discovering Barrie, who initially wrote Scottish character sketches for the 'British Weekly' (from 1887), and encouraging Watson to write 'The Bonnie Briar Bush' for it in 1893. In 1891 Nicoll founded the successful literary monthly 'The Bookman', and in 1893 'Woman at Home', an illustrated magazine intended as a 'Strand Magazine' for women, and subtitled 'Annie S. Swan's Magazine', the Scottish novelist (Anne Burnett Smith) being its chief contributor. 
Nicoll and his wife were often unwell. In 1892 they moved to Bay Tree Lodge, Hampstead, with room for 24,000 books. In 1894 Isa Nicoll died, following an operation, and Nicoll was left to rear their children. If anything, he increased his literary output, with 'Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century' (2 vols., 1894-6), edited with T. J. Wise. In 1896 he visited the USA with J. M. Barrie and on 1 May 1897 he married Catherine, daughter of Joseph Pollard, of Highdown, Hitchin, Hertfordshire; they had one daughter. Catherine Nicoll was the model for Percy Bigland's painting 'A Quaker Wedding', and was herself a competent water-colourist. His second marriage rejuvenated Nicoll: the years from 1897 to 1914 were the most energetic and fruitful of his always productive career. In addition to his usual journalism, he began again to preach and lecture widely. He played a prominent role in the 'passive resistance' movement against the 1902 'Education Act', and campaigned for a fair settlement between the United Free Church of Scotland and the 'Wee Frees', which was achieved in 1905. Nicoll supported the Lloyd George group in the Liberal governments of 1905-16, though he was lukewarm about home rule. His knighthood in 1909 recognized his position as 'the intellectual leader of nonconformity -- the chief exponent of its thought, and the most effective advocate of its cause in the press' ('Daily Chronicle', cited in Darlow, 210). He was a strong supporter of war with Germany and his 'War notes' in the 'British Weekly' often reflected Lloyd George's thinking and supported him as he rose to the premiership. 
Nicoll's health began to fail in 1920, though he wrote until his death. He was made CH in 1921. He died, from an abscess, on 4 May 1923 at his home in Hampstead, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was a tubby man, with a scrappy moustache, who smoked heavily. He disliked fresh air, and always had a fire blazing in his study. Much of his literary output was dictated from his bed. He was fascinated by palmistry and was notorious for absent-mindedness, often returning from house parties with other men's clothes. H. A. Vachell recalled:'he had a dry, pawky wit. He was well-named 'Sense and Sensibility'' (Darlow, 415). Nicoll was among the most prolific of British journalists and succeeded in being both popular and erudite; it was said of him that he had 'the keenest nose for a book that will sell of any man in the book business' (Clement Shorter, in Price, 73). His nonconformist readership declined after the war and from that point of view his death was well timed. 


@@@@@


doc= 35237


Nicolson, Adela Florence (1865-1904), poet, was born at Stoke House, Stoke Bishop, Gloucestershire, on 9 April 1865. She was the daughter of Arthur Cory (died 1903), colonel in the Indian army, and his wife, Elizabeth Fanny Griffin (1834-1916). Her sister was the novelist Victoria Cross ['see 'Cory, Annie Sophie]. She was educated with her elder sister Isabel, at a boarding-school in Montague Road, Richmond, run by a Belgian, Jacques Philippart, and at the age of sixteen joined her parents in Lahore, India. Here she worked with her father on the 'Civil and Military Gazette', later to be associated with the Kiplings. In 1889 she married Colonel Malcolm Hassels Nicolson of the Bengal army ['see below'] and settled at Madras. Her poetry was published under the pseudonym Laurence Hope, and it was not until after her death that the poems were published in her name. Her first volume of poetry, 'The Garden of Kama and other Love Lyrics from India', was published in 1901. Generally reviewed as the work of a man, it attracted enormous attention and was repeatedly reissued every year for the next fourteen years. While the substance of the poems is not drawn from any identifiable Indian source, the exotic settings emphasized a passionate intensity which was seen as oriental. The influence of Swinburne and the Pre-Raphaelites can also be discerned in this and later works. 
After spending some time in north Africa Adela Nicolson published 'Stars of the Desert' (1903); in that year she met Thomas Hardy, who greatly admired her work, and with whom she corresponded until her death. He wrote a preface for 'Indian Love', a volume of her poetry; it was published posthumously in 1905, but Hardy's preface was not included. Some of her shorter poems, such as 'Four Indian Love Lyrics' in the musical setting of Amy Woodforde Finden (1860-1919), continued to be very popular into the 1930s and were recorded by, among others, John MacCormack, Dame Clara Butt, and Rudolph Valentino. After her husband's death in August 1904 Nicolson suffered from depression and committed suicide by consuming perchloride of mercury on 4 October 1904 at Dunmore House, Teynampet, Madras. She was buried, like her husband, in St Mary's cemetery, Madras. Her only son, Malcolm Josceline Nicolson, subsequently edited her poems. 




@@@@@


doc= 35238


Nicolson, Arthur, first Baron Carnock (1849-1928), diplomatist, was born on 19 September 1849 in London, the second son of Admiral Sir Frederick Nicolson, tenth baronet (1815-1899), and the first of his three wives, Mary Clementina Marian (died 1851), daughter of James Loch of Drylaw. Nicolson was intended by his family for the Royal Navy, and entered HMS 'Britannia' at the age of twelve, after private schooling in Wimbledon. He passed third out of 'Britannia', but did not join the navy. Instead, he went in 1863 to Rugby School, and then in 1867 to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he did not take a degree. During 1869 and 1870 he prepared for the Foreign Office examinations by studying French in Switzerland and German in Dresden. He passed first into the Foreign Office, and joined that institution on 23 August 1870. 
Nicolson acted as assistant secretary to the foreign secretary, Lord Granville, from July 1872 to February 1874. He became acting third secretary at Berlin in that month, and, in November 1874, transferred to the diplomatic service. He did not return to the Foreign Office until 1910. From Berlin he was posted to Peking (Beijing) as second secretary in 1876 and back to Berlin in 1878. A year later he was sent to Constantinople, where he remained until late 1882. At this post he met a number of people, including Charles Hardinge (a future permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office) and Donald Mackenzie Wallace (journalist and expert on Russia), who later would be important for his career. Further, he met, became engaged to, and married, on 20 April 1882, (Mary) Katharine Rowan Hamilton (died 1951), the youngest daughter of Archibald Rowan Hamilton of Killyleagh Castle, co. Down, and the sister-in-law of Lord Dufferin, the British ambassador to Constantinople. Nicolson's marriage was a mixed blessing. He and his wife enjoyed a very happy private life; however, her social connections aside, Lady Nicolson (as she later became) was an impediment to his career, for she 'shuns society and dresses like a housemaid' (Hardinge to Bertie, 4 Dec 1903, TNA: PRO, Bertie MSS, FO 800/163). 
After Constantinople, Nicolson served successively in Athens, where he was charge d'affaires from 1884 to 1885; in Tehran, as secretary of legation, from 1885 to 1888; and, for the next four years, in Budapest, as consul-general. He spent 1893 as secretary of embassy in Constantinople, and in mid-1894 became British agent and consul-general at Sofia. A year later he became minister at Tangier, where he spent almost ten years. At Tangier, Nicolson's career accelerated. While he had done well at his earlier posts (he was created CMG in 1886 and KCIE in 1888 as rewards for his services), his progress in the diplomatic service had been unexceptional. However, the Anglo-French discussions concerning Morocco (which were part of the negotiations leading to the 'entente cordiale' of 1904) and the Franco-German rivalry over Morocco put Nicolson at one of the centres of British diplomacy and gave him an opportunity to display his abilities. He was made a KCB and KCVO as a result of his efforts, and was appointed ambassador to Madrid on 1 January 1905. His time in Spain was brief. At the end of 1905, owing in part to the intervention of Charles Hardinge, Nicolson was offered and accepted the embassy at St Petersburg (although his formal appointment to that post did not take place until February 1906). But before he took up his position in Russia, Nicolson served as the British representative to the Algeciras conference, which ran from January to April 1906. His performance at the conference was seen as exceptional. Sir William Tyrrell, the influential precis writer to the British foreign secretary, Sir Edward Grey, wrote to Nicolson on 3 April 1906 that 'you easily carry off the lion's share of the success of this most tiresome negotiation [Algeciras], and we don't mind basking in your reflected sunshine' (TNA: PRO, Nicholson MSS, FO 800/338). 
Nicolson served in St Petersburg for the next four years. During this time, his views of Russia shaped by Mackenzie Wallace, he was instrumental in the negotiation of the Anglo-Russian convention, signed 31 August 1907. His performance during the talks was impressive: so much so that Lord Morley, the secretary of state for India, wrote that Nicolson 'deserves his reputation as the best man of his day in his own trade. He is quiet, steady, full of ready resource, not making difficulties, nor delighting to put the other man into a hole' (Morley to Minto, 2 Aug 1907, BL OIOC, MS Eur. D/573/2). More tangible praise came from Grey, who ensured that Nicolson received the GCB for his efforts. 
In part owing to further determined lobbying by Hardinge, Nicolson became permanent under-secretary in 1910. For the next six years Nicolson was at the centre of British foreign policy. Before the war he advised Grey that Britain should turn her loose entente with France and Russia into a formal alliance designed to check Germany's aggressive policy. Nicolson was convinced that the security of Britain and her empire depended on such a policy. He believed that otherwise France and Russia would view Britain as an unreliable partner and instead try to reach an accommodation with Germany. In particular, Nicolson advocated maintaining the close relationship with Russia that he had helped to bring about. Such an approach was unacceptable to Grey. Within his own party there were many who felt that autocratic Russia was an inappropriate partner for Liberal Britain. Others insisted on attempting to achieve better relations with Germany. And a substantial number objected to Britain's joining any alliance system whatsoever. This, combined with Lady Nicolson's outspoken support for Ulster, diminished his influence with Grey. Nicolson did not enjoy the routine bureaucratic work at the Foreign Office and, with his health poor owing to arthritis, pressed Grey for an opportunity to return to diplomacy. Nicolson was scheduled to become ambassador to Paris in the autumn of 1914, but this move was placed in abeyance by the outbreak of war. 
During the July crisis Nicolson urged Grey to make Britain's support for France and Russia clear to Germany and, if war broke out, to join the former pair. 'Should we waver now', he wrote to the foreign secretary as the guns began to fire on 1 August, 'we shall rue the day later' (Nicolson to Grey, 1 Aug 1914, TNA: PRO, Grey MSS, FO 800/94). Whether his advice had an influence on Grey's decision to take Britain into the conflict is uncertain, but Britain's wartime alliance with France and Russia was clearly what Nicolson had long believed was necessary to check Germany's belligerence. Throughout the war, and despite his increasing physical difficulties, Nicolson played an active role in British policy. In particular, he continued to advocate maintaining close relations with Russia, despite the latter country's drift to the political right and threat of internal collapse. However, by mid-1916 his health had deteriorated to such an extent that he asked Grey to be relieved of his post. On 20 June he was succeeded as permanent under-secretary by Lord Hardinge. That year he was created Baron Carnock of Carnock, having succeeded as eleventh baronet on 29 December 1899. 
In retirement Carnock briefly acted as an assistant private secretary to George V, and later served as a director of the London City and Midland Bank. He devoted himself to family life, and remained close to his three sons and daughter. His third son, Sir Harold Nicolson, followed him into the diplomatic service; he was also his father's biographer. After a lingering illness Nicolson died on 5 November 1928 at his Chelsea home, 53 Cadogan Gardens. 
Nicolson was one of the greatest diplomatists of his day. He was particularly sympathetic to the point of view of foreigners and was able to convey their feelings to his political masters. This was particularly evident in his dealings with Russia, the country that was the centrepiece of his career. At the same time, however, Nicolson never became an advocate for the country to which he was accredited; he was a firm believer in the maintenance of Britain's own interests and he pursued them tenaciously. By reason of his position as ambassador to Russia, his friendship with Hardinge, and his own tenure at the Foreign Office, Nicolson must be considered as one of those civil servants most influential in the formulation of British foreign policy in the decade before the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 35239


Nicolson, Sir Harold George (1886-1968), diplomatist and politician, was born at the British legation, Tehran, on 21 November 1886, the third son of Arthur Nicolson, first Baron Carnock (1849-1928), and his wife, (Mary) Katharine Rowan (died 1951), the youngest daughter of Captain Archibald Rowan Hamilton of Killyleagh Castle, co. Down. He was born into a minor patrician family with a well-established tradition of public service. His father was a distinguished diplomatist himself, becoming permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office in 1910. Through his maternal aunt he was related to the imperial statesman-cum-diplomat Frederick Temple Hamilton-Temple-Blackwood, the marquess of Dufferin. Not surprisingly, in light of his lineage, the young Nicolson turned to diplomacy as a career. 
Much of Nicolson's early youth was spent either abroad, wherever his father was posted, or at the Irish estates of his mother's relatives. It was in these great Irish houses, he would reflect in later life, that he found 'anchors in a drifting life,... the only places where I ceased to be a pot-plant for ever being bedded out in alien soil' (Nicolson, 'Desire to Please', 5). Only Tangier, where his father was Britain's minister from 1894 to 1904, held a similar spell over him throughout his life. At the age of nearly nine, in 1895, he was sent away from his beloved Morocco to attend The Grange, a preparatory school near Folkestone. He hated the regimented life at The Grange as much as he loathed Wellington College, where he was sent in 1900, although under the spell of its master, the Revd Bertram Pollock, later bishop of Norwich, he learned to love literature and the classics. Nicolson moved on to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1904, having spent the intervening year after leaving Wellington at Weimar to learn German. After the conventional dullness of Wellington, Nicolson flourished in Balliol's liberal and cerebrally stimulating climate, but left Oxford in 1907 with only a pass degree, having obtained a third in classical honour moderations the previous year. 
While still at Balliol Nicolson decided to try for diplomacy. On leaving Oxford he went to Paris and Hanover to complete his language studies -- he later described his experiences in his delightful, semi-autobiographical 'Some People' (1927) -- and in October 1909, much to everyone's (especially his father's) surprise, he passed second in the competitive entrance examination for the diplomatic service. He spent his early years in the service as an attache at Madrid (from February to September 1911) and then as third secretary at Constantinople (from January 1912 to October 1914). On 1 October 1913 he married the Hon. Victoria Mary (Vita) Sackville-West (1892-1962), only child of Lionel Edward Sackville-West, third Baron Sackville, and his wife and first cousin, Victoria Josefa Sackville-West, daughter of Lionel Sackville-West, second Baron Sackville, and his mistress, Josefa de la Oliva (known as Pepita), a Spanish dancer. Redoubtable as she was eccentric and irascible, Lady Sackville was to cause the Nicolsons great anxiety in future years. Nicolson's marriage to Vita, too, was the source of much despair. None the less this unconventional union, and its bond of mutual and deep understanding and affection, remained the bedrock of his life. There were two sons of the marriage: Lionel Benedict Nicolson (1914-1978) and Nigel Nicolson (1917-2004). 
Nicolson was recalled to the Foreign Office in the spring of 1914. During his home leave the First World War broke out. He was drafted back into duty, and it was left to him, as the youngest member of staff, to recover on 3 August Britain's declaration of war on Germany from the German embassy, which had been erroneously delivered after intercepted German wireless traffic suggested that Germany had already declared war (Nicolson, 'Lord Carnock', 424-6). Nicolson was exempted from military duty on account of his position at the Foreign Office. His war work earned him his first professional spurs. Much of it involved relations with the neutral powers; but he was also, with Sir Mark Sykes and Leo Amery, one of the chief draftsmen of the Balfour declaration, which committed Britain to supporting a Jewish homeland in Palestine. More importantly perhaps for the future course of his diplomatic career, he was brought in closer contact with the problems of south-eastern Europe. His war work allowed him to forge closer ties with the supporters of the pro-entente Hellenist leader Eleftherios Venizelos, ties which would stand him in good stead at the Paris peace conference and the later Near Eastern conferences of the early post-war years. 
At the end of hostilities Nicolson was attached to the British delegation at the Paris peace conference, where he served under his beloved chief Sir Eyre Crowe on a number of Balkan committees. Officially, Nicolson was only a junior adviser, but he soon established for himself a reputation for penetrating analyses and sound political judgement. He had travelled to Paris with high hopes, yet before long concluded that the conference was doomed to fail to deliver the lasting peace he had hoped for. In 1919 he accompanied General Smuts on a mission to Bela Kun's Soviet-style government at Budapest. For his services during the war and at the conference Nicolson was appointed CMG in 1919 and promoted to first secretary. After the conference he was appointed private secretary to Sir (James) Eric Drummond, the first secretary-general of the infant League of Nations. This appointment was perhaps as much a reward for the notable success of his conference work as it was a reflection of his strong pro-league sentiments. At Paris he had become strongly imbued with Wilsonian ideals and regarded the league as the panacea for the ills of international politics rather than the 'separatist alliances and combinations' of the old pre-war diplomacy (Nicolson to Viorel Tilea, 9 Dec 1919, Tilea MSS, box 67). 
Nicolson's professional success in these years, however, was marred by considerable conjugal disquiet. In 1915 the Nicolsons had bought Long Barn, a semi-derelict medieval farmstead in the Kentish weald not far from Sevenoaks, near Vita's ancestral home, Knole. At Long Barn the Nicolsons laid the foundations of their reputations as successful gardeners and writers. There Vita launched upon poetry and Nicolson wrote the first of his six literary biographies, 'Paul Verlaine', and also 'Sweet Waters', his first novel (both 1921). Yet their marriage was strained very nearly to breaking-point because of Vita's love affair with Violet Trefusis. The Nicolsons' marital crisis reached its near-farcical climax in the abortive elopement of the two women to northern France with Nicolson in hot pursuit in a two-seater aeroplane. Nicolson was himself by no means a stranger to homosexual affairs; but his forbearance and patience enabled the Nicolsons to continue their marriage. 
In June 1920 Nicolson was recalled to the Foreign Office. By this time his enthusiasm for the league had already begun to wane. Possibly under the strong influence of Crowe, now permanent under-secretary, he became more sceptical of the league and reverted to a more traditional concept of diplomacy. His duties at the Foreign Office were mostly concerned with Near and Middle Eastern affairs. Stirred by Venizelos's fall in November 1920 and the reverses suffered by Greece in the conflict with Turkey, the philhellene Nicolson challenged received Foreign Office opinion by arguing against any compromise with the Kemalist forces. It was the first time that he stood up to his masters on a major policy issue. Ultimately the course of the campaign in Asia Minor rendered his recommendations impracticable. Nicolson, however, remained the Foreign Office's chief expert on the remnants of the Eastern question. His notable 'Memorandum... respecting the Freedom of the Straits', of 15 November 1922, formed the basis of British policy at the Lausanne conference of 1922-3 (Medlicott and others, 'Documents on British Foreign Policy', 1st ser., 18, appx 1). At Lausanne he acted as Lord Curzon's private secretary and was Britain's representative on a number of subcommittees. Nicolson later rendered his account of the proceedings at Lausanne in 'Curzon: the Last Phase' (1934). Although busy with diplomatic work he still found time to write three further literary biographies: 'Tennyson' (1923), 'Byron: the Last Journey' (1924), and 'Swinburne' (1926). 
In 1925 the new head of the Foreign Office, Sir William Tyrrell, transferred Nicolson to Tehran as counsellor of legation. Relations between the two men had been strained, and Nicolson always suspected an element of personal spite in Tyrrell's decision to transfer him. A posting to Persia in the 1920s involved an arduous journey by sea to Haifa or via Russia and the Caspian Sea to Resht and thence across the desert in a motor car to Tehran. (His wife's 'Passenger to Tehran', 1926, offered a glimpse into this unglamorous aspect of diplomatic life.) Nicolson's two years in the city of his birth marked the nadir of his diplomatic career. Separated from his wife and sons, he suffered from the geographical, intellectual, and social isolation Persia imposed upon him. Worse still, his relations with his chief, Sir Percy Loraine, were rather reserved. Unlike Ponderous Percy, Nicolson was too much of an individualist ever to take seriously the representative side of diplomacy. 'I loathe processions & gholams & sowars & uniforms & tail coats & all that... -- I can't hide my loathing & P[ercy]... gets rather distressed' (Nicolson to Lancelot Oliphant, 12 March 1926, Sissinghurst, Nicolson MSS). Nicolson's lack of diplomatic decorum, his indulgence for intellectual frivolity, and his tendency to tease ('my jokes... are greeted with a 'two minute silence''; ibid., Nicolson to Oliphant, 28 May 1926) only added to the strain. Loraine, moreover, took umbrage when he suspected Nicolson of lampooning him in his essays 'on real people in imaginary situations and imaginary people in real situations', 'Some People' (1927), which he wrote at Tehran. 'A cad's book', Loraine called it (Waterfield, 116). Nicolson's differences with his chief, however, were not merely questions of style but also of policy. In September 1926, when in charge of the legation, he sent a long dispatch in which he criticized 'certain inherited maxims' of Britain's 'buffer state' policy towards Persia and Loraine's 'too rosy picture' of the situation (Nicolson to Sir Austen Chamberlain, (no. 486), 30 Sept 1926, 'Documents on British Foreign Policy', ser. 1a, 2, no. 447; and to parents, 28 Aug 1926, Sissinghurst, Nicolson MSS). It was the second time that Nicolson had taken it upon himself to challenge received Foreign Office wisdom. This time, however, his Foreign Office colleagues were incensed at his breach of protocol in criticizing his highly regarded former chief. The foreign secretary minuted: 'if Mr Nicolson were a fool, I should remove him. As he is certainly not a fool, I infer that, away from daily contact with us, our intentions are not as clear to him as to us. Let us make them clear. (Min. Chamberlain, 9 Nov 1926, FO 371/11481/E5994/92/34)' On his recall to London in the following summer he was demoted to first secretary. 
Nicolson was depressed at the lack of progress in his career. Instead of shaping policy, he found himself 'strand[ed] in this bog in which I have wasted the best years of my life', having to execute policies in which he did not believe (Nicolson to Owen O'Malley, 23 Aug 1927, Sissinghurst, Nicholson MSS). For the first time he considered leaving the service, but stayed 'an ageing limpet stuck to the hulk of British diplomacy' (ibid., Nicolson to Lancelot Oliphant, 28 Dec 1926). His next post was Berlin. What ground he had lost as charge d'affaires at Tehran he regained when in charge of the Berlin embassy in 1928. His dispatches from there re-established his high reputation and he was promoted to counsellor again. Nevertheless, in September 1929 Nicolson resigned from the diplomatic service, when he accepted an offer to join the Beaverbrook press. He was then halfway up the diplomatic career ladder with the distinct prospect of a legation or minor embassy in the near future. His colleagues were mystified by his decision. It was, however, a step which he did not take lightly. He remained attached to his old profession and occasionally longed 'to creep back into the F. O.' (ibid., Nicolson to Lancelot Oliphant, 24 Aug 1935). The unbearable absences from his wife and sons and their financial dependence upon the increasingly quarrelsome Lady Sackville induced him to take this decision. But his disillusionment with the policy-makers and his own nascent political ambitions were equally potent factors. 
With his resignation began Nicolson's public life. The year 1930 marked a major turning point. From January 1930, and for the next eighteen months, he wrote the 'Londoner's diary' in the 'Evening Standard', an occupation which the fastidious Nicolson found increasingly irksome. From new year 1930 he also kept the daily diary for which he would perhaps primarily be remembered. In the spring of 1930 the Nicolsons moved from Long Barn when a neighbouring poultry farmer threatened to invade their rural isolation. At Sissinghurst Castle, the remnants of an Elizabethan manor house near Cranbrook, they found a new home. There Vita Sackville-West's poetic temperament and gardening expertise combined with Nicolson's classically trained sense of architectural form and order to create one of the most celebrated gardens in England (now one of the most visited of National Trust properties). 
The political and economic crisis of 1931 convinced Nicolson of the inadequacy of the existing parliamentary machinery to solve contemporary problems. Having declined to stand as a Liberal for Falmouth, he joined the New Party under Sir Oswald Mosley, the son-in-law of his old mentor, Lord Curzon, with whom he had formed a friendship at Berlin in 1929. At the 1931 general election he unsuccessfully contested the Combined Universities seat. He also became editor of 'Action', the Mosley party's weekly organ. However, when Mosley embraced fascism, in 1932, Nicolson severed his links with him. 
Out of a job, Nicolson was once more thrown upon his resources as a writer. In 1932 he published his second novel, 'Public Faces', a benign satire about an international crisis into which he worked his own league and Persian experiences, and which characteristically ended on the notion that honesty is the best policy. Already in 1930 he had published the biography of his father, 'Lord Carnock'. His 'Studies in modern diplomacy' trilogy was now completed by his insightful account of the Paris peace conference, 'Peacemaking 1919' (1933), followed in 1934 by his book on Lord Curzon's foreign secretaryship. A well-paid lecture tour of America with his wife resulted in the commission to write the biography of the American financier turned diplomat Dwight Morrow, which was published in 1935. It was followed two years later by 'Helen's Tower', an account of the career of his uncle, the marquess of Dufferin. During these years Nicolson rose to prominence as a regular and popular broadcaster on the wireless. 
At the general election of 1935 Nicolson finally realized his political ambitions by being elected by a narrow margin as the National Labour candidate for Leicester West, a nomination which had been fixed by his wife's relative Herbrand Edward Dundonald Brassey Sackville, the ninth Earl De La Warr. Nicolson never climbed to the 'top of the greasy pole'. Like many of his class and generation, he felt politically uprooted, defining himself in terms of family ties and friendships rather than party labels. By choosing National Labour his political fortunes were bound up with those of Ramsay MacDonald. While his Leicester election was made possible only with Conservative support, he was fiercely anti-tory in his private sentiments, yet at the same time unable to understand the aspirations of the middle and working classes in his industrial constituency. But although he was perhaps not made for the cut and thrust of party politics, Nicolson was one of the best-informed speakers on foreign affairs in the long parliament of 1935, warning early and consistently of the dangers of appeasement. His expertise in foreign affairs was also very much in evidence in his slim, but elegant and instructive 'Diplomacy' (1939). His support for Churchill, however, never yielded the desired results. He held junior office at the Ministry of Information from 1940, but to his dismay was returned to the back-benches in 1941. Perhaps his most effective contributions to the war effort were his weekly column 'Marginal comment' in 'The Spectator' (1939-40, 1941-52), and the Penguin paperback 'Why Britain is at War' (1939). From 1941 to 1946 he served on the board of governors of the BBC. His political career came to an end in 1945 when, standing as an independent but with Conservative backing, he lost his seat in the Labour landslide. 
Nicolson retained his hopes of re-entering politics. Having unsuccessfully sought a peerage as a cross-bencher from Prime Minister Attlee, he joined the Labour Party in 1947 and in the following year contested the North Croydon by-election. Both steps were half-hearted at best. His bid for election -- 'this nightmare' -- ended in defeat (Nicolson to Sibyl Colefax, 28 Feb 1948, Colefax MSS, MS.Eng.c.3166); his socialism was 'purely cerebral' (Nicolson to Vita Sackville-West, 7 May 1948, N. Nicolson, 'Diaries', 3.148-9). An incautiously disdainful 'Marginal comment' on his electioneering experience (published in 'The Spectator' of 19 March 1948) put paid to all further hopes of re-entering politics and the much-coveted peerage eluded him forever. His only link with the world of politics and diplomacy were his regular broadcasts. In 1946 he covered the abortive Paris peace conference for the BBC. Apart from broadcasting, he channelled his prodigious energies into writing. The decade and a half after the end of the war saw a series of very different books from his pen. In 1945 he edited with his wife 'Another World than This', a poetry anthology. His next books were 'The Congress of Vienna' (1946), 'The English Sense of Humour' (1947), and 'Benjamin Constant' (1949). In 1948 he was commissioned to write the official biography of George V -- an awkward assignment skilfully executed; it was published four years later and confirmed his high reputation as a writer. It also earned him a knighthood as KCVO and an honorary fellowship of Balliol (both 1953). His Chichele lectures during 1953 at Oxford were published in the following year as 'The Evolution of Diplomatic Method'. His last productive years saw another spate of books: 'Good Behaviour' (1955), 'Sainte-Beuve' (1957), 'Journey to Java' (1957), 'The Age of Reason' (1960), and 'Monarchy' (1962). From 1949 to 1963 he also contributed weekly book reviews to 'The Observer'. 
Nicolson's last book, on kingship, was his perhaps least satisfactory. He himself took it as a sign of his waning powers. His wife's death, in 1962, dealt a violent blow to him from which he never recovered. Her death marked the end of a unique marriage and of his life as a writer. He had always been a glutton for work. Besides his writing he had found time to serve on the National Trust executive committee (1947-68) and the London Library committee (1952-7). He was also a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery (1948-64), and president of the Classical Association (1950-51). His last years, however, were spent in melancholy decline at Sissinghurst. He died there on 1 May 1968, following a stroke, and was buried at Sissinghurst church. He was survived by his two sons. 
Nicolson was in many ways 'a nineteenth-century character... living an eighteenth century life in the midst of the twentieth century' (J. Sparrow, 'Harold Nicolson and Vita Sackville-West', 6). His background and his strong intellectual tastes made him an elitist. But he was no snob, and disliked pomp and formality. He was known to a wide circle as a responsive and entertaining companion, but his diaries, edited by his son Nigel in three volumes (1966-8), quickly became a standard source for the period and revealed his capacity for self-scrutiny. He brought to politics shrewd practical wisdom combined with humanistic values, and to literature an easy, slightly ironic, classical style. 'His life tended to zigzag, but he extracted from it much pleasure' (N. Nicolson, 'Introduction', 'Diaries', 9). James Lees-Milne described him as 'stocky in build and cheerful in countenance; jaunty in movement; mischievous and benignant in manner' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 35240


Malcolm Hassels Nicolson (1843-1904), the son of Major Malcolm Nicolson (1792-1850), 30th Bengal lancers, and his second wife, Caroline Yates (died 1906), daughter of Major-General Richard Hassells Yates, Madras army, was born on 11 June 1843. He joined the army in 1859 as ensign in the Bombay infantry and was promoted lieutenant in 1862. His first active service was in the Abyssinian expedition of 1867-8; he was present at the action at Azogel and at the capture of Magdala, and received the Abyssinian medal. He attained the rank of captain in 1869. During the Anglo-Afghan War of 1878-80 he took part in the occupation of Kandahar and fought at Ahmed Khel and Ursu. He was mentioned in dispatches, and in 1879 was promoted to the rank of major. After the war he received the Afghan medal with one clasp, and in March 1881 the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel; he became army-colonel in 1885 and substantive colonel in 1894. For his services in the Zhob valley campaign of 1890 he was again mentioned in dispatches, and was made CB in 1891. From 1891 to 1894 he was aide-de-camp to Queen Victoria, being promoted major-general in the latter year and lieutenant-general in 1899. He died on 7 August 1904 at Mackay's Gardens Nursing Home, Madras, and was buried in St Mary's cemetery. General Nicolson was an expert linguist, having passed the interpreter's test in Baluchi, Brahui, and Persian, and the higher standard in Pushtu. 


@@@@@


doc= 35241


Nightingale, Florence (1820-1910), reformer of Army Medical Services and of nursing organization, was born on 12 May 1820 at Villa Columbaia, Florence, where her parents were on a European tour. Their other daughter, Frances Parthenope Nightingale (1819-1890) ['see 'Verney, Frances Parthenope], born in Naples, had been given the classical name of her birthplace. Their father, William Edward Nightingale (1794-1874), son of William Shore, a Sheffield banker, had inherited Derbyshire estates from his great-uncle, Peter Nightingale, and had changed his name by royal warrant. W. E. N., as he was known to friends, was handsome and cultivated, with a reputation for wit. In 1818 he married Frances Smith (1789-1880), daughter of William Smith, a Unitarian and supporter of dissenters; Florence's birth was subsequently recorded in the dissenters' register at Dr Williams's Library. Frances was the beauty of this distinguished family of five brothers and five sisters, most of whom married into prosperous, intellectual families, thus supplying the Nightingale girls with numerous relatives who were an important factor in their lives; several were later associated with Florence in her work. 
In 1825 William Nightingale bought Embley Park in Hampshire, and the family routine was to spend summer at Lea Hurst in Derbyshire, and winter at Embley with visits to London interspersed with visits to and from relatives. Although in private notes as an adolescent Florence railed against the empty life of her parents, and though biographers have represented Mr Nightingale as an 'amiable dilettante', he took his squirearchical duties seriously. As a dedicated educationist he supported schools on his estates at personal expense; in 1834 he stood as a whig for Andover on a distinctly radical manifesto; he was high sheriff in 1829; and he supervised the education of his daughters. Finding Florence an apt pupil he gave her a sound education in classics, philosophy, and modern and classical languages. Biographers, particularly feminists, anxious to portray Florence as the frustrated Victorian daughter, have tended to depict her mother, known as Fanny, as merely a pleasure-seeking hostess, but she attracted some of the best intellects of the day, including Lord Ashley, the editor of 'The Times' John Delane, the eminent theologian Chevalier Christian Bunsen, the prison architect Sir Joshua Jebb, the historian Leopold von Ranke, and many others. Florence met and enjoyed the company. In private notes she wrote 'I must overcome my desire to shine in company', but she undoubtedly did shine and enjoy it. 
Although she did not inherit her mother's beauty Florence was described by Mrs Gaskell as 'tall, willowy in figure, [with] thick shortish rich brown hair, a delicate complexion, and grey eyes that are generally pensive but could be the merriest' (Cook, 1.39). Florence was a good mimic, attractive to men, and had a number of suitors; many of the men she met through her parents remained lifelong friends. Half the Nightingale Fund council was originally known to her through her parents. 
In spite of these advantages Florence Nightingale was an unhappy young woman. She suffered from bouts of depression and feelings of unworthiness, and she questioned the purpose of life for the upper classes. Unlike her mother and sister, who were content to do good works on the estates, she pondered on the need for charity and the causes of poverty and unemployment. At the age of sixteen she recorded that on 7 February 1837 'God had called her to His service', though what God wanted her to do was unclear. She became interested in the mystics and would later study the lives of people such as St Teresa of Avila and St John of the Cross. With the help of Bunsen she studied Schopenhauer and the new biblical criticism. At the same time Julius Mohl, who had married Mary Clarke, a friend of the Nightingales, interested her in comparative religion. Looking for scope to give service she found none in the Church of England, and in 1845 she tried to persuade her parents to let her go to Salisbury Infirmary to nurse. Not surprisingly they refused. Her private notes became more despairing and dramatic, seeing 'nothing in life but death'. From these depths she was rescued by Charles and Selina Bracebridge, to whom she became strongly attached, and who persuaded her parents to let her travel with them to Rome for the winter of 1847-8. There she met Sidney Herbert and his wife, (Mary) Elizabeth Herbert, whose social concerns she shared and with whom she became friends. Her contacts with Sidney Herbert were to be of central importance to her later national prominence. During this visit she also met Madre Santa Columba, who became her spiritual mentor, at the convent of the Trinita dei Monti, where she became convinced that she had a mission from God to the sick. 
In 1850, during travels with the Bracebridges and on the advice of Bunsen, Florence contrived a visit to the religious community at Kaiserswerth am Rhein. This was a turning point in her life: she felt that Pastor Theodor Fliedner and the deaconesses were doing God's work, with women of humble birth devoting their lives to the sick and the deprived. Later she denied that she had 'trained' at Kaiserswerth, saying that 'The nursing was nil and the hygiene horrible' ('As Miss Nightingale Said', 11), but that she had never seen purer devotion. Here she saw a possibility of changing nursing, not on the lines of the sisterhoods, where the 'ladies' supervised and nurses did the menial work, but by training suitably motivated women of any class. Her anonymous account of the community, 'The Institution of Kaiserswerth on the Rhine, for the Practical Training of Deaconesses, etc.' (1851), printed 'by the inmates of the London Ragged Colonial Training School', was her first publication. 
Florence returned to England and was again at odds with her parents. She finally refused marriage with Richard Monckton Milnes, later Baron Houghton, who had wooed her for nine years, a union that would have delighted her parents. The rejection came hard, for Monckton Milnes seems to have understood her more than most. He was to remain a valued member of the Nightingale council until his death in 1885. Florence was not the only thwarted daughter: Parthe, with her own peculiar gifts, still unmarried, became ill and obsessive about her sister (Woodham-Smith, 84-8). Sir James Clark, the family physician, with considerable perspicacity advised that Florence leave home, and the Herberts suggested that she should accept the post of unpaid superintendent to the Establishment for Gentlewomen during Illness in Harley Street, London, of which a friend, Lady Canning, was the chairman. Before taking up the post Nightingale paid another visit to the Sisters of Charity in Paris (after taking the advice of H. E. Manning), visited other hospitals, and continued studying the blue books, making herself an expert on hospital administration. Once installed at the institute in August 1853 she impressed all who came into contact with her, including Dr Bence Jones, who was considering starting a training school for nurses at St George's Hospital, and William Bowman, with her skill both as a nurse and as an organizer. She demanded improvements in the facilities and threatened resignation unless Roman Catholics and Jews could be admitted as patients (Smith, 11). In August 1854, while she was at Harley Street, there was a devastating epidemic of cholera in Soho, and Nightingale went to help with the flood of patients overwhelming the Middlesex Hospital. These early experiences showed her to have a remarkable flair for imposing her will on institutions, as well as 'an extraordinarily rich and firm imaginative grasp of the relations between individuals and the siting and working of things and of human beings' relations to them' (ibid., 12). 
The Crimean War broke out in March 1854, and in September British and French troops disembarked for the invasion of the Crimea. In October William Howard Russell sent dispatches to 'The Times' in which he described the neglect of the wounded and the lack of nurses ('The Times', 9, 12, 15, and 29 Oct 1854). Much of the public indignation fell on the head of Sidney Herbert, now secretary of state at war, who on 15 October wrote to Nightingale, asking her to take a party of nurses, at the government's expense, to Scutari. The letter crossed with one from Nightingale herself to Elizabeth Herbert offering to take a small private expedition, evidently the consolidation of an emerging plan. On 16 October Nightingale met Sidney Herbert and the matter was arranged. 'Florence is sole leader', her sister recorded (ibid., 27). With the aid of Lady Canning and Elizabeth Herbert, within five days a party of thirty-eight nurses was assembled, consisting of fourteen professionals and twenty-four from religious sisterhoods, including five Catholic nuns from Bermondsey, five from Norwood, and fourteen from Anglican sisterhoods. The party, accompanied by Mr and Mrs Bracebridge, arrived at Scutari on 4 November and climbed the slopes to the enormous dilapidated Turkish barracks. 
At Scutari, on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, opposite Constantinople, were four hospitals to house wounded troops brought by ship across the Black Sea from the battleground. The nursing party was received with sullen opposition by doctors and officials (Cook, 1.182). Nightingale at once began to assert her authority and to use her influence in London (which she was careful to see was apparent to those at Scutari) to improve the conditions in the hospitals, especially with respect to hygiene. She used money from the 'Times' fund to buy needed equipment locally and to make up palliasses. When 125 Turkish workers struck for more money, she dismissed them and hired Greeks (Smith, 37). She organized and improved the quality of the male nursing orderlies, who did the bulk of the nursing. Professor Smith calculates that Nightingale had dismissed thirteen of her original female nursing contingent by Christmas 1854. 
The battle of Balaklava dramatized the need for good nursing, and as the sick and wounded were brought across the Black Sea the doctors turned to the Nightingale party for help on 9 November 1855 (Woodham-Smith, 168-70). For the next six months the doctors and nurses battled against overwhelming odds. Not only were they nursing 4 miles of patients but, because of the breakdown in purveying, Nightingale was acting as quartermaster. In January 1855 she wrote to Sidney Herbert 'Nursing is the least of the functions into which I have been forced' ('As Miss Nightingale Said', 34). Appalled by the inadequate feeding arrangements she persuaded Lord Panmure, secretary of state for war, to arrange for Alexis Soyer, chef at the Reform Club, who volunteered his services, to come out and reorganize the cooking, though it was standard practice for male nursing orderlies to be responsible for providing their patients' meals. 
While Nightingale was coping with the nursing, welfare, and rehabilitation of the sick, her task was complicated by the arrival of parties of nuns and 'lady ecclesiastics', sent as reinforcements by Herbert and led by Mary Stanley and Mother Mary Francis Bridgeman. Nightingale was furious at the absence of consultation and threatened resignation. She rightly saw that the new party affected her position as 'sole leader'. She was also alarmed both by the high proportion of Roman Catholics, a sensitive issue because of defections to Rome at the time, and, more important, because she regarded her experiment as the opportunity to prove the value of female nursing in wartime: to achieve this there had to be discipline, and she had to be in control. That she was autocratic there is no doubt, and her dealings with Mary Stanley seem harsh; she thought Sidney Herbert had betrayed her by allowing these missions, and on 3 April 1856 she reminded him: 'Your letter is written from Belgrave Square, I write from a hut in the Crimea. The point of site is different' ('As Miss Nightingale Said', 40). This determination to remain in control and the acerbic way she dealt with would-be helpers gave fodder to later biographers counteracting the 'ministering angel' legend (Smith, chap. 2). 
Nightingale proved a formidable administrator and organizer, and her role at Scutari was, like that of her male colleagues and predecessors, as much that of a 'General Purveyor', as she described herself, as of a medical nurse. The acquisition of clothing and equipment, given the priorities of war and the disorganization of the suppliers in Britain, was in itself a striking achievement. Although her duties were chiefly administrative, she made a point of visiting the wards: a Chelsea pensioner later recalled, perhaps with some exaggeration: 'Miss Nightingale was always coming in and out. She used to attend to all the worst cases herself' (Cook, 1.235). Her insistence on uniform, discipline, and orderly procedures in the midst of considerable squalor set a standard that permanently affected the self-esteem of what became the British nursing profession. Mary Stanley thus described her in December 1854: 'there sat dear Flo writing on a small unpainted deal table. I never saw her looking better. She had on her black merino, trimmed with black velvet, clean linen collar and cuffs, apron, white cap with a black handkerchief tied over it. (ibid., 1.234)' In May 1855 Florence Nightingale crossed to the Crimea to inspect the war hospitals, and while there collapsed and was dangerously ill with 'Crimean fever', which she referred to as 'typhus' but which was probably 'Brucella melinites', or perhaps 'Brucella melitensis' (D. A. B. Young, 'BMJ', 23 Dec 1995, vol. 311). Nightingale made a slow and painful recovery. She resisted efforts by officials to ship her home and returned to Scutari to continue working; in all she made three inspections of the Crimea, and on Good Friday 1856 she was given full jurisdiction over 'the East' (Smith, 63). 
When the news of her illness reached Britain there were prayers for her recovery, the queen asked to be kept informed, poems were addressed to her, and 'The Times' referred to her as 'The Lady of the Lamp'. A description of her midnight vigils by Mr Macdonald, the 'Times' almoner in the Crimea, defined what quickly became her iconic stature and anticipated the depiction, not only of Florence Nightingale but of nurses generally, in a thousand novels and films: 'She is a 'ministering angel' without any exaggeration in these hospitals, and as her slender form glides quietly along each corridor, every poor fellow's face softens with gratitude at the sight of her. When all the medical officers have retired for the night and silence and darkness have settled down upon those miles of prostrate sick, she may be observed alone, with a little lamp in her hand, making her solitary rounds. (Cook, 1.237)' Henry Longfellow's 'Santa Filomena' (1857) became one of the best-known of Victorian verses: '
Lo! in that hour of misery 

A lady with a lamp I see 

Pass through the glimmering gloom, 

And flit from room to room. 

' Sidney Herbert wrote 'There broke out in different parts of the country a feeling of immediate and spontaneous expression of public gratitude and isolated portions of the country were preparing to make gifts to her.' With the advice of the Nightingale family it was decided to co-ordinate this response into a national appeal to 'enable Miss Nightingale to carry out a service close to her heart'. In November 1855 a public meeting was held in Willis Rooms, St James, London, with the duke of Cambridge in the chair. A report was sent to Nightingale in Scutari, who was asked by the trustees of the fund for her plans for its use. Beset by the problems of giving evidence to the sanitary commission sent out by Lord Panmure, the internecine squabbling, and the organization of the hospital, she replied with logic, if asperity, 'If I had asked for a Fund you might have asked me for a plan': she had not asked and she had no plan. The fund, which raised $45,000, she came to see as a millstone. 
The war ended in March 1856 with little cause for rejoicing. Out of 94,000 men sent to the war area, 4000 died of wounds but 19,000 died of disease, and 13,000 were invalided. As she had questioned the causes of poverty, Nightingale now questioned the reasons behind this preventable death-rate. She recognized, as few people did, the grievances of the ordinary soldier and she wrote, time and again, 'I stand at the altar of murdered men and while I live I will fight their cause'. 
Florence Nightingale returned to England in July 1856 a changed woman. Emaciated and tense, and weighed down with the burden she felt had been placed on her, she realized that if such suffering were never to happen again the Army Medical Service, and, if necessary, the army itself, must be reformed. To this end she set about asking for a royal commission. She set up what became known as her 'reform cabinet', a group of well-placed male advisers. In September 1856 she was invited to Balmoral and established what was to be a highly effective relationship with the queen and Albert. On 16 November 1856 it was agreed at an interview she had with Lord Panmure that a commission would be established, but nothing followed. Having used influential allies, royal approbation, and the threat to publish her own report, eventually in April 1857 Nightingale saw a commission established with four subcommittees and Sidney Herbert as chairman. 'Notes on matters affecting the health, efficiency, and hospital administration of the British army' (1858), her own report of 830 pages, printed and privately circulated but never published, was backed by statistical evidence that showed how much of mortality was due to the state of the hospitals. The causes of the Crimean disaster were examined and a comparison made between the death-rate of the army in peacetime and the civilian rate, Nightingale's conclusion being 'Our soldiers are enlisted to die in barracks'. Her report constitutes 'an astonishing example of her gift for imagining palpable needs and assembling workable remedies' (Smith, 81). The reforms set in train as a result of the commission marked a turning point in the Army Medical Service. With respect to the commission, Nightingale was, as E. T. Cook put it, 'an unremitting task-master' (Cook, 1.356); but F. B. Smith argues that she was lax about preparing her witnesses and gave the impression 'that she did the work while Herbert played the dilettante figure-head', when the opposite was in fact the case; moreover, 'behind Herbert's back she was envious and disparaging' (Smith, 83). Her own evidence was given in written form. In 1858 she was elected a member of the Statistical Society, and at the Statistical Congress of 1860 'Miss Nightingale's scheme for uniform hospital statistics' was the principal subject for discussion. Breaking her social isolation, Nightingale gave a series of breakfast parties at the Burlington Hotel during the conference. Her model statistical forms were well received and were soon adopted by the major London hospitals. 
While working on the report with frenetic urgency at the Burlington, Nightingale collapsed manifesting cardiac symptoms (probably sequelae of the Crimean fever) so severe that it was thought she would die. She recovered, but remained depressed and continued to suffer from nausea, insomnia, and palpitations. The accepted medical wisdom was that excessive mental exertion on the part of a woman was unnatural and would lead to breakdown: the standard treatment was complete rest and quiet. Florence Nightingale took to her bed or couch because the doctors ordered it, but she continued to work feverishly and was hostile to anyone, including her family, who she thought did not understand her mission. This was the beginning of her twenty years of invalidism. In 1861 she had a further severe episode when she was unable to walk and suffered from alarming spondylitis. 
Determined to work come what may Nightingale used her illness to free herself from family commitments, though she often used relatives ruthlessly to help with her various projects; several were coerced into acting as secretaries or guardians in the house that her father purchased for her in South Street in London's Mayfair. Here she lived with five servants, with Dr Sutherland, whom she had met in the Crimea, installed downstairs as her amanuensis to whom she fired off notes and instructions. She now astutely exploited the isolation provided by her illness to further -- mostly by remorseless use of correspondence -- reforms in the army, the promotion of sanitary science, the collection of statistics, the design of hospitals, and the reform of nursing and midwifery services: no Victorian, except perhaps the queen, made more effective use of attrition by letter! Not for her were the waiting in the corridors of power and the attending of committees; people came to her and by appointment. 
By March 1858 Nightingale wrote a 'last letter' to Sidney Herbert excusing herself from the responsibility of the Nightingale Fund. The council, concerned that the money had been collected from the public for a specific purpose, made tentative approaches to London hospitals, but they were all wary of what they thought would be an 'imperium in imperio'. In November Nightingale became involved in correspondence in 'The Builder' (26 February 1859, no. 99) concerning the rebuilding of St Thomas's Hospital. The faction advocating a move to the suburbs welcomed her as an ally, and as a quid pro quo offered accommodation for a school of nursing bearing her name. Anxious about the unrest concerning the fund, Nightingale put forward a plan which was rejected by the hospital authorities, who countered with a much less ambitious plan, which, in spite of reservations by the council, she accepted as 'not the best possible but the best conceivable'. The chairman of the council, Sidney Herbert, and the secretary, Arthur Hugh Clough, Nightingale's cousin by marriage, both sick men, began negotiations, and a scheme was drawn up on scraps of paper. In June 1860 the school was opened, with fifteen probationers working as assistant nurses, six of whom were dismissed or left and one of whom died of typhus within a year. The following year both Sidney Herbert and Arthur Clough were dead: Florence Nightingale, herself ill, was devastated, and left the organization of the school to the council, with another cousin, Henry Bonham-Carter, as secretary, soon to be joined by her brother-in-law, Sir Harry Verney, as chairman. 
Herbert's death robbed Nightingale of her chief contact with cabinet-level politics, and she never overcame this loss. However, another very different confidant was found in the person of Benjamin Jowett, later master of Balliol College, Oxford, with whom she came in contact through his having been given by Clough a copy of a draft of her 'Suggestions for thought to the searchers after truth among the artizans of England'. Jowett (differing from J. S. Mill) advised against publication, and the book, though set in type and bound in three volumes in 1860, was never publicly issued. He and Nightingale corresponded regularly, and met from time to time, until Jowett's death in 1893. Their first meeting occurred in 1862 when Nightingale asked Jowett to come to London to give her the sacrament, which he did ('Dear Miss Nightingale', xvii). Their relationship was thus centred on religion and the discussion of religion, and was essentially epistolatory. Jowett was a bachelor, and it is not impossible that he proposed marriage to Florence Nightingale, as Cordelia Sorabji much later recalled being told by him (ibid., xxxii), but it is not probable. A marriage between two of the great Victorian manipulators-by-correspondence would certainly have been exotic; it would also have probably been unhappy. There was no need for Jowett and Nightingale to marry, for their preferred means of intercourse was already available and employed. Jowett's letters to Nightingale were edited by E. V. Quinn and John Prest (1987); her letters to him were mostly destroyed by their recipient shortly before his death. 
As Florence Nightingale recovered from her acute attack in 1861 she was roused to a new challenge. She had pressed Lord Palmerston, a family friend, to appoint Lord De Grey, a known reformer, as viceroy of India, and Captain Douglas Galton, a cousin by marriage, as under-secretary in charge of health and sanitation. The sanitary commission on India, which was to have been chaired by Herbert, began sitting; it reported in 1863. Nightingale gathered material for it by sending out a questionnaire to 200 stations in India (Smith, 115). Her knowledge of India became so encyclopaedic that every viceroy visited her before leaving Britain. Although she made mistakes onto which detractors fastened (ibid., 114-25), she was right about the fundamental importance of irrigation and the need for a pure water supply, and her views on famine, poverty, and debt were eminently sensible. Before the official report was completed she sent 'Instructions' about improvements to Indian barracks, but these were blocked by the India Office (ibid., 118). Her paper for the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, 'How people may live and not die in India' (1863), was read to its meeting in Edinburgh to great acclaim. One of her advisers on India, Sir John Lawrence, became governor-general in 1863, and a new channel of influence opened, especially with respect to sanitary reform there. 
During this period Nightingale was involved with the training of midwives, a subject on which she felt strongly. Part of the Nightingale Fund was used to finance an experimental training scheme at King's College Hospital, where her friend Mary Jones, under the aegis of the sisterhood of St John the Divine, was the sister superior. The scheme had only limited success and folded in 1867 because of an acrimonious dispute between the sisterhood, the hospital authorities, and the bishop, which even Nightingale's eirenic intervention could not quell. Nevertheless, the experiment and Nightingale's 'Introductory notes on lying-in hospitals and proposals for training of midwives' laid the foundation for further schemes (Donnison, 73). Nightingale maintained that efficient nursing depended on well-designed hospitals, and, having studied hospital design all over Europe, she was quick to condemn the proposals for Netley on Southampton Water. In spite of her insistence that female nurses should be the backbone of military hospitals, and massive correspondence on the subject, the War Office remained unenthusiastic. It took another war to change this attitude. 
In 1861 Nightingale was approached by William Rathbone, a philanthropist, about the possibility of supplying trained nurses for a poor-law institution in Liverpool. Few trained nurses were available at that time, but, much concerned about the fate of the sick in these institutions, in 1864 she sent Agnes Jones, who had trained at Kaiserswerth, and eight Nightingale nurses. They battled against appalling conditions and prejudice, until in 1868 Agnes Jones died of exhaustion and typhus. Involved in the difficult process of finding a replacement, Nightingale remained engaged in the work of the Liverpool infirmary for almost twenty years, paying visits and commenting both on the problems of staffing and the progress made since the early 1860s (Nightingale to W. Rathbone, 30 Oct 1885, 'Works', 6.324). However, fired by accounts of neglect in workhouses in London, Nightingale now threw her influence behind the Association for Improving Workhouse Infirmaries, with co-workers such as J. S. Mill, Charles Dickens, and Louisa Twining, which eventually resulted in the 'Metropolitan Poor Law Act' (1867). Though recognized as having been instrumental in the creation of the legislation, Nightingale remained critical of its limitations and had continued to lobby Gathorne Hardy, president of the Poor Law Board, for improvements. At the same time she persuaded the fund council to divert money for a training scheme for nurses based at St Pancras and Highgate and later, in 1881, more successfully, for a team of Nightingale nurses at the St Marylebone workhouse infirmary, thus laying the foundation for trained nursing in the new municipal hospitals after the 'Local Government Act' (1888). 
In 1867 Nightingale wrote 'never think you have done anything effective in nursing until you have nursed, not only the poor sick in workhouses but those at home'. Again working in co-operation with William Rathbone, with whom she did not always agree, she gave urgent consideration to the need for a home-nursing scheme in London. She arranged for Florence Lees to conduct a survey to ascertain the need, which resulted in 'The Report of the National Association for Providing Trained Nurses for the Sick Poor'. The following year, 1875, the Metropolitan and National Nursing Home was opened in Bloomsbury with Florence Lees as superintendent. Later Nightingale used her influence to ensure that the greater part of the women's jubilee offering to Queen Victoria was used to provide nursing for the sick poor at home, and the Bloomsbury Training Home became the model for the training scheme for the Queen's Institute for District Nursing. 
Florence Nightingale's influence on the army and India was declining, and in 1872, when the new viceroy did not come to see her and ignored her advice, she wrote 'this year I go out of office' (Cook, 2.240). Gladstone was one of those canny enough not to be drawn into the Nightingale web, though they corresponded from time to time. Nightingale was unsympathetic to his policies, and when he did call, without an appointment, she declined to receive him. The death of her father in 1874, quickly followed by that of Mrs Bracebridge, depressed her. She returned to her youthful interest in the mystics and prepared a never-completed book on those of the middle ages. Increasingly she felt isolated and despondent. Lying in bed she wrote vast quantities of spiritual meditation. E. T. Cook, who collected these for his biography, commented on them: 'The notes are often heart-rending in their impression of loneliness, of craving for sympathy which she could not find, of bitter self-reproach' (ibid.). She was not, however, wholly inactive, and she turned her attention to the school that bore her name, the Nightingale School attached to St Thomas's Hospital in London. In spite of publicity there had been few suitable candidates, and the attrition rate was 40 per cent. She now realized that the agreement with St Thomas's had been one-sided, and she complained that the Nightingale probationers were doing half the hospital's work. After legal advice, consideration was given to spending capital and starting elsewhere. Eventually the council settled for a series of compromises, which never satisfied Nightingale and which failed to answer the fundamental questions: how should nurses be prepared to meet the health needs of the population, who should train and educate them, and how should they be tested (Baly, 'Nursing Legacy', preface)? It is a paradox that Florence Nightingale should be best known for what she failed to achieve: a credible training for nurses in the school to which her name was given (Baly, 'As Miss Nightingale Said', 83-4). 
At the age of sixty Florence Nightingale considered herself old. Her friends and collaborators were dead, but her health improved. The thin, waspish woman who sent mordant, aphoristic letters to ministers now metamorphosed into a stout, benevolent old lady. She tried to keep up with public-health matters but she was increasingly out of touch. In 1889 St Thomas's appointed a matron without consulting her or the council. She continued to write sentimental addresses to probationers until 1889, but by now her eyesight was failing. After the death of her sister in 1890 she found something of a new life at Claydon House, near Bicester, where she cared for the estate and her brother-in-law (Claydon, now owned by the National Trust, houses her large bed and various memorabilia), but her last visit there was in 1894-5. She spent almost the whole of her final fifteen years in her room in South Street, London. Although from 1902 she could write only with great difficulty and her memory was failing, it was only in 1906 that the India Office was asked to stop sending her relevant papers on sanitation. She was the recipient of many honours, including membership of the German order of the cross of merit and the French 'Secours aux blesses militaires'. In 1907 the king made her a member of the Order of Merit, the first woman to be so honoured, and this encouraged something of a revival of interest. In 1908 she received the freedom of the City of London. 
Portraits are of particular importance in the life of a publicly well-known recluse. They are listed as appendix C in Cook's biography. Nightingale generally refused to sit, and disliked being photographed. Even so, Cook lists twenty-four likenesses that are 'authentic', and the National Portrait Gallery has a useful collection of photographs of her. Especially important among her images is Jerry Barrett's oil, now in the National Portrait Gallery; it was engraved by S. Bellin as 'Florence Nightingale at Scutari, a Mission of Mercy' (1856). Barrett travelled to Scutari to paint her; she refused to sit, but gave ample opportunity for him to observe her (Smith, 85). In the 1970s the portrait was reproduced on British $10 notes. The 'Illustrated London News' published a woodcut of Nightingale with a lamp in the Scutari hospital (24 February 1855). A photograph by the London Stereoscopic Company, taken at the request of the queen in 1856, was much reproduced. A fine bust by Sir John Steell (1862) was presented to her by the non-commissioned officers and men of the British army, and later placed in the Royal United Service Institution (now in the National Army Museum). G. F. Watts began a portrait in 1864 that he was unable to finish; Sir William Blake Richmond's oil portrait (1887, but begun earlier) established the icon of the later Nightingale, uncannily like that of Queen Victoria. 
Florence Nightingale outlasted her early Victorian colleagues, and was the chief living link with those days of sanitary reform and the start of the assertion by women of a claim to a recognized, official, professional role in the central actions of national life. She died in her sleep in her room at 10 South Street, Park Lane, London, on 13 August 1910. An offer of burial in Westminster Abbey was declined by her relatives, and she was buried next to her father and mother in the churchyard of East Wellow, Hampshire, the coffin borne to the grave by sergeants drawn from the regiments of the guards. Memorial services were held in St Paul's Cathedral on 20 August, in Liverpool Cathedral, and in many other places of worship. 
Florence Nightingale's attitude to health and the deprived must be seen in the light of her own idiosyncratic theology. Educated by her mother and (from 1827) by an evangelical governess, exposed to the philosophy of the Enlightenment, biblical criticism, and new scientific theories, like a number of her contemporaries she heard Matthew Arnold's 'melancholy, long, withdrawing roar' (M. Arnold, 'Dover Beach') of the sea of faith. Aware of her own spiritual need she sought guidance from different mentors, and at the age of thirty-two tried to set out her own philosophy in 'Suggestions for thought', dedicated to 'The Artizans of England -- Seekers after Truth', whom she thought had been led astray by the teachings of the positivists. Volumes 1 and 3 are devoted to explaining God's will and God's law, and have Unitarian undertones. A disciple of the teaching of Adolphe Quetelet, she believed there was a causal explanation for all human behaviour, and if the cause was corrected behaviour would improve; this argument, she thought, could be applied to health. If the factors causing ill health were removed mankind would become healthy, and the key to this lay in sanitary science. In an involved exegesis she linked this with God's will, which was that mankind must help mankind: as an example men should not pray to be delivered from cholera but bend their efforts to supplying clean water and proper sanitation. She looked to the day when sanitary science would overcome ill health and when hospitals, which she regarded as an 'intermediate state of civilization', would be abolished. It was for this reason that she continued to disregard the germ theory of infection: she thought it would lead people into ignoring the need for hygiene and sanitation. Influenced by Spinoza, she argued that God's laws were unalterable and therefore miracles were impossible. God's law was manifest in nature, and it is noticeable that in her best-selling book 'Notes on Nursing' (1860) she referred to disease as being 'a reparative process which Nature has instituted'. It was the duty of the nurse to put the patient in a position for nature to act on him; the nurse was thus aiding God's law, hence the emphasis on fresh air and the design of the Nightingale wards. 
'Cassandra', the concluding essay in volume 2 of Nightingale's 'Suggestions' is a diatribe about the wrongs suffered by women and is out of place in a metaphysical disquisition. Virginia Woolf in 'A Room of One's Own' (1929) referred to it as 'Shrieking aloud in agony' (p. 47). Florence Nightingale's attitude to women was contradictory. She considered them selfish, and, though she adulated a chosen few, she preferred working with men. She was an early campaigner for women's rights, particularly their right to property, and she inveighed against the limitations imposed on educated women undertaking worthwhile and paid work. However, in her later years she was irritated by women clamouring to enter male preserves like medicine, maintaining that there was plenty to be done in women's work like midwifery, teaching, and nursing. She made no common cause with women claiming the right to train as physicians. She argued against J. S. Mill that the lack of a vote was the least of women's disabilities. Her attitude to women was patrician, though at the end of her life she accepted that she had not taken sufficient account of 'ordinary women'. In fact she was a child of her time, and she lived for ninety years: the enthusiasms of radical youth were replaced by a more reactionary old age. 
At her death Nightingale's papers passed to her executor, Henry Bonham-Carter, who with the other executors authorized Sir Edward Tyas Cook to write an official biography. Cook's two-volume 'Life of Florence Nightingale' was published in 1913, and is an exceptionally well-researched example of its genre; it is also both sympathetic and critical, and remains a valuable biography as well as being an archival quarry. In 1918 Lytton Strachey included a short memoir of Nightingale in his 'Eminent Victorians'. Influenced by Freud he moved away from investigation into the realms of psychotherapy and fictionalization, claiming that the real Florence Nightingale was 'more interesting than the legendary one though less agreeable'. While highlighting the harsh aspects of her life Strachey did not deny her achievements. 
Early nursing historians were the most ardent keepers of the Nightingale flame (for example, M. A. Nutting and L. L. Dock, 'A History of Nursing', 1907). Anxious to portray nursing as an educated and homogeneous profession they overstated the failures of nursing pre-1860 and exaggerated the transformation. Nightingale was the ideal icon for publicity -- educated, impeccably respectable, and a national heroine; her lamp became the symbol of nursing. Anna Neagle thus portrayed her in Herbert Wilcox's film 'The Lady with a Lamp' (1951), though with a few Stracheyesque additions. Because Cook's biography was so monumental, and because of the sheer volume of material scattered in collections and libraries, most subsequent biographies were a recension of it. In 1950 Cecil Woodham-Smith produced a popular biography in which she claimed to have had access to new material. However, it added little to the life by Cook and errors and misconceptions remained. 
Since 1950 there has been an upsurge of interest in this enigmatic woman who is a Victorian figure but, on the other hand, strangely contemporary. The medical profession has attempted to explain her invalidism and various diagnoses have been expounded, including the theory that it was psychosomatic (Pickering), and theologians have examined her spirituality and its effect on her work. Research on the Nightingale Fund papers shows there was no sudden reform in nursing: it was a slow, inevitable process due to a multiplicity of factors, and, as Monica Baly has argued, the so-called Nightingale legacy was a mixed blessing. Other historians have taken an iconoclastic approach. Barry Smith's striking study (1982) stripped away the iconic aspects of the Nightingale legend to examine the remarkable network of manipulation (mostly by letter) by which she sought to impose her will and achieve her objectives. Between 2001 and 2009 the first thirteen of the planned sixteen volumes of 'The Collected Works of Florence Nightingale' were published, edited by Lynn McDonald. 
Florence Nightingale remains an enigmatic figure. Her sense of being 'in office' and 'out of office' reflects the frustration of a woman who sensed power but who, in the circumstances of the time, could use it only obliquely, and then chiefly by persuading men to act for her. Her remarkable practical ability, her intense religiosity, her illnesses, and her image of herself as a medieval recluse in a modern age reflect a complex character whose complexity grows with time and with the changing role of women in public life. 


@@@@@


doc= 35242


Nixon, Sir John Eccles (1857-1921), army officer, was born at Brentford, Middlesex, on 16 August 1857, the youngest son of Captain John Piggott Nixon of the 25th Bombay native infantry and later the Indian political service and his wife, Ellen, daughter of G. Cooper of Brentford. He was educated at Wellington College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Nixon was commissioned as a sub-lieutenant in the 75th foot in September 1875. In May 1878 he entered the Bengal staff corps and joined the 18th Bengal cavalry. For ten years he served with his regiment, fighting in the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1879-80) and the Zaimukht punitive expedition, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. In 1881 he participated in the Mahsud Waziri expedition on the north-west frontier. Nixon joined the garrison instruction staff in April 1888 as a captain, beginning a fifteen-year period of continuous staff employment during which he served with the Chitral relief force (1895) and the Tochi field force (1897-8). For the former he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel in January 1896, and was mentioned in dispatches on both occasions. With the rank of colonel Nixon was appointed an assistant quartermaster-general in March 1899, and at the end of 1901 he was sent to South Africa where he remained until the end of the South African War, commanding a cavalry column operating in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. Nixon was awarded the campaign medal with four clasps, was mentioned in dispatches, and was created CB in 1902. 
Following his return to India, Nixon held a succession of command and staff appointments. In 1902 he resumed his job as assistant quartermaster-general for intelligence. In May 1903 he was made commander of a second-class district, in August 1906 inspector-general of cavalry, and in May 1908 a divisional commander. Nixon was then given the prestigious appointment of general officer commanding the southern army in October 1912, which he held until February 1915, when he assumed command of the northern army. During this period he rose steadily through the ranks: major-general in March 1904, lieutenant-general in February 1909, and finally general in May 1914, establishing a reputation as an energetic and capable staff officer and commander. For his services he was created KCB in 1911. 
In April 1915 Nixon took command of Indian expeditionary force D deployed in Mesopotamia, which had originally landed in November 1914 following the entry of Turkey into the war to protect Basrah and oilfields near the Shatt al- 'Arab. Shortly after he arrived the Turkish army attacked an entrenched British position at Shaybah, but they were repulsed after heavy fighting. General Sir Beauchamp Duff, commander-in-chief in India, ordered Nixon to retain control of the Basrah vilayet, the mouth of the Tigris River, and as much of the surrounding area as deemed necessary to protect a pipeline and local oilfields. Although the secretary of state for India had expressly ordered that no further advances should be undertaken, Nixon was also instructed by Duff, after acquainting himself with the local position, to submit plans to secure the Basrah vilayet and for a subsequent advance on Baghdad. He was also specifically ordered to report on the military requirements of such an expedition, particularly about the adequacy and suitability of the river transport expected to arrive from India, Burma, and Egypt. 
A series of operations was undertaken under Nixon's command, with the approval of the government of India, to control the Basrah vilayet. On 31 May troops led by Sir Charles Townshend captured a strong Turkish position at Kurna, despite severe flooding of the surrounding area. This difficult feat of arms was followed by the capture of Amara, 90 miles upriver, and then Nasiriyyah on 25 July, which was defended by a large Turkish force. Following these successful operations an elated and over-optimistic Nixon proposed, in order to consolidate control of the Basrah vilayet, the capture of Kut al-Amara, located 150 miles upriver, which was eventually sanctioned by the government of India and the cabinet. The enemy defensive positions on either side of the river were skilfully captured by Sir Charles Townshend, who entered Kut on 29 September. The defeated Turks were pursued 60 miles further northwards to Aziziyyah, which was occupied on 3 October and fortified as the northernmost British defensive outpost. 
Nixon was not content with his recent successes, however, and proposed further offensive operations to offset the effects of recent Turkish victories at the Dardanelles. On 3 October he telegraphed the secretary of state for India, 'I consider I am strong enough to open the road to Baghdad, and with this intention I propose to concentrate at 'Aziziyyah'. Nixon's force was still badly short despite repeated earlier requests for tugs, barges, and other shipping, however, on which he was completely dependent for transport and supply along the narrow, winding Tigris River. Moreover, reserves of medical personnel and stores available in Mesopotamia and India were insufficient to support a major operation. The deadlock at the Dardanelles finally convinced the cabinet of the merits of advancing on Baghdad. Two Indian divisions were dispatched from France as reinforcements, but no serious endeavour was made to increase the amount of water transport. Despite continued doubts expressed by Sir Beauchamp Duff that insufficient troops and transport were available, on 23 October 1915 the secretary of state authorized Nixon to advance if he judged sufficient forces were at his disposal for the operation. 
On 22 November Townshend attacked a superior number of Turkish troops entrenched in a strong position astride the Tigris at Ctesiphon. By nightfall the battle was lost, and several days later Townshend conducted a fighting retreat to Kut, where he was besieged on 6 December by several Turkish divisions. A series of unsuccessful attempts was made to relieve the beleaguered division by the remaining British and Indian troops in Mesopotamia and further reinforcements. Sir John Nixon relinquished his command on 19 January 1916 through ill health, leaving behind for his successor an administrative nightmare. A chronic shortage of river transport meant it was impossible to evacuate large numbers of sick and wounded from either Kut or the relieving force, which suffered hardships owing to a lack of doctors and medical supplies. Despite further attempts during the spring to relieve the town, imminent starvation compelled Townshend to unconditionally surrender Kut on 29 April 1916. 
Nixon was summoned to England to appear before the Mesopotamia commission of inquiry appointed in August 1916 to investigate the underlying causes of the debacle in Mesopotamia. 'The weightiest share of responsibility', the commission's final report noted, 'lies with Sir John Nixon, whose confident optimism was the main cause of the decision to advance' ('War in Mesopotamia', 111). The army council also ordered that Nixon submit a written explanation of his conduct during the campaign, depending on which further action might be taken. An announcement was finally made in the House of Commons on 28 October 1918, however, that the army council considered Nixon's description of events satisfactory. In recognition of his services, in 1919 a GCMG was conferred on Nixon, and he was also posthumously made a grand officier of the Legion d'honneur in 1922. The nine months of command in Mesopotamia were Nixon's last active service. He had married in 1884 Amy Louisa, daughter of James Wilson, of Gratwicke, Billingshurst, and Felpham Manor, Sussex, and they had one son. His health gradually deteriorated and on 15 December 1921 he died at St Raphael, Var, France, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35243


Noble, Sir Andrew, first baronet (1831-1915), industrialist and expert in artillery, the third son of the twelve children of George Noble (died 1847), a retired naval captain of Greenock, Renfrewshire, and his wife, Georgiana, only daughter of Andrew Donald Moore of Ottercaps, Virginia, USA (formerly of Ayrshire), was born at 65 Union Street, Greenock, on 13 September 1831. His father came of a landed Dunbartonshire family. Andrew was first educated in Greenock and later at Edinburgh Academy, and entered Woolwich as a cadet in the spring of 1847. In June 1849 he joined the Royal Artillery, served for eleven years, being made captain in 1855. Most of his uneventful military career was abroad. While in Canada he met, and in 1854 married, Margery Durham (died 1929), daughter of Archibald Campbell, a notary in Quebec; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Always interested in mathematics and chemistry, Noble embraced several scientific pursuits before concentrating on the branch of inquiry in which he was to gain distinction. He returned to England from the Cape in January 1858, and, on being made secretary to the Royal Artillery Institution at Woolwich, found the naval and military authorities in controversy over superseding the old muzzle-loaded, smooth-bore guns by a new system of breech-loaded, rifled artillery. Remarkably, no advance in gunnery had been made between the Napoleonic and the Crimean wars. It was soon after the battle of Inkermann that William George Armstrong submitted to the War Office for trial his rifled breech-loading field gun, and began a controversy which agitated military minds for several years. The subject exactly suited Noble's aptitude for patient, scientific experiment and accurate observation, and he lost no time in taking part in it. In September 1858 he was appointed secretary to the special committee on rifled cannon, and the new system of artillery was adopted officially by the services towards the end of 1858, a step which polarized opposition by the more conservative military men. 
Noble was increasingly recognized as an artillery specialist, and in August 1860 resigned from the army to join Armstrong's Elswick Ordnance Company, Newcastle upon Tyne, where the government orders for rearmament were then being carried out. Armstrong valued the specialist military technical knowledge which Noble would bring to the firm, and offered him a partnership in the business and joint management, with George W. Rendel, of the works. In 1863 the Elswick Ordnance Company was amalgamated with the adjacent Hydraulic Engineering Works as Sir W. G. Armstrong & Co., with Noble as an original partner. Noble was now free to pursue his scientific inquiries, and he made full use of the resources for his experiments in ballistics and explosives. His experiments and observations followed the lines of those of T. J. Rodman, Sir Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford), and earlier investigators, in ascertaining the conditions which follow an explosion, but he carried the examination of fired gunpowder further than any of his predecessors. Confining the charge in a closed steel vessel, he determined the temperatures and pressures created, and analysed the gases and residues. Based on these experiments he developed methods for recording the pressures in the chamber of a gun, and the velocity of the projectile in its passage through the bore. His techniques were entirely new, and the exact science of ballistics is due to his work. The practical result of his experiments and conclusions was a complete alteration in the composition of gunpowder and in the design of guns. The use of hand rammed black powder was superseded by slow-burning explosive charges of regular size and shape, which gave more controlled explosion pressures. Improvements in the manufacture of gun steel assisted progress, allowing larger chambers capable of withstanding larger charges. Still faced with military hostility Noble argued that Elswick breech-loaders were best for the broadside armament of ships. The services eventually conceded, and about 1881 the new guns and explosive charges were introduced into the navy. 
From 1868 the Elswick works had entered an arrangement with Charles Mitchell & Co., shipbuilders, of Walker-on-Tyne, for the building of warships, Rendel's speciality, which left Noble in charge of ordnance and acting head when Rendel became a civil lord of the Admiralty in 1881. Armstrong and Mitchell amalgamated in 1882 with Noble, the largest shareholder, as vice-chairman. The company became Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Co. Ltd, and Noble, then aged seventy, became chairman on Armstrong's death in December 1900. 
The Elswick company had been exceedingly profitable under Noble's influence from the 1880s. Noble combined scientific ability with administrative powers. He had controlled a large business, was in daily attendance at his office or workshops, and actively supervised every detail. Despite opposing the Nine Hours League and the 1871 engineers' strike, he had achieved great success. After his day's work he had continued his technical studies in his library or laboratory, often far into the night. Nevertheless, he thoroughly enjoyed many recreations, including real tennis, fishing, and shooting. His hospitality was unbounded. He had a happy home life and his houses were the centre of large gatherings of relations and friends. However, the company went into relative decline early in the twentieth century. Noble had become unimaginative and conservative in engineering design, autocratic in dealing with his managers, and dynastic in his approach to his succession -- two of his four sons, Saxton and John, became directors of the company. 
Recognized as the leading authority, Noble acted on numerous committees dealing with guns and gunpowder. He took little share in public life; he published his researches through the learned societies. In many experiments he collaborated with Sir Frederick Augustus Abel, and two of his most important papers (in 1875 and 1879) were published in their joint names in 'Philosophical Transactions'. In 1906 he reprinted his papers and lectures in the volume 'Artillery and Explosives'. 
Noble was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1870, was made a CB in 1881, created a KCB in 1893, and a baronet in 1902. He was a vice-president of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1900, and its honorary vice-president from 1905. He was also the recipient of many scientific honours and foreign decorations including the royal medal of the Royal Society (1880) and the Albert medal of the Royal Society of Arts (1909). At the end of 1911 he ceased active management of the business, but remained chairman. About 1905 he bought the Callendar estate of Ardkinglas by Loch Fyne, Argyll, Scotland, and in the house which Sir Robert Lorimer designed for him there he died on 22 October 1915. He was buried at Cairndow on the estate. The baronetcy was inherited by his eldest son, George John William Noble (1859-1937), while the Ardkinglas estate passed to his third son, John Henry Brunel Noble (1865-1938), who was made a baronet in his own right in 1923. 


@@@@@


doc= 35244


Noble, Montague Alfred (1873-1940), cricketer and dentist, was born on 28 January 1873 at Dixon Street, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, the eighth son of Joseph Noble, grocer and later builder, and his wife, Maria Collins. His parents had emigrated from Egham, Surrey, earlier in the nineteenth century. After leaving school he was briefly a bank clerk before qualifying as a dentist in 1901, setting up in practice, and becoming in 1902 a dental surgeon at the dental hospital in Sydney. 
Throughout his cricketing life, Noble was associated with the Paddington club, and first played for New South Wales on their New Zealand tour in 1894. Later in the year he made 152 not out for a Sydney colts eighteen against A. E. Stoddart's English tourists. He made his debut in test cricket against England at Melbourne in 1898, taking 6 wickets for 49, appearing 'in the colonial team with the happiest results' ('Wisden', 1899, 393). It was as an all-rounder -- one of Australia's greatest -- that he played in a further forty-one consecutive matches for Australia up to 1909, including four tours to England and one to South Africa. 
Although Noble's only test century was against England at Sydney in 1903, he had the ability to bat defensively for long spells, never more so than at Manchester in 1899 when -- in two innings of 60 not out and 89 -- he was at the wicket for eight and a half hours to save the match. He bowled his off-breaks at a brisk pace, relying on swerve rather than spin. At Melbourne, against England in 1902, he had a match analysis of 13 for 77. Six months later, in the only test ever played at Sheffield, he took 11 for 103, 'breaking back again and again in an unplayable way' ('Wisden', 1903, 269). In test cricket he made 1997 runs (30.25) and took 121 wickets (25.00). 
In 1903 Noble was appointed captain of Australia, and, apart from the tour to England in 1905, he remained so for six years. 'Mary Ann', as he was nicknamed from his initials, was an authoritarian figure and a disciplinarian who later trenchantly expressed his views on captaincy in his book 'The Game's the Thing' (1926). Of him C. A. Macartney wrote: 'a strong character, hard but just. His judgement of other players' capabilities was astonishing. He was a rare personality and I know of none greater' (Pollard, 214). 
Noble was an equally dominant figure in the controversies of the day between players and administrators, being briefly suspended (with nine other players) by the New South Wales Cricket Association in 1906 when he led the opposition on behalf of players' rights. Later he wrote in the press that the Australian board of control in the six years of its existence had 'not been credited with one single act of conciliation or forbearance' ('Sydney Morning Herald', 29 Feb 1912). The upshot of these conflicts was the refusal of many leading players to travel to England in 1912, though by now Noble (almost forty years of age) had virtually retired from first-class cricket. 
Noble married on 14 January 1914 Elizabeth Ellen Ferguson (died 1963); her brother, William Ferguson (1880-1958), was a scorer and baggage-man for forty-three overseas tours. They had three sons and a daughter. 
Test cricket apart, Noble's record as a batsman in the Sheffield shield competition was unmatched until the era of W. H. Ponsford and Don Bradman. Two of his highest scores in first-class cricket were both made against Sussex (284 in 1902 and 267 in 1905), while for New South Wales against Victoria in 1905 he made 281. When he retired in 1919 he had made 13,975 runs (40.74) and taken 625 wickets (23.11). He continued to play first-grade cricket for Paddington until 1925 and, as he had done thirty-one years earlier, played that year for a colts eleven (as their mentor) against an England eleven led by A. E. R. Gilligan, on whose tour he wrote 'Gilligan's Men' (1925), one of four major contributions he made to the literature of cricket. 
Noble's commanding personality must have contributed to his election as president of the Dental Association of New South Wales in 1915. He briefly relinquished his career in dentistry but returned to it in the 1930s. In a full life, he was variously a New South Wales selector, a cricket journalist, a pioneer of test match broadcasting, and the president of the New South Wales Baseball Association. He died in Sydney on 22 June 1940, and was buried at Waverley cemetery, Sydney. A stand at the Sydney cricket ground is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35245


Noble, Sir Percy Lockhart Harnam (1880-1955), naval officer, son of Charles Simeon Noble and his wife, Annie Georgina Noble, was born on 16 January 1880 in India where his father was a major in the Bengal staff corps. He entered the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in 1894 and spent his midshipman's time in the 'Immortalite' on the China station. In view of his subsequent career it seems strange that his captain should notice him in his report as lazy and dull. During his sub-lieutenant's courses Noble was detailed for the naval guard of honour mounted at Windsor for the funeral of Queen Victoria. When the horses which were to draw the gun-carriage bearing the coffin became restive, and later unmanageable, Noble suggested that they be unhitched and the gun carriage drawn by the naval guard of honour, a precedent followed in every subsequent royal funeral. He was appointed MVO. 
After service in the battleships 'Hannibal' in the channel squadron and 'Russell' in the Mediterranean, Noble was appointed flag lieutenant to A. L. Winsloe, commanding destroyer flotillas at home. He commanded the destroyer 'Ribble' from 1907 to 1908, when he joined the signal school at Portsmouth and qualified as a signal specialist. A brief appointment to the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert' for Edward VII's visit to Copenhagen was followed by a commission in China as flag lieutenant to Winsloe, and on completion of that duty he returned to the royal yacht as first lieutenant, being promoted commander when he completed the appointment in 1913. In December he joined the 'Achilles', in the 2nd cruiser squadron, Home Fleet, as executive officer, and three years later was transferred, still as executive officer, to the large cruiser 'Courageous', flagship of the light cruiser force, Grand Fleet. His promotion to captain came in June 1918 and in October of that year he was made flag captain to Sir Allan Everett in the 'Calliope', transferring to the 'Calcutta' in 1919. In 1922 he was appointed to the 'Barham' in command and as flag captain to Sir Edwyn Alexander-Sinclair, then commanding 1st battle squadron, Atlantic Fleet. He was promoted CVO in 1920. 
Noble's next command (1925) was the 'Ganges', the boys' training establishment at Shotley, and his experience in this post led to his selection two years later (1927) as the first commanding officer of the 'St Vincent', a new boys' training establishment being set up at Gosport. This was followed by an appointment as director of the operations division on the naval staff, 1928-9, and his promotion to rear-admiral (1929). 
In 1931 Noble became director of naval equipment in the Admiralty and at the end of the following year was selected to command the 2nd cruiser squadron in the Home Fleet, flying his flag in the 'Dorsetshire', then in the 'Leander'. In 1935 he was brought back to the Admiralty as fourth sea lord where he was successful in obtaining marriage allowances for naval officers. He was promoted vice-admiral while holding this appointment and in 1937 was chosen to command the China station. He was appointed CB in 1932 and KCB in 1936. 
Noble's qualities of tact and restraint were continuously called into play during this difficult period in the Far East. The Japanese were engaged in their war with China and frequently made threatening advances to the borders of the British settlements at Hong Kong and Shanghai. Noble managed to prevent any of these threats from developing into outright hostilities, and the skill with which he handled all such incidents brought him many expressions of the Admiralty's appreciation. 
In 1939 Noble was promoted admiral, relinquished his command in July 1940, and in February 1941 was appointed commander-in-chief western approaches. It was this command which bore the responsibility for the war against German U-boats, which by that time had established a definite ascendancy in the Atlantic. Setting up his headquarters in Liverpool, Noble set about his task with his usual thoroughness. He realized that special training in anti-submarine warfare was the key to ultimate victory in this campaign, and although he was continuously hampered by a shortage of anti-submarine forces, he laid down the principles of training and also established the group organization of escort forces which was later to pay a high dividend in the Atlantic war. He himself went to sea and flew with Coastal Command so that the crews knew that he understood their problems and there were forged 'links of mutual confidence of inestimable value'. By the time he left the command, the British anti-submarine forces had reached a degree of organization and training which left his successor, Sir Max Horton, a firm and lasting foundation on which to wage successful warfare. 
On leaving Liverpool in the autumn of 1942 Noble was sent to Washington as head of the British Admiralty delegation. He saw the switch from the defensive to the offensive in the naval war, and much of the credit for the smooth co-operation both in planning and in operations between the British and American navies was owed to Noble for the qualities of firmness, tact, and sound sense which he brought to the deliberations of the combined chiefs of staff. For his services in Washington he was appointed GBE in 1944 and was made a commander of the American Legion of Merit in 1946. 
Noble was twice married: first, in 1907, to Diamantina Isabella (died 1909), daughter of Allan Campbell. Their son, Commander Sir Allan Noble, on retiring from the navy entered parliament and was minister of state for foreign affairs in 1956-9. In 1913 Noble married, secondly, Celia Emily (died 1967), daughter of Robert Kirkman Hodgson; they had a son. 
In 1943 Noble was appointed first and principal naval aide-de-camp to George VI. He retired from the navy on 16 January 1945 and was made rear-admiral of the United Kingdom. He received the grand cross of the royal order of St Olaf for his services to the Royal Norwegian Navy. He died at his home, 66 Ashley Gardens, London, on 25 July 1955. 
Peter Kemp', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35246


Nodal, John Howard (1831-1909), journalist and dialectologist, was born on 19 September 1831 in Downing Street, Ardwick, Manchester, the son of Aaron Nodal (1798-1855), a Quaker grocer and town councillor. He was a member of the Society of Friends and was educated at Ackworth School, Yorkshire (1841-5), a Quaker school. His first employment, aged seventeen, was as a clerk at the Electric Telegraph Company in Manchester, where he later became manager of the news department. From 1850 to 1853 he also acted as secretary of the Manchester Working Men's College. On 14 June 1859 he married Helen, daughter of Lawrence Wilkinson; the couple had two sons and three daughters. 
Nodal began early to contribute to the local press and he edited the 'Volunteer Journal' during the volunteer movement of 1860-62. His career as a full-time journalist began in January 1864, when he was appointed sub-editor of the daily 'Manchester Courier'. From 1867 to 1870 he occupied a similar position on the 'Manchester Examiner and Times' while also editing (1866-8) the 'Free Lance', a humorous and satirical Manchester weekly, and founding and editing (1868-71) 'The Sphinx', a weekly periodical of art and literature. In 1871 he became editor of the ailing 'Manchester City News', remaining there until 1904 and transforming it into a popular and financially successful journal. He was instrumental in moulding its policy and ideals, and it quickly came to reflect his wide-ranging interests not only in the public life of Manchester but also in local work on science, literature, and language. On the model of 'Notes and Queries', to which he was a regular contributor, Nodal established 'City News notes and queries' within the main newspaper. This developed into an independent periodical (8 vols., 1878-89) which he edited. 'Country Notes: a Journal of Natural History and Out-Door Observation' (2 vols., 1882-3), which he also edited, similarly originated in articles in the 'Manchester City News'. From 1875 to 1885 he was on the staff of the 'Saturday Review'. 
Nodal played a prominent role in the Manchester Literary Club, editing volumes 1 to 6 of its 'Papers' (1874-80) and serving as president (1873-9) and vice-president (1879-86). A founder member of the club's glossary committee (1872), which aimed to compile a Lancashire glossary, he published his 'Dialect and Archaisms of Lancashire' (1873) as part of its first report. Upon the relocation of the English Dialect Society from Cambridge to Manchester, he took over as honorary secretary (1876-94) from its founder, W. Skeat, with whom he worked on the 'Bibliographical List of... the Various Dialects of English' (vols. 1-3, 1873-7), editing the third volume (1877). He published (with George Milner) 'The New Glossary of the Lancashire Dialect' (pt 1, 'A-E', 1875), which was widely and favourably reviewed; part 2 appeared in 1882. Nodal was actively involved in the collection of local material for the 'English Dialect Dictionary' (6 vols., 1896-1905), edited by Joseph Wright. In 1878 he established the English Dialect Library in the Central Free Library in Manchester. He also played a major part in founding the Manchester Arts Club (1879). He published a variety of other works on local artistic, literary, and bibliographical matters, including 'Special Collections of Books in Lancashire and Cheshire' (1880) and 'The Bibliography, Biographical and Topographical, of Ackworth School' (1889). 
After his first wife's death Nodal married Edith, daughter of Edmund and Anne Robinson of Warrington, Lancashire. He died, aged seventy-eight, on 13 November 1909 at his home, The Grange, 6 Clifton Road, Heaton Moor, near Stockport, and was interred at the Society of Friends' burial-ground at Ashton upon Mersey, near Salford. 


@@@@@


doc= 35247


Buxton, Noel Edward Noel-, first Baron Noel-Buxton (1869-1948), politician, was born in London on 9 January 1869, the second son of Sir (Thomas) Fowell Buxton (1837-1915), third baronet and director of a brewery company, and his wife, Lady Victoria Buxton (1839-1916), daughter of the earl of Gainsborough. He grew up in the family house of Warlies in Essex, in a family of ten children. He was educated at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge (1886-9), where he gained a third in the historical tripos. In 1889 he went to work at the family brewery in Spitalfields, and became involved in social work in the area through the missions and the settlement movement. With his brother Charles Roden Buxton and his cousin Conrad Noel, he used to dress in old clothes and spend nights in 'common lodging-houses' to get closer to the poor (Anderson, 27). In 1901 he contributed to the volume of essays on the problems of city life, 'The Heart of the Empire', edited by C. F. G. Masterman. His social conscience and commitment to charitable work remained constant features in his life, and from 1919 onwards he directed part of his income to the achievement of 'social and economic progress' through a special trust administered by the family. Buxton's social work also developed into ambitions for public service. He became a member of the Whitechapel board of guardians in 1897, and stood unsuccessfully for the London county council. He was unsuccessful in his first parliamentary contest as a Liberal candidate in Ipswich in 1900, but was elected to parliament for Whitby at a by-election in 1905, only to be voted out again the following year in the general election. 
Buxton took a year's leave from his work at the brewery in 1892 to travel to Japan, and his encounters with Buddhism in the Far East inspired him to give up blood sports. Travel became an important influence on his life, and he published several books describing his experiences abroad. In 1896 he went to Australia to assist his father, who was then governor of South Australia. A visit to the Balkans in 1899 began a long-lasting fascination with that part of the world and a passion for the cause of oppressed minorities in the region. He helped to found the Balkan Committee in 1902, along with his brother Charles, Noel Brailsford, and James Bryce; he became its first chairman, and later (1907) its president. When the Turks suppressed a revolt in Macedonia in 1903, Buxton travelled with his sister Victoria to see conditions there for himself and to administer aid. 
In 1904 Buxton resigned his position as a director at the brewery and began to focus his attention on the eastern counties, taking an interest in the new wave of agricultural trade unionism and encouraging the development of smallholding on his family's Norfolk estate. He was elected Liberal MP for North Norfolk in January 1910, and while campaigning in the constituency he met his future wife, Lucy Edith Burn ['see 'Buxton, Lucy Edith Noel- (1888-1960)]; at the time she was canvassing on behalf of his political opponent. He lived first in the family properties of Runton Old Hall and then Colne Cottage, before purchasing Paycockes, a house at Coggeshall in Essex, which had been a home for the Buxton family in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. He restored the property to its original timbered appearance and presented the house to the National Trust in 1920. 
From 1911 onwards Buxton became increasingly vocal on foreign affairs, launching initiatives to defuse Anglo-German hostility, engaging in relief work in Bulgaria with his brother the Revd Harold Buxton during the hostilities of 1912, and taking up the cause of Armenia in 1913. On the outbreak of war in 1914 he and his brother Charles travelled to Bulgaria on a mission to secure the country's support for the allies or, failing that, its neutrality. Their diplomatic efforts were unsuccessful, but the brothers became local heroes in Bulgaria after they were wounded during a Turkish assassination attempt; a street in Sofia was named Brothers Buxton Street in tribute. 
Buxton married Lucy Burn on 30 April 1914 and they had six children: three girls and three boys. During the First World War he worked for the Admiralty, and promoted the Armenian cause on a visit to the United States in 1916. The entry of the US into the conflict seemed to spell an end to any hope of the negotiated peace which he had been promoting, and alongside this disillusionment he was also increasingly disenchanted with the Liberal Party and its leadership. He lost his North Norfolk seat at the 1918 general election, and in 1919 he joined the Labour Party, arguing that it represented what the Liberal Party should be doing but no longer did. He became a close friend and travelling companion of the Labour leader, Ramsay MacDonald. He was active in the party's committee on international questions, calling for the revision of the Versailles settlement and for economic reconstruction, and became treasurer of the Fight the Famine Council. 
In 1922 Buxton returned to the House of Commons, winning back his old seat of North Norfolk, this time under Labour colours. Although foreign affairs remained his main political interest, he agreed to take on the agricultural portfolio, which was of particular relevance to his rural constituency. He became minister of agriculture in the first Labour government in 1924. One of the few positive legislative achievements of that short-lived administration was the 'Agricultural Wages Act' which he piloted through parliament, securing the reinstitution of minimum wage legislation in agriculture. He returned as minister of agriculture in the Labour administration of 1929, but retired from the Commons on medical advice in June 1930. Despite his opposition to the principle of hereditary political power, he agreed to take the title Baron Noel-Buxton of Aylsham, Norfolk, on 17 June 1930, changing his surname to Noel-Buxton by deed poll. After he had taken his seat in the Lords, his wife briefly represented his old constituency of North Norfolk in the Commons. 
During the 1930s Noel-Buxton's energies were directed largely towards charitable work and campaigns on the international stage. He was president of the Save the Children Fund from 1930 to 1948, and chaired the Miners' Welfare Committee from 1931 to 1934. He agitated for the worldwide abolition of slavery, a cause to which he felt a special obligation as a continuation of the work of his ancestor Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, the 'Great Liberator'. He visited Abyssinia in 1932, on the invitation of its emperor, to advise on a programme for ending slavery in the country. He remained a critic of the Versailles settlement and was a committed advocate of the appeasement of Germany, arguing that Germany must be given a colonial role in Africa. Even during the Second World War he continued to promote the idea of a negotiated peace. In 1945 he stood down as president of the Balkan Committee, hoping that a younger and more energetic figure would take his place, but the position remained unfilled, and the organization itself collapsed soon afterwards. 
Among his papers Noel-Buxton left a list headed 'My lost causes', which included Armenia, Macedonia, and Germany. At the end of his life many of the ideals for which he had campaigned seemed to have been defeated. Although he sat as a Labour MP and later as a Labour peer, he remained a liberal in his social radicalism and his approach towards foreign policy. His manner was restrained and dignified, and colleagues recalled that they had never heard him raise his voice. He wore a beard to cover the scar on his face which was a lasting reminder of the assassination attempt in Bulgaria. He died in London on 12 September 1948, and was buried in the family graveyard at Upshire in Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35248


Norgate, Kate (1853-1935), historian, was born in St Pancras, London, on 8 December 1853, the only child of Frederick Norgate, bookseller, later a partner in the firm of Messrs Williams and Norgate, and his wife, Fanny, daughter of John Athow, stonemason and surveyor of the Norwich city pavements. Her grandfather Thomas Starling Norgate, a friend of William Taylor (1765-1836), gave her a link with the active literary group that throve in Norwich in the first half of the nineteenth century. When Norgate became the protegee of the historian John Richard Green, she was ready to use to the full the opportunities that he gave her. Green encouraged her to devote herself to a history of the Angevins. By 1877 she had already made some progress with her first book. Her mother is said to have accompanied her to the British Museum and to have sat by her in the reading-room. 'England under the Angevin Kings', in two volumes, was published in 1887, four years after Green's death. Its merits were recognized at once: E. A. Freeman wrote a long appreciation of it in the 'English Historical Review' (vol. 2, 1887). Norgate's mastery of the original sources showed critical skill and found expression in a clear narrative. If she was influenced by Green's strong preference for the chronicles and avoided unpublished material, including the generally uncatalogued manuscript sources in the Public Record Office, she did not share his deliberate indifference to records and used them assiduously in her later studies. Her work reveals her extensive knowledge and accurate rendition of the printed sources then available for a history of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. In addition, Norgate stressed the importance of topography and travelled extensively, especially in Anjou, in support of her work. Self-trained, yet scholarly in her approach to research, Norgate represented a transition point in the professionalization of women historians. 

'England under the Angevin Kings' carried her narrative to 1206. It was continued in 'John Lackland' (1902) and 'The Minority of Henry the Third' (1912). In 'Richard the Lion Heart' (1924) Norgate retraced her steps to follow the life of Richard I, as a hero of the Christian West. All three books are well-arranged, spirited narratives. At the time, they were the best available history of the Angevin empire, and were well received by contemporaries. They are still occasionally cited by scholars today. Steeped in the historical controversies of her day, Norgate joined with her friend Thomas Andrew Archer in a passionate defence of Freeman against the attacks of J. H. Round ('English Historical Review', 9, 1894). Of her critical studies, the most important are her defence of the authenticity of Adrian IV's bull 'Laudabiliter' ('English Historical Review', 8, 1893), and her consideration of the alleged condemnation of King John by the French court in 1202 ('Transactions of the Royal Historical Society', new ser., 14, 1900). Her work elicited critical attention from historians such as Round, another indication of the growing importance of women in the historical field. 
In these early years Norgate was very active: she contributed forty-four entries to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', collaborated with Alice Stopford Green in the preparation of the illustrated edition of Green's 'Short History of the English People' (1892-4), and worked on her next book in the society of learned friends such as William Hunt. Her historical contributions were later recognized by Somerville College, Oxford, which in 1929 elected her an honorary fellow. She died unmarried at her home, Jasmine Cottage, 2 Church Lane, Gorleston, Great Yarmouth, on 17 April 1935, and was fittingly described in her 'Times' obituary as the 'most learned woman historian of the pre-academic period' ('The Times', 6 May 1935). 


@@@@@


doc= 35249


Norman, Conolly (1853-1908), psychiatrist, was born on 12 March 1853 at All Saints' Glebe, Newtown Cunningham, co. Donegal, Ireland, the fifth of six sons of Hugh Norman, rector of All Saints', and his wife, Anne, daughter of Captain William Ball of Buncrana, co. Donegal. Several members of the Norman family served as mayor of Londonderry and two represented the city in parliament. Conolly Norman studied at Trinity College, Dublin, the Carmichael medical school, and the House of Industry hospitals. He received the licences of the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland and the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1874. Four years later he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons and in 1890 he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He worked at the Bethlem Hospital in London before returning to Ireland in 1882 to take up the post of medical superintendent at Castlebar Asylum, co. Mayo (1882-5) and then at Monaghan Asylum (1885-6). 
Norman was appointed medical superintendent of the largest psychiatric hospital in Ireland in 1886. This was the Richmond District Asylum in Dublin, later St Brendan's Hospital. At that time conditions within the asylum were very primitive and it was described as being more like a prison than a hospital. Norman was committed to reform and he strove consistently to introduce more humane practices. He also sought to incorporate a scientific approach in psychiatry. He published several papers in the 'Journal of Mental Science' and in the 'Transactions of the Royal Academy of Medicine of Ireland'. These papers included reports on the mental state in aphasia, an unusual case of brain tumour, an account of senile dementia, and medication trials. He also published in 'The Lancet' and the 'British Medical Journal' and was for very many years joint editor of the 'Journal of Mental Science'. 
In 1899 Norman reported an epidemic of beriberi in the Richmond Asylum in the 'Transactions of the Royal Academy of Medicine in Ireland'. Beriberi is a condition caused by a deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine), and it is found mainly in rice-eating communities where polished rice is the staple diet. Norman's description was the first account of the condition in a temperate climate in the Western world and within a short period it was followed by similar accounts from other institutions around the world, including one from the state asylum in Little Rock, Arkansas. Norman's subsequent reports referred to these epidemics as well as to an obscure earlier account of an outbreak of beriberi in northern Japan. The condition is still found in Western countries particularly in malnourished alcoholics. 
In the course of his regular visits to European centres of psychiatry Norman became aware of the tradition at Gheel, near Antwerp in Belgium, where the tradesmen and peasants cared for people with psychiatric disabilities in their own homes. Over 80 per cent of asylum patients were boarded out in this way at Gheel where they worked in the houses and fields. Norman became an advocate of this form of care which he claimed was more humane and which avoided the partial dementia which resulted from the institutionalization of patients. He also argued that it would be more cost effective. His efforts to introduce this enlightened approach in Dublin were frustrated by the authorities at the time. 
On 6 June 1882 Norman married Mary Emily (died 1933), daughter of Dr Randall Young Kenny of Killeshandra, co. Cavan. There were no children of the marriage. Norman had a deep interest in English literature and he was a keen student of French, German, and Italian. He was valued by his friends for his wisdom and integrity and for his humour. He collected art and old books and he was a practical botanist. In 1907 the honorary degree of MD was conferred on him by the University of Dublin. He died suddenly on 23 February 1908 while out walking in Dublin and was buried in the city's Mount Jerome cemetery. A memorial was erected by public subscription in the north aisle of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. It was unveiled by the lord lieutenant, the earl of Aberdeen, on St Luke's day, 18 October 1910. The Conolly Norman medal, presented annually to the best student in psychiatry in the final medical examinations in Trinity College, Dublin, commemorates his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 35250


Norman, Sir Francis Booth (1830-1901), army officer, was born on 25 April 1830 in London, the second son of James Norman (died 1853) (of Calcutta) and Charlotte (died 13 Sept 1902), eldest daughter of Henry Wylie; he was the younger brother of Sir Henry Wylie Norman. He attended Addiscombe College from 1846 to 1847, and obtained his commission in the 14th Bengal native infantry of the Bengal army on 8 December 1848. In 1852 he married Eliza Ellen, daughter of Lieutenant Nisbett, Bengal army, who died at Rawalpindi in 1870. 
On the mutiny of his regiment in 1857 Norman was attached to the Ferozepore Sikh regiment, and remained at Ferozepore during subsequent operations. In 1863 he took part in the second expedition against the Yusufzais at Ambela, and was present at the storming of the conical hill and the destruction of Laloo. He was mentioned in dispatches. In the three following years he was engaged during the Bhutan campaign in the capture of Dewangiri and of the stockades in the Gurgaon Pass, serving as assistant quartermaster-general and receiving a brevet majority. In 1868 he took part in the Hazara campaign as second in command of the 24th (Punjab) regiment. 
In the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-80) Norman commanded the 24th in the Bazar valley and the defence of Jagdalak, marching with Robert's force from Kabul to Kandahar and taking part in the battle of Kandahar. Mentioned in dispatches, he received a CB and brevet colonelcy. During the war with Burma in 1885-6 he commanded the Bengal brigade of the Upper Burma field force, assisting in the occupation of Mandalay and Bhamo. He was promoted KCB in 1886, attained the rank of major-general on 1 September 1889, and left India in 1891. He became lieutenant-general on 25 April 1892. 
In March 1892 Norman married Caroline Matilda, daughter of the Revd W. W. Cazalet and widow of Major E. F. J. Rennick, Bengal staff corps, who survived him. He died on 25 June 1901 at Dulwich and was buried in Norwood cemetery. He left three sons and three daughters; one of the latter, Edith, was the wife of Sir Louis W. Dane (1856-1946), lieutenant-governor of the Punjab. 


@@@@@


doc= 35251


Norman, Sir Henry Wylie (1826-1904), army officer and colonial governor, was born on 2 December 1826 in London, only son of James Norman, a businessman who had been at sea and at Havana, and Charlotte, 'nee' Wylie, of Dumfries. His father subsequently moved to Calcutta, where he died in 1853; his mother died at Sandgate, near Folkestone, on 13 September 1902. 
While his parents were overseas Norman was educated indifferently at three private schools in England, under the supervision of his maternal grandparents. He joined his father in Calcutta in 1842, where he worked as a clerk for eighteen months. In March 1844 he received a direct appointment to the Bengal army and joined the 1st Bengal native infantry as ensign in April 1844, transferring in March 1845 to the 31st Bengal native infantry. He served with his regiment in the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1846, becoming adjutant in 1847 and serving through the Second Anglo-Sikh War, being present at Ramnagar, Sadulapur, Chilianwala, and the final victory at Gujrat in February 1849. In 1849 he became brigade major to Sir Colin Campbell at Peshawar. He had already begun to create a reputation as an able, immensely hardworking staff officer, with a prodigious memory and a natural aptitude for work. He served in the 1850 Kohat Pass expedition under Sir Charles Napier and in expeditions against the Afridis, the Mohmands, and the Utman Khel, and was mentioned in dispatches in April 1852. He was made deputy assistant adjutant-general and aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir Abraham Roberts, commanding the Peshawar division, in 1853, where he became friendly with Sir Abraham's son, Frederick. Also in 1853 he married Selina Eliza Davidson, daughter of Dr Alexander Davidson, inspector of hospitals in India, and they had four daughters and a son, Henry Alexander, who died in 1858. In 1855 he rejoined his regiment in the suppression of the Santal uprising in Bihar, moving in May 1856 to the post of assistant adjutant-general at army headquarters in Calcutta and Simla. 
Norman was at Simla in May 1857 when news arrived of the Meerut mutiny and the mutineers' occupation of Delhi. Norman accompanied the force assembled for the siege of Delhi as assistant adjutant-general and became acting adjutant-general when Colonel Chester was killed at the battle of Badli-ki-sarai on 8 June 1857. He served throughout the siege and the recapture of the city at the end of September 1857, being superseded as adjutant-general to the force by Neville Chamberlain in June, but standing in again when Chamberlain was severely wounded in July 1857. He left Delhi with Greathead's column five days after the city fell and took part in the actions at Bulandshahr, Aligarh, and Agra before joining the new commander-in-chief, Colin Campbell, for the second relief of Lucknow, as deputy adjutant-general to the force. He took a direct part in the fighting at the Shah Najafmosque in November 1857, having his horse shot underneath him. He was present at the final capture of Lucknow in March 1858, and subsequently in the operations in Rohilkhand and the battle of Bareilly on 5 May, where he was wounded, and finally in the operations in Oudh in the winter of 1858-9. When the mutiny ended he had been mentioned in dispatches or general orders twenty-three times. He published 'A Narrative of the Campaign of the Delhi Army' (1858), and subsequently pamphlets and articles in reviews. 
Norman received a CB in August 1859 and was appointed to the new Bengal staff corps (which he had largely designed) in December 1860, when he also received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy. The mutiny had consolidated his reputation as one of the most able staff officers in India. 
In October 1860, after leave in England, Norman was appointed assistant military secretary to the commander-in-chief of the British army, the duke of Cambridge, a post which was effectively the link between the commander-in-chief and the authorities in India on all matters of personnel appointments. It was a post of high influence and responsibility, in view of the duke's keen interest in Indian army matters, and required tact and discretion. He held that post only until 1861, when he was sent back to India as secretary to the government in the military department to assist in the massive task of post-mutiny reorganization. It was a tribute to his abilities but also effectively the end of active soldiering, the rest of his career being in administrative posts. 
As a key figure in the reorganization, Norman attracted the wrath of the many vested interests affected, but he was rewarded by being made aide-de-camp to the queen in September 1863. His wife had died on 3 October 1862, and in September 1864 he married Jemima Anne (Minnie) Temple, the daughter of T. Knowles and widow of Captain A. B. Temple, but she died in 1865 at sea, 'en route' with her husband for leave in England. Throughout 1866 Norman was on sick leave in England, following a prolonged bout of fever, but he resumed his post in India in 1867 and was promoted major-general in March 1869. In March 1870 he married Alice Claudine Sandys, the daughter of Teignmouth Sandys, a Bengal civil servant. They had two sons and a daughter, and she survived her husband. 
In June 1870 Norman was promoted to the post of military member on the governor-general's council and head of the military department. He was a prominent supporter of the policy of 'masterly inactivity' associated with the governor-generalships of Lord Mayo and Lord Northbrook, of friendly relations with Russia, non-interference in Afghanistan, and retrenchment and reform in India. He was made a KCB in May 1873, but with the arrival of Lord Lytton as governor-general in 1876 Norman's views became out of tune with the 'forward policy' espoused by Lytton, Colley, Roberts, and others, and he resigned in March 1877, becoming a lieutenant-general shortly afterwards. In 1878 he joined the secretary of state for India's Council of India in London, playing a major part in the decision in 1881 to withdraw from Kandahar at the end of the Second Anglo-Afghan War. 
Norman's military career was over, his lack of recent service and command experience militating against him. He was promoted full general by seniority on 1 April 1882. Later that year he was employed in settling financial questions arising from the Indian contingent in Wolseley's Egyptian expedition. In November 1883 he resigned from the Council of India on taking up the governorship of Jamaica. He arrived to face a constitutional crisis over non-official representation on the governor's council. He brought with him new proposals which through his tact and discretion he succeeded in introducing without uproar, thus defusing the issue. By the time his tenure ended, he had become respected and popular. His reward was the GCMG and a military GCB in 1887. 
In 1889 Norman became governor of Queensland, succeeding Anthony Musgrave after Sir Henry Blake's nomination proved unacceptable there because of his Irish connections. Norman faced constitutional problems and financial difficulties. He defused the situation in his usual tactful and wise way, characteristically offering to accept a reduction in his own pay to assist in the financial crisis. He travelled much, was public-spirited and supported colonial rights, and was generally liked and respected. On issues such as the partition of Queensland and Australian federation he was cautious, but he was keenly in favour of the principle of imperial defence, although unable to do much because of Queensland's financial difficulties. His successful governorship ended in 1895, and he left Queensland in November for London, where he acted for a year as agent-general for the colony. 
In September 1893 Norman had been offered, and initially accepted, the governor-generalship of India, the highest post in the empire. It was a great tribute to his abilities and reputation, but within a few days he realized that the strain of such an arduous office would be too much for him at the age of nearly sixty-seven, and he withdrew; Lord Elgin was subsequently appointed. 
In 1896 Norman was appointed chairman of the royal commission on the economic conditions of the sugar-growing colonies in the West Indies. It enabled him to indulge his lifelong recreation of cruising, but his views on sugar duties were not shared by his fellow commissioners. 
In 1901 Norman accepted the pleasant post of governor of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, and was raised to field marshal in June 1902. He was vice-president of the Royal Geographical Society and of the Royal Colonial Institute, and director of the Commercial Union Assurance Company. His last public service was as a member of the royal commission on the war in South Africa. His health was already failing and he died at the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, on 26 October 1904, and was buried in the Brompton cemetery, London. Memorial tablets were installed at the Royal Hospital, in Calcutta, and in the crypt of St Paul's. 
Norman was slightly below medium height and slender. During the mutiny he had shown his personal courage, presence of mind, and coolness, and there is no reason to suppose that he could not have gone on to be a successful commander; but it was as a staff officer and administrator that he excelled -- lucid, penetrating, immensely industrious, holding his views firmly, but always modest, friendly, and tactful. He did not possess the charisma of a Roberts but he was the quiet man to whom others instinctively turned for wise counsel and to whom difficult problems could be presented with the expectation that they would be handled sensibly and without fuss -- the epitome of 'a safe pair of hands'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35252


Norman, Montagu Collet, Baron Norman (1871-1950), banker, was born on 6 September 1871 in Kensington, London, the eldest of the three children of Frederick Norman (1839-1916), barrister and banker, and Lina Susan Collet (1851-1950). He had a sister, and a brother, Ronald Norman (1873-1963), who became chairman of London county council (1918-19) and of the British Broadcasting Corporation (1935-9). Montagu Norman gained little stimulus from formal education: after four unhappy years at Eton College he spent only a year at King's College, Cambridge (1889-90). 
Norman's real education was obtained during the next twelve years. In 1890 he lodged in Dresden to improve his German, later travelling around central Europe before perfecting his French in Switzerland. His values, aspirations, and early career were shaped by membership of two dynasties of City merchants and bankers. His father became a partner in Martin's Bank. His maternal grandfather, Mark Collet, to whom he was particularly close, was senior London partner in the Anglo-American merchant bank Brown, Shipley & Co. and was also, like Norman's paternal grandfather George Warde Norman (1793-1882), a long-serving director of the Bank of England with much influence in defining its developing functions; he acted as its governor in 1887-9. Norman began work at his father's bank in 1892, moving two years later to his Collet grandfather's firm. In 1895 he was sent to complete his training with its partners, Brown Brothers of New York. Over the next four years he learned much about Anglo-American financial relationships and American commerce and industry, travelled to many parts of the United States, and acquired important friends -- knowledge and friendships renewed and expanded by frequent visits in later life. Norman's family traditions also included admiration for the army: he joined the 4th Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire militia in 1894, returned annually from the USA for its training camps, and was promoted captain. He served with distinction in the South African War in 1900-01, earning the DSO before being invalided home with persistent gastritis. Confidence in exercising leadership under stress had been added to an extensive financial apprenticeship. 
Appointed a Brown Shipley partner before he left for South Africa in 1900, on his return to England, Norman soon became its most energetic member. He revealed great skills in assessing financial propositions, expanded the area of the bank's acceptance business, and acquired a close understanding of the bill and exchange markets. His tenacious grasp of orthodox banking principles led, however, to disagreement with partners seeking to diversify the business in what he considered an unsound manner. This, together with an absorption which fostered overwork, aggravated nervous troubles he had suffered periodically since childhood and undermined his health. From 1911 to 1913 he was unable to work, and he suffered further distress when the Zurich psychiatrist Carl Jung bizarrely misdiagnosed his condition as general paralysis of the insane (a late consequence of syphilis), and he was given only months to live (Boyle, 90-95). 
During this period Norman drifted apart from his Brown Shipley partners, but the First World War presented alternative activities as adviser to various government departments on financial censorship and blockade, and especially at the Bank of England. As early as 1907 his qualities had been recognized by election to its court of directors; now, his American expertise was invaluable in the bank's tasks of war finance and exchange control. In December 1915 he finally retired from Brown Shipley and became assistant to the bank's deputy governor. He was soon appointed to its policy-making body, the committee of treasury, and was much involved in the sterling-dollar exchange crises of 1916-17 and the 1917 dispute over the powers of the governor, Walter Cunliffe. He was elected deputy governor in late 1917 and governor in 1920. 
Norman's governorship was frequently renewed, to become the longest in the Bank of England's history. It was also the most controversial, as the effort to cope with immense post-war difficulties increased the impact and public awareness of the bank's activities. He understood the extent to which the British economy depended not just on international trade and services but also on international systems of payment which the war had dislocated and which remained distorted by war debts and reparations. Consequently he believed that the re-creation of an international monetary system based on the pre-war gold standard and the revival of the international capital market would provide the necessary framework for industrial prosperity, high employment, and social progress, and should therefore take priority over other economic claims. Working closely with the League of Nations financial committee and European and American bankers, he was prominent in successive efforts to revise, and arrange the smooth transfer of, German reparations, which led to the Dawes plan of 1924 and the Young plan of 1929. In the early 1920s he also helped orchestrate, where necessary with the aid of Bank of England loans, the re-establishment of sound currencies and central banks in much of central Europe. This experience was later applied to the establishment of central banks in the dominions, and to advising upon recurrent problems of Indian finance. By the mid-1920s Norman was the accepted international authority on central banking practice. One of his leading principles was that monetary and banking matters should be conducted independently of governments, ever prone to sacrifice long-term interests to political pressures and national rivalries. This was also an important feature in domestic stabilization. Contrary to Bank of England advice, in 1919 the coalition government suspended the gold standard and thereby allowed wartime levels of inflation and public expenditure to continue. But after the brief but alarming post-war boom of 1919-20, the bank and Treasury were allowed to reimpose financial disciplines and to work towards restoring the gold standard, with its supposed 'automatic' mechanisms for economic adjustment under autonomous Bank of England supervision. Norman accompanied the chancellor of the exchequer, Stanley Baldwin, at the Washington negotiations in 1923 which arranged the funding of the British war debt to the United States and helped clear the way to stabilizing the pound against the dollar. Conservative ministers and Treasury officials finally sanctioned restoration of the gold standard at the pre-war parity in April 1925. 
This decision was famously criticized by J. M. Keynes, and as the British economy failed to recover significantly in the later 1920s a belief that sterling had been overvalued, unnecessarily imposing a damaging burden of high interest rates, became one of the propellants of the Keynesian revolution. Norman himself came to be regarded as bearing much of the responsibility for the inter-war mass unemployment, by putting the interests of the financial sector before those of manufacturing industry. He was sometimes represented as an archetype of the arrogance of irresponsible power, as not just misguided but dictatorial, reactionary, insensitive, and mysterious in ways linked to his supposed psychological instability. Later opening of the archives went some way towards qualifying such interpretations. For most of the 1920s the objectives of 'sound money' were supported by almost all political leaders, irrespective of party. Norman certainly dominated the bank, but he proceeded more collectively and upon wider advice and information than his predecessors. Always careful to consult his fellow directors, he implemented organizational reforms, creating a properly professional senior staff and from 1928 appointing expert economic, industrial, and foreign advisers; internal debate was encouraged, and he did not always prevail in the committee of treasury. Himself aware that the restored gold standard was not producing all the expected benefits, he presided over major innovations in practice and policy. Seeking to neutralize the effect of what were believed to be abnormal international money flows, he promoted close co-operation between the major central banks, building upon his already good relations with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. When, with Norman's support, the Bank for International Settlements was formed in 1930 under the Young plan, he hoped it would provide a forum for even closer co-ordination. In defending sterling, the Bank of England also devised techniques which minimized the use of high bank rate and credit restriction; by 1928 Norman was writing of 'a more or less managed Currency' (Clay, 310). As the manager of the now huge government debt and through informal control of capital issues, the bank's supervision of the money markets and financial institutions was greatly extended. Norman became the father confessor to the City, accumulating unrivalled knowledge of its many activities and offering advice which individuals and institutions generally thought it best to accept. From the late 1920s the difficulties of basic industries -- and a desire to forestall Labour Party demands for nationalization -- drew him into mobilizing the City to help finance industrial rationalization, creating the Securities Management Trust (1929) and the Bankers' Industrial Development Company (1930), which initiated and supervised large-scale restructuring in the cotton, engineering, iron and steel, and shipbuilding industries. Norman even tried to boost consumer demand, encouraging the development of institutions to finance hire purchase. Nevertheless, the attempt to reimpose the pre-war gold standard upon transformed post-war conditions proved to be mistaken, with Norman and the Treasury underestimating the financial nationalism of other central banks and overestimating the flexibility of British industry and wage-levels. 
Norman's influence owed something to an impressive presence. Tall, with a broad forehead and pointed beard, wearing his hat at a rakish angle, and seductively courteous, he reminded some of a Spanish grandee. His real power lay in tremendous grasp of complex detail, feel for the mood of the financial markets, and skilful deployment of his information and the authority of his office. Secretiveness -- characterized by his occasional use of 'Mr Skinner', his secretary's name -- seemed prudent to a man bearing so many secrets, and whose very movements might affect market behaviour. His understanding and powers of exposition should not be judged solely by a calamitous appearance before the (Macmillan) committee on finance and industry (1929-31), when defensiveness before his chief critics, Keynes's deployment of a newly minted theoretical model -- so alien to Norman's concrete and intuitive thinking -- and refusal to accept largely monetary explanations for unemployment, reduced him to monosyllables and silent gestures. Nor is it surprising that as governor he suffered one or two further nervous collapses: he bore great responsibilities and heavy workloads for a longer period than any other modern public figure. 
The burdens increased sharply from 1928, when the American stock market boom threatened the sterling exchange. The 1929 Wall Street crash and the growing effects of the world depression then disrupted the work of industrial rationalization, required rescues of important financial and commercial institutions, and destabilized the international monetary system. In early 1931 Norman sponsored an impressive plan for international reflation, but it met insurmountable American and French opposition. From May there were central European banking collapses, which he struggled to contain by arranging loans to Austria and standstill agreements on funds lent to Germany. But a European liquidity crisis had begun, which from mid-July focused upon London. Since late 1930 Norman had been aware of declining foreign confidence in sterling, and he warned Labour ministers of the damaging impression created by an unbalanced government budget. Now he undertook defensive measures in co-operation with the American and French central banks, while looking to the (May) report on national expenditure to persuade the British politicians to act. But in late July the strain broke his health, and during a long convalescent visit to Canada the emergency National Government was unable to keep sterling on the gold standard. 
The remarkable, but patchy, recovery of the British economy between 1932 and 1937, once free trade and the high interest rates required under the gold standard had been abandoned, helped to undermine public confidence in the orthodoxies which Norman had championed; and as the Treasury became partners in the conduct of monetary policy the Bank of England's traditional independence was reduced. But despite the collapse of much of Norman's earlier work, his knowledge and experience still seemed invaluable. He remained prominent in industrial restructuring and helped repair the damage to some City institutions and to central European finance. During 1932 the establishment of the Exchange Equalisation Account enabled the sterling exchanges to be stabilized, and the long-planned conversion of war loan brought cheap money. After the 1933 World Economic Conference failed to agree upon a new international monetary regime, Norman accepted the informal creation of a sterling area and encouraged negotiations which in 1936 produced the tripartite monetary agreement for co-operation with the Americans and French. As the European diplomatic crisis unfolded in the late 1930s, he was principally responsible for preparing the battery of controls which ensured that the outbreak of war did not bring the financial chaos experienced in 1914. From 1939 his advice helped prevent wartime inflation, and during 1943 he began organizing City support for post-war industrial reconstruction. But in early 1944 illness forced his retirement. A privy councillor since 1923, he now accepted a peerage (having declined one twenty years earlier), and became Baron Norman of St Clere. 
In 1933 Norman married Priscilla Cecilia Maria, 'nee' Reyntiens (1899-1991), the divorced wife of Alexander Koch Worsthorne. A London county councillor from 1925 to 1933, after Norman's death she became chairman of the National Association for Mental Health, and was made CBE in 1963. Her two sons -- Norman's stepsons -- were Simon Towneley (surname adopted by royal licence, 1955), appointed lord lieutenant of Lancashire in 1976, and Sir Peregrine Worsthorne, editor of the 'Sunday Telegraph' and writer. Norman himself had no children, and his peerage became extinct when, after a stroke, he died at his home, Thorpe Lodge, Campden Hill, London, on 4 February 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 35253


Normand, Wilfrid Guild, Baron Normand (1884-1962), judge, was born at Aberdour, Fife, on 16 May 1884, the youngest son of Patrick Hill Normand (1843-1910), linen merchant and manufacturer, and his wife, Ellen Prentice (died 1900). He followed four brothers to Fettes College, and in 1902 went on to Oriel College, Oxford, where he obtained a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1906; he then went to Paris University and, finally, to Edinburgh University, where he graduated LLB in 1910. So reserved and scholarly was Normand at this stage that few would have predicted for him exceptional success in high office. In 1910 he was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates, and quickly established a busy junior practice. On 22 July 1913 Normand married Gertrude, daughter of William Lawson, banker, of New York, they had a son and a daughter. 
Normand's legal career was interrupted by service as an officer in the Royal Engineers from 1915 to 1918. On his return to the Scottish bar after the war he developed a substantial practice, particularly in the shipping and commercial field, and took silk in 1925. As editor of the 'Juridical Review' in the early 1920s he contributed also to legal scholarship. His wife having died in 1923 he married, on 27 April 1927, Marion Bell Gilchrist (died 1972), daughter of David Cunningham, farmer, of Aberdour. 
In 1929 Normand was solicitor-general for Scotland for a few weeks, and he resumed that office after the general election of 1931, when he was elected Unionist member of parliament for West Edinburgh. His was the responsibility as solicitor-general to pilot through parliament the important 'Administration of Justice (Scotland) Act' of 1933, which still basically regulates procedure in the Court of Session. He was appointed lord advocate and sworn of the privy council in 1933, and in 1934 was elected an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple. He vacated his parliamentary seat in 1935, when he succeeded Lord Clyde as lord justice-general and lord president of the Court of Session. He presided in the highest courts in Scotland until 1947, when he was appointed a lord of appeal-in-ordinary, an office from which he retired in 1953 -- although he continued to sit from time to time thereafter both in House of Lords appeals and in the judicial committee of the privy council. In January 1947 he was created a life peer. 
Normand's high reputation as an appellate judge in London and Edinburgh is assured, and it was as such that he was happiest in his professional career. The administrative duties of lord president he did not find very congenial. Moreover he preferred dealing with legal principles rather than with the weaknesses and shortcomings of men and women. Thus as lord advocate he did not relish his responsibilities for criminal prosecutions, nor did he enjoy the earthier aspect of practice at the bar; his was a specialist rather than a general purposes practice. On the other hand he was keenly interested in the art of pleading, himself favouring clear, unemotional, and concise exposition. He often quoted the advice of a well-known dean of the Faculty of Advocates, Condie Sandeman: 'If you have thought of anything good to say the night before your speech, don't say it.' A typical example of Normand's style was 'Cantiere San Rocco, S.A. v. Clyde Shipbuilding and Engineering Co. Ltd.' (1923), a case of unjustified enrichment, where Normand was led by Sandeman. English authorities might have been fatal to this case and Normand therefore argued the appeal in the House of Lords on Scottish and Roman law authorities, translating the 'Digest' with successful effect. It was painful to Normand, but characteristic, that as lord advocate he refused to recommend his friend Sandeman for elevation to the bench after the latter had allowed his name to be used by a company, the administration of which had been criticized judicially in England. 
As a judge in the House of Lords, Normand employed his grasp of principles and his powers of reasoning to expound Scots law and English law with authority so as to influence substantially the course of foreseeable legal development. The House of Lords having since 1966 reclaimed its earlier freedom to depart from its own precedents, the quality of individual decisions rather than the fact that the House of Lords has spoken has greater importance. Normand fulfilled admirably the special responsibility of a Scottish lord of appeal in recognizing the areas in which Scottish and English solutions may or must be harmonized and areas in which divergences must be stressed. No legal nationalist, he was vigilant for the best interests of Scots law in a United Kingdom setting. Thus he accepted reluctantly (and with sympathy for the Court of Session, whom he overruled) the statutory anomaly that for fiscal purposes Scottish charities must conform to the requirements of a statute of the Tudor Elizabeth. On the other hand, in 'A.G. v. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover' (1957) judicially (but more vehemently extra-judicially) he deplored the attitude of the attorney-general, who was apparently prepared to accept that pre-union English statutes could confer British nationality while pre-union Scottish acts could not; the anomalous outcome was apparently that the prince became British in England only. 
Normand was distinguished in appearance and bearing, and had a fine head of white hair to the end. Throughout his life he was recognizably a Scot in speech and outlook. Although he might on first impression seem reserved and austere he could be most courteous and charming in public and in private, and warmed in scholarly circles. During his six years' sojourn in London he was always happy to return home to Scotland, and it was there that he spent nearly a decade in retirement. These years enabled him to pursue those many scholarly interests that he had always maintained. He was an active trustee of the National Library of Scotland from its foundation in 1925 until his death, and in 1950-53 was a trustee of the British Museum. He was active as chairman of the trustees of the Scottish Museum of Antiquities and of the Carnegie Trust for the Scottish Universities. He served in the capacity of president of the Classical Association of Scotland, of the International Law Association, of the Stair Society, and of the Scottish Universities Law Institute -- which he conceived to revive contemporary Scottish legal literature. His scholarship did not lack official recognition: he was an honorary LLD of Edinburgh, and an honorary fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, and of University College, London, which he served as chairman of its college committee during the era of post-war reconstruction. Somewhat fastidious in extrovert society, he enjoyed the company of scholars old and young. At his death he was working with Dr J. C. Corson, of Edinburgh University, on notes to the legal references in the works of Sir Walter Scott; these are deposited in the National Library of Scotland. He died in Edinburgh on 5 October 1962. 
T. B. Smith', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35254


North, Sir Dudley Burton Napier (1881-1961), naval officer, was born at Great Yarmouth on 25 November 1881, the fourth of the five sons of Colonel Roger North of the Royal Artillery and adjutant in the 1st Norfolk artillery volunteers, and his wife, Fanny Ellen, the daughter of Stephen Beeching, of Tunbridge Wells. He entered the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet in 1896 and then served in cruisers, destroyers, and battleships as a midshipman. He became sub-lieutenant in 1902 and lieutenant in 1903. 
In the battle cruiser 'New Zealand' North took part in the battle of Heligoland (1914). As commander, and in the same vessel, from 31 December 1914 he took part in the battles of the Dogger Bank (1915) and Jutland (1916). After a short period of shore service in the Admiralty, where he was naval assistant to Captain Lionel Halsey, he returned to sea in the battle cruiser 'Australia'. Promoted captain and appointed CMG in 1919, he embarked on a series of world tours by various members of the royal family as naval equerry. In 1919 he was also appointed MVO, in 1920 CVO, and in 1922 CSI. In 1922-4 he commanded C class cruisers before taking another royal tour with the prince of Wales in 1925. 
North was then successful in various important posts as captain, being flag captain in the flagship of the Atlantic Fleet in 1926-7, and subsequently flag captain and chief of staff in the Reserve Fleet. In 1930 he became director of operations at the Admiralty, being promoted to rear-admiral in 1932. He then became chief of staff to Admiral Sir John Kelly, the commander-in-chief, Home Fleet. There his tact and courtesy combined well with the unconventional attitude of Kelly, who was determined to make the fleet forget the Invergordon rising of 1931. In 1934 North was appointed to the command of the royal yachts at Portsmouth, a post for which he was well qualified after his experiences as equerry and his friendship with the royal family, whom he accompanied to Canada in 1939. When war came in September 1939, North, CB since 1935, a vice-admiral since 1936, and KCVO since 1937, had been too long out of touch with the fleet to be appointed to a sea-going command. Instead, he was made flag officer commanding the north Atlantic station and admiral superintendent at Gibraltar, taking up his post in November 1939. He was promoted to admiral in May 1940. The bombardment of Oran, by the British fleet under Admiral Sir James Somerville on 3 July 1940, distressed him considerably. He wrote an official letter to the Admiralty in which he criticized the operation and explained how repugnant it had been to all who took part. The letter was ill-received and the first lord, A. V. Alexander proposed that he should be relieved, but Sir Dudley Pound, the first sea lord, did not agree that the case was strong enough, whereupon a sharp reprimand was sent instead. This was the start of a lack of confidence in North by the Admiralty which was to have serious consequences. 
In September 1940 occurred the incident of the French squadron passing the Strait of Gibraltar and steaming on to Dakar where it played a part in repelling the attack of the Franco-British force, an operation of which North was aware unofficially. He had received previous intelligence reports of the French movements, but expected instructions from the Admiralty which were not sent, owing to mistakes in the handling of signals. In the event, he took no action to stop the French and this was regarded by the Admiralty as an unforgivable lack of initiative. The first sea lord proposed, and the first lord agreed, that he should be relieved, and this was done on 31 December 1940, despite North's violent protests and demands for an inquiry. On arrival in London in mid-January, North saw Pound, the first sea lord, but the interview, and subsequent letters, achieved no inquiry. North joined the Home Guard and in 1942 was appointed flag officer, Yarmouth, as a retired rear-admiral. 
In appearance North was of medium height and stocky, with a cheerful round face which usually had a twinkle. He married, in 1909, Eglantine, daughter of William R. Campbell of Sydney, New South Wales. She died in 1917 and he married, in 1923, Eilean Flora, daughter of Edward Graham JP of Charminster, Dorset. There were a son and three daughters of the second marriage. 
After the war North was still convinced that he had been treated unjustly, and so apparently was George VI, who appointed him admiral commanding royal yachts, a post which lasted a year only because economies were made. North became GCVO in 1947. The post-war years saw a succession of efforts, some by North personally, some by others, to secure an inquiry. The Admiralty was criticized in several books and articles and North again wrote to Whitehall. In 1953 five admirals of the fleet took up the case with the first lord, J. P. L. Thomas, but without result. In 1954 the publication of the official history appeared to clear North, and a bitter argument took place in the House of Commons, in which the first lord emphasized the loss of confidence in North by the Admiralty board and refused to act. A fiery debate also took place in the House of Lords. Whereas it cannot be disputed that the Admiralty could relieve any officer in whom confidence had been lost, the method used was clumsy and the subsequent handling bungled. 
When Lord Mountbatten of Burma, who had been a friend of North's for many years, became first sea lord in 1955, he at once investigated the affair and came to the conclusion that an inquiry would serve no purpose. However, in 1957 the publication of a book by Noel Monks, strongly criticizing the Admiralty, revived the matter yet again, and another debate took place in the Commons. Mountbatten, Lord Selkirk, the new first lord, and Harold Macmillan, the prime minister, spent many hours considering the documents and also met the five admirals of the fleet. The prime minister then produced a carefully balanced statement in which he stressed that North's honour and professional integrity had not been impugned but refused an inquiry into such a well-documented incident. The public generally were satisfied that the statement ended the affair with a vindication of North's honour. North himself was not so content. He died on 15 May 1961 at Herrison House, Dorchester, Dorset, a sad and bitter man. He was survived by his second wife. 
Peter Gretton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35255


North, John Dudley (1893-1968), aircraft designer, was born at 18 Kinver Road North, Peak Hill, Sydenham, on 2 January 1893, the only child of Dudley North, solicitor, and his wife, Marian Felgate. He was educated at Bedford School where he learned the elements of the mathematics which he applied so skilfully until the end of his days. After leaving school he became an apprentice in marine engineering. While still an apprentice he won two competitions in 'The Aeroplane', edited at that time by Charles Grey. It was through Grey's advice that his apprenticeship was transferred to Horatio Barber's Aeronautical Syndicate at Hendon, and when that venture ended he joined the Grahame-White company. He was still only nineteen when he became its chief engineer. Between 1912 and 1915 he designed and supervised the construction of a number of aeroplanes, one of which was the first British aeroplane to loop the loop. The best-remembered product of this period of extraordinary precocity was the Grahame-White Charabanc which in 1913, piloted by Louis Noel, took nine passengers, including the youthful designer, into the air. 
In 1915, North joined the Austin motor company as superintendent of its aeroplane division. In this post he was responsible not for design but for constructing the large numbers of RE7 and RE8 aircraft which the company produced for the Royal Flying Corps. At the end of 1917 he joined Boulton and Paul Ltd, of Norwich. As a consequence of the aircraft production work it had taken up during the war the company had decided to start a design department, and North was put in charge. 
The first machine North designed was the Bobolink, a fighter. It was followed by the Bourges, a bomber-reconnaissance aircraft of attractive design and remarkable performance. This aeroplane, of which there were several versions, was the first of a series of high-performance bombers. It was followed by the Bolton and the Bugle and, in 1927, by probably the most famous of North's aeroplanes, the Sidestrand. Towards the end of the 1920s there followed two single-seater fighters, the Partridge, which was a single-engine biplane and the Bittern, a twin-engine monoplane with a number of original features. The Air Ministry appeared to decide, however, that the forte of Boulton and Paul, and its successor (1934) in the aircraft field, Boulton Paul Aircraft Ltd, was the bomber, and the next selected for service was the Overstrand. Towards the end of the series came the remarkable turret-fighter, the Defiant, which was used in the early days of the Second World War and aided the Dunkirk evacuation. The last aircraft production run, which came after the war ended, was on the Balliol, an advanced trainer for the Royal Air Force and Fleet Air Arm. Thereafter the only aircraft of note were the delta research aircraft P111 and P120, the first to use Boulton Paul power controls. Few designers have to their credit a more remarkable series of aircraft, a testimony to North's outstanding fertility in invention and skill in engineering. 
North was one of the first to move away from the wood and fabric of the First World War to the tubular and monocoque constructions of the later years. He was always close to the latest development in metal and plastic materials. His particular genius for design in metal was given an excellent opportunity in 1924 when Boulton and Paul became intimately associated with the design and construction of the R101 airship. Its sad fate should not be allowed to obscure the ingenuity of its structure. The overall design of the skeleton was the work of the Royal Airship Works, but the design of the individual girders, in some parts of the ship a matter of most complicated three-dimensional geometry, was the work of North and his team. 
An outstanding characteristic of North's last bombers was their gun-turrets. As Boulton and Paul became famous for making powered turrets for a variety of aircraft, its work moved progressively away from complete aircraft to the increasingly complex parts thereof. In his last phase as a designer North concentrated more on powered controls -- including those of Concorde -- and on other powered devices within and without the aeronautical field. 
It was North's ideas on control which led to his deep interest in control mathematics and cybernetics. He developed a wide-ranging knowledge of operational research, ergonomics, and statistics, on which he published several profound and imaginative scientific papers. North was a member of the council of the Society of British Aircraft Constructors from 1931 to 1962. It was as the society's nominee that he joined the council of the Air Registration Board and the governing body of the College of Aeronautics at Cranfield, on both of which he worked with characteristic dedication. 
As engineer, as designer, and as applied mathematician, North was a great professional. As horticulturalist, gastronome, and cook, he was a great amateur, yet equal in skill to many professionals. He was an honorary fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society and in 1967 he became an honorary DSc of the University of Birmingham. In 1962 he was appointed CBE. Although he seemed indifferent to fame and his course was determined only by logic, he did not scorn recognition and when he was honoured he was greatly pleased. When his years of service to the Air Registration Board were appreciated by a modest presentation he was deeply touched. Perhaps, in his great modesty, he never felt neglected, but to those who knew him best he stood out as a person of distinction whose merit in his lifetime was comprehended by too few. This may have been because his integrity was complete and in things which mattered he could not compromise. North was a tall, heavily built man, bespectacled from youth. His voice was deep, his manner deliberate. On first meeting he could be a little frightening, but it was usually not long before his humour and kindliness came through. 
North married in 1922 Phyllis Margaret, daughter of Edward Huggins, clerk to the Norwich board of guardians. They had two daughters. He died at his home, Eversley, in Oldbury, Bridgnorth, Shropshire, on 11 January 1968. 
Kings Norton', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35256


Northcote, Henry Stafford, Baron Northcote (1846-1911), colonial governor, born on 18 November 1846 at 13 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London, was the second son of Stafford Henry Northcote, first earl of Iddesleigh (1818-1887); his mother was Cecilia Frances (1823-1910), daughter of Thomas Farrer and sister of Thomas Farrer, first Lord Farrer. He went to Eton College in 1858 and to Merton College, Oxford, in 1865, graduating BA in 1869 and proceeding MA in 1873. After leaving Oxford he was appointed to a clerkship in the Foreign Office on 18 March 1868. 
In February 1871 Northcote was attached to the joint high commission, of which his father was one of the members and which sat at Washington from February to May 1871, to consider the ''Alabama' claims' and other outstanding questions between Great Britain and the United States. He became secretary to the British member of the claims commission consequent on the treaty of Washington of May 1871, and assistant to the British claims agent in the general business of the commission. The commission sat at Washington from September 1871 to September 1873. In November 1876 Northcote became an acting third secretary in the diplomatic service. When Lord Salisbury went as British plenipotentiary to the Constantinople conference at the end of 1876, Northcote accompanied him as private secretary. In February 1877 he was made assistant private secretary to his father, who was then chancellor of the exchequer, and he was private secretary from October 1877 to 15 March 1880. In 1880 he retired from the diplomatic service and was elected tory MP for Exeter, his family's city. He held the seat until 1899. 
From June 1885 to February 1886, during Lord Salisbury's short first government, Northcote was financial secretary to the War Office. In Lord Salisbury's second government he held the post of surveyor-general of the ordnance from August 1886 to December 1887, when he resigned his appointment in order to facilitate changes at the War Office. He had been created CB in 1880, and on 23 November 1887, after his father's death, he was made a baronet. He was a charity commissioner in 1891-2, and in 1898 was appointed a royal commissioner for the Paris Exhibition of 1900. He was also for a time chairman of the associated chambers of commerce, and became well known and much trusted in business circles. In 1899 he was appointed to be governor of Bombay, and in January 1900 he was raised to the peerage with the title of Baron Northcote of Exeter, next month being made GCIE. 
On 17 February 1900 Lord Northcote landed at Bombay, where he served as governor for three and a half years. His tenure of office was marked by 'a famine of unprecedented severity, incessant plague, an empty exchequer, and bad business years generally' ('Times of India', 5 Sept 1903). Famine did not completely disappear until 1902-3, and plague was still rife when Northcote left India. He began an energetic programme of reform, and especially land reform, and his 'Bombay Land Revenue Code Amendment Act' (intended to protect small cultivators from moneylenders by wiping out arrears) proved highly controversial. He took other steps in the direction of land revenue reform, doing much to bring the somewhat rigid traditional policy of the Bombay government into harmony with the views of the government of India. In municipal matters, too, he made improvements, although the most important municipal act passed in his time -- the 'District Municipalities Act', by which local self-government in the 'mofussil', the rural hinterland, was much enlarged -- was a legacy from his predecessor Lord Sandhurst. Northcote travelled widely through the Bombay presidency, and he also visited Aden. He was a strong supporter of schools and hospitals, but his efforts were hampered by the impoverished state of the public finances. 'So far as he was able, Lord Northcote drew on his privy purse for money which the state should have furnished, and especially in the administration of relief and in the assistance of charitable undertakings was he able to take a more personally active part than any of his predecessors' ('Bombay Gazette Budget', 29 Aug 1903). He was present in 1903 at the coronation durbar which celebrated the accession of King Edward VII. When he left India on 5 September 1903 the viceroy, Lord Curzon, expressed the general feeling in the message 'Bombay and India are losing one of the most sympathetic and sagacious governors that they have known'. 
On 29 August 1903 Northcote had been appointed governor-general of the commonwealth of Australia. On 21 January 1904, when he was made a GCMG, he was sworn in at Sydney, and he remained in Australia for nearly four years and eight months. Northcote's task in Australia was no easy one. The commonwealth had come into existence on 1 January 1901, and Northcote had had two predecessors (lords Hopetoun and Tennyson) in three years. He was thus the first to hold his office for an appreciable length of time, and it fell largely to him to establish the position of governor-general, and to create traditions. He worked well with Alfred Deakin, and much better than he expected with the Labor leader J. C. Watson. 
In Australia, as in India, he travelled widely. He was determined, as the head of a self-governing commonwealth, to identify himself with the inhabitants of every part of Australia. During his term of office he travelled through the greater part of every state; visited most county towns, every mining centre, and the great pastoral and agricultural districts; and succeeded in obtaining a grasp of the industrial work and life of the people. He travelled an average of over 10,000 miles a year by land and sea. Particularly important was his tour of the Northern Territory, which called public attention to this little-known and somewhat neglected part of the continent. In Sydney and Melbourne he visited every factory of importance, while in social life, and through his support for institutions and movements for the public good, he won respect and affection. He laid stress on the importance of defence and of encouraging immigration for the development of the land. He was a vigorous governor-general, delaying royal assent to the 'Arbitration Act' in 1904 and controversially supervising federal and state honours ('AusDB'). His personal wealth enabled him to entertain generously and his popularity was enhanced by his amiable and clever wife, Alice, the adopted daughter of George, Baron Mount Stephen, whom he had married on 2 October 1873. 
Northcote returned from Australia in 1908. In 1909 he was sworn of the privy council and at the coronation of King George V he carried the banner of Australia. He was a strong defender of the privileges of the Lords in 1911. He died childless at Eastwell Park, Ashford, Kent, on 29 September 1911, and was buried at Upton Pynes, near Exeter. His wife died in London on 1 June 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 35257


Northcote, James Spencer (1821-1907), college head and historian, born at Feniton Court, near Honiton, Devon, on 26 May 1821, was the second son in the family of two sons and four daughters of George Barons Northcote (1796-1875), landowner, of Feniton Court and his wife, Maria (died 1836), daughter and coheir of Gabriel Stone of South Brent, Somerset. Educated at Ilmington grammar school (1830-37), he entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in 1837, was awarded a scholarship, and graduated BA in 1841 with a first class in the classical school. While at Oxford he came under the influence of J. H. Newman and E. B. Pusey. On 10 December 1842 he married his cousin Susannah Spencer Poole (died 1853), the daughter of Joseph Ruscombe Poole, solicitor, of Bridgwater, Somerset. Having been ordained deacon at Exeter Cathedral on Trinity Sunday 1844, he served as a supernumerary curate at Ilfracombe, but his doubts about the Anglican position steadily increased. 
In 1845 Northcote's wife, with three of her sisters, joined the Church of Rome. After resigning his curacy, Northcote himself followed her example and was received at Prior Park, Bath, on 7 January 1846. The move caused a lasting rift with his father. He set out his position in 'The Fourfold Difficulty of Anglicanism', published in 1846. A French translation by Jules Gondon appeared the next year. From 1847 to 1850 he resided at Rome and there developed a close friendship with G. B. De Rossi, the historian of the catacombs -- a subject which he now made his lifetime study. His stay at Rome coincided with the first years of the pontificate of Pius IX, and he witnessed the dramatic events attending the assassination of the papal prime minister and the pope's flight to Gaeta. 
Northcote spent the years 1850-53 at Clifton, devoting himself to literary work. From June 1852 to September 1854 he was acting editor of 'The Rambler', to which he had been a contributor since its inception by his friend John Moore Capes in January 1848. Following the death of his wife on 3 June 1853 he began studies for the priesthood, first at the Birmingham Oratory (1854) and then at the Collegio Pio in Rome (1854-5). Having been ordained priest on 29 July 1855 at St Dominic's Convent, Stone, Staffordshire, he was in charge of the mission at Stoke-on-Trent until his appointment in January 1860 as vice-president of St Mary's College, Oscott, near Birmingham. He became president the following July. 
Northcote's seventeen-year presidency came to be regarded as the golden age of the college. He modernized the studies and the regime in line with the principles established by Thomas Arnold, and Oscott gained the status of the leading Catholic public school, attended by the sprigs of the aristocracy. During his later years in office, however, Northcote had to contend with competition from the Oratory School, Birmingham, and with two severe epidemics, one of which led to the death in 1867 of his only surviving son, then a pupil at the college. In February 1865 he was involved in a highly publicized court case which came before the lord chief justice, Sir Alexander Cockburn, at the queen's bench. The case revealed some tension at the college between the fee-paying students and the clerical students, supported by charity, who went on to study divinity. David Fitzgerald, the son of an Irish appeal judge, was expelled by Northcote for leading a campaign of derision against the church students, as being 'of inferior extraction', and took an action against him for technical assault. The plaintiff was awarded damages of only $5 but Northcote had to pay costs of $800 -- a sum which was raised by his supporters. Another of the many Irish pupils at the college was the future novelist George Moore, who in his memoirs recalled Northcote, unflatteringly, as 'a great-bellied, big, ugly fellow, whom we used to call the Gorilla. He was almost as hairy, great tufts starting out of his ears and out of his nostrils' (Moore, 421-2). 
Northcote retired through ill health in 1877, and twelve years later the college at Oscott was converted to exclusive use as an ecclesiastical seminary. He was parish priest at Stone from 1877 to 1881, and of Stoke-on-Trent from 1881 to 1887, when creeping paralysis forced his retirement from active work. He died at the presbytery in Stoke on 3 March 1907 and was buried at Oscott cemetery. His three sons and three daughters all predeceased him. The only one who survived into adulthood became a Dominican nun at Stone. 
Northcote's most lasting literary legacy was his work on the Roman catacombs, first adumbrated in articles for 'The Rambler' (January and July 1860). His most substantial scholarly publication, 'Roma sotteranea, or, An Account of the Roman Catacombs' (1869), based on G. B. De Rossi's 'Roma sotteranea', was revised for a much expanded edition in 1879, which took account of De Rossi's important later work. De Rossi himself contributed a preface in which he praised Northcote for having 'remodelled' his own work to produce 'a new and partly an original book'. Northcote also published some popular guides to the catacombs as well as other devotional and controversial volumes. He was awarded the degree of DD by Pope Pius IX in January 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 35258


Norton, Edward Felix (1884-1954), army officer and mountaineer, was born on 21 February 1884 at San Isidro, Argentina, the second son of Edward Norton, a director of the Royal Mail and Union Castle shipping lines, and his wife, Edith Sarah, the daughter of Sir Alfred Wills, judge of the Queen's Bench Division. His father established the Estancia la Ventura on wild pampas some 300 miles south of Buenos Aires, but Norton was taken back to England as an infant. He was educated at Charterhouse School and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and was commissioned in 1902. In 1907 he was posted to Meerut, India, first with the Royal Field Artillery, then from 1910 with the Royal Horse Artillery. During this period he was aide-de-camp to the viceroy. 
In 1914 Norton went to France, where he served throughout the First World War, some of the time as staff officer, Royal Artillery, to the Canadian corps and from 1917 as commander of D battery, Royal Horse Artillery. He was three times mentioned in dispatches, was appointed to the DSO, and was awarded the MC. After the war he commanded D battery in India and later served on the staff at Chanak at a time when British relations with the Turks called for much diplomacy and tact. On 18 December 1925 he married (Isabel) Joyce, the daughter of William Pasteur CB CMG, a physician, with whom he had three sons. Having attended the Staff College and later the Imperial Defence College, he returned to India as senior instructor at the Staff College at Quetta (1929-32). He then became commander, Royal Artillery, to the 1st division at Aldershot, and subsequently brigadier-general staff to the Aldershot command. In 1937 he was appointed aide-de-camp to King George VI, in 1938 he commanded the Madras district, and in 1939 he was appointed CB. 
As acting governor and commander-in-chief, Hong Kong (1940-41), Norton took a firm lead in bringing the inadequate air-raid shelter system up to scratch, so saving many lives when Japan invaded a few months later. While there he was severely injured in a riding accident, from which he never fully recovered. It forced his retirement in 1942, at which time he was holding command of the western independent district in India. He was granted the honorary rank of lieutenant-general. After returning to England he became commander of the north Hampshire sector of the Home Guard (1942-4); when the Home Guard was disbanded he went on to serve as Hampshire's county Army Cadet Force commandant (1944-8). In 1947 he was appointed colonel commandant of the Royal Horse Artillery. 
Norton began alpine climbing at the Eagle's Nest above Sixt, in the Haute-Savoie, a chalet built by his grandfather Sir Alfred Wills, who was founder and third president of the Alpine Club. There, with his brother, Norton stalked chamois over ground which was so bad that even the local men kept off it. During his long service abroad he climbed wherever the opportunity offered, and in 1922 he was selected for the second British Mount Everest expedition. With George Leigh Mallory and (Theodore) Howard Somervell he reached the then record height of 26,985 feet. They were the first to pass the critical level of 8000 metres, and this without supplementary oxygen. In 1924, when the leader, Charles Granville Bruce, was taken ill, Norton took charge of the difficult third Everest expedition. After many crushing setbacks, and hazards owing to blizzards and ferocious winds, Norton led the first serious summit attempt. Again he climbed without oxygen, an aid for which he had little respect. At 28,000 feet his companion, Somervell, was stopped by severe throat trouble and Norton continued alone to a height of 28,126 feet. He reached the great couloir on the north face, which later became popularly known as Norton's couloir. This, too, was an altitude record, and it was fifty-four years before anyone climbed higher without oxygen. Another summit bid was undertaken a few days later by Mallory and Andrew Comyn Irvine, from which neither man returned. Norton handled this tragedy and the publicity it engendered with impeccable dignity, and his dispatches from Mount Everest after the loss are among the most lucid and moving examples of mountain writing. He also wrote the greater part of the official expedition book, 'The Fight for Everest, 1924'. 
In 1922 Norton was elected to the Alpine Club, of which in later years he twice refused the presidency on health grounds; he was a founder member of the Himalayan Club and an original member of the Mountain Club of India. In common with other members of the 1922 Everest expedition, he was awarded an Olympic silver-gilt medal (the prix d'Alpinisme, presented at the 1924 winter Olympics), and in 1926 he received the founder's medal of the Royal Geographical Society. In 1953 he was consulted by Brigadier John Hunt, who led the first successful Everest expedition and who was always quick to acknowledge Norton's useful strategic advice. 
Tall and athletic in figure, Norton was a fine horseman, a keen shot, and an enthusiastic fisherman. His service years offered him plenty of scope for adventurous sports, but he was interested, too, in natural history, and on his trips to Everest made collections of birds and flowers for the British Museum (Natural History). He was a skilled draughtsman and watercolourist, with a preference for painting landscapes, several of which have been reproduced in the Everest literature. He also had a talent for quick and often witty sketches of his companions. A man of many interests, he was widely read, well informed, and a charming companion. Integrity was the essence of his character. He was a born leader and, in the army, popular with all ranks; he understood and got on well with Indians and with the Gurkhas, Sherpas, and Bhotias on Everest. Norton died at his home, Morestead Grove, Morestead, Winchester, on 3 November 1954, survived by his wife, Joyce. 


@@@@@


doc= 35259


Norton, John (1823-1904), architect, was born on 28 September 1823 at Bristol, the son of John Norton and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Russell. In 1846, after attending Bristol grammar school, he became a pupil in the London office of Benjamin Ferrey; he also attended the classes of Professor Thomas Leverton Donaldson at the University of London, where he won a first prize in 1848. In 1857 he married Helen Mary, the only daughter of Peter Le Neve Aldous Arnold; they had eight daughters and two sons. 
Norton became an associate of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1850 and a fellow in 1857; he was for a time a member of its council, and became president of the Architectural Association for the 1858-9 session. He was honorary secretary of the Arundel Society (which produced printed copies of paintings by old masters) throughout its existence (1848-98) and a council member of the Artists' General Benevolent Institution. 
Norton was for some time in partnership with Philip Edward Masey and quickly built up a large and lucrative architectural practice which handled both domestic and ecclesiastical commissions. He worked for a number of wealthy patrons, including the maharaja Duleep Singh (for whom he built Elveden Hall, Suffolk, 1863-70), William Gibbs (who commissioned the rebuilding of Tyntesfield, Somerset), and Alexander Acland-Hood, first Baron St Audries (for whom he designed a house and church at St Audries in Somerset in 'c'.1856). His other principal works were: Badgemore, Oxfordshire, for Richard Ovey; Ferney Hall, Shropshire (after 1856), for W. Hurt-Sitwell; Horstead Hall, Norfolk, for Sir E. Birkbeck; Nutfield Priory, Surrey (1858-9), for H. E. Gurney; Monkhams, Essex, for H. Ford Barclay; Euston Hall, Suffolk, for the duke of Grafton; public works and buildings of the new boulevard, Florence; International College, Isleworth; the Winter Gardens at Great Yarmouth and Tynemouth; Langland Bay Hotel, south Wales; South Western Terminus Hotel, Southampton (1872); Fickle Castle, Estonia; Framlingham Hall, Norfolk; Brent Knoll, Somerset (1862-4); Summers Place, Sussex (now an outpost of Sothebys); Chew Magna Manor House, Somerset (1864); the town hall and constitutional club, Neath; and a training college for the diocese of Gloucester and Bristol. He also won the Bombay public markets competition. 
Among Norton's London commissions were the Turf Club, Piccadilly; the Submarine Telegraph Company's office, Throgmorton Avenue; the Canada government buildings and Victoria Mansions, Westminster; as well as mansions in Mandeville Place and several hotels, business premises, and residential flats elsewhere in London. 
Norton did not work exclusively in Gothic, though this was the norm for his church designs, the most important of which was Christ Church in Finchley (1870). His other church commissions included those at Stapleton, Stoke Bishop, and Frampton Cotterell in Gloucestershire; St Matthew's, Brighton, Sussex; St John's, Middlesbrough, Yorkshire; those at Bourton, High Bridge, and Congresbury in Somerset; and St Luke's, St Matthias, Emmanuel (Clifton), and the parish church of Bedminster in Bristol. He designed a number of churches in Wales and Monmouthshire, including those at Pontypridd and Llwynmadog. He was responsible for the church on Lundy island and others at Powerscourt, Wicklow; Chevington, near Howick, Northumberland; Bagneres de Bigorre in the French Pyrenees; and Bishop Hannington's Memorial Church, Frere Town, Kenya. 
Norton acted as architect to the Crystal Palace Company, for the Ascot Land Company, and for several London clubs. He was also responsible for the Church Missionary Society children's home at Limpsfield and the Royal Normal College for the Blind at Norwood, Surrey; the county courts at Williton, Dunster, and Long Ashton in Somerset; and the High Cross at Bristol. He died at Casalini, his home in Bournemouth, on 10 November 1904, and was buried there. He was survived by his wife. His son Charles Harrold Norton (1867-1942) succeeded him in his practice. 


@@@@@


doc= 35260


Griffiths, Sir John Norton-, first baronet (1871-1930), public works contractor, was born on 13 July 1871, at Williton, Somerset, son of John Griffiths (1825-1891), builder, and his wife, Juliet Avery (1831-1926). He was educated at Colet Court, Kensington, and Latymer School, Edmonton. At fifteen he was articled to an architect but soon enlisted in the army as a trooper after lying about his age. During the 1890s he worked in southern Africa as a sheep farmer, beachcomber, barman, captain in the British South African police in Mashonaland, scout in the Matabele (Ndebele) campaign, and collector of mining claims in Rhodesia. He re-enlisted during the South African War and was captain of Lord Roberts's bodyguard. 
In 1901 Griffiths married Gwladys (1873-1974), daughter of Thomas Wood, engineer; they had two sons and two daughters. He was selected in 1905 to build the Benguela railway connecting the Angolan coast with Belgian Congo mining districts and the Rhodesian copperbelt. Despite the suspension of this work in 1908 Griffiths obtained the backing of a syndicate led by Lord Howard de Walden to form the firm of Griffiths & Co. In 1909 Griffiths and this syndicate contracted to build a northern extension to the Chilean Longitudinal Railway. For five years he spent half his time in Chile superintending the work. Life there was rough: on average two peons were murdered weekly on his work gangs. Griffiths had the strength of a prize-fighter and the temperament of a guerrilla leader. He made a private cult of triumphing over adversity by sheer will-power and this resulted in his eventual nemesis. 
Before 1914 Griffiths built sewers in London and Manchester, and constructed a 105 mile aqueduct through the Caucasus to supply the oil industry at Baku. In 1911 he formed a Canadian subsidiary, but his backers were alarmed by his escalating costs in Chile and Russia, and refused to finance an Australian railway contract signed by him in 1913. Howard de Walden resigned in October 1914 as chairman of the Griffiths company, which was wound up in March 1915 with heavy losses. Griffiths had secured his own financial position, but henceforth met difficulties in raising capital. 
A regiment of irregulars, the 2nd King Edward's Horse, was raised by Griffiths in August 1914. Next year, under the aegis of the Royal Engineers, using methods evolved by his sewer workmen, he organized tunnelling companies which endured hideous conditions to reach the German lines, under which they planted deadly mines. Most notably they buried 933,300 pounds of explosive under Messines Ridge; when these were detonated on 7 June 1917 Lloyd George heard the explosion in Downing Street. Griffiths was abominated by fellow officers for his flamboyance, which included motoring about Flanders in a 2 ton Rolls-Royce loaded with champagne, but was awarded the DSO and temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel (1916). In November 1916 he was sent to Romania to destroy vital materials which the Germans might seize. He mustered a small force, and within six days exploded 200 square miles of oilfields causing damage valued at $50 million. He also burned or flooded hundreds of thousands of tons of grain. On becoming KCB in 1917 he assumed the surname of Norton-Griffiths. 
In January 1910 Griffiths was elected Conservative MP for Wednesbury (which he represented until 1918). He defeated a partner of his business rival Weetman Pearson, afterwards Viscount Cowdray; simultaneously Worthington Evans, Griffiths's intimate business friend, defeated Pearson at Colchester. Griffiths's patriotism was violent and vulgar -- admirers nicknamed him 'Empire Jack'. He and Evans were ultra-Imperialist 'insufferable bores', Sir Maurice Hankey noted in 1917, Griffiths 'a clever man in a technical sense, but stupid, unpractical and visionary in his ideas' (Roskill, 423). Norton-Griffiths was elected anti-coalition Unionist MP for Wandsworth in 1918 and held this seat until 1924. His public meetings were often rowdy, and he was fined for striking a heckler. He received a baronetcy in 1922 and implored Baldwin for a barony in 1929: 'I'm always fighting Yanks, Italians, Germans etc and a Peerage would 'materially' influence foreign business for the benefit of British Trade... Cowdray helped his party, but his party helped him to do so. Why if one has played the game for 20 years shouldn't a good old Conservative get an equal chance to a Liberal?... I am the only British firm -- or all but -- trying to keep the flag flying in S America... I can play the game and of course I should do much more if I am helped in this manner. (Norton-Griffiths to Baldwin, n.d. [1929], Baldwin MS 164)' J. Norton-Griffiths Ltd in 1921 contracted to reconstruct the harbour at Luanda, but when work was suspended in 1925, it was suspected 'that operations were being deliberately held up and difficulties intentionally created so as to provoke a breach of contract' by the Angolan government 'so to give the firm an opportunity of claiming damages' (dispatch 14 of A. B. Hutcheon, 17 March 1925, TNA: PRO FO 371/11091). Among other works in the 1920s Norton-Griffiths built the underground railway from Charing Cross to Kennington, but lost money on the contract. He was deeply distrusted in the City and by government departments. Like many bullies he was a poor judge of character. His desperation increased as he became discredited: by 1928 he was involved with dubious associates, or pursuing over-elaborate schemes with no object 'except that... our old friend 'Empire Jack' will make a few thousand pounds to buy a new Rolls Royce' (Joseph Addison to Sir Michael Palairet, 10 Aug 1928, TNA: PRO FO 371/13275). 
In 1929 Norton-Griffiths contracted to heighten the Aswan Dam, but his costings were hopelessly awry. Facing ruin, he could not maintain his bluster any longer and on 27 September 1930 paddled out in a surf boat at the coastal resort of San Stefano near Alexandria and shot himself. His embalmed corpse was returned to England. 


@@@@@


doc= 35261


Norway, Nevil Shute (1899-1960), novelist and aeronautical engineer, was born in Ealing, London, on 17 January 1899, the younger son of Arthur Hamilton Norway CB (1859-1938), who became an assistant secretary at the General Post Office and wrote erudite travel books, and his wife, Mary Louisa Gadsden (died 1932). At the age of eleven Norway played truant from his first preparatory school in Hammersmith, spending inquisitive days among the model aircraft at the Science Museum. On being detected in these precocious studies he was sent to the Dragon School, Oxford, and thence to Shrewsbury School. His brother, Fred, was killed in action in 1915. Norway was on holiday in Dublin, where his father was then secretary to the Post Office in Ireland, at the time of the Easter rising of 1916 and acted as a stretcher-bearer, winning commendation for gallant conduct. He passed into the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, with the aim of being commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps; but a bad stammer led to his being failed at his final medical examination, and he returned to civil life. In August 1918 he enlisted in the Suffolk regiment as a private and was posted on the Isle of Grain. 
In 1919 Norway went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he took third-class honours in engineering science in 1922 and rowed in the college second eight. During the vacations he worked, unpaid, for the Aircraft Manufacturing Company at Hendon, then for Geoffrey de Havilland's own firm, which he joined as an employee on coming down from Oxford. He fulfilled his thwarted wartime ambition of learning to fly in 1923 and gained experience as a test observer by 1924. During the evenings he wrote novels and short stories, unperturbed by publishers' rejection slips. He wrote under his forenames only, as he felt authorship would compromise his reputation as a serious engineer. His first book, 'Marazan', was published in 1926. 
In 1924 Norway took the post of chief calculator to the Airship Guarantee Company, a subsidiary of Vickers Ltd, to work on the construction of the R100. In 1929 he became deputy chief engineer under Barnes Wallis and in the following year he flew to and from Canada in the R100. He had a passionate belief in the future of airships but his hopes foundered in the crash of its government rival, the R101, wrecked with the loss of Lord Thomson, the minister of aviation, and most of those on board. He had watched with mounting horror what he regarded as the criminal inefficiency with which the R101 was constructed. His experience in this phase of his career left a lasting bitterness; it bred in him an almost pathological distrust of politicians and civil servants. 
In 1931 Norway married Frances Mary Heaton, a doctor. They had two daughters. It was in the same year that, having recognized that airship development was a lost cause, he founded Airspeed Ltd, aeroplane constructors, in an old garage; he remained the company's joint managing director until 1938. The pioneering atmosphere of aircraft construction in those years suited his temperament. He revelled in individual enterprise and doing things by improvisation on a financial shoestring. When the business grew and was becoming one of humdrum routine, producing aircraft to government orders, he decided to get out of the rut and live by writing. He had by 1938 enjoyed some success as a novelist and had sold the film rights of 'Lonely Road' (1932) and 'Ruined City' (1938). 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Norway joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as a sub-lieutenant in the miscellaneous weapons department. Rising to lieutenant-commander in 1941, he found experimenting with secret weapons a job after his own heart. But his growing celebrity as a writer caused him to be in the Normandy landings on 6 June 1944, for the Ministry of Information, and to be sent to Burma as a correspondent in 1945. Soon after demobilization in 1945 he emigrated to Australia and made his home in Langwarrin, Victoria. High taxation and what he felt to be the decadence of Britain, with the spirit of personal independence and freedom dying, led him to leave the old country. 
As a writer Norway had an unaffectedly popular touch which made his books best-sellers throughout the Commonwealth and the United States; his success lay in his skill in combining loving familiarity with technicalities and a straightforward sense of human relationships and values. He conveyed to readers his own zest for making aircraft and flying them, and he sympathetically portrayed the hazards and rewards that were the lot of back-room boys. His briskly moving plots were superior to his characterizations, and he retained to the last the outlook of a decent, average public-school boy of his generation. Although he lived into the James Bond era he never made concessions to the fast-growing appetite in the mass-fiction market for sadism and violence. 

'No Highway' (1948), dealing with the drama of structural fatigue in aircraft, set in human terms of those responsible for a competitive passenger service, gave full scope to both sides of Norway's talent. Machines and men and women share in shaping the drama. 'A Town Like Alice' (1950), describing the grim odyssey of white women and children in Japanese-occupied Malaya, captured cinema audiences in 1958 as completely as it had the reading public. This novel was also produced as a television serial in 1981. 'Round the Bend' (1951) was thought by Norway himself to be his most enduring book. It told of an aircraft engineer of mixed Eastern and Western stock who taught his men to worship God through work conscientiously and prayerfully performed and came to be regarded as divine by people of many creeds. 'On the Beach' (1957) expressed Norway's sensitive appreciation of the frightful possibilities of global nuclear warfare and annihilation by radioactive dust. It was very popular and was filmed in 1959. Other novels, several of them also filmed, were 'What Happened to the Corbetts' (1939), 'An Old Captivity' (1940), 'Landfall' (1940), 'Pied Piper' (1942), 'Pastoral' (1944), 'In the Wet' (1953), and 'Requiem for a Wren' (1955). 
In 'Slide Rule' (1954), subtitled 'The Autobiography of an Engineer', Norway told, candidly and racily, of his life up to 1938, when he left the aircraft industry. His stammer, which was as much a stimulus as a handicap, did not prevent him from being good company, and he was always welcome at the social gatherings of his many friends. An enthusiastic yachtsman and fisherman as well as an air pilot, he delighted in outdoor life, and his gaiety was not dimmed by the heart attacks from which he suffered. He died in Melbourne on 12 January 1960. 


@@@@@


doc= 35262


Norwood, Sir Cyril (1875-1956), educationist, was born in Whalley, Lancashire, on 15 September 1875, the only child of the Revd Samuel Norwood and his second wife, Elizabeth Emma Sparkes. His father was head of the local grammar school at Whalley, but when this closed in 1880 the family moved to Leytonstone in Essex. Home life was marred by Samuel's drink problem; this experience left a lasting impression on Cyril, who was always deeply reserved and later became a teetotaller. He managed to support himself and his mother through his own efforts at school and university. In 1888 he entered the leading day school Merchant Taylors', in London, where he showed ability especially in classics and cricket, and became head monitor in 1893. He won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, and gained firsts in classical moderations (1896) and 'literae humaniores' (1898). One of his classics tutors described him as being 'among the most eminent Oxford students of his day' (A. T. Barton, letter of reference, 1 April 1902, Norwood MSS). In 1899 he headed the list for entry to the civil service by a considerable margin, and was the only candidate in his year who attained more than half marks in every subject. 
Norwood entered the secretary's department of the Admiralty in October 1899 but he left in January 1901 to take up a teaching post at Leeds grammar school. Despite the shortness of his stay at the Admiralty, he was already highly regarded there, as he apparently showed a 'very considerable aptitude for administrative work', as well as 'a power of concentration and a sanity of judgment which, if he had remained in His Majesty's service would certainly have marked him out for promotion to the highest rank' (letter of reference, 2 Feb 1905, Norwood MSS). Later in 1901 he married Catherine Margaret Kilner, daughter of Walter John Kilner, medical practitioner, of Kensington. They were married for fifty years until her death in 1951, and had three daughters. 
At Leeds, Norwood found his vocation as a teacher. He became sixth-form classics master and took an active part in sports, especially cricket. In 1906, at the age of thirty, he was appointed headmaster of Bristol grammar school, which was experiencing major difficulties in forging a new identity and role for itself following the 'Education Act' of 1902. During the following decade, under Norwood's headship, pupil numbers trebled, the facilities and grounds were extended, and a boarding-house was created. In 1907 he was commissioned as captain of the Territorial Force, and he commanded a company in the 4th battalion of the Gloucestershire regiment. In recognition of his achievement the University of Bristol awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1912. 
In 1916 Norwood was appointed master of Marlborough College in Wiltshire, a traditional boys' boarding-school. In many respects this marked an important departure in his educational career, which had hitherto been spent at day schools in large cities, and his lack of boarding-school experience was the subject of criticism. He encouraged Marlborough to develop a relationship with the expanding educational agencies of the state and to make use of the opportunities offered by new developments such as the school certificate and higher school certificate examinations, while being careful at the same time to emphasize 'the building of character and the training for citizenship which at Marlborough must be the first considerations' (application for headship, April 1916, Norwood MSS). During his headship Marlborough enjoyed considerable academic success. By this time he had also become a national figure, and he was invited in December 1917 to become a member of the new Secondary Schools Examinations Council (SSEC), which had been created by the Board of Education. Board officials were worried that Norwood might be 'too engrossed with his reforms at Marlborough which are said to be extensive', but the president of the board, H. A. L. Fisher, insisted on Norwood, who struck him as being 'the most interesting Head Master I have yet met' (TNA: PRO, ED.12/246). Norwood became chairman of the SSEC in 1921 and was to continue in this role for a quarter of a century until his retirement (encouraged by a less sympathetic minister of education, Ellen Wilkinson) in 1946. 
In 1926 Norwood cemented his reputation by accepting the headship of Harrow School, having been urged to take up the appointment by Randall Davidson, the archbishop of Canterbury and chairman of the Harrow governors. There his characteristic reforms to raise standards of work and discipline met with sterner resistance on the part of some staff and students, and his period there was not altogether successful or happy. Masters who resisted his authority were gradually removed. Nevertheless, his position did allow him a platform from which to seek influence in public debate about education. He had always been active in putting across his views, writing regularly on education for a wide range of newspapers and journals. In 1909 he had jointly edited (with Arthur H. Hope) a book entitled 'The Higher Education of Boys in England'. In 1929, while head of Harrow, he produced his major published work, 'The English Tradition of Education'. This celebrated the tradition of the boys' independent schools, which he regarded as being based on the historical ideals of knighthood, chivalry, and the English gentleman. He emphasized in particular the importance of discipline, the chapel, culture, athletics, and the ideal of service in promoting the training of character, public spirit, and leadership. This was a strongly conservative message, especially in the case of girls, who he insisted should be educated in a different way from boys. At the same time Norwood was anxious to spread the benefits of the 'English tradition' to pupils in state secondary education, and with this in view he also advocated radical reforms in the curriculum and examinations of secondary schools. His book attracted widespread and largely admiring notices from, among others, C. W. Valentine and Michael Sadler. 
In the 1930s Norwood's educational influence was extensive. He took a leading role in international conferences, for example in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, most notably under the auspices of the New Education Fellowship. He inspired the personal loyalty of many of his colleagues and followers such as Thorold Coade, who became headmaster of Bryanston School in Dorset in 1932, and Ronald Gurner, who held headships at boys' day schools. A distinguished and tall man with a piercing gaze, Norwood was a commanding presence at the pulpit, in the school, or in the committee room, although he was often reserved in company and tended to appear remote. An Anglican layman, he was devout in his theologically undogmatic Christianity, which he saw as fundamental to education, and was active in the Modern Churchmen's Union, of which he was president. He was no less resolute in his admiration for the ideals of Plato, which formed the grounds for so much of his hierarchical ideals as well as for his notion of citizenship. 
Norwood left Harrow in 1934 to become president of his old Oxford college, St John's, and was knighted in 1938. His long and distinguished public career culminated during the Second World War in his central involvement in the major educational debates that led to the 'Education Act' of 1944. He was a staunch defender of the public schools at this time, when they were at their most vulnerable and most unpopular, but he also made enemies from among the public schools themselves by proposing that they should forge a new accommodation with the state. Even more controversial was his role as chairman of a committee established in 1941 to consider the secondary school curriculum and examinations. The Norwood report, as it became known, reported in July 1943, soon after the major white paper 'Educational Reconstruction'. At first, this attracted less attention than the white paper, but its argument and ideals, clearly stemming in large part from Norwood himself, soon became highly contentious. Part one of the report identified 'three kinds of mind', and proposed that these should comprise the basis for three different kinds of secondary school -- grammar, technical, and modern -- in a new era of 'secondary education for all'. This report was far from alone in its Platonic ideals, and in its rejection of multilateral (comprehensive) schools, but it was later held responsible by many critics for the failures of the so-called 'tripartite system' that developed after the Second World War. The Norwood report also fell foul of established educational interests because of its call for the abolition of the school certificate examination in its existing form. 
After his retirement to Iwerne Minster in 1946 Norwood faded from the scene, although he maintained a role in the Allied Schools, a group of schools of religious outlook founded after 1920, including Stowe and Canford, which sought to embody the tradition of the English public schools. He died in the Warneford Hospital, Oxford, on 13 March 1956 having, as the 'Times Educational Supplement' (16 March 1956) expressed it, 'outlived his fame'. His ideas appeared outdated and even irrelevant for the future of education. In the end he was regarded as too radical and unsound for the public schools, but too traditional and conservative for state secondary education in a more socially mobile, if not egalitarian, age. In the inter-war years, however, he had been among the foremost educators of his time, of conservative stamp but with the passion of a reformer. He was a successful and highly regarded scholar and headmaster. He was also among the most influential educational thinkers of the period, alongside such figures as R. H. Tawney and Fred Clarke in his public impact. He was surely unique in his capacity to operate successfully within the closed worlds of both the Board of Education and the public schools, across the contested frontiers of private and state education. 


@@@@@


doc= 35263


Novello, Clara Anastasia (1818-1908), singer, was born on 10 June 1818 at 240 Oxford Street, London, the fourth daughter of the music publisher Vincent Novello (1781-1861) and his wife, Mary Sabilla Hehl (1789-1854). Clara revealed musical talent at an early age. Her first official music lessons were at York with John Robinson, organist of the Catholic chapel in the city, where her brother (Joseph) Alfred Novello was already serving as an apprentice. On advice from Francois-Joseph Fetis, she was placed in the prestigious singing class of Alexandre Choron, at the Institution Royale de Musique Classique et Religieuse in Paris. During this period she also made the acquaintance of Rossini, who was impressed with the talents of the young soprano and frequently requested her to perform his music in later years. 
With the political climate in France in upheaval, Clara Novello returned to England in 1830 and made her public debut on 22 October 1832 at a benefit concert at the Theatre Royal, Windsor. By 1833 she had regular public engagements, notably at the Three Choirs festival (Worcester, 1833) and at the Philharmonic Society concerts. Other important performances from early in her career included those at Birmingham in 1837, of Mendelssohn's 'St Paul' for the opening of the town hall, and, again for Mendelssohn, in Leipzig at the Gewandhaus concerts. There followed an extensive and successful tour of European cities, among them Berlin, Vienna, Dresden, and Weimar. 
In 1838 Clara went to Milan to study operatic technique with the cavaliere de Micheroux; she made her Italian opera debut in Padua on 6 July 1841 in Rossini's 'Semiramide'. Rossini also selected her to perform in the Italian premiere of his 'Stabat mater'. During her engagement in 1842 to sing in the Italian city of Fermo, she met Count Giovanni Baptista Gigliucci, whom she married in London on 22 November 1843. 
Following the custom of the time, after her marriage Clara put aside her career to live with the count in Italy, where she raised a family and assisted her husband in the fight for Italian independence. The couple had four children: Giovanni (1844-1906), Porzia (1845-1938), Mario (1847-1937), and Valeria (1849-1945). During the uprisings of 1848, however, the count lost his property and Clara willingly returned to the stage and resumed her professional life. Although she continued to sing sacred works, in this second half of her career she focused more frequently than before on the opera repertory, especially when singing on the continent, and her performances included 'Semiramide' and 'Robert le diable', as well as 'Rigoletto' at La Scala. 
Clara Novello's career in England, however, was based largely on her performances of oratorio, which continued its general popularity over opera. She appeared at large choral festivals, including, again, the Three Choirs festival and the reopening of the Crystal Palace in 1854. She also sang before Queen Victoria in 1852 and on various other occasions. Writing in her diary on 13 May 1852, Queen Victoria noted, 'Madame Clara Novello, a native artist, has a very powerful, fine and clear voice and sings extremely well.' In comparison with other British sopranos of her day, she maintained a strong following and a long-lasting popularity, and was especially loved for her performances of oratorio. 
Although still popular, in 1860 Clara felt it time to close her career and withdraw from public performance; her final appearance was on 21 November 1860, at St James's Hall, London. The concert included selections from oratorio as well as opera and boasted an orchestra and choir of 250 performers. Clara and her husband retired to Rome and Fermo; Count Gigliucci died on 29 March 1893 and Clara died on 12 March 1908 at Rome. 
Clara Novello's singing was considered agile, and contemporary accounts remarked on its fluidity and perfection. Writing to her brother Joseph Alfred Novello, Mendelssohn noted after the performance of 'Messiah' in Leipzig in 1837, 'she possesses just those two qualities of which the public is particularly fond here, purity of intonation and a thoroughbred musical feeling' (Mackenzie-Grieve, 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 35264


Novello, Ivor (1893-1951), composer, actor, and playwright, was born on 15 January 1893 at Llywn yr Eos (Nightingales' Grove), 95 Cowbridge Road, Cardiff, the only son of David Davies (1852?-1931), a rent collector for Cardiff council, and his wife, Clara Novello Davies (1861-1943), a singing teacher and choral conductor. His parents had married on 31 October 1883 at Salem Chapel in Cardiff, and the independently minded Clara had increasingly developed a reputation as a singing teacher and choral conductor. Six months after Ivor's birth she took her Welsh Ladies' Choir to the Columbian Exposition in Chicago; they won first prize in the women's choral competition and then embarked on a tour of America. Following a royal command performance at Osborne for Queen Victoria, the choir was given the royal appellation. It subsequently toured further, and in 1899 won prizes at the Paris Exhibition. Clara established a teaching practice in London at 13 George Street, Hanover Square, and also taught at her London home (143 Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale), where Ivor became acquainted with leading performers of the day, including members of George Edwardes's Gaiety Girls and such friends of his mother as Dame Clara Butt, Adelina Patti, and Landon Ronald. After private education in Cardiff and Gloucester, where he studied harmony and counterpoint with the cathedral organist, Dr Herbert Brewer, he gained a scholarship to Magdalen College School, Oxford, where for three of his five years he was a solo treble in Magdalen College choir. He later attributed his fondness for the composers of the Romantic era, particularly Wagner, to a reaction against this exposure as a boy to early sacred choral music. 
Visits to the Gaiety and Daly's theatres in London led the young man towards early vocal compositions: his waltz 'Spring of the Year' was featured on a programme given by his mother's choir at the Albert Hall, but it was only with 'The Little Damozel' (1910) that he attracted any attention. He spent some time in Cardiff teaching the piano, but moved permanently to London in 1913 and took a flat at 11 Aldwych, which became his London residence for the rest of his life. There he fell under the patronage of Sir Edward Marsh, who encouraged his composition and also facilitated his career through practical introductions. Davies began to use the name Ivor Novello professionally and formally changed his name by deed poll in 1927. 
Novello did not escape entirely from the First World War: in 1914 he achieved one of his greatest songwriting successes with 'Till the boys come home' ('Keep the home fires burning'), to words by the American poet, Lena Guilbert Ford. It was not until June 1916 that he reported to Crystal Palace training depot as a probationary flight sub-lieutenant, but after crashing twice, and through the influence of Marsh, he was moved to the Air Ministry office in the Hotel Cecil. He continued his musical theatre writing and had his first major success with 'Theodore & Co.' (Gaiety Theatre, 14 September 1916), a production by George Grossmith and Edward Laurillard that had a score written jointly by Novello and Jerome Kern. Novello then contributed to Andre Charlot's revue 'See-Saw' (14 December 1916) and another production by Grossmith and Laurillard, the musical comedy 'Arlette' (6 September 1917). In 1917 he was introduced through Marsh to the actor Robert (Bobbie) Andrews (1895-1976), and the two became lovers and lifelong companions. Further shows raised Novello's profile even further, with the musical comedies 'Who's Hooper?' by Fred Thompson (13 September 1919; a joint score with Howard Talbot) and 'The Golden Moth' by Thompson and P. G. Wodehouse (5 October 1921), and with his continuing association with Charlot through the revues 'Tabs' (15 May 1918), 'A to Z' (21 October 1921; including 'And her mother came too', with the lyricist Dion Titheradge), and 'Puppets' (2 January 1924). 
Despite his inexperience, Novello was offered a silent-film role in 'The Call of the Blood' (1920) by the French film director Louis Mercanton, who employed him as a romantic lead on the strength of a publicity photograph. Through this, over the next decade Novello embarked on a successful film career and was also prompted to develop his stage ability. His next film, 'Miarka' (1920) was also for Mercanton, and in 1921 he appeared on stage in an amateur performance of E. G. E. Bulwer Lytton's 1850 play 'Not as Bad as We Seem'. He made his professional stage debut in a straight play as a Young Man in 'Deburau' (Ambassadors Theatre, 1921), in which the role of Charles Deburau was played by Bobbie Andrews. Novello made his first English film, 'Carnival', in 1921, and his first film in America, 'The White Rose' (1923), for D. W. Griffiths. Clara Novello Davies had also enjoyed a continuing reputation, and after the First World War she built up a teaching practice in New York, where her pupils included many of the singers from the shows of Florenz Ziegfeld and Charles Dillingham, among them Dorothy Dixon (at that time a dancer rather than a singer) and the leading soprano Mary Ellis, both of whom were later to star in Novello's London musical romances. 
Novello's increasing prominence as a silent film star did not prevent his development of stage material, and in 1924 he produced and starred in the successful play 'The Rat' (Prince of Wales's Theatre, 9 June 1924). Credited to the pseudonymous David L'Estrange, it was written by Novello with his friend the actress Constance Collier. Most importantly, the film of 'The Rat' (1925) was a major success and led to a sequel, 'The Triumph of the Rat', in 1926; a further sequel, 'Return of the Rat', was produced in 1928. Novello starred in further films, notably in Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Lodger' (1926), which Hitchcock credited as being the first film in his own style. A contract with the Gainsborough Film Company in 1927 led to his making 'The Constant Nymph' in the Austrian Tyrol in the autumn of that year and in addition enabled him to purchase Munro Lodge, Littlewick Green, near Maidenhead. He renamed the property Redroofs, and it remained his main residence outside London for the rest of his life. In 1928 he appeared in the silent adaptation of Noel Coward's 'The Vortex' and made his last silent film, 'A South Sea Bubble'. 
Novello returned to the musical stage with the revue 'The House that Jack Built' (Adelphi Theatre, 8 November 1929), to which he contributed eight items to a score that also included music by Vivian Ellis, Arthur Schwartz, and Sydney Baynes. Although Novello had retained some musical theatre compositional presence with a few song contributions to shows, since 'Puppets' he had been involved primarily with the straight theatre, acting in Ferenc Molnar's 'Liliom' (Duke of York's Theatre, 23 December 1926) and Noel Coward's 'Sirocco' (Daly's, 24 November 1927) and producing his own play 'Symphony in Two Flats' (New Theatre, 14 October 1929). In 1930 he went to New York for a short run of 'Symphony in Two Flats' (Shubert Theater, 16 September 1930) and then a more successful production of his 'The Truth Game' (Ethel Barrymore Theater, 27 December 1930), which brought him to the attention of Hollywood studios. With a contract from MGM as both a screen writer and an actor, he arrived in Hollywood in the summer of 1931 and initially began working on a screen adaptation of 'The Truth Game'. His abilities were hardly utilized by the large studio system and he made only one minor film as an actor; the period has been better remembered for his work on the script for 'Tarzan the Ape Man', for which he reputedly originated the line that gave rise to the now mythical if inaccurate 'Me Tarzan. You Jane' (originally -- with appropriate pointing -- 'Tarzan. Jane.'). His father died in October 1931 while Novello was in Hollywood, and -- tired of his relatively insignificant role in the studio system -- he returned to London. 
The 1930s for Novello were characterized by prolific work as an actor and playwright and by the beginning of a series of musical theatre works for which he is best remembered. He had written the play 'I Lived With You' while in Hollywood, and it was produced in the West End at the Prince of Wales's Theatre in the spring of 1932. The following year saw great success, with simultaneous London productions of 'Fresh Fields' (Criterion), 'Proscenium' (Globe), and 'Sunshine Sisters' (Queen's). Also in 1933 his 'Flies in the Sun' employed Christopher Hassall (introduced to Novello by Marsh) as an understudy for a tour, and who was also to appear in 'Murder in Mayfair' (5 September 1934). It was with Hassall as lyricist that Novello wrote his first musical romance for Drury Lane, 'Glamorous Night' (2 May 1935), and its extravagant mix of theatrical effects and a pared-down operetta lyricism ensured its immediate popularity; Hassall was to contribute lyrics to nearly all of Novello's later musical stage shows. Novello played the romantic lead himself -- something he continued to do in all but his last musical, 'Gay's the Word', in 1950 -- while his leading lady was Mary Ellis. With its combination of a Ruritanian princess and a television inventor, set pieces that included the sinking of an ocean liner, and a musical style that drew heavily on the operetta tradition of Franz Lehar and the Victorian ballad, it was a peculiarly British concoction. Despite its acclaim, 'Glamorous Night' was closed in order to make way for the traditional Christmas pantomime; however, with the following year's 'Careless Rapture' (Drury Lane, 11 September 1936) Novello sealed what has become an enduring association both with the theatre and with a style of musical theatre work that was uniquely his own. 'Crest of the Wave' (Drury Lane, 1 September 1937) continued this style combining large-scale theatrical effects and well-placed lyrical numbers in an otherwise escapist plot. Its duet 'Why isn't it you' is a witty ironic revue number that signals Novello's background in revue, while with 'Rose of England' he made one of his most eloquent statements of a sincere patriotic feeling. 
Clara Novello Davies had remained active in music, despite her supposed retirement in 1926, when she left New York to take up residence in her son's Aldwych flat. In her mid-seventies she was rehearsing her choir for a short tour abroad, and in 1937 she was an official representative of Wales along with her Royal Welsh Ladies' Choir at the Paris Exhibition; at their first concert on 16 October at the Palais du Bois she was presented with the medaille de merite by the French government and the gold medal of the Renaissance Francaise. A somewhat injudicious tour to sing for international peace just before the outbreak of the Second World War -- abruptly curtailed -- effectively marked the end of a remarkable career, and her attentions were diverted by her son into the writing of her autobiography, 'The Life I have Loved' (1940). She died peacefully on 1 March 1943. 
In 1938 Novello played the title role in a limited engagement of 'Henry V' at Drury Lane. He received complimentary notices for his performance, but this was only a brief excursion into more heavyweight drama, and in the same year his play 'Comedienne' was produced. Based on the character of Mrs Patrick Campbell, the play is typical in Novello's use of a theatrical world for its setting -- a device he employed in other plays, such as 'Sunshine Girls', and, with the inclusion of opera singers, in his musical romances. For someone whose life was so completely bound up in the theatre from an early age, surrounded by both performers and writers, it was inevitable that it would provide his primary source of reference and inspiration. 'The Dancing Years' (Drury Lane, 23 March 1939) has become Novello's most lasting musical stage work, and among its wealth of melodies is his archetypal waltz song 'Waltz of my Heart'. Hugely successful, it was driven out of its home at Drury Lane with the onset of the Second World War and so toured the country for several years, finally returning to the West End at the Adelphi on 14 March 1942, to run until 8 July 1944. During this extensive run 'Arc de Triomphe' (Phoenix, 9 November 1943), another showcase for Mary Ellis, was much less well received. 
On 24 March 1944, following the improper use of his car during wartime rationing, Novello was charged with unlawful conspiracy to commit offences against the motor vehicles (restriction of use) order 1942. The victim of duplicitous acts by a supposed fan and assistant, Dora Grace Constable, Novello was none the less deemed liable, and on 24 April 1944 at Bow Street court he was sentenced to eight weeks in prison. Constable was fined $50 with $25 costs. An appeal (16 May 1944) reduced the sentence from eight weeks to four, but his brief spell in Wormwood Scrubs, however ameliorated by his fame and the influence of his friends, severely shook him mentally and physically, with lasting effects. After a period of recovery at Redroofs he returned to 'The Dancing Years' in June 1944 and received a rapturous ovation upon his first entrance. 

'Perchance to Dream' opened at the Hippodrome (21 April 1945) and introduced another of Novello's most enduring numbers, the Victorian parlour ballad pastiche 'We'll gather lilacs'. Despite continually playing to full houses, the London production was closed after 1000 performances and the company taken on tour to South Africa. Novello flew to South Africa via a short trip to New York, arriving in the second week of December to open the show at His Majesty's Theatre, Johannesburg, on 23 December 1947. He subsequently appeared at Cape Town for two weeks from 20 February 1948. 
Novello's last major musical romance was 'King's Rhapsody' (Palace, 15 September 1949), which used a plot that mirrored many elements of the abdication crisis. Apart from his own portrayal of Prince Nikki, the romance introduced Vanessa Lee as Princess Christiane; her 'Someday my heart will awake' was the last of the characteristic sweeping waltz songs that became a defining feature of Novello's output. On 16 February 1951 his last show, 'Gay's the Word', opened at the Saville. A musical comedy that took as its subject the contrasting styles of European operetta and post-war American musicals in the West End, it starred the comedienne Cicely Courtneidge and for the first time had no role for Novello; the lyricist was the young and acerbic Alan Melville, who had his roots in intimate revue, rather than the highly poetic Hassall. Novello was still playing in the hugely successful run of 'King's Rhapsody' but had increasingly been feeling unwell. A Christmas holiday to his house on Jamaica, Wyndways at Montego Bay, failed to restore his health. He returned to London in February 1951, unwisely insisted on performing, and died of coronary thrombosis at his home at about 2.15 a.m. on 6 March 1951, shortly after completing his evening performance in 'King's Rhapsody'. The committal was held at Golders Green crematorium at 1 p.m. on 12 March 1951, and his ashes were buried under a lilac tree. A memorial service at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 28 May 1951 was relayed outside on loudspeakers to a crowd of several thousands. His will included a substantial bequest to Bobbie Andrews and various legacies to theatrical charities; Redroofs was later sold at auction (the proceeds went to Andrews) and the property became a convalescent home for actors. 
Novello was an extraordinary figure, combining high achievement in writing and performing, both on stage and in films; the guest books for his homes are a virtual compendium of the leading stars of the day, and regularly include the names of such figures as Gladys Cooper, Vivien Leigh, Douglas Fairbanks junior, and Noel Coward. The establishment of his matinee idol image in the 1920s, drawing on his elegant and strong profile, was a significant factor in retaining his appeal as a stage performer. His writing and performing brought a sense of genuine emotion to otherwise light and artificial material and made a virtue of them. Many of his plays and musical romances contain an acerbic and well-observed barbed wit, which Novello particularly indulged for his company stalwart and unofficial housekeeper, Olive Gilbert, in 'Perchance to Dream'. High-quality artifice, escapism, and a sense of the exotic were at the heart of his approach to theatre. A scholarship in his memory was established at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and in 1952 a bronze bust of Novello sculpted by Clemence Dane, and previously in the Aldwych flat, was unveiled in the rotunda of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. A commemorative panel was installed in the actors' church of St Paul's, Covent Garden, and in 1972 a memorial stone was unveiled in St Paul's Cathedral to mark the twenty-first anniversary of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 35265


Noyce, (Cuthbert) Wilfrid Francis (1917-1962), mountaineer and writer, was born at Simla, India, on 31 December 1917, the elder son in a family of two sons and a daughter of Sir Frank Noyce (1878-1948) of the Indian Civil Service and his wife, Enid Isabel, daughter of W. M. Kirkus, of Liverpool. He was educated at Charterhouse, where he became head of the school, and in 1936 he went to King's College, Cambridge, as a major scholar. He obtained first-class honours in the classical tripos (part 1, 1939) and in the preliminary examination for part 2 of the modern languages tripos (1940), before graduating BA in 1940 and MA in 1945. In 1939 he joined the Friends' Ambulance Unit, but in 1940 joined the Welsh Guards as a private. Commissioned in the King's Royal Rifle Corps in 1941, he spent the years 1942-6 in India, first as a captain in intelligence and then as chief instructor at the aircrew mountain centre in Kashmir. 
From 1946 until 1950 Noyce was an assistant master teaching modern languages at Malvern College. On 12 August 1950 he married Rosemary Campbell ('b'. 1925/6), daughter of Henry Campbell Davies, and there were two sons. Subsequently he taught for ten years at Charterhouse. In the latter period he served for some years on the Godalming borough council. He retired from teaching in 1961 in order to give more time to writing. 
Already, at eighteen, Noyce was a fine rock climber, partly through the influence of a brilliant older companion, J. Menlove Edwards, with whom he climbed regularly between 1935 and 1937. He survived a serious accident on Scafell in 1937, when he fell 180 feet and was magnificently held by Edwards on a rope of which two of the three strands had parted. He was badly injured, especially about the face, and the completeness of his recovery was astonishing. In two early alpine seasons, 1937 (shortly before this accident) and 1938, climbing with either Armand Charlet or Hans Brantschen, both great guides, he made a series of major climbs in very fast times. During the war, when he was stationed in India, his exceptional stamina and capacity to acclimatize were demonstrated when he and Sherpa Angtharkay reached the top of Pauhunri in Sikkim (23,385 ft) fifteen days after leaving Darjeeling. 
In 1946, climbing in a gale in the Lake District, Noyce was blown from his holds and broke a leg, and for some years he climbed to more ordinary standards. He was nevertheless an obvious choice for the 1953 Everest expedition, and at a critical stage it was Noyce and Sherpa Annullu who opened the route to the south col. Ten days later Noyce reached the col again, without oxygen, in support of the successful summit climb. Subsequently he had several impressive seasons in the Alps and one (1961) in the High Atlas, but his major ventures were further afield. In 1957 he was turned back by bad weather just below the top of Machapuchare (22,997 ft), a difficult peak in western Nepal, and in 1960 he led an expedition to Trivor (25,370 ft) in the Karakoram, where Noyce himself was one of the pair that reached the summit. His main reason for joining the Pamirs expedition on which he died was his wish to promote friendship between British and Russian mountaineers. 
Noyce was a cultivated, unassuming man with an almost diffident manner. Despite his outstanding achievements, his appreciation of mountains was largely aesthetic and his instincts scholarly and literary. In 1947 he wrote an unusual autobiography, 'Mountains and Men', the first of more than a dozen books. These included two volumes of poetry, 'Michael Angelo: a Poem' (1953) and 'Poems' (1960); some of the poems were written at 21,000 feet, on Everest. His main reputation was as a mountaineering author. He had a gift for conveying, vividly but with restraint and complete honesty, what mountain experiences were really like. This was skilfully demonstrated in 'South Col' (1954), his personal story of Everest and easily his most successful book; but the same approach characterized his two later expedition books, 'Climbing the Fish's Tail' (1958) and 'To the Unknown Mountain' (1962). An earlier work, 'Scholar Mountaineers' (1950), was a study of various historic figures who in different ways were both lovers of mountains and men of thought. He wrote one mountain novel, 'The Gods are Angry' (1957). Latterly, he was moving away from purely mountain subjects; in 'The Springs of Adventure' (1958) he explored the motives for engaging in any sort of hazardous activity, and in 'They Survived' (1962) he made a case study of mankind's will to survive in desperate situations. 
Noyce died in the USSR on 24 July 1962, when he and a companion fell, descending from the summit of Garmo Peak ('c'.21,500 ft) in the Pamirs. His wife survived him. His death cut short a literary career of notable achievement in a particular field, but one whose wider promise was not yet fulfilled. 
A. D. M. Cox', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35266


Noyes, Alfred (1880-1958), poet, was born on 16 September 1880 in St Mark's Road, Wolverhampton, the son of Alfred Noyes, a grocer who later became a teacher, and his wife, Amelia Adams, 'nee' Rowley. He went to school in Aberystwyth, where he developed a lifelong enthusiasm for boats and the sea. His father, a devout Anglican, had been prevented by financial difficulties from going to university, but the young Noyes entered Exeter College, Oxford, in 1898. Here he gave much of his time to rowing, and this interest continued throughout his life. 
Noyes was supposed to be studying for a degree in English under the aegis of Ernest de Selincourt. Instead of taking his final examinations, however, he travelled to London to fulfil an appointment with Grant Richards, a publisher who had become interested in Noyes's poems, and published them as 'The Loom of Years' (1902). It can now be perceived that Noyes's poetry, essentially looking back to his great idol, Tennyson, appealed to a generation of elderly men who dominated the literary establishment of the time. A crucial admirer was R. C. Lehmann, editor of the 'Daily News', who introduced Noyes to H. W. Massingham of 'The Nation' and J. A. Spender of the 'Westminster Gazette'. These influential periodicals published many of the young writer's poems. 
Noyes's most signal triumph came early, in the form of his poem 'The Highwayman', a characteristically atavistic subject. The subject occurred to him when he was twenty-four, living at Bagshot Heath. Noyes records that it was a blustery night that inspired the famous first section: '
The wind was a torrent of darkness among the gusty trees. 

The moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas. 

The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor, 

And the highwayman came riding -- 

Riding -- riding -- 

The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn-door. 

' Readers who do not consciously recall Noyes's name may none the less recognize this piece, as for half a century and more hardly a school anthology was complete without it. The poem was collected, with many in a similar vein, in such volumes as 'Forty Singing Seamen' (1907), 'Tales of the Mermaid Tavern' (1912), and successive volumes of 'Collected Poems' (1910, 1913, 1920). These poems, compounded of books rather than perceptions, were equipped with stirring metres that could be fairly said to have put a spin on the familiar form of the ballad. This formula, resembling that enjoyed in Victorian verse collections, ensured that for a time Noyes was lauded as the true successor of Tennyson. Noyes himself was an explicit opponent of anything that he deemed to be contemporary realism. His book 'Some Aspects of Modern Poetry' (1924) pillories various unnamed writers as 'destructive forces'. 
For some time now, Noyes had been able to earn his living by writing verse. He supplemented this by giving lectures in the United States. He had strong connections with America through his wife, (Kate) Garnett Upham, 'nee' Daniels (1881/2-1926), whom he had married on 25 July 1907; she was the daughter of the American consul, Colonel Byron Gordon Daniels. The first of Noyes's tours was suggested in 1911 by Frederick A. Stokes, his American publisher, and arranged by an agency, William B. Feakins Inc. Noyes was invited in 1913 to give the Lowell lecture at Harvard; his chosen title was 'The sea in English literature'. His delivery was no doubt enhanced by a resonant voice, a sturdy physique, and a forehead of distinction emphasized by his increasing baldness. Out of this performance came (in 1914) an appointment as Murray professor of English literature at Princeton University. There he lectured twice a week for half of each college year. Among his auditors were Edmund Wilson and F. Scott Fitzgerald. He continued in this post until 1923. Necessarily, his tenure was interrupted by the First World War, and although he was rejected for military service on the grounds of poor eyesight, 1916 found him working for the Foreign Office in the news room, the precursor of the Ministry of Information. Here he got into trouble for writing a book about methods of trapping enemy submarines. The censure was lifted, however, when it was found that all the information supplied by Noyes was already in the public domain. 
Noyes's first wife died suddenly in 1926, shortly after they had visited the monastery at Roncesvalles. Within the year, Noyes entered the Roman Catholic church, and on 27 September 1927 married Mary Angela Weld-Blundell, 'nee' Mayne (1889-1976), herself a member of an old Catholic family, and the widow of an officer killed in the war. They settled first in London, where Noyes had preserved his many literary acquaintances, and, from 1929, on the Isle of Wight. From 1926 to 1930 Noyes produced a three-volume history of science called 'The Torch-Bearers'. More importantly, however, and one of the fruits of his conversion, was a biography of Voltaire (1936), which sought to exculpate that philosopher from charges of atheism. 
During the Second World War, Noyes moved with his wife and their three young children to Canada and the United States, where he continued to give his lectures. His vision had continued to deteriorate, and a disastrous operation for glaucoma in the mid-1940s ensured that he would never read again. The Noyes family returned to the Isle of Wight in 1949, where Noyes managed to continue with his studies. As late as 1957 Noyes produced a book persuasively seeking to exonerate the Irish patriot Roger Casement from authorship of some homosexual diaries with which he had been smeared as part of the prosecution in a trial for treason. Noyes had been shown a typescript of these diaries during his time with the Foreign Office, and had at that time thought them genuine, but came to revise his opinion. 
Alfred Noyes died at the Isle of Wight County Hospital in Ryde on 28 June 1958, aged seventy-seven; he was buried at St Saviour's Roman Catholic church, Totland, on the Isle of Wight. He had received honorary doctorates from Yale, Glasgow, Berkeley, and Syracuse, and in 1918 had been appointed CBE. Little of his work has held public attention, apart from 'The Highwayman', among other anthologized poems. One such poem, found in Philip Larkin's 'Oxford Book of Twentieth-Century Verse', genuinely deserves a place in the canon: 'Spring, and the Blind Children' uses failing eyesight as an allegory of the vain attempt on the part of humankind to understand the providence of God. 


@@@@@


doc= 35267


Nunn, Joshua Arthur (1853-1908), army veterinary surgeon, born on 10 May 1853 at Hill Castle, co. Wexford, Ireland, was the son of Edward W. Nunn JP DL. Nunn was educated at Wimbledon School, and he served in the Royal Monmouthshire engineer militia from 1871 to 1877. In 1874 he entered the Royal Veterinary College at Camden Town, London, and was admitted MRCVS on 4 January 1877. In the same year he obtained a certificate in cattle pathology from the Royal Agricultural Society. He was also gazetted veterinary surgeon on probation in the army veterinary service on 21 April 1877 and veterinary surgeon to the Royal Artillery on 24 April 1877, being the last officer to obtain a commission under the old regimental system. 
Nunn proceeded to India in December 1877, and from September 1879 to August 1880 he took part in the Anglo-Afghan War as the veterinary officer in charge of transport on the Khyber line of communication. Later, accompanying the expeditionary column in the Laghman valley, he was in charge of the transport base hospital at Gandamak. For these services he was awarded the Afghan medal. 
Nunn was employed on special duty from 1880 to 1885 as a civil servant under the Punjab government, first in the suppression of glanders under the 'Glanders and Farcy Act' and, afterwards, in connection with the agricultural department of Punjab, as the veterinary inspector. In this capacity he travelled widely to collect all manner of information and statistics about cattle, including folklore and disease. This he embodied in a series of valuable reports: 'Animal Diseases in Rohtak' (1882); 'Diseases in Sialkote and Hazara' (1883); and 'Diseases in the Montgomery and Shapur Districts' (1884-5). He also lectured to students at the Lahore Veterinary College. Before he left India in 1886, the government of the Punjab recognized his valuable services in a special minute. 
After taking short courses in bacteriology at Cambridge and Paris, Nunn was ordered to South Africa in January 1887 to investigate 'horse sickness', thought to be due to anthrax; he proved that the disease was malarial in type. Engaging meanwhile in the campaign against the Zulu in 1888, he was at the surrender of the chief Somkali at St Lucia Lagoon. 
Nunn returned to India on 11 December 1888, and was appointed inspecting veterinary officer of the Chittagong column during the Chin Lushai expedition of 1889. Nunn was mentioned in dispatches and was decorated with the Distinguished Service Order on 12 December 1890, being the first member of the army veterinary service to receive this distinction. In 1890 he was appointed principal of the Punjab Veterinary College, where he worked for six years and laid the foundations of the local veterinary service. He was rewarded by becoming CIE in 1895. Nunn did much to advance the cause of veterinary science in India. Of untiring energy, he was personally popular with his associates. 
Nunn was joint editor of the 'Veterinary Journal' from 1893 to 1906, and also published 'Report on South African Horse Sickness' (1888); 'Notes on Stable Management in India' (1896); 'Lectures on Saddlery and Harness' (1902); 'Veterinary First Aid in Cases of Accident or Sudden Illness' (1903); 'The Use of Molasses as a Feeding Material' (1903), which was translated from the French of Edouard Curot; 'Diseases of the Mammary Gland of the Domestic Animals' (1904), also translated from the French of P. Leblanc; and 'Veterinary Toxicology' (1907). 
From December 1896 to August 1905 Nunn was in England, spending part of his time studying law, though in 1901 he also passed his examinations as a meat inspector. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in November 1899, and was later admitted as advocate of the bar of the supreme court of the Transvaal. Again in England, he was from 1901 to 1904 deputy director-general of the army veterinary department, and then was principal veterinary officer in South Africa, in 1904-5. He was transferred to India in June 1906 and there he filled a similar position. He was made a CB on 26 June 1906. In Bombay on 12 January 1907 he married Gertrude Ann, widow of W. Chamberlain and daughter of E. Kellner CIE. He remained in India, despite illness, until 23 January 1908, when he returned to England. He died by his own hand in the Warneford Hospital, Oxford, on 23 February 1908. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35268


Nunn, Sir (Thomas) Percy (1870-1944), educationist, was born on 28 December 1870 in Bristol, the second son of Edward Smith Nunn (died 1890) and his wife, Harriette ('nee' Luff). Both his father and grandfather were schoolmasters, and in 1873 their proprietary school was transferred to Weston-super-Mare. There Nunn received his own education and began to teach. He subsequently studied at Bristol University College. His interests at this time included the writing and producing of school plays and the making of scientific instruments. In 1890, on the death of his father, Nunn decided against taking over responsibility for management of the school. In the same year he gained a London BSc degree; he took the degrees of BA in 1895 and MA in 1902. In 1894 he married Eliza Alice (Ethel), daughter of Edmund John Hart, a carter. Their daughter, Elsa, also obtained a London MA, in 1929, and was principal of Fishponds Training College, Bristol (1930-54). 
Nunn taught in schools in Halifax and London, where by 1903 he was senior science master at the William Ellis School. From March of that year he was engaged on a part-time basis by the London Day Training College (LDTC) to demonstrate methods of teaching mathematics and science. In 1905 he was appointed vice-principal there. In 1913 he was accorded the title of professor of education by the University of London, and in 1922 he succeeded John (later Sir John) Adams as principal at the LDTC. Nunn's personality and educational philosophy were to exercise a considerable influence over the LDTC and more widely. An early contribution to the nature of scientific knowledge was 'The Aim and Achievements of Scientific Method: an Epistemological Essay' (1907), a study based on his London University doctoral thesis, presented in the same year. Publications of 1912-14 intended for classroom teachers included a co-authored 'First Class Book of Chemistry' and two volumes on algebra. He also served as editor of 'Black's Elementary Science Series' and in 1923 wrote a study entitled 'Relativity and Gravitation'. 
But the work for which Nunn became best known was 'Education: its Data and First Principles', written in the concluding years of the First World War and published in 1920. Its central thesis was 'that nothing good enters into the human world except in and through the free activities of individual men and women and that educational practice must be shaped to accord with that truth' (T. P. Nunn, 'Education', 1920, 5). This book went through three editions and more than twenty reprints, and was required reading for student teachers for some forty years. 
Nunn presided over a number of important changes at the LDTC, including the establishment of a department for higher degrees and research and a colonial department (1927). He was knighted in 1930. Two years later the academic status and international role which Nunn had fostered were recognized by the transmutation of the LDTC into the London University Institute of Education. In spite of the talented team which Nunn collected around him, including Cyril Burt, Fred Clarke, H. R. Hamley, Susan Isaacs, and Marion Richardson, his authority and pre-eminence were unquestioned. As another colleague, P. Gurrey, wrote: 'Over this collection Nunn towered in every way: intellectual ability, force of character, and width of interest and knowledge. There was no doubt about our realisation of his supreme position as a thinker, organiser, mathematician and teacher. The legend of Nunn did not grow after he had left us: we saw it growing. (A. S. Harrison and others, 46)' Nunn, however, was always accessible. His personal charm and whimsical humour were coupled with a great gift for explaining complex issues in simple and clear language. One of his former students, G. B. Jeffery, who in 1945 succeeded Clarke as director of the institute, recalled of Nunn that: 'He never talked down to you. He put himself by your side ready to share your enthusiasms, taking it for granted that you would share his. You were learning and he was learning; you were learning together. The remarkable thing is that it was perfectly true. In teaching you, his vivid and adventurous mind was sure to see some new light and you shared the discovery together. (ibid., 14)' Nunn's interests were boundless. He had a great admiration for Plato and bought a Greek fount for his printing press so that he could produce Greek quotations and verses. He also took great delight in music, both classical and light, and penned parodies for LDTC concerts -- from 'Phyllis was a Fair Maid' to 'Knocked 'em in Southampton Row'. Yet in spite of his commitment to all aspects of the life of the LDTC and institute, and of the university, he also played significant roles in the Aristotelian Society, the British Association, the British Psychological Society, the Mathematical Association, and the Training College Association. In his later years Nunn's prodigious workload began to take its toll and he suffered considerably from bronchitis and emphysema. He found increasing difficulty in breathing in foggy weather and in climbing stairs (the five-storey Southampton Row building had no lifts). In 1932 he spent most of an intended recuperation cruise in the ship's hospital, and on his return to London he was diagnosed as suffering from extreme exhaustion. In 1936 he retired to Funchal, Madeira, where he died on 12 December 1944; he was buried on 13 December at the British cemetery, Funchal. 
Nunn was awarded honorary degrees by the universities of Liverpool, St Andrews, and Trinity College, Dublin. The status accorded to 'Education' has been questioned by such academics as J. W. Tibble ('British Journal of Educational Studies', 10, 1961, 58-75), and in 'All Must Have Prizes' (1996) the journalist Melanie Phillips included Nunn -- who wrote chapters in 'Education' on the importance of 'Play' and 'Freedom in Education' -- among those whom she accused of promoting 'cranky views' (Phillips, 203). Indeed Nunn himself, in company with many of his students, would probably have placed his lectures and writings in the field of teaching mathematics and science above his treatment of educational principles. But his commitment in 'Education' to the roles of the individual and of individuality in education was of central importance in a world that was increasingly dominated by totalitarian regimes. His gravestone in the British cemetery at Funchal bears a fitting epitaph: 'Teacher, Philosopher, Mathematician. Revered by the Academic World, Mourned by his Disciples, Loved by his Friends'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35269


Nutt, Alfred Trubner (1856-1910), publisher and Celtic scholar, was born in London on 22 November 1856, the eldest and only surviving son of David Nutt (died 1863), a foreign bookseller and publisher, and his wife, Ellen, daughter of Robert Carter and granddaughter of William Miller, publisher, of Albemarle Street, London, predecessor of John (II) Murray. His second name commemorated his father's partnership with Nicholas Trubner. He was educated first at University College School, London, and afterwards at College de Vitry-le-Francois in the Marne departement, France, until 1873. Having served three years' business apprenticeship in Leipzig, Berlin, and Paris, in 1878 he took his place as head of his father's firm which, founded in 1829 at 58 Fleet Street, London, was moved in 1848 to 270-271 Strand. The business, which had been mainly confined to foreign bookselling, soon benefited by young Nutt's energy and enterprise, especially in the publishing department, which he mainly devoted to folklore and antiquities. Among his chief publications were the collection of unedited Scottish Gaelic texts known as 'Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition', the 'Northern Library' of Old Norse texts, the 'Tudor Library' of rare sixteenth-century works, the Tudor translations (in sixteenth-century prose), the 'Grimm Library', the 'Bibliotheque de Carabas', a critical edition of 'Don Quixote' in Spanish, 'Nutt's Juvenile Library', the works of W. E. Henley, and the collection of English, Celtic, and Indian fairy tales. He also produced a number of excellent school books. The business was carried on in London at 57-59 Long Acre, 'At the sign of the Phoenix', from 1890 to 1912, when it was removed to Grape Street, New Oxford Street. 
Nutt was not only an astute businessman, but was also a lifelong student of folklore and of the Celtic languages, and displayed scholarship and power of original research in both fields. His name was 'definitely associated with the plea for the insular, Celtic, and popular 'provenance' of the Arthurian cycle' ('Folk-Lore', 513). Nutt founded the 'Folk-Lore Journal' (afterwards 'Folk-Lore'), was one of the earliest members of the Folk-Lore Society (1879), and was elected president in 1897 and 1898. Besides presidential addresses he contributed many valuable articles to the society's journal, the 'Folk-Lore Record', and in 1892 he edited a volume of 'Transactions' of the International Folk-Lore Congress (1891). In 1886 he helped to establish the English Goethe Society and he was one of the founders of the movement which led in 1898 to the formation of the Irish Texts Society. His most important literary productions included 'Studies on the legend of the holy grail, with special reference to the hypothesis of its Celtic origin' ('Folk-Lore Record', 23, 1888), and two essays on the Irish vision of the afterlife and the Celtic doctrine of rebirth, appended to 'The Voyage of Bran, Son of Febal, to the Land of the Living' ('Grimm Library', vols. 4 and 6, 1895-7). He also wrote numerous studies of the 'Mabinogion', the holy grail and of Celtic and Gaelic literature, and produced an annotated edition of Matthew Arnold's 'Study of Celtic Literature' (1910). 
On 21 May 1910, while on holiday at Melun on the Seine, Nutt drowned trying to save his invalid son, who had fallen into the river. His wife, Mrs M. L. Nutt, who had been his secretary for several years, succeeded him as head of the firm. Two sons survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35270


Nuttall, Enos (1842-1916), archbishop of the West Indies, was born at Clitheroe on 26 January 1842, the eldest son of James Nuttall, farmer and builder, of Coates, St Mary-le-Gill, Yorkshire, and his first wife, Alice, daughter of William and Martha Armistead of Aynhams, in the same parish. His education was such as his mother and the parish school could give him, but he developed powers of self-tuition, and being placed by his father in charge of a farm, gave his leisure to learning. James Nuttall was a Wesleyan, and Enos became at seventeen a local preacher of some power. Anxious for mission work abroad, he applied to the Revd George Osborn, secretary of the Wesleyan Missionary Society, was accepted, and, after a period of training under the Revd Andrew Kessen, was posted by the society to Jamaica, for which he sailed on 2 December 1862, in his twenty-first year, to work as a layman. 
While his brother Ezra (1850-1915) won distinction in South Africa as a Methodist minister, Enos offered himself in Jamaica for the ministry of the Church of England. He was ordained deacon on 18 February 1866 in the cathedral at Spanish Town, and priest on 8 April in the parish church, Kingston, where fifty years later (23 February 1916) his last sermon was addressed to a departing war contingent. He was appointed 'island curate' of St George's, Kingston, with a stipend derived from the government, and technically he retained the post until his death. In December 1869 notice was given that state endowment (saving some life interests) would cease at the end of that year, and Nuttall, young as he was, took a leading part in the reorganization of the disestablished Church of England in Jamaica, helping to draft its canons and to settle its financial system, and engaging in public controversy with the governor, Sir John Peter Grant. He was made secretary of synod in 1870 and of the diocesan board of finance in 1874. Archbishop Tait recognized his work by giving him in 1879 the Lambeth degree of BD. 
In 1880, on the resignation of Bishop George William Tozer, the synod chose Nuttall as bishop of Jamaica, and he was consecrated by Tait in St Paul's Cathedral on 28 October. From 1881 to 1891 he was also responsible for the supervision of the diocese of British Honduras, while his efforts among the West Indians working on the Panama Canal caused that district to be transferred temporarily in 1885 to the diocese of Jamaica. In 1883 the first meeting of the provincial synod of the West Indies was held in Jamaica, five bishops attending, and Nuttall was mainly responsible for drafting its canons and constitutions. He was elected primate of the West Indies in 1893 and in 1897, in consequence of a resolution of the West Indian bishops passed (30 July) during the Lambeth conference, he assumed the title of archbishop of the West Indies. 
On 14 January 1907 Jamaica suffered a destructive earthquake. At the time the archbishop was attending a meeting of the West India Agricultural Conference; his coolness averted a panic, and his immediate organization and guidance of all the measures for relief and reconstruction were beyond praise. Throughout his fifty-four years in Jamaica he was intimately concerned in the daily welfare of the islanders -- education, nursing, housing, agriculture -- and was in constant consultation with the Colonial Office at home. 
Nuttall married in 1867 Elizabeth Duggan, daughter of the Revd Philip Chapman, a Wesleyan minister, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. In his later years, in spite of frequent visits to England, his health failed, though he continued to work. He died at Bishop's Lodge, Kingston, on 31 May 1916, and was buried in the churchyard of St Andrew, Halfway Tree, in Jamaica. 


@@@@@


doc= 35271


Nuttall, George Henry Falkiner (1862-1937), bacteriologist, was born in San Francisco, California, on 5 July 1862, the second son of Robert Kennedy Nuttall MD, from Tittour, co. Wicklow, and his wife, Magdalena, daughter of John Parrott of San Francisco. In 1865 the family returned to Europe, and the children were educated in England, France, Germany, and Switzerland. With his cosmopolitan upbringing Nuttall could speak several languages, which helped him greatly in his work and travels. He returned to America in 1878 and entered the University of California, where he proceeded MD in 1884. He went to Germany in 1886 and stayed for four years, studying mainly botany and zoology, subjects that led to an interest in parasitology, which became the main scientific interest of his life. In 1891 he returned to America as assistant to W. H. Welch, professor of pathology at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, but went back to Germany in 1892 to work on hygiene at Gottingen and Berlin. In 1895 he married Paula (died 1922), daughter of Kammerherr Hans von Oertzen-Kittendorf of Mecklenburg; they had two sons and a daughter. 
In 1899 Nuttall gave a course of lectures on bacteriology at Cambridge, and a year later he was appointed university lecturer in bacteriology and preventive medicine. In 1901 he founded the 'Journal of Hygiene' which he edited up to the time of his death, and in 1908 'Parasitology', which he edited until 1933. In his editorial work he displayed the same thoroughness as in his research. He considered part of an editor's duties to be educational and was prepared to spend time in correcting and improving papers and advising young and inexperienced colleagues. As an editor he exerted great influence on associates all over the world, and his journals became models upon which the publications of several scientific societies were based. 
In 1906 Nuttall was elected the first Quick professor of biology at Cambridge and a fellow of Magdalene College, with the duty of studying 'protozoa, especially such as cause disease'. In 1919 he appealed for funds to build an institute for parasitological research. This led to the erection of the Molteno Institute for Research in Parasitology (later known as the Molteno Institute of Biology and Parasitology), which was formally opened in 1921. In 1920 the words 'study of parasitology' were substituted for 'study of protozoa' in the regulations concerning the duties of the Quick professor. 
By this time, Nuttall's scientific work had covered a very wide field; in addition to several books, he had published papers on bacteriology, serology, hygiene, tropical medicine, and parasitology. Among his contributions to science was his discovery in 1888 that defibrinated blood possesses a strong bactericidal property against anthrax bacilli, and that this property disappears on heating the blood to 55 degree C. This work was the foundation for the study of humoral immunity and was the forerunner of great discoveries such as that of anti-toxic immunity. In 1892 he studied with Welch the anaerobic gas-forming micro-organism, later known as 'Clostridium welchii', the importance of which as a pathogenic agent was not fully appreciated until the war of 1914-18. With H. Thierfelder (1895-7) he also carried out the first successful experiments on life under aseptic conditions. 
In 1897 Nuttall turned his attention to the part played by arthropods in the spread of disease, a subject to which he devoted the later period of his life. In 1901 he showed that the disappearance of malaria from England was not due to the extinction of the mosquito genus 'Anopheles', which still prevailed in all formerly malarious districts. In the same year he became interested in the precipitin reaction, and in 1904 he published his monograph 'Blood Immunity and Blood Relationship', which demonstrated a distinct similarity in chemical structure of the blood in animals which are related phylogenetically. Nuttall then began his investigations into diseases transmitted to animals by ticks. Using infected ticks ('Haemophysalis leachi') from South Africa, he succeeded in infecting dogs with piroplasmosis, a disease unknown in England. One result of this investigation, which had great economic importance, was the discovery of the curative property of trypan blue for piroplasmosis in dogs, cattle, and sheep. This study was followed by an extensive investigation with Cecil Warburton and Louis Edward Robinson of the anatomy, biology, life history, and systematics of ticks, which occupied Nuttall during the remaining years of his life. 
Nuttall resigned the Quick professorship in 1931 and became emeritus professor of biology. He died suddenly at the Craven Hotel in London on 16 December 1937 on the eve of a dinner in his honour to be given by sixty colleagues on his retirement from his editorship of the 'Journal of Hygiene'. He was cremated on 21 December 1937 at Golders Green. 
Nuttall was of distinguished appearance, had great charm, was an excellent raconteur, and was at ease in whatever company he found himself. He was elected FRS in 1904, received honorary degrees from several universities, and was elected corresponding member of many scientific societies. 


@@@@@


doc= 35272


Nye, Sir Archibald Edward (1895-1967), army officer, was born in Ship Street barracks, Dublin, on 23 April 1895, the youngest but one in the family of three sons and three daughters of Charles Edward Nye (died 1930) and his Irish wife, Mary Sexton. His father was a regimental sergeant-major in the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire light infantry. Having been an outstanding scholar at the Duke of York's royal military school, Dover, he was preparing to become an army schoolmaster when war began in August 1914. He volunteered for combatant duty and, serving as a non-commissioned officer in France, was selected in 1915 for a commission in the Leinster regiment. Twice wounded in action, and awarded the MC for gallantry thereafter, he was granted a regular commission in 1922 in the Royal Warwickshire regiment, given the demise of the Leinsters, a southern Irish regiment. Lacking any private means, Nye never drank, and helped to pay his mess bills by winning games of billiards. In the military doldrums of the 1920s Nye's quick, keen mind drew him to the staff. In 1924-5 he attended the Staff College, Camberley. He soon acquired a high reputation, brevet, and accelerated promotion through exchange of regiments. While holding demanding appointments he managed simultaneously to qualify as a barrister at the Inner Temple in 1932. 
Recognized as a potential general officer, Nye was returned to regimental duty to command the 2nd battalion, Royal Warwickshire regiment in 1937, earned at once a recommendation for higher command, and was appointed to raise the Nowshera brigade in India in 1939. Nye married (Una Sheila) Colleen, daughter of General Sir Harry Hugh Sidney Knox, during that year, and they had one daughter. Colleen also had two children from her previous marriage to Colonel N. D. Stevenson. 
War once again changed Nye's plans. He was recalled to London a few months after leaving for India, and was soon later promoted major-general as director of staff duties in the War Office, the branch concerned with organization and co-ordination. During the crises of 1940 his enterprise, moral courage, and mastery of complex politico-military policy impressed Winston Churchill; when Sir John G. Dill was removed as chief of the imperial general staff in 1941, Nye was one of three possible successors in his mind. But seniority and experience in high command weighed in this selection. Sir Alan Brooke was chosen; Nye was promoted lieutenant-general and vice-chief. Fortunately the two men complemented and had absolute confidence in each other. They carried a formidable workload for four years until victory in 1945. Nye accompanied Brooke on many of his important journeys during the war. At its end Brooke wished to make Nye adjutant-general, but another option was offered: governor of Madras. Retiring as CB (1942), KBE (1944), and KCB (1946) Nye returned to India in 1946. 
Nye's support for independence there inspired Jawaharlal Nehru to ask him to stay in post when imperial government ended. Further, his firmness and wisdom in the ensuing political, racial, and caste turbulence prompted the Indian government to suggest his appointment as United Kingdom high commissioner at Delhi when he completed his extension in Madras in 1948. In this second post he developed successfully the new and friendly relationship between the British and Indian governments, enhancing it by skilful diplomacy during the opening and greater part of the Korean War. 
Nye departed from India in 1952 with the honours GCIE (1946) and GCSI (1947), and was appointed high commissioner to Canada. In his four years in Ottawa his most notable success was the extension of British-Canadian trade; perhaps his most difficult political task was the representation of British policy on the Suez Canal. Retiring in 1956, Nye left many official and personal friends in Canada. He had received the freedom of the capital city, academic honours from Bishop's, McGill, Toronto, and McMaster universities, and had been appointed GCMG by his own government in 1951. For some years he held several directorships in commercial companies, but in 1962 he returned temporarily to government service as chairman of a committee to consider reorganizing the War Office. The work of this body -- the Nye committee -- influenced profoundly the reshaping of the army's headquarters for the rest of the century. 
Nye made an important contribution to the high political and military policies of his country, and often played a crucial part in their execution over more than twenty years. His reputation is, happily, unsullied by any manifestation of jealousy, bitterness, or disregard towards those with whom he served. It is remarkable that he caught the attention of three prime ministers -- Churchill, Attlee, and Nehru -- each of whom wanted to place him in a significant position. Nye died in London on 13 November 1967. 
Anthony Farrar-Hockley', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35273


Oakeley, Sir Herbert Stanley (1830-1903), composer and organist, was born on 22 July 1830 at the vicarage, Ealing, the second son of the Revd Sir Herbert Oakeley, third baronet (1791-1845), and his wife, Atholl Keturah Murray (1801-1844), the daughter of Lord Charles Murray Aynsley (whose father was John, third duke of Atholl) and his wife, Alicia. Educated at Rugby School (1843-6) and at Christ Church, Oxford, he graduated BA in 1853 and proceeded MA in 1856. A talented keyboard player, he took lessons in harmony at Oxford from Stephen Elvey, organist of New College. Though his intention had been to take holy orders in the Church of England, music came to occupy him more and more. Visits to Canterbury, Durham, Norwich, and Winchester confirmed in him a love for cathedral music. His circumstances enabled him to travel widely: he studied the piano with Ignaz Moscheles and Louis Plaidy (Leipzig, 1855) and organ with Johann Schneider (Dresden, 1863), and met leading musicians including Liszt and Meyerbeer. As music critic of the 'Manchester Guardian' from 1858 to 1868 he wrote on musical events at home and abroad. 
In 1865, to the surprise of many in the musical world, Oakeley was appointed Reid professor of the theory of music at the University of Edinburgh in succession to John Donaldson. A carriage accident in the Swiss Alps in June 1872 left his right leg permanently impaired, although he continued to give organ recitals and conduct. He was knighted on 17 August 1876, following the unveiling of the Albert memorial in Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, at which he directed the music: Queen Victoria observed that 'Professor Oakeley... is a wonderful musician, and plays beautifully on the organ' (Victoria, 327). On 19 September 1881 she conferred on him the title of 'Composer of Music to Her Majesty in Scotland'. His first music degree was a doctorate from the archbishop of Canterbury (1871). Later he received honorary degrees from many universities; other honours included membership of the Accademia Filarmonica of Bologna (1888) and the Accademia di Santa Cecilia of Rome (1892). 
Oakeley directed the resources of the Reid chair towards 'the promulgation of musical art' in Scotland. An excellent organist with a flair for improvisation, he gave 200 recitals between 1866 and 1891 on the fine organ by William Hill & Sons (1861, rebuilt 1869) in his classroom. Under his administration the Reid memorial concerts were transformed into artistic events of high quality, at which many major works received their first performances in Scotland. In 1867-8 August Manns was engaged to conduct; from 1869 to 1891 the concert became the centrepiece of a Reid festival given by Charles Halle and his orchestra. Soloists included Clara Schumann, Alfredo Piatti, Therese Tietjens, and George Henschel; a piece by Oakeley was usually included in the programme. Another innovation was the founding of Edinburgh University Musical Society. From 1871 Oakeley conducted annual concerts of its male students' chorus and a semi-professional orchestra. He also encouraged the formation of similar societies at Aberdeen, St Andrews, and Glasgow. When in 1876-7 John Stuart Blackie attacked him in 'The Scotsman' for neglecting Scottish song he responded with his 'National Melodies', dedicated to the university musical societies of Scotland. The 'Scottish Students' Song Book' (1891) owed much to his enthusiasm, and includes his songs for Edinburgh ('Alma mater', 1884) and St Andrews ('Carmen saeculare', 1890). 
Oakeley's efforts to develop music as an academic subject at Edinburgh made less headway. Classes were held (including from 1884 one for women) and certificates awarded, but comparatively few students enrolled. In his inaugural lecture (1866) Oakeley looked forward to the time when students might matriculate 'for the especial purpose of obtaining aid in cultivating music, and to 'graduate' in that subject' (Oakley, 23-4), and he argued the case for musical degrees before the Scottish universities commissioners in 1877 and 1890; but the syllabus eventually introduced in 1894 was Niecks's, not his. Ill health and increasing deafness, coupled with the impending institution of music degrees and Sir Charles Halle's decision to withdraw from the Reid concerts, precipitated Oakeley's early retirement from his professorship in 1891. During his last years he lived in Dover, but continued to travel. He died at 53 Grand Parade, Eastbourne, on 26 October 1903 and was buried at Eastbourne parish church. 
As a composer Oakeley won respect as 'an earnest and conscientious artist' ('Musical Times', 17, 1875-6, 206). But apart from hymn tunes such as 'Abends' and 'Dominica', his compositions, like much Victorian music, made no impact on the twentieth century. His best work is perhaps to be found in his songs: he wrote to the music critic Joseph Bennett (23 February 1887) that he hoped he had earned 'a place as a representative composer of this kind of music' (U. Edin. L., MS Dk.7.385). Other pieces loyally marked occasions such as the duke of Edinburgh's marriage ('Edinburgh Festal March', Liverpool festival, 1874) and Queen Victoria's golden jubilee ('A Jubilee Lyric', Cheltenham festival, 1887). After retiring he devoted his energies particularly to writing anthems, such as 'The Glory of Lebanon' for the 800th anniversary of Winchester Cathedral (1893). Among his prized possessions was the autograph of Bach's prelude and fugue BWV 544 for organ. 


@@@@@


doc= 35274


Oakley, Sir John Hubert (1867-1946), surveyor, was born at 65 Gloucester Place, Kensington, London, on 11 October 1867, the eldest son of Christopher Percival Oakley, surveyor, of Chislehurst, and his wife, Kate, daughter of Charles Kingsford, of Lewisham Hill, Kent. He was a nephew of John Oakley, dean of Manchester, and the grandson of John Oakley, surveyor, a founder in 1868 of the Surveyors' Institution, later the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. Educated at Uppingham School, Oakley entered the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, in 1885, where he excelled as a student and athlete. A tall man of powerful physique, at rugby football he was captain of the college fifteen, capped for Gloucestershire, and tried for England. 
Having passed out of Cirencester with honours at Christmas 1887, Oakley joined the family firm of Daniel Smith, Son and Oakley (later Daniel Smith, Oakley and Garrard), surveyors, land agents, and auctioneers, of London, which had been founded in 1780. He remained with them all his life, first as an articled pupil, from 1892 as partner, and from 1898 senior partner. Oakley married on 11 November 1891 at St James's Church, Croydon, Ida ('b'. 1869/70), only daughter of Daniel Watney, surveyor, of Brittleware, Croydon; they had one daughter, Margery Ruth. 
A modest and kindly man, Oakley was held in respect and affection throughout his profession. His experience, founded upon an early training in agriculture, ranged over the whole field, urban and rural, of successful general practice. His reputation as a surveyor and valuer of real property was considerable; and his professional knowledge was reinforced with good judgement. His services as an arbitrator were in frequent demand; he once had to make what amounted to a valuation of the whole city of Hong Kong in order to resolve differences between two government departments. On another occasion he was appointed by the London county council and the landowners concerned to assess the betterment rate, then one of the first of its kind, to be levied upon lands benefited by, but surplus to, the Kingsway improvement scheme between Aldwych and Holborn. He followed his father as land agent for the St Germans estates at Blackheath and was responsible for their development. 
Oakley served on the council of the Surveyors' Institution for twelve years and remained a member until his death. Like his father and father-in-law before him, and his brother-in-law after him, he became president of the institution, holding office in 1918. In the institution's 'Transactions' for 1918-19 he reviewed its history and work (vol. 51, no. 642, 1-38) as it celebrated its golden jubilee. In 1925 he was elected president of the College of Estate Management, founded in 1919 as a centre of education for surveying and allied professions. 
Oakley was a member of the royal commission on the universities of Oxford and Cambridge (1919-21); the committee on crown and government lands (1921-2); the royal commission on compensation for suffering and damage caused by enemy action (1922-4); the River Ouse drainage commission (1925-6); the Irish grants committee (1926-30); and the advisory committee on crown lands (1933-9). He was knighted in 1919 and appointed GBE in 1928. A member of the Conservative Club, he gave his interests as fishing and shooting. 
Oakley died on 5 December 1946 at Welbeck Palace Hotel, Welbeck Street, London. His widow survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35275


Oates, Lawrence Edward Grace (1880-1912), Antarctic explorer, was born on 17 March 1880 at Putney, London, one of the four children, and the elder son, of William Edward Oates (1841-1896), gentleman, of Gestingthorpe Hall, Essex, and his wife, Caroline Anne, 'nee' Buckton, of Meanwood, Leeds. He spent two years at Eton College but was withdrawn with ill health and was afterwards educated privately. In 1898 he was gazetted to the 3rd West Yorkshire (militia) regiment and in April 1900 he was commissioned into the regular army, and posted to the 6th (Inniskilling) dragoons. He served with distinction in the South African War and was severely wounded in the thigh on 6 March 1901. He was mentioned in dispatches and invalided home, but returned to his unit before the end of the year and was promoted lieutenant on 2 February 1902. He afterwards served with his regiment in Ireland, Egypt (where he became captain and adjutant in 1906), and India. 
Oates was devoted to hunting and steeplechasing and was happiest when working with horses, but he was also a keen yachtsman and had a thirst for adventure. When army life in India began to pall he applied to join Captain Robert Falcon Scott's second Antarctic expedition and in March 1910 learned that he had been accepted. He had offered to contribute $1000 to expedition funds but it was for his expertise with horses that he was taken on, and he was put in charge of the nineteen ponies that were vital to the south pole attempt. 
Nearly 6 feet tall with a strong frame, Oates was an independent-minded character with little time for ceremony or pretence. He arrived at the expedition ship 'Terra Nova' in London in the spring of 1910 wearing an old raincoat and was scrutinized by the crew who, according to the Irishman Tom Crean, 'never for a moment thought he was an officer, for they were usually so smart. We made up our minds he was a farmer.' Crean added: 'but oh! he was a gentleman, quite a gentleman, and always a gentleman!' (Gregor, 34). As the only cavalry officer on an expedition staffed primarily by naval men, Oates won respect by his hard work and he grew to be more popular with the seamen than perhaps any other officer. Such was his contribution to the 'Terra Nova' that he was kept on the ship for the voyage south, instead of being sent to oversee the purchase of the expedition ponies in Siberia. 
In retrospect this was a grave mistake, and when Oates first saw the animals, at Lyttelton, New Zealand, he was dismayed at the selections made. Scott, however, was inclined to think that he was too pessimistic and there was considerable tension between them as a result. News that a Norwegian expedition was also bound for the south pole sharpened Oates's misgivings about the British undertaking and of Roald Amundsen he wrote: 'If he gets to the Pole first we shall come home with our tails between our legs and no mistake... I myself think these Norskies are a very tough lot' (Limb and Cordingley, 123). Rather ominously he noted that they had 200 dogs: the British expedition had 32. 
Once ashore at Cape Evans, Oates urged that the ponies be worked hard in preparation for the polar journey, but Scott would not allocate the necessary manpower. The animals struggled during the depot-laying expedition across the great ice barrier (now the Ross Ice Shelf) during January and February 1911, and Oates spent the polar winter striving to build up their strength. Known on the expedition as 'Titus', or 'the Soldier', he was conservative in outlook and naturally taciturn. He affected a dislike of foreigners, an indifference to society in general and women in particular (he was unmarried), and preferred long periods in the relative isolation of the stables to life in the cramped expedition hut. But for all his austerity and reserve he was well liked, with 'a fund of dry humour, and a store of anecdote from which gems would drop at the most unexpected moments' (Ponting, 161). His care of the ponies was universally admired. More than most he suffered from the perpetual darkness and he wrote to his mother, to whom he was extremely close, that he had no intention of remaining for a second winter if it could be avoided. 
As the southern journey approached, Oates's frustration with Scott reached its pitch. The failure of the expedition's two experimental motor sledges put extra pressure on the ailing ponies and in a letter to his mother on 24 October 1911, Oates complained: 'it is perfectly wretched starting off with a lot of cripples... I dislike Scott intensely and would chuck the whole thing if it was not that we are a British expedition and must beat those Norwegians' (Limb and Cordingley, 169). But he later added: 'please remember that when a man is having a hard time he says hard things about other people which he would regret afterwards' (ibid., 173). 
After the main polar party set out across the ice barrier on 1 November, Scott began to appreciate better the true extent of the ponies' failings and of Oates's achievement in bringing them so far. The animals performed their task of transporting loads across the barrier and when the last was shot, at the foot of the Beardmore Glacier on 9 December, a load was lifted from Oates's shoulders. On new year's eve, sitting in Scott's tent high on the polar plateau, he unusually took the lead in the conversation and talked openly for hours about his home and horses and life in the army. One of those present, Lieutenant Edward Evans, later recalled: 'At length Captain Scott reached out and affectionately seized him in the way that was itself so characteristic of our leader, and said, 'You funny old thing, you have quite come out of your shell, Soldier. Do you know, we have all sat here talking for nearly four hours?' (Evans, 'Captain Oates', 626)' On 3 January 1912 Scott announced a five-man team for the pole. Along with Dr Edward Adrian Wilson, Lieutenant Henry Robertson Bowers, Petty Officer Edgar Evans, and Scott himself, it included Oates, who was selected for his strength and toughness. Scott must also have felt that he deserved the honour because of his work with the ponies, and as a representative of the army. In a letter to his mother, to be taken back with the last returning party, Oates was restrained in his reaction to the news, but wrote emotionally about his longing for his home and family. Dr Edward Atkinson, leader of the team that had turned back on 21 December, thought that by then Oates did not want to go on. His feet were wet and cold and he was troubled by his old war wound, and gave the impression of someone 'who knew he was done -- his face showed him to be and the way he went along' (Limb and Cordingley, 194). On 15 January, about 30 miles from the pole, Oates wrote that he 'felt very depressed and homesick' (Huntford, 512). Scott's team reached the pole on 18 January 1912 and Oates was ungrudging in his respect for the Norwegians who had beaten them there (on 14 December 1911): they seemed to have had, he noted, 'a comfortable trip with their dog teams, very different from our wretched man-hauling' (Limb and Cordingley, 196). 
The return journey was from the outset a struggle for survival, and after the death of Edgar Evans on 17 February 1912 Oates was the principal cause for concern. From 26 February to 2 March the minimum temperatures dipped below -30 degree F every day, and on the latter date Oates revealed to Dr Edward Wilson his badly frostbitten feet. By 5 March they were in a 'wretched condition' and although he never complained, he had become, in Scott's words, 'a terrible hindrance' to the others (Scott, 'Diaries', vol. 2, 5 and 6 March 1912). On 10 March, Oates asked Wilson if he 'had a chance', to which Wilson replied that he did not know, and Scott recorded: 'In point of fact he has none' (ibid., 10 March 1912). In fighting for his own life Oates risked jeopardizing the survival of his companions and Scott wrote on 11 March: 'he is a brave fine fellow and understands the situation, but he practically asked for advice -- nothing could be said but to urge him to march as long as he could' (ibid., 11 March 1912). Scott, however, compelled Wilson to give to each man thirty opium tablets from the medicine case, 'the means of ending our troubles' (ibid.). They were not used. At lunch on 15 March Oates proposed that the others should leave him behind in his sleeping-bag, but they persuaded him to go on. He woke next morning, 16 March 1912, and according to Scott: 'It was blowing a blizzard; he said I am just going outside and may be some time. He went out into the blizzard and we have not seen him since... We knew that poor Oates was walking to his death but though we tried to dissuade him we knew it was the act of a brave man and an English gentleman. (ibid., 16/17 March 1912)' His thoughts were of his regiment and, lastly, his mother: 'he did not -- would not give up hope till the very end' (ibid.). 
Oates's three companions made only about 18 miles before their final camp at 79 degree 50' S on 19 March, where they died about ten days later. Their tent was found by the relief expedition led by Edward Atkinson on 12 November 1912 and a cairn was built over it, commemorating also Evans and Oates. Scott's diary revealed what had happened to the polar party and the relief expedition travelled two days south in a vain search for Oates's body. As near as they could judge to the site of his death they built a memorial cairn. At the burial service on 12 November Scott's moving account of Oates's death was read aloud and from this point onwards the legend of his heroism spread. His parting words became familiar to successive generations of his countrymen and his noble deed an inspiration. R. C. K. Ensor, in his 'England, 1870-1914' (1936), saw the praise reaped by Oates in Edwardian England as indicating the shifting moral emphasis of the time (p. 553), and in 1961 the lord chancellor, Viscount Kilmuir, arguing in a debate on the 'Suicide Bill' for a more sympathetic approach, noted that Captain Oates 'commands the respect and admiration of us all' ('Hansard 5L', 2 March 1961, col. 247). 
In a less romantic age Oates's tragic end has become key evidence in the historical inquiry conducted into Scott's leadership of the expedition, and his death has been portrayed not as an act of heroic self-sacrifice so much as of suicide brought on by unbearable pain. But it is the original interpretation that endures, encapsulated in the inscription left by the relief expedition at his memorial cairn: 'Hereabouts died a very gallant gentleman, Captain L. E. G. Oates of the Inniskilling Dragoons. In March, 1912, returning from the Pole, he walked willingly to his death in a blizzard, to try and save his comrades, beset by hardships. (Evans, 'South with Scott', 254)' The Oates Coast (69 degree 30' S, 159 degree 00' E) and the Oates Piedmont Glacier (76 degree 25' S, 162 degree 35' E) in Antarctica are named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 35276


O'Brien, Charlotte Grace (1845-1909), author and social reformer, born on 23 November 1845 at Cahirmoyle, co. Limerick, was the younger daughter in a family of five sons and two daughters of William Smith O'Brien (1803-1864), Irish nationalist, and his wife, Lucy Caroline (died 1861), eldest daughter of Joseph Gabbett, of High Park, co. Limerick. She was educated at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, near Dublin, and privately. Smith O'Brien had been transported to Van Diemen's Land after the 1848 rebellion, and on his release in 1854, his daughter joined him in Brussels, and stayed there until he was allowed to return to Cahirmoyle in 1856. After her mother's death in 1861 she and her father moved to Killiney, near Dublin, and she lived with him until his death at Bangor, Wales, in 1864. From 1864 she lived at Cahirmoyle with her brother Edward, a widower, caring for his children, until his remarriage in 1880. She then went to live at Foynes, co. Limerick, and there devoted herself to writing. 
Charlotte O'Brien was a committed nationalist, supported the Land League, and opposed the 1881 'Coercion Act'. She contributed articles and letters to the 'Nineteenth Century' and the 'Pall Mall Gazette', attacking the government's Irish policies, in 1880 and 1881. 
One particular interest, however, increasingly occupied her time. The disastrous harvest in Ireland in 1879, combined with Irish political unrest led to a sharp rise in the number of emigrants to America. At Queenstown, co. Cork, the port of embarkation, women emigrants suffered greatly from overcrowded lodgings and from robbery. Charlotte O'Brien's article in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' (6 May 1881) led to an investigation of the White Star Line by the Board of Trade, and the enforcement of the law on lodging-houses. In 1881 she founded a boarding-house at Queenstown to receive and protect women about to emigrate. In order to improve the steamship accommodation for women emigrants, and to study their prospects, she made several steerage passages to America. In New York she founded another boarding-house for women. 
When she retired in 1886 Charlotte O'Brien returned to Ardanoir, Foynes, on the bank of the Shannon, to write and to study plant life; she contributed articles on the flora of the Shannon district to the 'Irish Naturalist'. In 1887 she converted to Roman Catholicism. She died on 3 June 1909 at her home, Ardanoir, Foynes, and was buried at Knockpatrick. 
O'Brien's contributions to 'The Nation' and to 'United Ireland' were vigorous and direct. As well as writing for the periodical press, she wrote fiction, drama, and poetry. Her novel 'Light and Shade' (1878) was based on the recollections of the Fenian leaders whom she knew, and deals with events in the 1867 rising. In 'Lyrics' (1886) she wrote nationalist ballads and poems describing emigrant life. She wrote a series of sonnets in praise of W. E. Gladstone, collected by Stephen Gwyn (1909), and corresponded with him. Works by Charlotte O'Brien have been incorrectly attributed to Charlotte Grace O'Brien. 


@@@@@


doc= 35277


O'Brien, Cornelius (1843-1906), Roman Catholic archbishop of Halifax (Nova Scotia), born near New Glasgow, Prince Edward Island, on 4 May 1843, was seventh of the nine children of Terence O'Brien of Munster and his wife, Catherine O'Driscoll of Cork. After school he was briefly employed, but at nineteen entered St Dunstan's College, Charlottetown, to study for the priesthood. In 1864 he passed to the College of the Propaganda in Rome, and concluded his seven years' course in 1871 by winning the prize for general excellence in the whole college. While he was in Rome, Garibaldi attacked the city, the Vatican Council was held, and the temporal power of the pope fell. O'Brien, who had literary ambition and a taste for verse, founded on these stirring events a historical novel which he published later under the title 'After Weary Years' (1886). 
On his return to Canada, O'Brien was appointed a professor in St Dunstan's College and rector of the cathedral of Charlottetown, but failing health led to his transfer in 1874 to the country parish of Indian River. There he devoted his leisure to writing, publishing 'The Philosophy of the Bible Vindicated' (1876), 'Early Stages of Christianity in England' (1880), and 'Mater admirabilis' (1882). He later wrote 'St Agnes' (1887), 'Aminta' (1890), and a life of Edmund Burke (1753-1820), first bishop of Halifax (1894). He twice revisited Rome, and in 1882, on the death of Archbishop Hannan, was appointed his successor in the see of Halifax. O'Brien administered the diocese with great energy, building churches and schools, founding religious and benevolent institutions, and taking an active part in public affairs whenever he considered the good of the community demanded it. His hope of seeing a Catholic university in Halifax was not realized, but he established a French college for the Acadians at Church Point, and founded a collegiate school, St Mary's College, in Halifax, which was to be the germ of the future university. He died suddenly in Halifax on 9 March 1906, and was buried in the cemetery of the Holy Cross, Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
O'Brien, who was elected president of the Royal Society of Canada in 1896, was a representative Irish-Canadian prelate, combining force of character with depth of sentiment and winning the esteem of his protestant fellow subjects while insisting on what he believed to be the rights of the Roman Catholic minority. Advocating home rule for Ireland, he was at the same time a staunch imperialist and a strong Canadian. 


@@@@@


doc= 35278


O'Brien, Ignatius John, Baron Shandon (1857-1930), lord chancellor of Ireland, was born in Cork on 31 July 1857, the ninth child and youngest son of Mark Joseph O'Brien, merchant, and his wife, Jane, daughter of William Dunne, of Cork. He was educated at the Vincentian school, Cork, and then privately; at the age of sixteen he entered the Catholic University of Ireland, Dublin, an institution which had no power to award recognized degrees. He left after only two years, because of financial difficulties at home, and had to earn his own living immediately. He worked first as junior reporter on 'Saunders' Newsletter', a Dublin Conservative daily newspaper, and then for 'Freeman's Journal', while studying for the bar in his free time. 
O'Brien was called to the bar in 1881, but he continued to have to support himself through his freelance journalism and was very slow to build up a practice. In his first year at the bar he made only 6 guineas and in his second only 29; in his third year he began to acquire a small practice on the Munster circuit. Despairing of any real success, he was about to emigrate to New South Wales when he unexpectedly won public acclaim. In 1887 the parish priest of Youghal, Canon Keller, had been questioned in the bankruptcy court as a witness to the financial circumstances of some of his parishioners. Since the priest had acquired his knowledge in his capacity as confessor, and so was bound to silence according to Catholic canon law, he refused to give evidence, and was sent to prison for unsatisfactory answering. T. M. Healy, supported by the Land League, suggested that O'Brien should bring a motion of habeas corpus to secure Canon Keller's release. Although unsuccessful in the court of Queen's Bench, O'Brien secured an order of release from the Court of Appeal, and became a popular Irish Catholic hero, which helped him to build up a good practice. On 11 February 1886 O'Brien had married Anne (died 1929), daughter of John Talbot Scallan, a well-known Dublin solicitor. O'Brien soon gave up circuit business and devoted himself to cases in Chancery and bankruptcy; before long he was a leading authority in bankruptcy law, and in 1899 he finally took silk. 
Once his career was launched, O'Brien's professional success was from 1906 ensured by the steady rise of the Liberal Party, which reflected his own political preferences. Since there were very few eminent Liberals in the Irish bar, he helped his party at elections, though he did not stand as a candidate himself. In 1907 he became a bencher of King's Inns, and in 1910 he was promoted to the position of serjeant-at-law. In 1911 he was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland and in 1912 he became attorney-general and was admitted a privy councillor for Ireland. In 1913 the offices of lord chancellor and of lord chief justice of Ireland became vacant at the same time, and as attorney-general O'Brien sought for and obtained the chancellorship. 
The same political climate which enabled O'Brien to rise in his profession also made his tenure of office rather insecure at times, as Conservative English politicians attempted to oust him from office. When the first coalition government was formed in 1915 he was on the verge of being superseded in favour of the unionist James Henry Mussen Campbell, a former solicitor-general and attorney-general for Ireland, but the government feared American and Irish nationalist opinion too much to appoint such a staunch and uncompromising unionist as Campbell. In the end, an outcry was averted and O'Brien kept his position. On 15 January 1916 he was created a baronet, and in 1917, when his rival Sir James Campbell was made lord chief justice, his position seemed safe. However, in 1918 Conservative opinion again seemed to be in the ascendant and O'Brien was dismissed as lord chancellor in favour of Campbell, being offered consolation in the form of a peerage in July 1918. He accepted, choosing the title of Baron Shandon after the church bells described in the poem 'The Shandon Bells' by Father Prout (Francis Sylvester Mahony). Horrified and exasperated by the violence perpetrated and justified by Sinn Fein, who had raided his own house, he left Ireland for good; he sold his Irish property at Ardtona, near Dublin, and went to live at St Lawrence on the Isle of Wight. He also kept a house at 12 Newton Court, Church Street, Kensington, London. He was called to the English bar by the Middle Temple in 1923. 
Initially sceptical about the House of Lords, Lord Shandon found the peers unexpectedly agreeable and even became reconciled to the hereditary system. He took an active part in negotiations and debate over the abortive 'Government of Ireland Act' (1920), but afterwards became less voluble, speaking only on questions which directly affected Ireland, or on matters in which he had legal expertise. His last speech was delivered in 1927, on the 'Law of Libel Amendment Bill', which he opposed. He died at his London home on 10 September 1930; since he had no children, the peerage became extinct on his death. 
Unlikely to be remembered as a truly great advocate, judge, or statesman, Shandon worked hard all his life and will be remembered as a competent judge. During the troubled times when he was in office, he exercised a moderating influence over the political activists of his day. His wish was for home rule in Ireland without severing completely the imperial tie with Britain. However, his views were overborne by those of his more vociferous political opponents. 


@@@@@


doc= 35279


O'Brien, James Francis Xavier (1828-1905), Irish nationalist, born in Dungarvan, co. Waterford, Ireland, on 16 October 1828, was the son of Timothy O'Brien (died 1853), a merchant there, who owned some vessels which traded between England, Ireland, and south Wales. His mother, Catherine, also belonged to an O'Brien family. James Francis Xavier was the sixth of their ten children. When Father Mathew, the total abstinence missionary, visited Dungarvan, O'Brien, then aged eight, took the pledge, which he kept until he was twenty-one. He was educated successively at private schools in Dungarvan and at St John's College, Waterford, where he was a student from autumn 1848 to summer 1849. On leaving he became involved in the secret revolutionary movement directed by James Fintan Lalor and others, which culminated in the abortive attack on the police barracks of Cappoquin in September 1849. A warrant was issued for O'Brien's arrest, but he escaped to Wales in one of his father's vessels. 
On his return to Ireland O'Brien engaged, at first at Lismore and then at Clonmel, in the purchase of grain for the export business carried on by his father and family. After his father's death in 1853 he gave up this occupation in order to study medicine. In 1854 he gained a scholarship at the Queen's College, Galway, but left in 1855 to accompany a political friend, John O'Leary, to Paris, where he continued his medical studies. He attended lectures at the Ecole de Medecine, and visited the hospitals of La Pitie, La Charite, and Hotel Dieu. Among the acquaintances he formed in Paris were those of the artist James MacNeill Whistler and the Young Irelanders John Martin and Kevin Izod O'Doherty. Ill health led him to break off his medical studies. After returning to Ireland in 1856 he sailed for New Orleans, with the intention of seeking a new experience by taking part in William Walker's expedition to Nicaragua. Through the influence of Pierre Soule, then attorney-general for the state of Louisiana, O'Brien joined Walker's staff. He sailed with the expedition to San Juan and up that river to Fort San Carlos, but Walker made terms without fighting. On returning to New Orleans, O'Brien became a bookkeeper there and enjoyed considerable success in business. In 1859 he married Mary Louisa, 'nee' Cullimore (died 1866), the widow of another emigrant, Patrick O'Brien. They had a son. On the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 O'Brien signed up as assistant surgeon in a volunteer militia regiment for the defence of New Orleans, but saw no action. 
Late in 1862 O'Brien returned to Ireland, and joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB), or Fenian organization, in Cork. He also contributed many letters to the Fenian newspaper the 'Irish People'. He deemed the rising in 1867 to be premature, but on the night of 3 March 1867 he loyally joined his comrades at the rendezvous on Prayer Hill outside Cork, and led an attack upon the Ballynockan police barracks, which surrendered. The party seized the arms there, and marched on towards Bottle Hill, but scattered on the approach of a body of infantry. O'Brien was arrested near Kilmallock, and taken to Limerick gaol. He was subsequently taken to Cork county gaol, and in May tried for high treason. He was convicted, and was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. The sentence was commuted to penal servitude for life. O'Brien was the last person to be sentenced to the barbarous punishment provided by the old law of treason. From Mountjoy prison, Dublin, he was soon taken with some twenty-nine other political prisoners, chained together in gangs on a gunboat, to Holyhead and then Millbank, where he was kept in solitary confinement for fourteen months. Next he was removed to Portland with others, chained in sets of six. In Portland he worked at stone-dressing. He was finally released on 4 March 1869 in the first batch of Fenian prisoners granted amnesty by Gladstone's newly formed cabinet. On visiting Waterford, and subsequently Cork, he received popular ovations. 
He found that the leadership of the IRB had been reorganized in 1868 along representative lines under a supreme council. He made a major contribution towards the consolidation of this change by conveying that he knew the still-imprisoned Fenian notables to be opposed to the continuation of the old ascendancy of James Stephens. O'Brien and James O'Connor (another amnestied prisoner) seem to have assumed charge of the revival of the IRB and to have controlled the emergence of a new supreme council in the summer of 1869. O'Brien then or soon afterwards became president of the supreme council. It was he who proposed the significant innovation which saw Fenian resources being directed to having the imprisoned colleague Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa elected MP for Tipperary in November 1869. By 1874, however, O'Brien had left the leadership of the IRB, although he continued to associate with some of his old colleagues, including Charles J. Kickham, a successor of his as president of the supreme council. 
Before his arrest O'Brien had worked with Cleary & Co., a wholesale tea and wine business at Cork. He was re-employed on his release, and was soon appointed a traveller for the firm, a post which facilitated his Fenian business. From 1873 he was accountant with the Cork Gas Company. In 1882 he moved to Dublin as senior partner in the tea and wine business of W. H. O'Sullivan. In 1870 he had married Mary Teresa O'Malley, with whom he had three daughters and two sons. 
Meanwhile, O'Brien was gradually drawn into the parliamentary home-rule movement under Parnell's leadership. He was nationalist MP for South Mayo from 1885 to 1895 and for Cork City from 1895 until his death. In the schism of 1891 he opposed Parnell. O'Brien's expertise in business and accountancy was turned to good use for party purposes. From 1886 he was 'de facto', and then formally, a treasurer of the Irish Parliamentary Party. From 1888 (in which year he moved to London with his family) he was treasurer and (from 1890) secretary of the Irish National League of Great Britain. In 1900 he became general secretary of the United Irish League of Great Britain, an office which he held for life. He died at his home, 39 Gauden Road, Clapham, on 28 May 1905, and was buried on 1 June in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 35280


O'Brien, Peter, Baron O'Brien (1842-1914), judge, was born on 29 June 1842 at Carnelly House, Ballynalacken, co. Clare, the fifth son of John O'Brien JP (1794-1855), of Ballynalacken, MP for Limerick from 1841 to 1852, and his wife, Ellen (died 1866), daughter of Jeremiah Murphy, of Hyde Park, co. Cork. Brought up a Catholic and educated at Clongowes Wood School, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 5 November 1858; he graduated BA in 1865 and MA in 1874. He entered the Middle Temple in London on 9 June 1862 and was called to the Irish bar at King's Inns, Dublin, in 1865. He devilled for Christopher Palles (later chief baron) and acted as registrar for his uncle, Mr Justice James O'Brien. He failed to be elected as a whig for County Clare in 1879 and became queen's counsel in 1880. On 8 August 1867 he married Annie Clarke, daughter of Robert Hare Clarke JP, of Bansha, co. Tipperary, and they had two daughters and one son. 
Ireland was in a state of political upheaval after the failure of home rule, and O'Brien took silk at a time when judges were under police protection, prosecutors ran the risk of intimidation, the country was subject to insurrection and violence, and the Land League conspiracy was at its height. Retained by the crown in all important cases, O'Brien was rapidly promoted to the position of serjeant (1884), solicitor-general (1887), and attorney-general (1888). His attorney-generalship was notable for his administration of Arthur Balfour's 'Crimes Act', passed in an attempt to restore national order. O'Brien was aided by Edward Carson and Stephen Ronan in his efforts. Where possible, every prosecution was apparently tested microscopically on appeal. Public order was eventually restored and in 1889 O'Brien was appointed lord chief justice. He remained in the post for twenty-four years, enjoying a reputation for an urbane sense of humour. He won the confidence of juries by his rectitude and leniency. He was popular with the bar and the public alike. He was also hospitable, often entertaining at his residence in Donnybrook, co. Dublin, and hunting with friends and colleagues. 
O'Brien retired in 1913, having been created a baronet on 28 September 1891; he was raised to the peerage as Baron O'Brien of Kilfenora on 16 June 1900. He lived at 41 Merrion Square East, Dublin, and at Airfield, Donnybrook, co. Dublin, where he died on 7 September 1914, survived by his wife; their son had died young, and so the peerage became extinct with his death. A Roman Catholic, he was known to most not as Lord O'Brien but informally, as Peter. 


@@@@@


doc= 35281


O'Brien, William (1852-1928), journalist and Irish nationalist, was born in Mallow, co. Cork, on 2 October 1852. He was the second son of James O'Brien, a solicitor's clerk, and his wife, Kate, daughter of James Nagle, a local shopkeeper. On his mother's side he was descended from an old and distinguished local family, of which Edmund Burke's mother had been a member, although that family no longer enjoyed either the status or prosperity it once had. O'Brien received his secondary education at the local Anglican school, Cloyne Diocesan College, and was brought up in an environment generally noted for its religious tolerance. From an early age he appears to have greatly valued this climate, and to have attached great importance to the need for such tolerance in Irish national life. 
In 1868 financial misfortune caused O'Brien's family to move to Cork, where he began to write, in the hope that this might earn him an income. At Queen's College, Cork -- an institution indicted by the Catholic hierarchy as a 'godless college' -- he studied law, one of the few courses not discountenanced by the church. The death of his father in 1869, and the illness of his elder brother and younger brother and sister, meant that he had to turn his attention at an early age to the financial support of his mother and siblings, and thus he never graduated. However, he retained a lifelong attachment to the institution which, later in his life, was to become University College, Cork, and it is there that one of the finest portraits of him hangs and the major part of his private papers is deposited. The habit of prolific writing, which was to remain with him for the rest of his life, began early, and by 1869 it had earned him a job as a reporter on the Cork 'Daily Herald'. This established him in what was to be his primary career, and it was as a journalist that he first attracted attention as a public figure. 
As with so many of his contemporaries in the nationalist movement, O'Brien's political ideas were largely shaped by two influences, the Fenian movement and the plight of the Irish tenant farmers. Although he was himself too young to be a participant in the abortive rebellion of 1867, his elder brother did take part and O'Brien shared much of the excitement of those around him. Afterwards he became actively involved himself in the Fenian brotherhood, but resigned in the mid-1870s because of what he later described as 'the gloom of inevitable failure and horrible punishment inseparable from any attempt at separation by force of arms' and 'the miserable mire of recrimination in which beaten movements in Ireland... are sure to end' (O'Brien, 'Evening Memories', 443-4). His attention as a journalist had, in any case, turned to the sufferings of tenant farmers, especially the poorest and most miserable of them. In particular, over Christmas 1877, O'Brien -- now on the staff of the 'Freeman's Journal' -- toured the Buckley estate in the Galtee Mountains, where the impoverished tenants were threatened with eviction. The articles he wrote describing their conditions were subsequently published in pamphlet form under the title 'Christmas on the Galtees' (1878). It is here that O'Brien first revealed his belief that parliamentary reform, the secret ballot, and the new power of press and public opinion had opened up the prospect of pursuing Irish issues through constitutional and open political activity. In this he was, with so many, responding to the hope that the new home-rule movement associated with Isaac Butt might marshall Irish opinion around a linking of political and agrarian reform. 
It was the dominance of Charles Stewart Parnell that raised O'Brien to the first rank of Irish nationalist politicians of the new generation. Parnell, recognizing his exceptional talent as a writer and journalist, appointed him in 1881 to be the editor of the new weekly Land League newspaper 'United Ireland'. While imprisoned in Kilmainham gaol with the other nationalist leaders between October 1881 and April 1882, O'Brien drafted the famous 'No rent' manifesto which escalated the conflict between the Land League and Gladstone's government. Through his editorship of 'United Ireland' during the 1880s, O'Brien made a major contribution to the consolidation under Parnell of a confident and aggressive nationalist political culture, encompassing the aspirations of widely diverse elements of nationalist Ireland. 
O'Brien was first elected to parliament in 1883, at a by-election for the seat of Mallow, where he secured a significant victory, a product both of his own local standing and of the new political power of Parnellism. This was to mark the beginning of a long and significant parliamentary career, though one characterized throughout by a strong disinclination for the parliamentary role as distinct from political activity in Ireland itself. He foreshadowed this at his Mallow victory with the declaration that 'to be a member of the English Parliament is to me a matter of repugnance rather than of joy' (Warwick-Haller, 63). Despite this, he was a member of the House of Commons almost continuously until the general election of 1918, there being only three periods of absence: in 1886-7, between 1895 and 1900, and for eight months in 1904. As a member he added considerable colour to the house, often providing highly theatrical representations of occurrences in Ireland. During one of his imprisonments, when his refusal to wear prison clothes resulted in his being left without clothing, a Blarney tweed suit was smuggled into him; he later wore this much publicized apparel for his parliamentary confrontation with his incarcerator, Arthur Balfour. Apart from Mallow (1883-5), he was also member for Tyrone South (1886), North East Cork (1887-92), and Cork City (1892-5 and 1901-18). 
The year 1890 marked a major turning point in O'Brien's personal and political life. On 11 June of that year he married Sophie Raffalovich ['see 'O'Brien, Sophie (1860-1960)], the daughter of a Russian Jewish banker, Hermann Raffalovich, domiciled in Paris. His wife brought to the marriage very considerable wealth, which was to enable O'Brien thereafter to act more independently in politics and to back his judgement with the necessary financial resources, to the point even of being able to establish his own newspapers. He also received from his wife very substantial moral and emotional support for his political pursuits; the correspondence between them attests to her deep commitment to his public life. In addition, their marriage began what was for O'Brien to be a deep and abiding love of France and interest in its affairs and politics. Their wedding had another less auspicious significance: it was the last occasion on which virtually the whole of the Irish Parliamentary Party was gathered together before its disruption by the O'Shea divorce case. 
The ensuing split in the party and the death of Parnell in 1891 were to affect O'Brien with particular force. Together with his leading colleagues he was now to be thrust into primary responsibility for the party's affairs, but unlike most of them he found peculiar difficulty in reconciling himself to either side of the chasm which had opened over the issue of Parnell's continued leadership. Remaining personally and emotionally loyal to Parnell, he none the less took the view that Parnell's actions were insupportable politically. Having failed in negotiations at Boulogne to persuade Parnell to withdraw from the leadership, he returned to the United Kingdom, where he and John Dillon gave themselves up to the prison sentence for conspiracy which they had been evading in the United States and in France, and in the relative calm of Galway gaol he began to consider his political future. Unlike Dillon, he thought they should remain aloof from any alignment, preserving themselves as a 'dispassionate tribunal' (O'Brien, 'Olive Branch', 54) to which other nationalists might turn as the fratricidal strife receded. However, he subordinated his judgement to that of Dillon, who saw the weight of political strength on the anti-Parnellite side, rather than risk an open split with one with whom he was so closely identified personally and politically. 
O'Brien was never comfortable in the anti-Parnellite party. He worked hard in the negotiations leading to the 1893 'Home Rule Bill', but with its defeat in the House of Lords and with Gladstone's retirement he was face to face with what he saw as the irrelevance of the party, both at Westminster and in Ireland. On the one hand, he thought that it was now essential for Irish nationalism to re-establish its independence of the Liberal Party, but he was also hostile to the solely parliamentary strategy which was being pursued. His own views had been shaped by the 'new departure' in the 1870s, when the combination of Fenian, agrarian, and parliamentary elements had given a new vitality to nationalist action. Whereas Parnell had appeared to think that the extra-constitutional dimension of the movement could be allowed to fall into abeyance once his immediate objectives had been secured, O'Brien saw such agitational politics as a necessary means both of preserving the attachment of more extreme nationalists to constitutionalism and of maximizing pressure on British parties at Westminster. For this reason, in 1886 he and others had launched the Plan of Campaign in the face of opposition from Parnell. In the mid-1890s he saw the necessity of a similar mobilization, but resistance now came from the leaders of all the nationalist factions. 
In 1895 O'Brien gained his freedom from a political involvement that he found increasingly intolerable. Threatened with bankruptcy on account of debts incurred politically and for which he was being held personally responsible, he seized the excuse this gave him to withdraw from parliament. He and his wife settled, for the first period of relative domesticity since their marriage, at Mallow Cottage, beautifully located between Croagh Patrick and Clew Bay, near Westport, co. Mayo, where he also established connections with the tenant farmers of that area and began to articulate their political aspirations. From these origins he established a new agrarian and political organization, the United Irish League, founded in January 1898. Exploiting the centenary of the United Irishmen's rebellion, as well as agrarian discontent and disenchantment with the factionalism of national politics, this new body proved extremely popular and had, by 1900, extended its network of branches over most of the country. While O'Brien's objective was the achievement of national unity through organized popular opinion, the effect of the league's success was to stimulate a largely defensive reunion by the discredited parliamentary factions. This unity, achieved in January 1900, was a disappointment to O'Brien, for it prevented the league from using its control of selection of candidates to remove from the parliamentary party its less effective members, most of whom were re-elected in the general election of 1900. Recognizing the impossibility of openly opposing reunion, O'Brien hoped that the vitality and relative autonomy of the United Irish League would serve as a stimulant to a more active and imaginative political strategy. 
With the reunion of the Irish Parliamentary Party and the dominance of the United Irish League as the national organization, O'Brien became the most influential figure within the nationalist movement, although not formally its leader. His initial strategy was to intensify agitation for completion of land purchase by the tenant farmers, pressuring the government to use powers of compulsory purchase to buy out the landlords. Instead, the major effect of the agitation was an initiative by moderate landlords for a conference of landlords and tenants to reach a settlement by agreement. As a result of its success, and the consequent Wyndham 'Land Act' of 1903, O'Brien guided the official nationalist movement into endorsement of a new policy of conciliation, designed to remove the sharp polarization between the erstwhile landlord and tenant classes and to allow for a broadening of the basis of nationalism. To O'Brien this was the logical outcome of the abolition of landlordism. He also saw in this new approach, which he labelled 'Conference, Conciliation, Consent', the potential to bridge some of the divisions along religious and ethnic lines which had been so marked an attribute of Irish politics since 1886. He already foresaw that, unless this could be done, nationalist objectives would be frustrated, and he lived to see the realization of his worst fears in the partition of Ireland. For many of his colleagues, however, the adoption of a conciliatory approach to the 'hereditary enemy' involved too sharp a deviation from the political and cultural habits of a lifetime, and -- led by John Dillon, Michael Davitt, and Thomas Sexton -- a campaign was launched against that policy. Faced with the failure of the party's leader, John Redmond, to discipline the opponents of the new policy, O'Brien resigned in November 1903 from his positions of leadership in the movement, hoping thereby to shock the party and public opinion into realizing the need for adherence to policy. The effect of his action, however, was to secure for his opponents control of the party and its organization and effectively to exclude him thereafter from influence within the movement which he had played the principal part in reconstructing. 
From 1903 to 1916 O'Brien's contribution to Irish political life took three forms. First, he assumed the role of principal critic of the strategy being pursued by his former colleagues, warning against the increasingly sectarian basis of nationalist action, condemning the refusal to reciprocate the co-operative attitude of more moderate members of the landlord class, and predicting the resurgence of revolutionary nationalism. Secondly, despite initial inclinations to withdraw from active political life, he became the parliamentary leader of a small group of dissident nationalists, known from 1909 onwards as the All-for-Ireland League, which had its principal basis of support in the anti-sectarianism of county Cork. While never holding more than ten seats in the House of Commons, this group was able to keep alive a broader concept of nationalism and deny to the party of John Redmond a universality of representation to which it thought itself entitled. Thirdly, during these years O'Brien applied himself to writing both general literary works and autobiographical and other accounts of the events in which he had been a participant. His robust and colourful language, together with the distinctiveness of his point of view on political events, made his works popular in Ireland. While out of accord with the dominant political strategy of the Irish party, they stand the test of time extremely well, embodying a view of Irish politics more able than the established historiography to accommodate events since his death. All told, his publications comprise: two novels, evocative in their own way of the periods in which they were set and both written during terms of imprisonment; about ten substantial literary, autobiographical or historical volumes; approximately ten pamphlets, some of them embodying his speeches; and more than twenty articles in contemporary journals. His editorship, proprietorship, and sponsorship of newspapers must also be added to this body of writing: 'United Ireland' in the 1880s; the 'Irish People' from 1899 to 1909; the 'Cork Accent' in 1910; and the 'Cork Free Press' from 1910 to 1916. 
In 1918 O'Brien finally withdrew himself and his small party from active political life, believing that Sinn Fein had earned the right to represent the nationalist interest. Many of his own supporters in the All-for-Ireland League had already transferred their allegiance to the revolutionary movement, and by the time of the Irish Free State election of 1927 O'Brien had publicly committed himself to the republican side, more on account of his opposition to partition than for support of republicanism. 
To O'Brien the unity of Ireland was to be preserved at all costs. His alienation after 1903 from many of his lifelong friends and colleagues was attributable to his belief that by their attachment to older habits of conflict they would stereotype sectarian divisions and make the ideals of national autonomy and unity impossible of achievement. 'Any price for a United Ireland, but partition never' (MacDonagh, 224) was his view, and he would have preferred the indefinite deferral of national independence to one based on the establishment of two confessional states. It was a perspective to which subsequent events have given more substance than most of his contemporaries were prepared to acknowledge. 
O'Brien died suddenly of heart failure on 25 February 1928 at the Belgravia Hotel, Grosvenor Gardens, Victoria, while on a visit to London with his wife. A requiem mass at Westminster Cathedral, where he had often worshipped while in London as a member of parliament, preceded the return of his body to Ireland, for burial in the churchyard at Mallow. His wife later returned to live in Paris, where she lived into the 1950s. They had no children. Both O'Brien's parents, and his three siblings, had all died before he was thirty. 


@@@@@


doc= 35282


O'Callaghan, Sir Francis Langford (1839-1909), civil engineer, was born on 22 July 1839, the second son of James O'Callaghan JP, of Drisheen, co. Cork, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of the Revd Francis Langford. He was educated at private schools and at Queen's College, Cork. From 1859 to 1862 he received training in applied engineering while employed under Henry Conybeare on railway construction in Ireland and south Wales. Success in a competition for a position in the public works department of India led to his appointment as a probationary assistant engineer on 13 June 1862. 
By promotion, often temporary well before the confirmed advance, O'Callaghan rose through the various grades of the department: he achieved the permanent positions of executive engineer fourth class in April 1866 (first class, March 1871), superintending engineer third class in January 1880 (first class, March 1886), and chief engineer third class in April 1889. In May 1889 he was promoted to chief engineer first class and appointed consulting engineer to the government of India for state railways. In August 1892 he became secretary to the government of India, public works department. Posted from 1862 to 1870 to the Northern road and related bridge works (Kanhan Bridge, 1866), in the Central Provinces, O'Callaghan began his association with the state railways when he joined the Nagpur and Raipur railway survey in February 1871. A posting to the Wardha valley railway works (1872) followed, then a furlough, during which time he married, on 22 September 1875 Anna Maria Mary (died 1911), second daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Clarinbold Powell of Banlahan, co. Cork. From 1877 to 1879 he was chief engineer of the Tirhut state railway. He next served with great success as engineer-in-chief for a number of demanding railway projects, surveys, and constructions on India's north-west frontier: the Rawalpindi-Peshawar section of the Punjab Northern (1879-83); Sind-Sagar surveys (1884-5); the Bolan line through the Bolan Pass to Quetta (1885-6); the Khwaja-Amran (1887); and the Sind-Pishin railway (1887-9). Repeatedly commended by government he was made CIE (1883) for his work on the Attock Bridge over the Indus and CSI (1888) for the line through the Bolan Pass. 
O'Callaghan's technical skills were complemented by his popularity, tact, and sound judgement. He retired from India service in 1894 and returned to England where the Colonial Office appointed him in September 1895 to the demanding position of managing member of the Uganda Railway committee, a position he held until the committee was dissolved on 30 September 1903 and for which he was made KCMG in 1902. During the often controversial construction of that line O'Callaghan had to respond to criticism, to provide testimony to parliamentary investigations, and to make trips of inquiry to east Africa. He also served as a company director of the Burma Railway and the Egyptian Delta Light Railways. 
Elected an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers on 12 January 1869 and a full member on 23 April 1872 O'Callaghan was also a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He published in 1865 an adaptation of 'Bidder's Earthwork Tables' for use in India. O'Callaghan died suddenly at Redbraes, London Road, Guildford, on 14 November 1909. He was Anglican by faith, and his funeral and burial took place a few days later at Holy Trinity Church, Guildford. He was briefly survived both by his wife and their only son, Captain Francis Reginald Powell O'Callaghan RE (1880-1910). 


@@@@@


doc= 35283


O'Casey, Sean (1880-1964), playwright and writer, born on 30 March 1880 at 85 Upper Dorset Street, Dublin, was baptized John Casey on 28 July, the youngest of the five children surviving into adulthood of Michael Casey ('c'.1836-1886), a clerk for the Irish Church Mission, and his wife, Susan, 'nee' Archer (1836/7-1918). The facts surrounding John Casey's childhood are vague, a situation not helped by the playwright's tendency to memorial mythologizing in his later years. Clearly the family lived in relative poverty after the father's death, the quality of their actual homes deteriorating with each of several shifts of residence; but they appear not to have known the abject indigence prevalent in many a Dublin tenement. Susan Casey, daughter of an auctioneer, strove to preserve a semblance of protestant gentility; her writer son, as his socialist sympathies grew, tended to stress a solidarity with the working-class values and lifestyle of their Catholic neighbours. 
The onset of trachoma in his childhood greatly affected Casey's sight for the rest of his life; initially, it seriously affected his ability to undergo a sustained education, though his sister Isabella, a trained schoolmistress, did secure him a modicum of traditional schooling. Though he was largely self-taught, his reading was avid, open-minded, and wide-ranging. Equally varied with adulthood were his growing allegiances to cultural and political organizations. When he joined the Drumcondra branch of the Gaelic League in 1906, with the intention of learning the Irish language, he Gaelicized his name to Sean O'Cathasaigh; for their 'Journal' he wrote his first stories. From 1907 he was a member of the St Laurence O'Toole Club and he was founder member and secretary of the St Laurence O'Toole Pipers Band. He joined Jim Larkin's Irish Transport and General Workers' Union in 1911, and was secretary first of the Women and Children's Relief Fund during the Dublin lock-out strike of 1913 and later of the union's most militant wing, the Irish Citizen Army (ICA). Although he resigned this position in 1914, when the ICA backed Patrick Pearse's revolutionary stance and severely criticized the Easter rising of 1916, he was to publish 'The Story of the Irish Citizen Army' in 1919. After his sacking from the Great Northern Railway in 1911, what earned income he had over this period came from casual labour. He appears not to have begun playwriting until 'c'.1916 when the Abbey Theatre rejected 'Profit and Loss', but by then certain abiding values had become fixed: a fervent championing of social equality and as fervent a hatred of all processes or institutions that he saw as entrapping the human spirit, inciting enmity or aggression, or provoking death. These values were to inform all his future writing, together with an exuberant joy in language and a highly attuned ear for the niceties of Dublin speech and its idiosyncratic rhythms and phrasing. 
By 1920, when he began regularly submitting plays to the Abbey Theatre, O'Cathasaigh had re-Anglicized his name to Sean O'Casey. The Abbey directors rejected his next four submissions ('The Harvest Festival', 'The Frost in the Flower', 'The Seamless Coat of Kathleen', and 'The Crimson in the Tri-Colour') but the fifth, 'The Shadow of a Gunman', was accepted for staging in April 1923. It established the form that his next two major plays would follow, investigating the impact of events sparked by national political unrest (the black and tan raids in this instance) on the lives of impoverished tenement families. O'Casey's was what Brecht would term an epic drama by virtue of its exploration of the relationship between the processes of political history and the apparent vagaries of everyday contingencies in working-class life. The action of 'Juno and the Paycock' (staged March 1924) is situated during the civil war, while 'The Plough and the Stars' (staged February 1926) is set at the time of the Easter rising. In all three plays the violence of the public world sets at hazard the attempts by the characters within their domestic sphere to sustain an indomitable spirit; and this juxtaposition creates the unique tone of O'Casey's drama which is skilfully pitched between the comic and the tragic, the one never quite asserting pre-eminence over the other as the action unfolds. What impresses is the rapidity with which O'Casey mastered stagecraft, learning to deploy stage space, properties, and settings to enhance and develop his themes in ways which owe little to the Irish dramatic tradition which preceded him. He evolved too a wholly new depiction of working-class heroism, focused especially on his female characters who resiliently refuse to succumb to circumstance, whatever social adversities confront them. 
It was wholly fitting that W. B. Yeats should describe O'Casey as a genius when defending 'The Plough and the Stars' against nationalist rioters at its fourth performance: O'Casey's innovations in dramaturgy in the six years since he had first offered a play to the Abbey were remarkable, as was reflected in the award of the Hawthornden Prize for 'Juno' in 1926. But that questing innovatory impulse was steadily to take O'Casey further away from the Abbey in ensuing years. The visit to London to receive the Hawthornden introduced him to George Bernard Shaw and Augustus John, who painted his portrait in May 1926, and to West End managements who could offer greater financial recompense for his work than the Abbey could hope to equal. There too he met his future wife, Eileen Carey. 
Eileen Carey was the stage name of the singer-actress Eileen Kathleen Reynolds [
Despite a protracted holiday in Ireland by way of honeymoon, the couple appear never to have considered settling in Dublin; by January 1928 they had found a home at 19 Woronzow Road, St John's Wood, where their son Breon was born the following April. However, what confirmed O'Casey's decision to begin a lifelong exile in England was the Abbey's rejection that same April of 'The Silver Tassie'. The Abbey arguably did not possess the resources to stage the play in the monumental manner which it clearly demanded, but Yeats couched his refusal in aesthetic terms (chiefly that the First World War was not a subject for drama) which O'Casey found insulting and absurd. O'Casey took issue and, not for the last time in his career, went public with the debate, clearly relishing a new-found gift for vituperation. (James Agate, Noel Coward, Kingsley Martin, Malcolm Muggeridge, George Orwell, and the archbishop of Dublin were all to suffer O'Casey's attack.) The play was eventually staged by C. B. Cochran at the Apollo Theatre, London, in October 1929 with a setting for the scene in the trenches by Augustus John. It was that second act (not the three remaining acts set in Dublin) with its daring mixture of ritualism, doggerel, the choric and scenographic techniques of German expressionism, and quotation from the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' which indicated the path that O'Casey's imagination was now to follow. 

'Within the Gates' (staged February 1934) and 'The Star Turns Red' (staged by the Unity Theatre in March, 1940) are modern morality plays, their didacticism offset as in many expressionist dramas by a brilliant deployment of stylized scenic effects and passages of powerful choral chanting. They are very much of their time, especially 'The Star Turns Red' with its confrontation of fascist and communist forces; but both contain passages of sexual lyricism and of wry knockabout comedy, which are not to be found in the German prototype of this genre of play. These passages together with the scenic experimentalism foreshadow the wholly unique style of theatre that O'Casey was to invent for his last plays. The thirties were a difficult period. Eileen's theatrical engagements were sporadic (notable appearances were in the chorus for Noel Coward's 'Bitter Sweet', Rutland Boughton's 'The Immortal Hour' in a revival by Barry Jackson, Reinhardt's staging of 'The Miracle', and A. P. Herbert's 'Mother of Pearl'). The family moved to Chalfont St Giles and then back to Battersea, before settling by 1938 at Tingrith, a house in Totnes, Devon, to enable the children to attend Dartington School. (A second son, Niall, was born on 15 January 1935 and a daughter, Shivaun, on 28 September 1939.) The family moved again in 1954 to Villa Rosa Flats, 40 Trumlands Road, St Marychurch, Torquay. Eileen O'Casey gave up her stage career to devote herself to creating the right working environment for her husband. The banning in Ireland of 'Windfalls' (a collection of stories, poems, and short plays published in 1934) initiated a series of such acts of censorship there; but compensation for this and the loss of London theatre contacts came with O'Casey's visit to New York in September that year for the American staging of 'Within the Gates', when he established friendships with critics George Jean Nathan and Brooks Atkinson and the playwright Eugene O'Neill. 
Later there came creative compensation of a different kind. If shaping plays was a slower process for O'Casey at this time, the chance writing in 1931 of a personal sketch, 'A child is born', initiated a project which steadily grew into six volumes of autobiography by 1954: 'I Knock at the Door' (published 1939), 'Pictures in the Hallway' (1942), 'Drums under the Windows' (1945), 'Inishfallen, Fare thee Well' (1949), 'Rose and Crown' (1952), and 'Sunset and Evening Star' (1954). It was a prodigious achievement, casting a cold satirical eye on Irish and English cultural and political life, as O'Casey recorded the development of his sensibility through private triumphs and adversities in a richly rhetorical prose. 
The fifteen years following from the staging at Dublin's Olympia Theatre in March 1943 of 'Red Roses for Me' were prolific: 'Purple Dust' opened at the Liverpool Playhouse in October 1945; 'Oak Leaves and Lavender' in Hammersmith in May 1947; 'Cock-a-Doodle Dandy' in Newcastle in 1949; 'The Bishop's Bonfire' in Dublin in 1955; and 'The Drums of Father Ned' was commissioned by the Dublin International Theatre Festival for 1958 but was withdrawn after clerical opposition (the premiere was in Lafayette, Indiana, the following year). In all these plays the didactic impulse is still strong in the recurrent contrasting of fiercely anti-clerical satire with images of wild Dionysian liberation; intimations of pantomime and melodrama are present, but transformed by a personal vision that blends song, dance, vaudeville routines, magic, ecstatic drumming, knockabout farce, and stylized violence into a theatricality that is rich and enriching because fuelled continually by an urgent sense of the need to be wholly open to life's possibilities. An awareness of the dangers of repression within society brings to these plays a dark, threatening tone: the moments of transcendence are hard won and so without sentiment or whimsy. Earlier generations of English reviewers found the lack of stylistic unity irritating, because devoid of art; continental and American directors thought otherwise. It became a critical commonplace to infer that with exile from Ireland, O'Casey lost his prime inspiration; but a compassionate awareness of contemporary Ireland is deeply woven into the fabric of these plays (with the one exception of 'Oak Leaves and Lavender'), showing the depth of O'Casey's detestation of de Valera's insular policies, of familism, and the bigotry they both encouraged. These late plays make profound demands in terms of ensemble playing and require highly versatile performers: being about the imagination, they ask for a vibrant and daring imagination in the staging. So too does the group of one-act plays O'Casey published in 1961 ('Behind the Green Curtains', 'Figuro in the Night', and 'The Moon Shines on Kylenamoe'), the year in which, politely but on strong socialist grounds, he refused a doctorate from Trinity College, Dublin. His prodigal genius also saw into print volumes of theatre criticism and stories: 'The Flying Wasp' (1937) which was expanded into 'The Green Crow' (1956) and 'Under a Coloured Cap' (1963); 'Blasts' appeared posthumously in 1967. 
There seemed scant sign of failing creative powers, though O'Casey's health had been deteriorating since 1956 when he underwent two operations and suffered the death of his younger son from leukaemia. He died in Torbay Clinic, St Luke's Road, Torquay, on 18 September 1964 after sustaining a heart attack. His body was cremated four days later in Torquay, but his ashes were scattered in the gardens at Golders Green crematorium, Middlesex, on 3 October. 
In later years the O'Caseys had enjoyed the friendship of Sean's publisher Harold Macmillan, often staying at his home. After the death of their respective spouses, Macmillan and Eileen (now living in Holland Park) sustained their friendship. How platonic their relationship remained has been a subject of some debate. At the invitation of Macmillans, Eileen O'Casey wrote a biographical memoir of her husband, published as 'Sean' in 1971, and an autobiography, 'Eileen', in 1976. She died of natural causes on 9 April 1995 and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 35284


O'Connor, Charles Yelverton (1843-1902), civil engineer, the youngest son of John O'Connor (died 1863), a landowner, of Gravelmount, Castletown, co. Meath, and (Mary) Elizabeth O'Keefe (died 1863), the granddaughter of George Yelverton of Belle Isle, Tipperary, and great-niece of Barry Yelverton, first Lord Avonmore, was born at Gravelmount on 11 January 1843. In 1850 the family moved to Waterford, where Charles was later educated at the endowed school; at the age of seventeen, he was articled to John Chaloner Smith, a railway engineer. After experience of railway work in Ireland, in 1865 he emigrated to New Zealand, where he was employed by the Canterbury provincial government as an assistant engineer on the construction of the coach road from Christchurch to the Hokitika goldfields on the west coast. He was gradually promoted, and in 1870 was appointed engineer for the western part of the province. On 5 March 1874 he married Susan Laetitia, the daughter of William Ness, a Scottish-born architect then living in New Zealand. Later that year, when provincial governments were abolished, O'Connor worked for the national New Zealand government as district engineer for the combined Westland and Nelson districts. In 1880 he was elected to the London Institution of Civil Engineers. From then until 1883 he was inspecting engineer for the whole of the South Island; from 1883 to 1890 he was under-secretary for public works for New Zealand; and in 1890 he was made marine engineer for the colony. 
In April 1891 O'Connor was appointed engineer-in-chief and general manager of railways in the colony of Western Australia at a salary of $1200, but after effecting striking improvements and extensions to the railway system he resigned the latter post in December 1896, in order that he might devote all his time to engineering work. The discovery of the Coolgardie goldfield in 1892 led to an extraordinary and rapid development of Western Australia, in which O'Connor, as engineer-in-chief, played a part second only to that of the premier, Sir John Forrest. In eleven years he undertook two important projects, namely Fremantle harbour and the Coolgardie water supply, besides a large number of roads, bridges, harbours, and jetties. He was also responsible for all new railway work, for which he had a lifelong passion. Under his leadership major lines were built from Perth to the southwest and northern regions of Western Australia and to its eastern goldfields. 
The Fremantle harbour works, carried out from 1892 to 1902, at a cost of $1,459,000, provided a safe harbour for the largest ocean steamships at all states of the tide and in all weathers. It was formed by constructing north and south moles, and an inner harbour with wharves and jetties was established by dredging the mouth of the Swan River. The Coolgardie water scheme, carried out between 1898 and 1903 at a cost of $2,660,000, supplied water to the principal goldfields of the colony. The source was the Helena River, on which, about 23 miles from Perth, a reservoir was constructed whence 5 million gallons of water could be pumped daily to Coolgardie, a distance of 328 miles. This bold plan, without precedent anywhere in the world at that time, was supported by Premier Forrest and approved by a panel of British experts, but many colonists were sceptical. O'Connor's use of an untried electric caulking machine to join the pipes drew particular fire in the local press. After Forrest left Perth for federal politics in 1901 O'Connor was particularly isolated and received little public backing from a weak and unstable government. By March 1902 tests had convinced him that the scheme would work. But the strain had affected his mental balance. On 10 March 1902, ten months before Forrest turned on the water, he rode his horse into the water near Robb's Jetty, Fremantle, and shot himself. He was buried at Fremantle cemetery on 12 March. He was survived by his wife and seven of their eight children, one of whom, Kathleen (Kate), later become a distinguished artist. 
O'Connor was a tall and athletic man who enjoyed riding and often swam. The courtly manners of the Irish gentry which he had acquired in his youth were unusual in Perth, but despite a degree of reserve he was generally liked. Only his willingness and ability to work very long hours enabled him to cope with the demands of his job. His professional achievements earned him respect from his engineering peers in Britain as well as in New Zealand and Australia. He was created CMG in 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 35285


O'Connor, James (1836-1910), journalist and politician, was born on 10 February 1836 in the Glen of Imaal, co. Wicklow, to Patrick O'Connor, a farmer, and Anne, 'nee' Kearney, of Donard in the same county. Following education at a local national school, he entered a commercial career and then was an early member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (Fenians). When its organ, the 'Irish People', was established in 1863 with John O'Leary as editor, he joined the staff, working mainly as a bookkeeper though he seems to have had a limited aptitude for business. Along with other members of the newspaper when it was suppressed, O'Connor was arrested on 15 September 1865, convicted, and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment. His incarceration was mainly in Millbank and Portland prisons and he was released in 1869 along with Charles Kickham, who later lived with O'Connor's family from November 1879 until his death on 22 August 1882. After his release O'Connor joined the staff of Richard Pigott's Fenian newspapers, becoming chief writer on 'The Irishman' and editor of 'The Shamrock'. Meanwhile he resumed work in the Irish Republican Brotherhood: a younger brother, John, was the long-time secretary of the supreme council and in 1870 James was an envoy to the Clan na Gael in the United States. He also attended the meeting at the Bilton Hotel in Dublin on 19 May 1870 at which the modern home rule movement was founded. 
Initially O'Connor opposed the so-called 'new departure' (1879) which linked Fenianism and Charles Stewart Parnell, but like many of his compatriots he drifted towards support of the land war (1879-82), joining the Land League. When Pigott's newspapers were sold to a consortium headed by Parnell in mid-1881, he moved to the successor newspaper, 'United Ireland', as sub-editor. In December 1881 he was detained without trial under the 'Protection of Person and Property Act' (1881) in Kilmainham gaol with Parnell and other leaders of the agrarian agitation, and he was released with them in mid-1882. He remained on 'United Ireland' until December 1890, when he supported the anti-Parnellites and was ejected from his position. When rival journals were established in March 1891, O'Connor was appointed editor of the 'Weekly National Press'. At the general election of 1892 he successfully stood as an anti-Parnellite for Wicklow County West, and he retained the seat (which was contested in 1895, 1900, and 1910) until his death at Kingstown, co. Dublin, on 12 March 1910. 
O'Connor's first wife, Molly, with four of their children, died on 30 June 1890 from eating poisonous mussels at Monkstown, co. Dublin. He was survived by his second wife ('nee' McBride) and their daughter. After a funeral mass at St Michael's Roman Catholic Church, Kingstown, he was buried in Glasnevin cemetery alongside his first wife (14 March). A public monument was erected over their graves. 


@@@@@


doc= 35286


O'Connor, Thomas Power (1848-1929), journalist and politician, was born at Athlone on 5 October 1848, the eldest son of Thomas O'Connor, a shopkeeper, and his wife, Theresa Power. He was educated at the College of the Immaculate Conception, Athlone, and in 1863 he entered Queen's College, Galway, where he took his BA degree in 1866 (he was awarded an MA by the college in 1873). After an attempt to enter the civil service, in 1867 he began as a reporter on the staff of 'Saunders's Newsletter', a Conservative Dublin daily paper. In 1870 he went to London, and at the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War his command of French and German led to his appointment as a sub-editor on the 'Daily Telegraph'. Here he remained only briefly, moving on to the London office of the 'New York Herald', only to be dismissed after eighteen months. He became a freelance journalist, working in the press gallery of the House of Commons. The hardships of these years were said to have made him an extreme radical, and he took part in debates in working men's clubs, becoming vice-president of the Lambeth Radical Association in 1880. 
During 1876 O'Connor's first book, a life of Disraeli, appeared anonymously in serial numbers. It was so unsparing an attack on the prime minister that it attracted considerable notice; when it was published under his name in 1879, its success provided a spur to his entry into politics. Initially O'Connor wanted to stand as a British radical but he was persuaded by Parnell to stand as a home-rule candidate for the borough of Galway, which he won in 1880. He became one of the most voluble and pertinacious speakers among the Parnellites who opposed the Liberal government. In 1885 he stood for the Scotland division of Liverpool, and wrote an address from the Irish party to the nationalist voters in Great Britain, urging them to defeat the Liberals by supporting the Conservative candidates; at the general election of 1886, when Gladstone had adopted home rule, he wrote another address to the same electors, exhorting them in even more moving terms to vote Liberal. 
Throughout his long life O'Connor combined journalism with politics and was better known, perhaps, as a journalist than as a politician. John Morley, editor of the 'Pall Mall Gazette' from 1880, engaged him to write a nightly sketch of the proceedings in parliament, and thought him unrivalled in depicting the personalities of the party fight of that day, and its dramatic episodes. In 1888 O'Connor founded the 'Star', an evening journal noted both for its radicalism and for its inauguration of the 'new' journalism. Differences arose between him and the proprietor, and O'Connor was bought out reportedly for $15,000, subject to the condition that he should not start another evening paper in London for three years. In 1891 he brought out the 'Sunday Sun', subsequently called the 'Weekly Sun'. In 1893, when he was able to start another evening paper, he founded the 'Sun', but it was less successful. His next venture, in 1902, 'T. P.'s Weekly' (he was known familiarly as T. P.), a penny literary paper, was extremely popular. He started other weekly papers, such as 'M.A.P.' ('Mainly about People') and 'P.T.O.' ('Please Turn Over'), both devoted chiefly to gossip, and experimented with a monthly called 'T.P.'s Magazine'. Of his books the more important are 'The Parnell Movement' (1886) and 'Memoirs of an Old Parliamentarian' (1929). 
As a journalist O'Connor was not a publicist, writing few leading articles of weight and influence on public affairs. He was content rather to be an observer of life and its chronicler in an easy style, full of reminiscences and anecdotes. Nor as a parliamentarian did he ever aspire to leadership. As the voice of the Irish in Britain, his role was as mediator and ambassador for the cause of Irish nationalism. President of the Irish National League of Great Britain from 1883 to 1918, he played an important role in making links between Ireland and the Irish in Britain. He promoted Irish home rule policies in France, and raised funds for the Irish Parliamentary Party in America. 
In 1917 O'Connor became the first president of the British Board of Film Censors, nominated by the film trade, but independent of trade control or influence. O'Connor's signature on the censors' certificate that preceded the presentation of every film thus became familiar to millions. He was successful in ensuring that disputes between the Home Office, local authorities, and the board were eased, and the board's decisions were accepted as final. He was made a member of the privy council in 1924 by the first Labour government. He was also for many years 'father' of the House of Commons by right of the longest unbroken period of service. O'Connor loved the Commons for its history, its customs, and its sociabilities, and wrote innumerable articles about its more prominent members, their fortunes and fates. 
O'Connor married, in 1885, Elizabeth Howard, 'nee' Paschal, the daughter of a judge of the supreme court in Arkansas, USA; they had no children, and she died in 1931 (her son from her first marriage, Francis Howard, was the father of Brian Howard, the dilettante). O'Connor died on 18 November 1929, and was buried in the Roman Catholic cemetery, Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 35287


O'Conor, Charles Owen (1838-1906), landlord in Ireland and politician, was born on 7 May 1838 in Dublin. He was the eldest son of Denis O'Conor of Belanagare and Clonallis, co. Roscommon, and Mary, 'nee' Blake, daughter of Major Blake of Towerhill, co. Mayo. The O'Conors were among Ireland's most ancient and renowned Catholic families. Charles's father, MP for co. Roscommon from 1831 to 1847, died when he was a child, leaving him large estates in Roscommon and Sligo. 
O'Conor was educated at the Benedictine public school St Gregory's College, Downside, near Bath, and in 1855 entered London University, but did not take a degree. He was married twice: first, on 21 April 1868, to Georgina Mary (died 1872), the third daughter of Thomas A. Perry of Warwickshire; they had four sons. Seven years after Georgina's death he married Ellen, the third daughter of John S. More O'Ferrall, of Granite Hall, Kingstown, and Lisard, Edgeworthstown, co. Longford. Coming from a Catholic landed family, O'Conor was destined to play a significant role in political life. He was made her majesty's lieutenant and 'custos rotulorum' of co. Roscommon in 1858; and at the parliamentary by-election on 26 March 1860 he was returned unopposed as a Liberal for that county, which he represented until his defeat in the general election of 1880. Although not particularly skilled as a debater, he enjoyed considerable influence in the House of Commons because of his mastery of detail. He took particular interest in education, land tenure, prisons, workshop conditions, Irish Sunday closing, state purchase of Ireland's railways, grand jury reform, the taxation of Ireland, and Catholic issues generally. During his lifetime he wrote pamphlets on Irish taxation, land tenure, and education. His immense local status and close connections with the Catholic ecclesiastical hierarchy made him a valuable channel of communication between Westminster politicians and Catholic clergy. 
O'Conor stood unopposed for re-election as a Liberal in the general elections of 1865 and 1868. In the early 1870s he flirted with the home-rule movement, attending and speaking at the national conference held in Dublin in November 1873 which founded the Home Rule League. During the proceedings he expressed reservations about the precise formulation of home rule, but nevertheless stood as a home-ruler at the general election of 1874 and was once again returned unopposed; his younger brother Denis O'Conor was elected without a contest for Sligo in the home-rule interest at the same election. Although O'Conor declined to join the newly formed Home Rule Party, he gave it independent support. During the debate on home rule in June 1874 he expressed reservations about its application to Ireland and in subsequent years opposed the party on various questions. During these years he advocated the extension of the 'Ulster custom', giving tenants the right to sell their 'interest' in their holdings, to the rest of Ireland. He played a significant part in negotiations leading to the 'Irish Intermediate Education Act' in 1878 and was involved in the discussions of the 'University Act' of the following year. His interest in education and contribution to the Royal University, where he was a member of senate for many years, led to the conferment of an honorary LLD in 1892. Although standing as a home-ruler at the general election of 1880, he was one of those old-style MPs displaced by a follower of Charles Stewart Parnell. O'Conor made one further attempt to re-enter the House of Commons, contesting Wexford borough against W. H. K. Redmond, brother of the Irish nationalist John Redmond, at the by-election on 27 July 1883, when he was defeated decisively. 
O'Conor's chief political role was as a member of numerous committees and commissions and in local administration. He served on the penal servitude commission (1862), the factories and workshops commission (1875), the registration of deeds commission (1878), the land law commission (1880), the reformatories and industrial schools commission (1882), and the royal commission on the financial relations between Great Britain and Ireland (1894). On the death of H. C. E. Childers in 1896 he became chairman of this last body, a post he held at the time it reported. His involvement in local administration was also extensive. He was a magistrate, deputy lord lieutenant of Roscommon from 1888 until his death, and was elected to the Roscommon county council following its creation under the 'Local Government Act' of 1898. He was also a member of the intermediate education board and of the executive committee of the Irish landowners' convention. 
O'Conor also took a strong interest in Irish history and language. He was for many years president of the Antiquarian Society of Ireland, president of the Royal Irish Academy, and president of the Irish Language Society. In 1881 he was sworn of the Irish privy council. He secured the introduction of the Irish language into the curriculum of the intermediate education board, while his interest in antiquarianism resulted in the publication in 1891 of a history of the O'Conors of Connaught. O'Conor died at his home, Clonallis, Castlerea, co. Roscommon, on 30 June 1906, leaving an estate valued at $33,272 4's'. 4died, of which $6937 13's'. 4died was in England. On 5 July he was buried in the new cemetery, Castlerea. 


@@@@@


doc= 35288


O'Conor, Sir Nicholas Roderick (1843-1908), diplomatist, born at Dundermott, Ballymoe, co. Roscommon, on 3 July 1843, was the youngest of three sons of Patrick A. C. O'Conor, of Dundermott, and his wife, Jane, second daughter of Christopher Ffrench, of Frenchlawn, co. Roscommon. He was educated at Stonyhurst College, and afterwards at Munich under J. J. I. von Dollinger, and entered the diplomatic service in 1866. After some months of employment in the Foreign Office he was appointed attache at Berlin, where he attained in 1870 the rank of third secretary. After service at Washington and Madrid he returned to Washington to be second secretary in 1874, and was transferred in 1875 to Brazil, where he was employed on special duty in the province of Rio Grande do Sul in November 1876. In October 1877 he was moved to Paris, where he had the advantage of serving for six years under Lord Lyons. 
In December 1883 O'Conor was appointed secretary of legation at Peking (Beijing), and on the death of the minister, Sir Harry Parkes, in March 1885, he assumed charge of the legation for a period of fifteen months. He found himself almost immediately involved in somewhat awkward discussions with the Chinese and Korean governments with regard to the temporary occupation of Port Hamilton, a harbour formed by three islands at the entrance to the Gulf of Pecheli (Beizhili), of which the British admiral had taken possession as a coaling station, following the deterioration of Anglo-Russian relations over Afghanistan. The question was eventually settled, after the alarms about war with Russia had disappeared, by the withdrawal of the British occupation, the Chinese guaranteeing that no part of Korean territory, including Port Hamilton, would be occupied by any foreign power. 
The annexation of Upper Burma to the British Indian empire, proclaimed by Lord Dufferin in 1886, gave rise to an equally embarrassing issue. The Chinese government viewed the annexation with great jealousy. The Burmese shared a frontier with China and with the Chinese vassal state of Tibet. China claimed indeterminate and rather obsolete rights of suzerainty over the Burmese, recognized by a decennial Burmese mission to China. After a tedious negotiation O'Conor succeeded in concluding an agreement on 24 July 1886, making provision for the delimitation of the frontier by a joint commission, for a future convention to settle the conditions of frontier trade, and agreeing to the continuance of the decennial Burmese mission, in return for a waiver of any right of interference with British authority and rule. Although this agreement was only the preliminary to a series of negotiations, it paved the way for a friendly solution. On its conclusion O'Conor, who had been made CMG in February 1886, was created CB. 
After a brief tenure of the post of secretary of legation at Washington, in January 1887 O'Conor succeeded Frank Lascelles as agent and consul-general in Bulgaria. The principality was at the time in a critical situation. Prince Alexander, whose nerve had been shaken by his abduction, having failed to obtain the tsar's approval of his resumption of power, had abdicated in September 1886, and the government was left in the hands of three regents, of whom the principal was the former prime minister, Stambulov. For the next few months, in the face of manoeuvres on the part of Russia to prolong the interregnum or procure the selection of a nominee who would be a mere vassal of Russia, vigorous attempts were made by the regency to obtain a candidate of greater independence. On 7 July 1887 Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha was elected, and Stambulov again became prime minister. O'Conor, who united great shrewdness with a blunt directness of speech which, although not generally regarded as a diplomatic trait, had the effect of inspiring confidence, exercised a steadying influence on the energetic premier. Excellent relations were maintained between them in the course of five years' residence. Among other results was the conclusion in 1889 of a provisional commercial agreement between Great Britain and Bulgaria. 
In April 1892 O'Conor was again appointed to Peking, this time in the position of envoy to the emperor of China and to the king of Korea. A notable change in the etiquette towards foreign representatives was made by the court in his reception at Peking; he was formally received with the staff of the legation at the principal entrance by the court officials and conducted to a personal audience with the emperor in the Cheng Kuan Tien (Zhengguandian) Palace. In July 1894 the disputes between China and Japan over the introduction of reforms in the administration of Korea led to open war between the two countries, and O'Conor's responsibilities were heavy. The Chinese forces were routed by land and sea, and in April 1895 the veteran statesman Li Hung-chang (Li Hongzhang) concluded the treaty of Shimonoseki, by which China made substantial concessions to Japan, including the peninsula of Liaotung (Liaodong). O'Conor handled this and subsequent negotiations about Port Arthur in 1895 with considerable skill and was made KCB in May 1895. 
In October 1895 O'Conor left China to become ambassador at St Petersburg. The following year he attended the coronation of Tsar Nicholas II. He received the grand cross of St Michael and St George and was sworn of the privy council in the same year. He was as popular at St Petersburg as at his previous posts, but towards the close of his residence British relations with Russia were seriously complicated by the course taken by the Russian government in obtaining from China a lease of Port Arthur and the Liaotung peninsula. The discussions, which at one time became somewhat acute, were carried on by O'Conor with his usual tact; but a dispute arose between him and Count Muravyov, the Russian minister for foreign affairs, as to an assurance which the latter had given but subsequently withdrawn that Port Arthur, as well as Talienwan (Dalianwan), should be completely open to international commerce. This incident, and the manner in which Count Muravyov endeavoured to explain it, made it on the whole fortunate that in July 1898 there was an opportunity for O'Conor to be transferred to Constantinople. He had been promoted GCB in 1897. 
The last ten years of O'Conor's life, which were passed in Constantinople, were very laborious. He worked under great difficulties for the policy of administrative reform, which was strenuously pressed whenever possible by the British government. He succeeded, however, in winning to a considerable extent the personal goodwill and confidence of the sultan and of the ministers with whom he had to deal, and by persistent efforts cleared a large number of long outstanding claims and subordinate questions which had been a permanent burden to his predecessors. Among the more important questions which he succeeded in bringing to a settlement were those of the Turco-Egyptian boundary in the Sinai peninsula, and of the British frontier in the hinterland of Aden. 
O'Conor had married, on 13 April 1887, Minna, eldest daughter of James Robert Hope-Scott and his second wife, Lady Alexandrina Howard. They had three daughters. O'Conor had succeeded in May 1877 to his brother Patrick's estate of Dundermott, but was never able to live there. His health had never been strong since his residence in China, and in 1904 he returned to Britain for advice, and underwent a serious operation. The strain of work on his return to Turkey was too much for him, and he died at his post in the British embassy, Constantinople, on 19 March 1908. He was buried with every mark of affection and respect in the cemetery at Haydar Pasha, where a monument erected by his widow bears with the date the inscription 'Nicolaus Rodericus O'Conor, Britanniae Regis apud Ottomanorum Imperatorem Legatus, pie obiit'. It was at that time unusual for a Roman Catholic Irishman to be appointed ambassador. O'Conor showed a safe pair of hands in several complex negotiations. 


@@@@@


doc= 35289


O'Doherty, Kevin Izod (1823-1905), politician and physician, was born in Gloucester Street, Dublin, on 7 September 1823, the son of William Izod O'Doherty, solicitor, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' McEvoy, and was baptized at the Roman Catholic church of St Andrew. He was educated at Dr Wall's school, Hume Street, Dublin, and began medical training, first at the medical school, Cecilia Street, Dublin, from November 1842 until April 1843. He was an assistant in St Mark's Ophthalmic Hospital for diseases of the eyes and ears (December 1845 - July 1847), and a clinical practising assistant in the Meath Hospital, Dublin (October 1847 - May 1848). His subsequent life fell into four phases: Young Ireland and transportation to Australia; qualification, medical practice, and Queensland politics from the mid-1850s to 1885; a brief incursion into Ireland's political arena in the mid-1880s; and a relatively obscure resumption of private life in Brisbane after 1888. 
In May 1843 O'Doherty became associated with the Young Ireland movement and contributed to its newspaper, 'The Nation', then under the stewardship of Charles Gavan Duffy; he was also a founder of the students' and polytechnic clubs, which opposed the policies of Daniel O'Connell. When John Mitchel seceded from 'The Nation' and advocated revolution, O'Doherty, who although essentially a moderate had been radicalized by the experience of treating patients suffering from famine diseases, followed him to support the confederation and contributed to Mitchel's new journal, the 'United Irishman'. When this was suppressed, O'Doherty co-founded a successor newspaper, 'The Tribune', which first appeared on 10 June 1848. Five weeks later the paper was seized and O'Doherty along with several colleagues was arrested on 8 or 9 July and charged with treason-felony. After three trials an all-protestant jury found him guilty on 3 October 1849 and O'Doherty was given the extended sentence of transportation for ten years to Van Diemen's Land. He arrived in Hobart Town on 31 October 1849. 
Like other transported political prisoners, O'Doherty enjoyed comparative freedom: he was granted a ticket-of-leave and allowed to settle in the Oatlands district, where he continued his medical studies. In November 1850 O'Doherty was given permission to transfer to Hobart, where he worked with a local physician and became manager of the dispensary. During this period he regularly met his fellow exiles. One meeting discovered in December 1850 led to confinement for three weeks in January 1851 in a prison colony where he was obliged to 'split shingles' alongside ordinary criminals. From August 1851 to September 1853 O'Doherty was acting surgeon at St Mary's Hospital, Hobart, and then in autumn that year he moved to Huon River, though he proved unable to develop a successful medical practice there. 
In March 1855 it was announced that O'Doherty would be given a conditional pardon, which forbade residence in the United Kingdom. Before departing for Europe he and P. J. Smyth travelled to the Australian gold fields. In 1855 he went to Paris, where he studied surgery for a year at the Pitie hospital and then anatomy for a further six months. In 1855 he made a surreptitious trip to London to marry (on 23 August) the nationalist poet Mary Anne Kelly ['see 'O'Doherty, Mary Anne (1830-1910)], 'Eva of 'The Nation'', to whom he had become engaged in spring 1848, before his conviction. They went through another marriage ceremony in Paris on 30 November, to avoid the detection of his violation of the terms of his conditional pardon. Kelly had declined O'Doherty's offer to release her from the engagement following his sentence. He received a pardon the following year and returned to Ireland, where he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons and Physicians of Ireland in June 1857. O'Doherty practised in Dublin until emigrating in 1860 first to New South Wales, then to Ipswich, Queensland, for three years before settling in 1865 in Brisbane, where he became a leading physician. He was an early president of the Queensland Medical Society and carried out extensive honorary work at Catholic hospitals. Between 1867 and 1873 he was a member for Brisbane in the legislative assembly of Queensland, where he was responsible in 1872 for the first 'Health Act'. From May 1877 to 1885 he was a member of the Queensland legislative council, where he sponsored the bill to stop the recruitment of Kanakas. In November 1882 he was made surgeon-major of the Queensland volunteer force. He remained active in Irish affairs: he established the Queensland Hibernian Society in 1871 and was president of the Irish Australian Convention in 1883. 
On returning to Ireland in 1885 O'Doherty received a rapturous reception and was granted the freedom of Dublin. At the request of Charles Stewart Parnell he stood as nationalist parliamentary candidate for North Meath at the general election in 1885 and was returned unopposed on 27 November but did not stand again at the general election in July 1886. 
Having been unable to establish a successful medical practice, O'Doherty returned to Brisbane in 1888 but failed to recover his position. In 1892 he was appointed surgeon to the central board of health and also was supervisor of the quarantine station, posts which brought him $250 per annum. He suffered from advancing blindness during his final years, which were marred by straitened financial circumstances, and following his death on 15 July 1905 at his home in Torwood, Brisbane, his widow was supported by a fund raised for her relief. Of his eight children, only one daughter survived him. O'Doherty and his wife (who died on 21 May 1910) were interred in the Woowong cemetery, where a monument provided by the Queensland Irish Association stands over their graves. 


@@@@@


doc= 35290


O'Doherty, Mary Anne [called Eva of 'The Nation'] (1830-1910), poet, was born on 15 February 1830 at Headford, co. Galway, the daughter of Edward Kelly, a country gentleman, and his wife, Mary O'Flaherty. One of seven children, she spent her childhood at Headford. She was educated by governesses, one of whom encouraged her literary talents, which she soon turned to nationalist ends, perhaps influenced by her cousin John Blake Dillon and her uncle Martin O'Flaherty, who were both Young Irelanders. 
After her poem 'The Leprechaun' appeared in the Young Ireland newspaper 'The Nation' on 28 December 1844 under the signature Fionnuala, she began writing passionate nationalist verses under the signature Eva for 'The Nation' and then for John Mitchel's 'United Irishman' and the 'Irish Felon' and the 'Irish Tribune'. Her most famous poems were 'Down Britannia' and 'The Men in Jail for Ireland'. In 1848, during a visit to her uncle, a Dublin solicitor active on behalf of imprisoned Young Irelanders, she met Kevin Izod O'Doherty (1823-1905), a young medical student imprisoned for his nationalist political activities. They became engaged before O'Doherty was convicted and sentenced to transportation to Van Diemen's Land in 1849. Her promise to wait for him, his clandestine return to Ireland after he was partially pardoned in 1854, and their subsequent marriage became the stuff of romantic nationalist legend. John Mitchel celebrated the love of his fellow exile O'Doherty for Eva, as she had become known, 'a dark-eyed lady, a fair and gentle lady, with hair like blackest midnight; and in the tangle of those silken tresses she has bound my poor friend's soul' (J. Mitchel, 'Jail Journal', 254). 
Kevin O'Doherty and Mary Anne Kelly were married in London on 23 August 1855 and again in Paris on 30 November 1855 so that his presence in London, which violated the conditions of his partial pardon, would not be known. O'Doherty completed his medical studies in Paris and, after he received a full pardon in 1856, in Dublin, where the first of their eight children was born in May 1856. In 1859 they emigrated to Australia, where Kevin O'Doherty practised medicine, first in Sydney and eventually in Brisbane. Mary Anne devoted her energies to raising her young family, but her correspondence revealed her continuing literary aspirations. After the birth of her fourth child in 1860, she published forty poems in the 'Sydney Freemen's Journal', many of which expressed an exile's longing for Ireland and a continued commitment to social justice for the poor and oppressed. 
Mary Anne O'Doherty and her husband were active in church and political circles with fellow emigrants from Ireland. She wrote verse in commemoration of the Daniel O'Connell centenary in 1875 and the Thomas Moore centenary in 1879. 'Poems by Eva of 'The Nation'', published in San Francisco in 1877, represented the full range of her poetic output: fervent nationalist verse, passionate love poetry, and melancholy musings on life and death. Passionate, popular, and effective political propaganda, her conventional themes and mediocre verses are now only of historical interest. 
Eva's poetry and her romantic courtship and marriage earned her a place in Irish national legend which has overlooked the tragic aspects of her life. After an initially successful medical career, her husband's Irish nationalism and support for the Land League adversely affected his medical practice. Three of their children died in infancy, and of the five who lived to be adults only their daughter Gertrude survived her parents. Between 1890 and 1900 four sons died, and Kevin O'Doherty went blind. He died on 15 July 1905. In 1909 a testimonial in Australia and the publication of a collection of her poems in Dublin raised some money for the impoverished Eva, who died of influenza in Brisbane the following year on 21 May 1910. She was buried in Brisbane, beside her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 35291


O'Donnell, Patrick (1856-1927), cardinal, was born on 28 November 1856 at Kilraine, near Glenties, co. Donegal, the second son of nine children of Daniel O'Donnell, tenant farmer, and Mary Breslin, of Gortlosk, co. Donegal. He was educated at the local national school and the high school at Letterkenny. He was nominated for a place at the Pontificio Collegio Irlandese, Rome, but was sent instead in 1873 to the faculty of arts and science in the Catholic University, Dublin. In 1875 he entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, and in 1879 became a student of the Dunboyne Establishment. In 1880 he was ordained and was appointed to a chair in theology. During his time at Maynooth he contributed a number of articles to the 'Irish Ecclesiastical Record'. In 1884 he was appointed prefect of the Dunboyne Establishment. In 1888, at the unusually young age of thirty-two, he was appointed to the see of Raphoe, comprising most of co. Donegal. 
As bishop of Raphoe, O'Donnell was energetic in both religious and secular affairs. During his episcopate the ancient cathedral chapter was re-established by Pope Leo XIII in 1901 and St Eunan (St Adomnan) was declared joint patron saint of the diocese with St Columba. The cathedral was opened in 1901, and new schools and churches were built. On 28 April 1922 he was installed as coadjutor, with the title archbishop of Attalia, to Cardinal Michael Logue, whom he succeeded as primate in November 1924. In December 1925 he was created cardinal and took the title Santa Maria Della Pace. On his return to Ireland from Rome he was greeted by President Cosgrave, two government ministers, a guard of honour of fifty men, and a pipe band. As he travelled north to Armagh he was welcomed by groups ranging from the Gaelic League and Knights of Columbanus to the Royal Ulster Rifles. He attended the International Eucharistic Congress in Chicago in 1926 and received a warm welcome from Irish Americans. His final religious event of major significance was a plenary synod of the Irish hierarchy at Maynooth in August 1927. 
As bishop of Raphoe -- a diocese frequently afflicted by famine -- O'Donnell took a keen interest in the plight of the small farmer. He was a member of the congested districts board from its establishment in 1896 to its dissolution in 1923, and a member of the royal commission on congested districts in 1906. He also promoted the revival of the cloth-making industry in Donegal. 
O'Donnell took a keen interest in national politics and was actively involved in the Irish parliamentary party. He retained the confidence of both sides when the party split following the death of Parnell and he helped promote reunion. He presided at the Irish Race Convention in January 1896, and was the only bishop present. O'Donnell supported the United Irish League, which was to become the constituency organization of the Irish parliamentary party, but had some difficulty in leading his clergy to support it. He was responsible for the removal of the hierarchy's ban on the Ancient Order of Hibernians in 1904 and this organization was to form an important part of the party's political machine in the north-east. O'Donnell was appointed a trustee of the reunited party and was to prove a valuable adviser to leader John Redmond until 1918. Between 1917 and 1918 he was one of four episcopal representatives in the Irish Convention which deliberated on an Irish settlement. There he argued strongly in favour of fiscal autonomy. He rejected a compromise suggested by Redmond and led the nationalists in the convention when Redmond withdrew. Before the post-war election of 1918 he suggested that all Irish party members withdraw from the election, a suggestion John Dillon rejected. After the eclipse of the party in the 1918 election O'Donnell maintained a close friendship with leading party members Dillon and Joe Devlin. 
While O'Donnell always considered partition lamentable, he realized at an early stage that some form of exclusion of the north-east from home rule might be inevitable and warned against any form of autonomy which might have detrimental effects on Catholic education. Strictly constitutional in the methods he espoused, O'Donnell kept his distance from Sinn Fein during the struggle for independence, unlike some of his episcopal colleagues. His statements increasingly dealt with human rights issues rather than party politics. During the civil war he tried in vain to prevent the execution of Erskine Childers, who had helped him during the Irish Convention of 1917-18. In 1924 he appealed for the release of political prisoners both north and south. The following year he spoke of the obligation of both governments to protect the rights of minorities. When the boundaries of the Northern Irish state had been settled, he urged Catholics to use legitimate means to further their objectives and expressed hope in the goodwill of unionists. 
A fluent Irish speaker, O'Donnell sought in many ways to promote the language. As bishop he issued pastoral letters in Irish as well as English. He expounded his views on the language question in the preface he wrote for the autobiography of another language enthusiast, An tAthair Peadar Ua Laoghaire. In Letterkenny, O'Donnell clashed with the Gaelic League when their fund-raising for an Irish college for teachers conflicted with his campaign for St Eunan's Cathedral. O'Donnell established his own Irish college for teachers and his own Irish-language organization, the Crann Eithne. Nevertheless, the rift was not permanent and in 1926 he supported a Gaelic League proposal for a separate Irish-language organization in Northern Ireland. He frequently spoke at Feis Thir Chonaill in promotion of the language. 
O'Donnell was involved in a variety of educational initiatives during his life. He was rector of the Catholic University, a member of the governing body of the Catholic school of medicine, and member of the governing body of the National University of Ireland, which awarded him an honorary doctorate in law in 1915. In 1918 he represented the bishops on the vice-regal committee of inquiry into primary education (the Killanin committee). As primate his relations with Lord Londonderry, the first minister of education in Northern Ireland, were cordial. Together they resolved the impasse reached in relation to the provision of teacher training for Catholic males by sending them to St Mary's College, Hammersmith. He made suggestions to the Northern Ireland ministry of education on the teaching of Irish to young children, and expressed his concerns about school buildings to both Belfast and Dublin governments. 
O'Donnell was generally recognized as handsome, with a charming manner. He was frequently described as 'of princely bearing' and was a skilled orator. He was a fine swimmer and a keen walker. His enduring fault, however, was his notoriously bad handwriting, which unfortunately rendered his copious writings on political issues a trial for his contemporaries and for later researchers. He died at his summer residence at Carlingford, co. Louth, on 22 October 1927. The immediate cause of death was an embolism, but he had also been suffering from pneumonia and had developed pleurisy. He was buried in St Patrick's cemetery, Armagh, on the 28th. During his lifetime he was known to respect the views of his political opponents and was seen by many protestants as a force for reconciliation. O'Donnell had been impressed at the healing of old political divisions he witnessed during his visit to the United States in 1926 and hoped for similar reconciliation in Ireland. On the day of his death the bells of both Catholic and protestant cathedrals in Armagh tolled for him. After his death the 'Belfast News-Letter' described him as 'an honourable opponent'. 


@@@@@


doc= 35292


O'Dwyer, Sir Michael Francis (1864-1940), administrator in India, was the sixth son in the family of fourteen children of John O'Dwyer, a landowner of Barronstown, co. Tipperary; he was born on 28 April 1864. His mother was Margaret, daughter of Patrick Quirk, of Toom, co. Tipperary. He was educated at St Stanislaus College, Tullamore, and passed the open competition for the Indian Civil Service in 1882 and the final examination in 1884. The intervening two years of probation he spent at Balliol College, Oxford, where in a third year he obtained a first class in jurisprudence. Joining the service in India in 1885 he was first posted to Shahpur in the Punjab. He enjoyed the initiative and authority that administrators had traditionally wielded in the Punjab, and rose rapidly in the service. He greatly distinguished himself in land revenue settlement work, and was made director of land records and agriculture in the Punjab (1896); the next year he was placed in charge of the settlements of the Alwar and Bharatpur states. He was a fine rider and sportsman; he was also highly skilled in the vernacular. On 21 November 1896 he married Una Eunice (1872-1956), daughter of Antoine Bord of Castres, France. They had one son and one daughter. 
After a long furlough which he spent largely on examination leave in Russia, passing for an interpretership, O'Dwyer was selected by Lord Curzon for a prominent part in the organization of the new North-West Frontier Province and its separation from the Punjab: he was revenue commissioner from 1901 to 1908. From 1908 to 1909 he was acting resident in Hyderabad, and agent to the governor-general in central India from 1910 to 1912. In December 1912, while Lord Hardinge of Penshurst was viceroy, he was appointed to be lieutenant-governor of the Punjab, a post which he held until May 1919. 
O'Dwyer's sympathies were with rural India. He was of the paternalist school, believing that Britain's role in India was to bring security and material prosperity, not to encourage the development of politics or democratic institutions. He built good relations with the traditional leaders of Punjab society but alienated the urban groups, especially the educated classes, with his outspoken views. In his pugnacious book, 'India as I Knew it, 1885-1925' (1925), O'Dwyer explains how the threat of terrorism in the strategically vital Punjab province preoccupied him during his administration. He believed in the importance of nipping such movements in the bud and taking early action to stop the spread of political agitation to the Punjab. The firm measures he took against the revolutionary Ghadr (revolt) movement among Sikh emigrants returning from North America and the Far East averted a very dangerous situation in the early months of the First World War. O'Dwyer was single-minded, dynamic, and skilful in organizing the Punjab for the war effort. The Punjab provided 360,000 recruits, more than half the number provided by the whole of India during the war. By the end of the war one male Punjabi in every twenty-eight had been mobilized. His services were recognized by his appointment as GCIE in 1917; he had been created KCSI in 1913. 
Much to O'Dwyer's annoyance, nationalist politicians did not cease their activities for the duration of the war and, indeed, wartime conditions -- the demands of recruitment, price inflation, increased government intervention in the economy, and concern about the progress and outcome of the war -- alienated many Indians from the government, and won support for a growing home rule movement. 
Like many administrators O'Dwyer believed that 'extremist' nationalist politics and terrorism were inter-connected. He had been successful in persuading the government of India to bring in a special 'Defence of India Act' in 1915 to give greater powers to deal with terrorism. However, that act would come to an end with the war, and there was concern that terrorism, especially in Bengal and the Punjab, would resurface. Following a report by Mr Justice Rowlatt, an emergency bill was passed into law as the 'Anarchical and Revolutionary Crimes Act' in March 1919. This measure was very unpopular and led directly to Gandhi's first nationwide 'satyagraha' (non-violent resistance) in protest. Despite Gandhi's wishes, the movement resulted in violence in some parts of India, the worst taking place in the Punjab where O'Dwyer took strong measures to counteract it. In some areas the situation became critical, and there was a fear of widespread rebellion against British rule. At Amritsar on 13 April, Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer ordered his troops to fire on a very large crowd assembled in a walled area known as the Jallianwalla Bagh. More than 300 people were killed and more than 1000 wounded, according to British estimates, but Dyer did not wait to treat the wounded or to count his victims. It is likely that the casualties were considerably higher. O'Dwyer was not alone among British officials in initially giving his support to Dyer, based on the rather limited information he received on the circumstances. However, he staked his reputation in the coming months and years by backing Dyer, even when fuller information about the scale of the killings, and the fact that Dyer had used the shooting to create a 'moral and widespread' effect among the people of the Punjab, became available. 
O'Dwyer was himself in the thick of the action in Lahore: it was his decision to expel two Indian political leaders, Kitchlew and Satyapal, from Amritsar that triggered the violence. He clearly believed that firm action had averted a widespread rebellion in north India, which might have been supported by an Afghan invasion. His decision to implement martial law in some parts of the Punjab was controversial, and some of the punishments meted out by the military were excessive and designed to humiliate communities rather than to punish individuals. O'Dwyer argued that he could not be held responsible for what took place under martial law, as the government of India had refused his request to maintain control of martial law administration, apart from the purely military operations. In the circumstances, he had used his influence where appropriate to control any excesses. There can, however, be no doubt that O'Dwyer was responsible for the orders given for an aeroplane to restore order in and around the town of Gujranwala. In the bombing and machine-gunning that ensued at least a dozen people were killed, including children. These appalling events coincided with O'Dwyer's intended retirement, which was now delayed until May 1919. He left the Punjab still popular among the traditional elites, but vilified by the rising political classes, whose views O'Dwyer had completely failed to understand or even consider. Ironically, his actions proved to be one of the most significant factors in the rapid rise of mass nationalism in India under Gandhi's leadership. 
The controversy over events in the Punjab in 1919 continued for several years. The Hunter committee which inquired into the causes and handling of the disturbances was highly critical of Reginald Dyer, whose military career was now ended. The committee was divided along racial lines on the broader question of whether the situation in the Punjab justified the implementation of martial law. The secretary of state for India, Edwin Montagu, was highly critical of O'Dwyer's methods, and had to be constrained by his colleagues from expressing his views publicly. O'Dwyer himself felt that the Hunter committee had neither been representative in its personnel nor fair in its conclusions; he believed that Dyer had been condemned without a proper army hearing. His chance to justify his viewpoint came in 1922 when Sir Sankaran Nair published a book entitled 'Gandhi and Anarchy' which O'Dwyer believed libelled him. The majority of the jury in the ensuing trial before Lord Justice McCardie found in O'Dwyer's favour, and damages of $500 were awarded. 
O'Dwyer served on the Esher committee on the administration of the army in India (1919-20). He often wrote letters to 'The Times' on Indian affairs in which he argued the case for continued British control in India, and was dismayed by the failure to tackle the Gandhian non-co-operation movement more firmly. He had opposed the Montagu-Chelmsford constitutional reforms of 1919 while he was lieutenant-governor of the Punjab, and continued to do so in his retirement. He was an important contributor to 'die-hard' opposition to both the 1919 and the 1935 reforms, and continued to state his opinions with frankness and courage. In the end he paid with his life, for on 13 March 1940 at a meeting of the Royal Central Asian Society at Caxton Hall in London he was shot at close range by Udham Singh. O'Dwyer's injuries were fatal and he died in Caxton Hall. Udham Singh was tried, convicted, and hanged for the offence. O'Dwyer was survived by his wife, who had been made DBE in 1919, and their children. 


@@@@@


doc= 35293


Ogden, Charles Kay (1889-1957), psychologist, was born on 1 June 1889 at Rossall School, Fleetwood, Lancashire, the elder son of a housemaster, Charles Burdett Ogden (1849-1923), and his wife, Fanny Hart ('b'. 1850). He was educated at a preparatory school in Buxton by his uncle, Thomas Jones Ogden, and then at Rossall. He was a good athlete, with school colours for fives, until a serious attack of rheumatic fever when he was sixteen. Turning to intensive study he won a scholarship to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he obtained a first class in part one of the classical tripos in 1910 and played billiards for the university. During 1913 he visited schools and universities in Italy, Germany, Switzerland, and India, investigating methods of language teaching. On his return in 1914 he published, with R. H. Best, 'The Problem of the Continuation School', and also translated Dr Georg Kerschensteiner's 'Grundfragen der Schulorganisation' as 'The Schools and the Nation' (1914). 
In 1912 Ogden founded the weekly 'Cambridge Magazine' which, selling at 1 died, was astonishingly successful. In 1916 he converted it into an organ of international opinion and comment on politics and the war, digesting and translating from 200 periodicals weekly for a regular survey of the foreign press, which in 1917 and 1918 filled more than half of each issue. The circulation rapidly rose to more than 20,000. Poems by Siegfried Sassoon and John Masefield, and contributions from Hardy, Shaw, Bennett, and other well-known authors were other unusual features of this university magazine. Throughout this period Ogden was also very busy as president of the Heretics Society, which he had founded in 1911 together with H. F. Jolowicz, P. Sargant Florence, and F. P. Ramsey. The Heretics too became a publishing outlet and papers read before the society by Jane Harrison, Shaw, Chesterton, F. M. Cornford, and G. M. Trevelyan were published between 1911 and 1914. 
During a discussion with I. A. Richards on 11 November 1918 Ogden outlined a work to correlate his earlier linguistic studies with his wartime experience of 'the power of Word-Magic' and the part played by language in contemporary thought. Ogden converted the 'Cambridge Magazine' into a quarterly in which he and Richards published a series of articles as a first draft of the book which appeared in 1923 as 'The Meaning of Meaning'. This empirical approach to theoretical confusion about language, setting forth principles for the understanding of the function of language, rapidly became one of the important books of the decade. Chapter 7, a study of the linguistic factor in aesthetics, appeared separately in expanded form under the title 'The Foundations of Aesthetics' in 1922 as the joint work of Ogden, I. A. Richards, and the artist James Wood. 
After the demise of the 'Cambridge Magazine' in 1922 Ogden took over the editorship of the international psychological journal 'Psyche', which he had helped to found in 1920, as a vehicle for publishing research in international language problems and continuing the work of the post-war 'Cambridge Magazine'. He also accepted the planning and editing of two major series: 'The history of civilisation' and 'The international library of psychology, philosophy and scientific method'. The latter series produced 100 volumes in its first decade, many of them stimulated and initiated by Ogden. With the help of F. P. Ramsey he translated for this series the 'Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung' of Ludwig Wittgenstein, whom he introduced to English readers by a translation of the 'Tractatus logico-philosophicus' as early as 1922. 
Throughout this busy period Ogden's linguistic researches gathered pace and momentum. From his earlier studies of the writings of Horne Tooke and Bishop Wilkins he moved to the neglected contributions to linguistics of Jeremy Bentham. Ogden's earliest publications on Bentham and those containing the germ of his idea for Basic English appear side by side in the issues of 'Psyche' between 1928 and 1930. The latter progress from speculation on the simplification of Basic and discussion of universal language to Basic English, so called for the first time in 1929. Basic English was conceived as: 'an auxiliary international language comprising 850 words arranged in a system in which everything may be said for all the purposes of everyday existence. Its distinctive features are the selection of words so that they cover the field, the restriction of the vocabulary, and the elimination of verbs except for the sixteen verb-forms which deal with the fundamental operations ('put', 'take', 'get', etc.) and their replacement by the names of operations and directions ('go in', 'put in', etc.).' Ogden established the Orthological Institute in 1927, revised and published the Basic vocabulary for copyright purposes in 1929, and in rapid succession published the first four essential books: 'Basic English' (1930), 'The Basic Vocabulary' (1930), 'Debabelization' (1931), and 'The Basic Words' (1932). He edited editions of Bentham's 'Theory of Legislation' (1931) and 'Theory of Fictions' (1932), and published his Bentham centenary lecture, entitled 'Jeremy Bentham, 1832-2032' (1932). 
Basic English developed rapidly, setting up agencies in thirty countries, and at the outbreak of war in 1939 Ogden had produced, in 'Psyche', 'Psyche Monographs', 'Psyche Miniatures', and other series, some 200 titles in print in or about Basic English. In 1943 Winston Churchill set up a cabinet committee on Basic English and made a statement to the House of Commons on its report on 9 March 1944. He outlined the steps which the government would take to develop Basic English as an auxiliary international and administrative language through the British Council, the BBC, and other bodies. A Basic English version of this statement and of the Atlantic charter, side by side with the original texts, was published as a white paper ('Parl. papers', 1943-4, 8, Cmd 6511) later in the month. Thereafter Ogden, as he tersely recorded in 'Who's Who', was 'bedevilled by officials, 1944-6'. He was requested to assign his copyright to the crown, which he did in June 1946, and was compensated by $23,000, a sum selected because it was the compensation paid to Bentham for his expenditure on the Panopticon or reformed prison. The Basic English Foundation was established with a grant from the Ministry of Education in 1947. 
Throughout his life Ogden, who never married, was a voracious collector of books, amassing complete housefuls of thousands of volumes. In 1953 University College, London, bought his manuscripts, incunabula, early printed books, and his collection on Bentham and Brougham, which included almost 60,000 letters to Lord Brougham. The 100,000 books he left when he died in a London clinic, at 20 Devonshire Place, on 20 March 1957 were bought by the University of California at Los Angeles. 
Though Ogden was never able to reassemble the worldwide network of Basic English teaching agencies that had flourished before the Second World War, the sound principles and obvious pedagogical advantages of Basic have continued to attract teachers and users around the globe. The Basic English Association in Tokyo, for example, boasts thousands of members, and the Caterpillar Corporation produces all the manuals for the heavy-duty equipment which it manufactures in a standard system adapted from Basic English. 


@@@@@


doc= 35294


Ogilvie, Sir Frederick Wolff (1893-1949), economist and college head, was born at Valparaiso, Chile, on 7 February 1893, the youngest son of William Maxwell Ogilvie, an engineer, and his wife, Mary Ann Wolff. The Ogilvies were Scots from Dundee. Ogilvie was educated at Clifton College and at Balliol College, Oxford, where he had a quiet university career, taking a first in classical moderations in 1913. His reading for 'literae humaniores' was interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War and within two days he was in the forces as a second lieutenant, 4th Bedfordshire regiment. He quickly found himself in France. In April 1915 he was seriously wounded at Hill 60, and lost his left arm; he remained in the army, however, until the end of the war, and was demobilized in 1919 with the rank of captain. 
Ogilvie returned at once to Balliol and in the autumn of the same year became lecturer in economics at Trinity College, Oxford, being elected to a fellowship in 1920. Ogilvie married in 1922 Mary Helen (1900-1990), eldest daughter of Alexander Beith Macaulay, professor of apologetics and systematic theology at Trinity College, Glasgow; they had three sons. In 1926 he was appointed to the chair of political economy in Edinburgh. 
The interest in the study of economics which Ogilvie had shown from his early undergraduate days was due partly to a growing social sense, and in Oxford and Edinburgh he was a sympathetic teacher of the subject. At all times his quality as a teacher and friend of the young was enriched by his knowledge of music and his unrestrained enjoyment of the outdoor life. He was also invited to act as guide and mentor in economic matters to a group of younger, and later most distinguished, Conservative members of parliament. During these years his main interests within his subject proved to be the tourist industry of Great Britain and the economic problems of Scotland. His only book, 'The Tourist Movement', was published in 1933, and he later contributed on the subject to the new edition of 'Chambers's Encyclopaedia'. He was a member of the Edinburgh chamber of commerce and of trade boards, and also concerned himself with adult education and juvenile employment in Scotland. 
In the autumn of 1934 Ogilvie left Edinburgh for Belfast, where he became president and vice-chancellor of the Queen's University. There he remained for four years, and left his mark in his own way. The university found in him a strength, integrity, and courtesy rarely combined in one person. He believed strongly in the value to a university of a wide social and cultural life, and he used his great personal charm and the persuasive impact of his own inner enjoyment of learning and the arts to very good purpose. He might well have been one of the great vice-chancellors, but in the summer of 1938 he was drawn away from the academic world to become the second director-general of the British Broadcasting Corporation in succession to Sir John Reith, who had guided its growth from the beginning and whose masterful single-mindedness had largely made it what it was. 
In his memoirs Reith praised Ogilvie's personal charm, but added, 'I was quite sure he was not the man for the BBC' (Briggs, 2.637). Such indeed proved to be the case, the historian of the BBC describing Ogilvie's tenure of office as 'short, stormy and in some ways calamitous' (ibid.). The most insistent problems of Broadcasting House in wartime were organizational and administrative. The corporation emerged from the war in most remarkable esteem for its unremitting care for truth and for human sympathy throughout a remorseless struggle. But in order to play its part at all, triumphs of technical and administrative adjustment had to be achieved almost daily. This was not Ogilvie's sphere. Indeed, R. C. Norman, chairman of the BBC at the time of Ogilvie's appointment, later admitted that he had every quality 'except that of being able to manage a large organization, the one quality which was indispensable' (ibid., 2.638). Early in 1942 Ogilvie resigned. Though uncomplaining, he must have been deeply disappointed; but he secured notable personal success in performing special war duties for the British Council between 1943 and 1945. 
At this time Ogilvie thought seriously of taking up editorial work in the national press, but in 1944 he became principal of Jesus College, Oxford. He was now fifty-one, and he had fewer than five more years to live; but in that short time he showed, as in Belfast, his great gifts for educational work in a university. His wide cultural contacts and his record of public service enabled him to give much to the college. By quietly infusing his own enjoyments and convictions into its way of life he made it a more friendly community, more enlightened, and more civilized. In 1948 he was grievously stricken by the death of his eldest son, James William Ogilvie, in a climbing accident on the Matterhorn, but he was a remarkable principal in the humane tradition. 
In person Ogilvie was tall and fair, with grey eyes. His expression was serious and thoughtful, but a smile was never far away, for he was easily moved by friendship and his sense of humour was readily aroused. He was knighted in 1942 and died in London on 10 June 1949. Lady Ogilvie became in 1953 the principal of St Anne's College, Oxford. Their son Robert Maxwell Ogilvie became a fellow of Balliol in 1957. 
C. R. Morris', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35295


Ogle, John William (1824-1905), physician, born at Leeds, Yorkshire, on 30 July 1824, was the only child of Samuel Ogle ('b'. 1797), a businessman, and Sarah Rathmell. His father, who was first cousin to Admiral Thomas Ogle and second cousin to James Adey Ogle (1792-1857), regius professor of medicine at Oxford, was a member of an old Staffordshire and Shropshire family which originally came from Northumberland. John was educated at Wakefield School, from which he moved in March 1844 to Trinity College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1847, and developed sympathy with the Tractarian movement. Ogle entered the medical school in Kinnerton Street attached to St George's Hospital, London, and became in 1850 a licentiate and in 1855 a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. At Oxford he proceeded MA and MB in 1851 and MD in 1857. 
On 31 May 1854 Ogle married Elizabeth, daughter of Albert Smith of Ecclesall, near Sheffield, whose family subsequently took the name of Blakelock. They had five sons and one daughter. The eldest son, John, became a barrister. Another son, Cyril, became a physician at St George's Hospital, while a third entered the church. 
At St George's Hospital, Ogle worked at morbid anatomy, and was for years curator of the museum, along with Henry Grey, after whose death in 1861 Ogle became lecturer on pathology. In 1857 he was elected assistant physician, and in 1866 he became full physician; however, he resigned in 1876 owing to depression. When he recovered from this, soon after overcoming an attack of enteric fever, he returned to active practice, but not to his work at St George's Hospital, where instead he became consulting physician in 1877. Ogle spent the whole of his professional life in London, also running a successful private practice there from premises in the fashionable and prosperous locations of Upper Brook Street and, subsequently, Cavendish Square. 
Apart from his posts at St George's, Ogle held numerous hospital and other positions. He was censor (1873, 1874, and 1884) and vice-president (1886) of the Royal College of Physicians, associate fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, vice-president of the Pathological Society, vice-president and fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, corresponding member of the Edinburgh Medical and Chirurgical Society, corresponding member of the New York Society of Neurology and Electrology and of the New York Neurological Society, fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He was elected FSA on 7 March 1878. Ogle's hospital appointments included honorary posts at St James's Dispensary, St Leonard's Hospital, Sudbury, East Grinstead General Dispensary, Belgrave Hospital for Children, and the School for the Indigent Blind. In addition he was an examiner in medicine at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Ogle's main interest, though, lay in nervous diseases. In a lecture on aphasia, or inability to translate thoughts into words, he made some interesting historical references to the cases of Dr Johnson and Dean Swift. Always a strong churchman, he was on friendly terms with W. E. Gladstone, Cardinal Newman, who was a patient, Richard Church, Henry Liddon, Frederick Temple, and Edward Benson. 
Ogle was active in medical literature, publishing several books including 'On the Relief of Excessive and Dangerous Tympanites by Puncture of the Abdomen' (1888). But it was in the medical press that he made his greatest mark as a writer. Together with Timothy Holmes he founded the 'St George's Hospital Reports' (1866-79), and he edited seven out of the ten volumes. He was also editor of the 'British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review'. He contributed very widely to medical periodicals and to the proceedings of learned societies, making 160 contributions to the 'Transactions of the Pathological Society of London' alone. He delivered the Royal College of Physicians' Croonian lectures in 1869 and its Harveian oration for 1880. The oration, which was published, including in summary form in the 'British Medical Journal', contained a vigorous rebuttal of those critical of the state of medical education in Oxford University. This in turn elicited strong criticism in the form of an open letter signed by many distinguished figures including Joseph Lister. 
After some years of increasing paralytic weakness, dating from 1899, Ogle died at St Michael's vicarage, Highgate, where he had been living for some time with his clergyman son, on 8 August 1905. He was buried later in the month at Shelfanger, near Diss in Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 35296


O'Hanlon, John (1821-1905), Roman Catholic priest and hagiographer, was born in Stradbally, Queen's county, on 30 April 1821, the son of Edward and Honor Hanlon of Stradbally, who wanted him to become a priest. He went to a private primary school in Stradbally and then, aged thirteen, to an endowed school at Ballyroan. In 1840 he went to the ecclesiastical college at Carlow, staying there until May 1842, when he emigrated with some relatives to Quebec, Canada; in August he moved to Missouri in the United States. In 1847 he was ordained by Peter Richard Kenrick, archbishop of St Louis, and he spent the next few years as a missionary priest to Irish communities in Missouri. He later published 'Life and Scenery in Missouri' (1890), an account of his experiences in America. In September 1853 he returned to Ireland because of ill health. From 1854 to 1859 he was assistant chaplain of the South Dublin Union, and from 1854 to 1880 curate of St Michael's and St John's, Dublin. In May 1880 he became parish priest of St Mary's, Sandymount, co. Dublin, where he remained until his death. In 1886 he was made a canon and in 1891 he returned briefly to the USA for the golden jubilee of Archbishop Kenrick. 
O'Hanlon dedicated himself to Irish ecclesiastical history, and especially to research into the lives of the Irish saints. In 1856 he was elected a member of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society, and he was also a member of the Royal Irish Academy. While still a curate he visited nearly all the important libraries of England and southern Europe in order to pursue his research and in 1856 he began to collect material for his great work, 'The Lives of the Irish Saints'. The first volume appeared in 1875, and nine further volumes and part of a tenth were published before his death. He was also a prolific contributor to Irish reviews and newspapers, and his published works include 'Abridgment of the History of Ireland from its Final Subjection to the Present Time' (1849), 'The Irish Emigrant's Guide to the United States' (1851), 'The Life of St Laurence O'Toole, Archbishop of Dublin' (1857), 'The Life of St Malachy O'Morgair, Bishop of Down and Connor, Archbishop of Armagh' (1859), 'The Life of St Dympna, Virgin Martyr' (1863), 'Catechism of Irish History from the Earliest Events to the Death of O'Connell' (1864), 'The Life of St Grellan, Patron of the O'Kellys' (1881), and 'Irish-American History of the United States' (1902). Under the pseudonym Lageniensis he also published verse, including 'Legend Lays of Ireland' (1870), 'Irish Folk-Lore: Traditions and Superstitions of the Country, with Numerous Tales' (1870), 'The Buried Lady: a Legend of Kilronan' (1877), and 'The Poetical Works of Lageniensis' (1893). He edited Monck Mason's 'Essay on the Antiquity and Constitution of Parliaments of Ireland' (1891) and Molyneux's 'Case of Ireland... Stated' (1893). O'Hanlon died at 3 Leahy's Terrace, Sandymount, co. Dublin, on 15 May 1905, and was buried at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on 17 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 35297


O'Higgins, Kevin Christopher (1892-1927), politician and social reformer, was born on 7 June 1892 in the Dispensary House, Stradbally, Queen's county, fourth son and fourth of the sixteen children of Thomas Francis Higgins (died 1923), medical officer for the Athy union and county coroner, and his wife, Anne or Annie (died 1953), daughter of Timothy Daniel Sullivan (poet, patriot, MP, and lord mayor of Dublin), and sister of the wife of Timothy Michael Healy KC, first governor-general of the Irish Free State. His brothers included the medical officer, army officer, and politician in Ireland Thomas O'Higgins (1889-1953). The family home soon became Woodlands, near Stradbally, and that is where Kevin O'Higgins grew up, attending the local convent school, then the Christian Brothers' school, Maryborough, Clongowes Wood College, and St Mary's College, Knockbeg, Carlow. With a view to entering the priesthood he then attended St Patrick's College, Maynooth, but had to move to Carlow seminary, in 1911, for breaking the non-smoking rules. Being further unwilling to accept the restricted seminary lifestyle, he abandoned notions of a vocation. He was briefly apprenticed to Maurice Healy, a Cork solicitor and brother of Timothy, while at the same time resuming his BA studies, in legal and political sciences -- this time at University College, Dublin. Uninspired by his subject and increasingly distracted by his practical political activities, he obtained only a pass BA in 1915 and a similar LLB in 1919. 
Already O'Higgins had committed himself to the cause of nationalist separatism by joining the Irish Volunteers in 1915, becoming captain of the Stradbally company, Carlow brigade, in 1917, and being imprisoned for five months in 1918 in Mountjoy gaol and Belfast internment camp. In the general election of December 1918 he was elected Sinn Fein MP for Queen's county. Efficient and forceful, he soon gained recognition in Dail Eireann as it asserted itself as an alternative government at a time also of increasing armed resistance to London rule. He became assistant minister for local government in January 1919, and raised the republican loan in his constituency (a remarkable $10,000). When his minister, W. T. Cosgrave, was arrested in 1920, he became substitute minister, an appointment confirmed by the Dail that June. In the May 1921 general election he was returned for the Laois-Offaly constituency unopposed, and that August he was again appointed assistant minister for local government. 
When peace negotiations were arranged for October 1921 between British and Irish representatives, O'Higgins declined the position of secretary to the Irish delegation in order to marry Bridget Mary (1898-1961), schoolteacher daughter of Andrew Cole, of Drumlish, co. Longford. He approved the settlement, however, and was one of the ablest speakers in its favour in the Dail, arguing that 'it represents such a broad measure of liberty for the Irish people and it acknowledges such a large proportion of its rights, you are not entitled to reject it without being able to show them [the plain people of Ireland] that you have a reasonable prospect of achieving more' (Dail Eireann, 45). In January 1922 he became minister for economic affairs in Arthur Griffith's first Free State government and he held a similar position in the provisional government chaired by Michael Collins. In the election of that year he was returned, the second of four deputies, for the same Laois-Offaly constituency, and after the tragic deaths of both Arthur Griffith and Michael Collins that August, he became minister for home affairs and vice-president of the executive council. The home affairs ministry was changed to the ministry of justice in 1924, and to that responsibility he added external affairs in the summer of 1927. After transferring to co. Dublin for the election of 1923 he had headed the poll, on behalf of Cumann na nGaedheal, and this he repeated in the June elections of 1927. He had grown in these few years to be the outstanding political figure of his day, the main prop of the government and its principal international spokesman. 
It was to O'Higgins that the task fell of steering through the founding constitution of the state, modified, unacceptably to some, from its original form by the requirements of the 1921 treaty, but still a humane, liberal, and democratic document. He regretted only that those who retained reservations about it would not join in the democratic struggle to build upon it to reach the goal sought by all. His description of the early provisional governments as 'eight young men in the City Hall standing amidst the ruins of one administration, with the foundations of another not yet laid, and with wild men screaming through the keyhole' (White, 84) remains a vivid example of his style. After years of civil strife, and physical and passive resistance to the institutions of the British state, it fell now to him to restore the rule of law and rebuild the state along national lines. For his work he is recognized as the father of the unarmed Garda Siochana, the new national police force established in 1922. It was he who most prominently epitomized the determination of the government during the civil war of 1922-23, at the cost of the life of his father, murdered in retaliation on 11 February 1923. And it was O'Higgins, too, who took the lead in confronting and confounding those mutinous elements in the swollen state army as the government sought to return it to peacetime numbers in 1924. At the Imperial Conference of 1926, perhaps the most significant of such meetings, he had contributed vitally to the debates which were to complete the transformation of an empire of domination into a Commonwealth of partners. 
It is as a reformer of the powerful Irish drink trade, with three 'Liquor Acts' to his credit, and as a visionary for an Ireland reunited by consent, that O'Higgins will also be remembered. Strong, intelligent, of the most rigorous integrity, he strove to banish the evils that had blighted his country and to make of his countrymen proud upholders of the best in the Irish tradition. Shy and private, with a perhaps misleadingly tough exterior, he had a self-deprecating humour that expressed itself even at the most trying of moments. When asked by a British captor how he would like five or six bullets in his head, he is said to have replied that he would not particularly mind the last four or five (Foxall, 2 June 1963); even at the end, when close to death, when those around tried to offer encouragement, he had whispered 'There is no hope. I should be dead by now, only I have always been a bit of a diehard' ('Belfast News-Letter'). 
O'Higgins had by then endured many hardships. Despite his good marriage, he had belatedly encountered and fallen in love with Hazel, Lady Lavery, wife of the distinguished painter, to whom he could only regret in his many letters that he had met her too late. He retained the joy in the birth and vitality of his two daughters, Maeve ('b'. June 1923) and Una ('b'. January 1927); but in between, his son, Finbarr Gerald, born in November 1924, had lived only twelve days. His hope for his girls was that they would grow up in an Ireland 'where all the creases in Irish life will have been ironed out.... Taxation will be halved, unemployment abolished, and Irish-speaking Orangemen will be boasting about Henry Joy McCracken in a Dublin Parliament' ('Irish Times', 11 July 1927). That he was cut down in his prime, with so little time given to seek such ends, is one explanation for their slow progress. His death, however, was followed by a stringent 'Public Safety Act' and an 'Electoral Amendment Act' that finally forced the main opposition party, Fianna Fail, to enter Dail Eireann rather than risk political oblivion, and this did much to secure the democratic political institutions that were the object of his political life. 
O'Higgins was assassinated on his way to attend mass at Booterstown, near Dublin, on 10 July 1927. His murder on a Sunday morning, just back from projecting his state's interests at a League of Nations naval conference in Geneva, and having considerately dismissed his escort for the short walk to mass, caused particular revulsion. As he lay dying, he forgave his killers, believing that no more blood should be shed in a country that had lost too many of its sons. (He had perforce signed the death warrant of his own best man, Rory O'Connor, during the civil war.) His death should have been instantaneous, but his strong will helped keep him alive for several hours as, having been carried back to his house, he put his affairs in order and took his leave of family and friends. The following day his remains were removed from his dwelling, Dunamase House, Cross Avenue, Booterstown, to the Mansion House, Dublin, where thousands filed past his coffin, which lay in state until 8 p.m. on Tuesday 12th. His funeral took place in the morning of 13 July after a requiem mass at St Andrew's Church, Westland Row. It was a sad and sombre day of national mourning, a state occasion attended by all leading Irish figures and by foreign and Commonwealth representatives, amid tributes from around the world. The funeral cortege stretched for over 3 miles along thronged and silent streets, with ten lorryloads of flowers behind the family wreaths. O'Higgins was buried in the north-west corner of Glasnevin cemetery, in the division known as St Brigid's, in the same grave as his infant son. 


@@@@@


doc= 35298


O'Kelly, Sean Thomas (1882-1966), president of Eire (Ireland), was born at 4 Lower Wellingon Street, Dublin, on 25 August 1882, the eldest son of Samuel O'Kelly and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' O'Dea (died 1923), originally from co. Clare. His family soon moved to Berkeley Road, where his father established a boot making business. He was educated at the convent of the Sisters of Holy Faith, Mountjoy Street, the Christian Brothers' schools at St Mary's Place, and, briefly, at the O'Connell Schools, North Richmond Street. On leaving school in 1898, he became a junior assistant in the National Library, and remained in that post until 1902. 
During this time O'Kelly joined the Ard Craobh branch of the Gaelic League, and was taught Irish there by Sinead O'Flanagan, the future wife of Eamon de Valera. In 1902 he joined the Archbishop McHale branch of the league, and eventually became secretary and president of that branch. O'Kelly also attended meetings of the Celtic Literary Society, where he met Arthur Griffith and William Rooney, and this contact led him to make contributions to the 'United Irishman'. O'Kelly joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) in 1902, enrolling in the Bartholomew Teeling Club, which had about twenty members. He was a dedicated member and travelled to Wexford, Sligo, and Galway swearing in new members. He also helped to set up the Confederate Literary and Debating Society to further recruitment to the IRB. In 1903 he was named as business manager of 'An Claidheamh Soluis', the weekly journal of the Gaelic League, and Patrick Pearse was appointed editor. O'Kelly's task was to secure advertisements for the paper and to promote its sales. 
O'Kelly joined Sinn Fein at its inception in 1905, and he was fortunate to be chosen by lot to represent the Inns Quay branch of the party in the municipal council election of 1906. He was elected to the Dublin corporation, and served on it in various capacities until 1932. He acted on committees for the waterworks, finance, and technical education. In 1908 he went to Rome, as part of a delegation from Dublin corporation, and was chosen to read the official address, in Irish, to Pope Pius X. At the same time he was advancing his position within the Sinn Fein. He served on the Sinn Fein Co-operative Savings Bank, and in 1906 he was elected to the national executive. From 1907 to 1909 he was honorary secretary. All of these activities adversely affected O'Kelly's performance as manager of 'An Claidheamh Soluis'. Pearse, while praising O'Kelly's other works, complained that he was not managing 'An Claidheamh Soluis' properly. Other difficulties were also apparent, and both men resigned from their positions in 1909. 
This set-back did not harm O'Kelly's career prospects. In the same year, 1909, he was elected to the executive of the Gaelic League, a position he held until 1915. He was also appointed secretary of the Sinn Fein Printing and Publishing Company in 1909, and subsequently worked with Griffith in publishing 'Sinn Fein', 'Scissors and Paste' and 'Nationality'. 
O'Kelly enrolled in the Irish Volunteers when they were founded on 25 November 1913, and in September 1914 he attended a meeting of the IRB and the Irish Citizen Army, which was held with the intention of securing a common front between the two groups. O'Kelly was appointed secretary of the Irish Neutrality League, an open organization for the group, but it was quickly suppressed. Acting for the IRB he went to the United States in March 1915 and made contact with John Devoy, Judge Cohalan, and Joe McGarrity. He informed them of plans for an insurrection, and was given a donation of $5000, which he delivered to Eoin MacNeill in May 1915. In August 1915 O'Kelly was appointed secretary of the Gaelic League at the Dundalk Ard Fheis, in a move by the IRB to gain control of the organization. Douglas Hyde remarked in his memoir that this appointment was political, although he accepted that O'Kelly was 'a very nice little gentlemanly man' (University College, Dublin, folklore department). 
When the Easter rising started on 24 April 1916 O'Kelly was instructed to act as a staff captain under the command of Pearse in the General Post Office. Following the surrender O'Kelly was arrested and held in Richmond barracks, Dublin. He was then deported, and spent some time in custody at Wandsworth, Woking, Fron-goch, and Reading gaols, before he was released, just before Christmas day 1916, as part of a general amnesty. He was deported again in February 1917, and remained in England until June 1917. On his return to Ireland he participated in the negotiations that culminated in the creation of the new republican Sinn Fein at the end of October 1917, and he was elected to the executive of the party. He did not, however, resume activity in the IRB. In the following year, on 1 April, he married Mary Kate (died 1934), a lecturer in French at University College, Dublin, second daughter of John Ryan, farmer, of Tomcoole, co. Wexford, and sister of Dr James Ryan (1891-1970), a participant in the Easter rising. 
O'Kelly played an influential role in the Sinn Fein election victory of December 1918, himself winning the contest for College Green, Dublin. He was subsequently appointed to act as chairman of a committee to plan a new assembly, and to be a member of a foreign affairs committee. He played a crucial role in preparing for the first meeting of Dail Eireann on 21 January 1919, and in formulating the proclamations, especially the democratic programme, that were made on that day. He was appointed speaker (chairman) of the Dail on 22 January, and was re-elected to that position in April 1919, although, since February, he had been acting as the Irish republican envoy in Paris. His brief was to present the case for Irish independence to the peace conference in Paris. The mission, while unsuccessful in its main aim, did much to enhance the Irish cause. 
O'Kelly spent some time in Rome from February 1920, and significantly advanced the standing of nationalist Ireland. With the help of Monsignor Hagan, rector of the Irish College, and Father Curran, he drafted memoranda on Ireland's case for recognition, one of which he presented personally to Pope Benedict XV on 12 April. The beatification of Oliver Plunket in May, thanks to O'Kelly's influence, was not only a religious celebration, but also an affirmation of Irish nationalist values. O'Kelly also met Mussolini in June 1920, and engaged in plans to import arms into Ireland, which ultimately proved abortive. 
In August 1920 O'Kelly returned to Paris as envoy, being confirmed in his position by the second Dail in 1921. Although he voted against the Anglo-Irish treaty on 7 January 1922 he retained his post as envoy under the new administration of Griffith. He opened the Irish Race Congress in Paris on 23 January on behalf of Gavan Duffy, the new minister for foreign affairs, but he was criticized for supporting de Valera rather than the representatives of the provisional government. Matters came to a head on 26 January, when O'Kelly and Harry Boland appealed to representatives to the coming Sinn Fein Ard Fheis to support the existing republic. They were both dismissed as a result. O'Kelly received notification of his dismissal on 20 February, but he remained in Paris until 24 March. 
In the election on 16 June 1922 O'Kelly retained his seat for mid-Dublin. When the attack on the Four Courts and the civil war began on 28 June, O'Kelly reported back for armed duty, and was in the Granville Hotel immediately prior to the shooting of Cathal Brugha on 5 July. He was arrested on 28 July, after letters were found in his possession which linked himself, de Valera, and Harry Boland in a plan to bring guns into Ireland from America. Boland was shot in controversial circumstances within twenty-four hours, and O'Kelly remained in prison until the end of the civil war in April 1923. 
While in prison O'Kelly was appointed to the council of state of the second Dail government, which had been restored by de Valera on 25 October 1922. He was elected for Dublin North as the republican candidate in August 1923 but, like all other anti-treaty candidates, he did not take his seat. However, O'Kelly played a significant role in the illegal second Dail administration, and acted as its chairman from December 1923 until his appointment as its envoy to America in 1924. When de Valera broke with Sinn Fein in 1926 O'Kelly played a crucial role in winning over a majority of the American Association for the Recognition of the Irish Republic to the side of de Valera and of Fianna Fail. He also took initiatives among Irish-Americans which strengthened de Valera's claim to the Dail Eireann funds in opposition both to the Free State and other republicans. 
On his return to Ireland in 1926 O'Kelly played a significant role in building up the Fianna Fail. He was appointed a vice-president of the party, and in March 1927 he became editor of 'The Nation'. Following the June election of 1927, in which Fianna Fail won forty-five seats, O'Kelly, acting as spokesman for the party, declared that the oath would be taken as an 'empty formula', like the signing of a visitors' book. When Fianna Fail became the government in March 1932 O'Kelly was appointed vice-president of the executive council and minister of local government and public health. His main achievement as minister was the supervision of a house building programme which produced some 12,000 houses a year. He also represented the government at the Ottawa Commonwealth conference of 1932, and at the League of Nations in 1933. His first wife died in 1934, and in August 1936 he married her sister, Phyllis, an analytical chemist, who was to survive him (dying on 19 November 1983). There were no children of either marriage. 
O'Kelly fully identified with the broader thrust of de Valera's policy, and after the new constitution of 1937, his official position became that of tanaiste. In September 1939 he became minister of finance in a cabinet reshuffle, and during the war he served on the committees of internal security and of economic planning. Following the retirement of Douglas Hyde, the first president of Ireland, in 1945, O'Kelly was nominated by Fianna Fail to contest the June election for the presidency. He won the election with 565,156 votes on the second count, and was re-elected unopposed in 1952, remaining in office as president until 1959. 
Following the act which made Ireland a republic in 1949 O'Kelly used his enhanced position of undisputed head of state to visit other countries, notably the United States, to represent the Republic of Ireland. He received many honours during his lifetime, of which the papal award of the grand cross of the order of St Gregory the Great (1933) reflected the close relationship between himself and the Roman Catholic church on a personal and diplomatic level. 
O'Kelly retired to Roundwood, in co. Wicklow, in 1959, and lived quietly there until his death at Dublin Nursing Home, Roundwood, co. Wicklow, on 23 November 1966. He was buried at Glasnevin, Dublin. His obituary fittingly recorded that, as president, he 'had as fully transcended the political sphere as his natural dignity overcame his diminutive stature' ('Irish Times', 24 Nov 1966). Stories about his size were legend, and the cry of 'cut the grass so that we can see him' was often affectionately heard as he met visiting teams before soccer internationals. However, the wearing of morning suit and top hat, which he had come to love as envoy in Paris, became his hallmark, and did much to enhance his standing. 


@@@@@


doc= 35299


Charles James Oldham (1843-1907), son of James Oldham (1817-1881), who, like his father, practised as a surgeon in Brighton, invented a refracting ophthalmoscope, and bequeathed $50,000 to public institutions, including the Manchester grammar school, Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and the universities of both Oxford and Cambridge, for the foundation of Charles Oldham scholarships and prizes for classical and Shakespearian study. He died in Brighton on 24 January 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 35300


Oldham, Henry (1815-1902), obstetric physician, was born in Balham, Surrey, on 31 January 1815, the sixth son and ninth child of Adam Oldham (1781-1839), solicitor, and his wife, Ann Lane Penny, daughter of William Stubbington Penny. His father's family claimed descent from Hugh Oldham, bishop of Exeter, the founder of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and of the Manchester grammar school, and another forebear, Francis Penny, was at one time the editor of the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. One of Oldham's nephews, 
After education at Mr Balaam's school at Clapham (1824-31) and at London University, Henry Oldham entered Guy's Hospital medical school in 1834. In May 1837 he became MRCS and the following September a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. In 1843 he took the LRCP and in 1857 he became FRCP; he graduated MD at St Andrews in 1858. In 1849, with Dr J. C. W. Lever, he was appointed physician accoucheur and lecturer on midwifery and diseases of women at Guy's Hospital; after twenty years' service he became consulting obstetric physician. 
Oldham was an excellent teacher and an impressive lecturer. He was a regular contributor to the 'Guy's Hospital Reports', and published four papers in the 'Transactions of the Obstetrical Society of London', of which he was one of the founders, an original trustee, and subsequently president (1863-5). He invented the term 'missed labour' to describe those cases where the child dies in the womb and labour fails to come on, though the specimen on which he had based his view was subsequently differently interpreted; he also advanced the hypothesis that menstruation was due to periodic excitation of the ovaries, and gave his name to an obstetric instrument, the Oldham perforator. Before his appointment to Guy's Hospital, Oldham had studied embryology in the developing chick by means of coloured injections and the microscope and he subsequently introduced the use of the microscope at Guy's, where he pursued his interest in morbid anatomy. He did not believe in the extensive use of drugs, placing greater emphasis on diet and hygiene as the means to restore health. He was a great walker, an extremely simple eater, and for the last fifteen years of his life he was a vegetarian. 
In 1838 Oldham married Sophia (died 1885), eldest daughter of James Smith of Peckham; they had four daughters and two sons, of whom one died in infancy and the other was Colonel Sir Henry Hugh Oldham CVO, lieutenant of the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen-at-Arms. Oldham had an extensive and lucrative practice in the City of London, first at 13 Devonshire Square, Bishopsgate Street, and then at 25 Finsbury Square; about 1870 he moved to 4 Cavendish Place and in 1899 he retired to Bournemouth. Oldham died at Boscombe, Bournemouth, on 19 November 1902, of heart failure, and was buried in Bournemouth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35301


Oldham, Joseph Houldsworth (1874-1969), missionary, was born in Girgaum, Bombay, India, on 10 October 1874, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel George Wingate Oldham RE (1840-1923), and his wife, Eliza (Lillah) Houldsworth (died 1890). George Oldham retired early from his successful career to take his delicate wife home. Oldham attended the Edinburgh Academy and, passing out dux in 1892, entered Trinity College, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in both honour moderations (1894) and 'literae humaniores' (1896), with a career in the Indian Civil Service in mind. His plans changed as the result of a religious conversion under the influence of D. L. Moody, the American evangelist. Having signed the pledge of the Student Volunteer Missionary Union, and after working as the first secretary to the Student Christian Mission (1896-7), he went to India in 1897 under the auspices of the Scottish YMCA to work among students and government employees in Lahore. The following year he married Mary (died 1965), only daughter of Sir Andrew Fraser, later governor of Bengal. They had no children. 
Oldham spent three years in India, almost entirely in the company of Indians, and became very sensitive to their aspirations. After catching typhoid he was invalided home and in 1901 entered New College, Edinburgh, where he completed his theological studies with distinction. He then went to the University of Halle, Germany, to study missionary theory and practice under Gustav Warneck. Although never ordained, Oldham became a ministerial assistant at Free St George's, Edinburgh, and worked to promote the study of missions among students and in Scottish congregations. Throughout his life he saw the work of the laity and the involvement of youth as everywhere crucial to the future of the church and its mission. In 1908 he was appointed full-time organizing secretary for the Edinburgh World Missionary Conference of 1910. The conference included not only all shades of Anglican opinion but also members of the younger churches, as Oldham had hoped, and can be regarded as the start of the modern ecumenical movement. His own remarkable administrative success led the conference to appoint him secretary to a proposed 'Edinburgh continuation committee' under the chairmanship of his close friend John R. Mott, the American evangelist. 
In the brief period before the First World War Oldham managed to meet the main mission boards on the continent, in Great Britain, and in America. Most significant among the committee's ventures was the 'International Review of Missions', established in 1912 with Oldham as editor. He created a distinguished quarterly by his editorials and comprehensive reviews of the year, and by enlisting as contributors not only outstanding missionaries but scientists and administrators. He won Roman Catholic co-operation and continued as editor until 1927. 
Although the continuation committee foundered, Oldham, as the servant of all missions and especially of those hardest hit by the war, tried to keep the spirit of internationalism alive. Working through both the Conference of British Missionary Societies (CBMS) and the committee on missions and governments, Oldham approached heads of government departments on delicate matters such as the internment of German missionaries in India and their expulsion from their African spheres. He was successful in preventing the confiscation of German mission properties; he negotiated the terms for the ultimate return of German missionaries and, with Archbishop Randall Davidson, secured the inclusion in the peace treaty of a clause guaranteeing freedom for missions in former German colonies. In 1920 Joe Oldham, as he was commonly and affectionately known, prepared proposals for a new departure in international missionary co-operation, with the result that in 1921 he became secretary of a new International Missionary Council (IMC), its membership comprising national or regional councils of churches and missions. To further his plans he visited India, China, and Canada (1922-3), and played a crucial role in securing strong Indian representation in the National Christian Council there. The government's recognition of Oldham's unique position as spokesman for so many missions, his mastery of facts, and his recognition that 'governments must govern', established him as a trusted adviser. 
Occasionally Oldham was an equally effective critic of government policies. His writings included 'The World and the Gospel' (1916) which sold more than 20,000 copies in Britain alone and helped to lift the sights of war-engrossed Christians to the world beyond Europe, above all to Africa. 'Shall the African peoples be enabled to develop their latent powers, to cultivate their peculiar gifts and so enrich the life of humanity by their distinctive contributions? Or shall they be depressed and degraded and made the tool of others? (Bliss, 576)' For Oldham this was 'one of the great issues of history' (ibid.) and, as he told Colin Leys, required for him 'the throwing of the weight of missionary influence more definitely and explicitly on the side of justice and the treatment of native populations' (Cell, 145). Soon after the war he joined forces with Bishop Frank Weston, among others, in opposition to forced labour in Kenya. Unable to obtain satisfaction from the secretary of state for the colonies, Oldham organized a massive and highly successful protest by politicians of all parties, humanitarians such as the Anti-Slavery Society, religious leaders, academics, and editors of the national press. In general, however, he preferred quietly to pursue the art of the possible. After Edinburgh, his move to London, the IMC's office in Chelsea, and membership of the Athenaeum, were positively conducive to constructive compromises behind the scenes. His knowledge of both the Kenyan and the Indian scenes thrust him unexpectedly in 1922-3 into the role of mediator between Europeans and Indians in Kenya. His own principle that, whatever the claims of white settlers or Indians, native African interests should be paramount was eventually spelt out in July 1923 in the imperial government's important statement of policy known as the 'Devonshire declaration'. 
Oldham's lifelong interest in education centred at first on India, but his main achievement was in relation to Africa. Despite official reluctance he set out to persuade the Colonial Office in close co-operation with the missions to play a more positive role. Having visited institutions for the education of black people in the southern United States as early as 1912, Oldham worked closely with the Phelps-Stokes Fund on its visits to east Africa in the early 1920s and its recommendations to the British government. With support from several colonial governors and missionary societies he developed proposals that led to the establishment in 1923 of the advisory committee on native education in tropical Africa. Oldham was an active member from its inception until 1936 and, with Sir Frederick Lugard, drafted what became an important statement of policy ('Memorandum on native education in British tropical Africa', 'Parl. papers', 1924-5, 21, Cmd 2374). 
From his base in the international missionary movement Oldham thus contributed enormously to the post-war definition of concepts of imperial 'trusteeship'. Very soon his work was given institutional form. In 1926 he organized at High Legh the first conference of missionary educators and colonial administrators, and seized on a suggestion made there for an international institute of African languages and cultures. His links with the Colonial Offices of European governments, his access to Rockefeller funds, and the aid of helpers such as Edwin Smith and Diedrich Westermann enabled him to bring the idea into effect. Lugard became its chairman. From 1931 to 1938 Oldham was administrative director, promoting a research and publications programme which included the distinguished journal 'Africa', Professor B. Malinowski's seminars for young anthropologists, and Lord Hailey's influential 'An African Survey' (1938). In 1924 Oldham had published his most influential book, 'Christianity and the Race Problem'. As its author he was invited to visit southern and east Africa in 1926. In South Africa he was appalled by the 'colour bar' act, for 'doctrines of racial domination', he was convinced, would lead the world 'directly and inevitably to catastrophe' ('Christianity and the Race Problem', 9). In east Africa, however, he saw more hope and seriously considered becoming research director to Kenya's governor, Sir Edward Grigg (later Lord Altrincham). Instead he accepted appointment to the commission on closer union between the east African territories, chaired by Sir E. Hilton Young (later Lord Kennet). Oldham and Sir George Schuster wrote its intricate and carefully argued report. Vociferous opposition from the Kenya settlers, coupled with the chairman's refusal to sign, seemed to incline the imperial government towards handing over control to the settlers. Once more Oldham, with the support of the CBMS and again in partnership with Lugard, organized successful pressure and secured reference of the issue to a joint select committee of both houses of parliament (1931). 'What is at Stake in East Africa' and 'White and Black in Africa' both appeared in 1930, each in its own way attacking that 'most dangerous doctrine' (Oldham to Mott, 21 Nov 1929, J. R. Mott MSS) of 'white Christian settler civilization' as Africa's best hope. 
The need for broader missionary perspectives and closer co-operation between missions and state if African interests were to be served in the modern world were themes central to the conference Oldham organized at Le Zoute, Belgium, in 1926. They also influenced his own decision in 1928 to go with Hilton Young to east Africa rather than join the missions at the Jerusalem world conference, and informed the many speeches he made on both sides of the Atlantic which were summarized in 'The New Christian Adventure' (1929). Its theological justification Oldham saw in the need for a new missionary approach to engage effectively with a worldwide secular culture, one in which the 'field' and the 'base' of such a mission were everywhere and its chief agents the Christian laity. To supplement the mastery of nature and control of the future which science was progressively achieving there must be an attitude to life based on relationship -- man with nature, man with man, and man with God. He introduced the thought of Eberhard Grisebach and Martin Buber to English-speaking audiences, and this 'relational' philosophy informed his later books, 'Real Life is Meeting' (1941) and 'Life is Commitment' (1953). 
Oldham's donnish earnestness and infinite capacity for taking pains bred impatience with inward-looking missionary conferences that failed to seek clear or practical answers to well defined questions. This was heightened by his engagement with governments and public policy, as well as by his mounting deafness in middle life and the logistics of managing his vast hearing aid. Mott and the IMC, however, several times refused his resignation, preferring instead to appoint an additional secretary and to allow Oldham leeway for his own preoccupations. These lay not with ecclesiastical organization but with other forms of support for the laity, trying to live out their faith in the world. In 1934, therefore, Oldham became chairman of the research committee for the Universal Christian Council for Life and Work, and began preparations for the world conference of church, community, and state. Racist philosophies, the growth of totalitarian states, and the church policies of the German government all gave particular point to Oldham's sustained attempt to arouse Christians and others to the issues at stake. This was perhaps his most successful educative campaign, helping to shape Christian thinking for a generation. Before and after the conference, held at Oxford in 1937, essential steps were also taken to bring existing ecumenical movements into a single world council whose members would be individual churches. Archbishop William Temple provided the leadership, Oldham the agenda, looking forward to the World Council of Churches in 1948. 
On retirement in 1938 from the IMC and the International Institute, Oldham remained as active as ever. To carry on the ideas of the life and work conference, he founded the fortnightly 'Christian News Letter' in 1939 and edited it throughout the war. The Christian Frontier Council, founded in 1942 as a lay movement bringing together lay expertise and Christian insight, was also his conception. His great capacity for friendship, his eye for issues of the moment, and his management of small discussion groups were legendary. Some of these (for example, 'The Era of Atomic Power', 1947) produced corporate findings. Others, such as the Moot, a group of intellectuals drawn to Oldham who included T. S. Eliot and Karl Mannheim, had their outcome in the thought and writings of the members. 
Public recognition also came with the degrees of DD conferred on Oldham by Edinburgh (1931) and Oxford (1937) and a CBE in 1951. In 1952 he moved to Dunford House, near Midhurst, where he not only walked in the Sussex countryside but also wrote his last book. As the affairs of east and central Africa again became critical, his 'New Hope in Africa' (1955) was a warm but ill judged response to the multiracial enthusiasms of a new generation represented by the Capricorn Africa Society. He died on 16 May 1969 at St Leonards, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 35302


O'Leary, John (1830-1907), Irish nationalist and journalist, was born in Tipperary town, Ireland, on 23 July 1830, the eldest child of John O'Leary (died 1848), merchant, and Margaret Ryan (died 'c'.1835), the second of his three wives. He was educated at the fashionable protestant Tipperary grammar school and at the age of fifteen entered the Catholic boarding-school Carlow College. A tall, austere, imposing figure, he was admired for his intellect, integrity, and loyalty. In summer 1846 he met James Stephens, the future leader of the Fenians. In common with other young liberal-minded Catholics he identified with the views advocated by Thomas Davis, and after entering Trinity College, Dublin, in 1847 to study law, he attended meetings of the Grattan Club presided over by Thomas Francis Meagher and supported the policies of John Mitchel in 1848. In November 1848 he was detained for two or three weeks as a suspect in the plot to rescue William Smith O'Brien. At this time he made the acquaintance of Thomas Clarke Luby, who like Stephens became a lifelong friend. O'Leary's characteristic political creed -- contempt for Irish politicians' agitation at Westminster; dislike of clerical influence in politics; a wish to convert wealthy protestants to nationalism; and a belief in Irish separatism -- were formed between mid-1847 and the end of 1849. 
On the death of his father O'Leary inherited property in Tipperary town, yielding approximately $200 per year. At the beginning of the same year he had entered the new Queen's College, Cork, to study medicine. In autumn 1850 he moved to the Queen's College, Galway, on being awarded a scholarship, remaining there until 1853 when he proceeded to Dublin in order to attend surgery classes at Meath Hospital. In 1854 he went to study medicine in London and then in 1855 migrated to Paris where he continued his medical education. In Paris, O'Leary established a circle of friends which included the American painter James McNeill Whistler. Late in 1856 he returned to London and then went to Dublin in summer 1857, spending the next year at the Meath Hospital once more. In March 1859 he was again in Paris, having probably given up his intention to practise medicine around this time, though he later claimed that it was only when he became editor of the 'Irish People' (in 1863) that he finally abandoned the profession. 
During 1858, O'Leary established, via Stephens, his 'first direct connection with Fenianism' (O'Leary, 1.85). This close link led Stephens to persuade a reluctant O'Leary, who was not a republican, to visit the United States in order to secure funds for the Irish Republican Brotherhood. He sailed in April 1859, returning to Europe in September. While in New York, he turned his hand to journalism with the 'Phoenix' and travelled extensively. Between 1860 and 1863 he took little part in politics, but then Stephens induced him to come to Dublin and become editor of the 'Irish People', the new Fenian weekly newspaper, at a salary of $150 per annum. In this venture he was closely associated with Luby, Charles J. Kickham, and Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa among others. During this time O'Leary was the chief financial officer to the revolutionary movement. This, politically and personally his most satisfying period, is described at length in 'Recollections of Fenians and Fenianism' (1896). 
The newspaper was suppressed after ninety-five issues on 16 September 1865. O'Leary was convicted in December of treason-felony by a special commission and sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude. Most of his confinement was spent in Portland prison, where he was obliged to work in the quarries. He regarded the notorious protests of his fellow inmate O'Donovan Rossa against the prison regime as undignified for a political prisoner. On 21 January 1871 he was released, but he was not allowed to return to the United Kingdom, and except for short trips to the United States and one brief sojourn in Tipperary he lived in Paris until 1885. During his long residence there O'Leary acquired a reputation as a letter writer. He continued to uphold the separatist cause, opposing the 'skirmishing fund' to promote terrorist acts in Great Britain, rejecting the 'new departure' between the militant wing of the Home Rule Party and the Fenians, and also criticizing the land war (1879-82). The land war (and later the Plan of Campaign, from 1886 to 1891, which he opposed) caused a drop in his rental income, and for considerable periods thereafter he faced financial stringency. 
Following passage of the amnesty act O'Leary returned to Dublin on 21 January 1885 where, for all but brief periods, he remained for the rest of his life, living with his sister Ellen O'Leary until her death in 1889. After his release he was active in promoting the separatist ideal and also played a prominent role in literary circles. At this time William Butler Yeats came under his spell, seeing himself later as 'a nationalist of the school of John O'Leary' (Bourke, 187). O'Leary raised funds for the publication of Yeats's 'The Wanderings of Oisin' (1888). He was a founder of the Contemporary Club (1885/6), became a patron of the Gaelic Athletic Association (1886), helped form the Pan-Celtic literary group (1888), regularly visited the Southwark Literary Club, and accepted the presidency of the National Literary Society of Ireland. Although he favoured an Irish literature that was Irish in content, he was apathetic towards the Irish language, and ignored the Gaelic League. 
Always a fierce critic of parliamentarianism, O'Leary nevertheless admired Charles Stewart Parnell, whom he had first met in the late 1870s; he supported the fallen leader during the Irish party split of 1890 to 1891, and was co-opted onto the Parnell Leadership Committee. In spite of being a bookish man and having engaged in journalism for periods, O'Leary wrote little (authoring only three pamphlets between 1885 and 1895), until during the early 1890s he prepared his 'Recollections of Fenians and Fenianism', published in 1896. He helped form the Young Ireland League in 1895, was active in the '98 celebrations, and was president of the Irish Transvaal Committee during the South African War. His last half-sibling died in 1898 and his own health deteriorated from 1901. He continued to support the old causes until he died on 16 March 1907, virtually penniless. He was buried in Glasnevin cemetery with a Celtic cross placed over his grave, beside his old friend James Stephens. In 1913 Yeats penned what remains O'Leary's epitaph: '
Romantic Ireland's dead and gone, 

It's with O'Leary in the grave. 
('Collected Letters', 1.503)' A bachelor, he bequeathed an extensive collection of books and pictures to the National Literary Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 35303


Oliver, David Thomas (1863-1947), jurist, was born at Pontypridd on 8 February 1863, the fifth of twelve children of the Revd Henry Oliver, a Congregationalist minister, and his wife, Catharine, daughter of the Revd Joshua Thomas, Congregationalist minister, of Aberdar. Educated at Caterham School, he first entered the civil service, from which he resigned after being called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1888. In the meantime he had served in Ireland and had graduated BA at the Royal University of Ireland, proceeding MA (1886), LLB (1888), and LLD (1898). In 1898 he also took the LLB degree of the University of London with first class honours. In 1900 he entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge, as an advanced student, taking the degrees of LLB in 1902 and LLM in 1908. 
By this time Oliver had found that his heart was in academic work and he became lecturer in law in his own college and supervisor of legal studies for several other colleges, gradually relinquishing his practice in the Temple. In 1920 he became a fellow of Trinity Hall, a position which he retained until his death. His particular interest in Roman law led him to the study of Roman-Dutch law, in which subject he was appointed to the Monro lectureship which was founded for him by the master and fellows of Gonville and Caius College at the end of 1920 to provide for the needs of the students from South Africa who went to read law in Cambridge. This successful enterprise was eventually taken over by the university and thereafter Oliver carried on the course as university lecturer; and although he was compelled to retire officially from this post in 1928 on reaching the statutory age limit he continued to conduct the teaching of the subject for a number of years until a successor could be found. 
Oliver's renown as a teacher was founded on an encyclopaedic knowledge of his field and great sympathy with those he taught. Although somewhat slow in speech, he had a penetrating mind. In 1891 he married Lavinia Mary Harrison, who died in 1917; there were no children of the marriage. In 1918 he married Alice Maud, daughter of George Kirby, of Watford. They had two sons, Humphrey and Peter, both of whom studied law at Trinity Hall; Peter Oliver became a lord of appeal in ordinary, taking the title Baron Oliver of Aylmerton, in 1986. 
Oliver's writings included reviews and articles on Roman law in the 'Cambridge Law Journal', and 'Roman law in modern cases in English courts' in the volume 'Cambridge Legal Essays' (1926) edited by P. H. Winfield and A. D. McNair. One of his earliest works, with W. A. Willis, was 'The Roman Law Examination Test for Bar and University' (1897). He also published a translation, with commentary, of portions of books xii and xiii of Justinian's 'Digest' ('De condictionibus') (1937). He produced the seventh edition of L. A. Goodeve's 'Modern Law of Personal Property' (1930), and was also responsible for three editions of B. R. Wise's 'Outlines of Jurisprudence' (3rd edn, 1918; 4th edn, 1925; 5th edn, 1930). Oliver died at his home, Woodview, 18 Girton Road, Cambridge, on 18 January 1947. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35304


Oliver, Francis Wall (1864-1951), palaeobotanist and ecologist, was born on 10 May 1864 at Richmond, Surrey, the only son of Daniel Oliver (1830-1916), from 1864 keeper at Kew, and Hannah, daughter of James Wall, of Sheffield. Oliver's father was a member of the Society of Friends and sent his son at the age of nine to the Friends' school at Kendal. There, Oliver developed a passion and skill for mountaineering which persisted; in later years he climbed the Alps with J. Norman Collie and E. J. Garwood. He went next to Bootham School, York, where he was given charge of their 41/2 inch telescope and, but for his early love of botany, might have adopted astronomy as a career. After a year at University College, London, he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained a foundation scholarship and first-class honours in both parts of the natural sciences tripos (1885-6). He spent vacations studying at Bonn and Tubingen, where he met many leading botanists of the day. 
In 1888 Oliver took his father's place at University College, London, first as lecturer, then in 1890 as Quain professor of botany, a chair which he held until 1929. Oliver's earliest papers were mostly of a physiological character and mention should be made of his pioneer investigations of the effect of fog on vegetation at the time when 'London particulars' could turn daylight into darkness ('Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society', 1891). In 1894-5, with the help of others, he translated the 'Pflanzenleben' of Kerner von Marilaun, under the title of 'The Natural History of Plants', which was a great success financially and further stimulated the ecological bias that had been aroused in Oliver by his contacts at Bonn. In 1896 Oliver married Mildred Alice (died 1932), daughter of Charles Robert Thompson, surgeon, of Westerham, whom he encountered when climbing in the Alps. They had one daughter and two sons, both of whom attained distinction in the navy. The elder son was Sir Geoffrey Nigel Oliver. 
In 1892 Oliver became associated with the newly appointed honorary keeper of the Jodrell Laboratory, D. H. Scott. Oliver induced Scott to give the famous lectures on fossil plants at University College in 1896. Soon afterwards Oliver began his researches, which might best be described as meticulous palaeobotanical detection, on fossil seeds. They led to the recognition of 'Lagenostoma lomaxi' as the seed of a woody, fern-like plant, the well-known fossil, 'Lyginopteris oldhamia' ('Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', 1905). Oliver thus established the existence of a group, the Pteridosperms, with fern-like habits but bearing seeds, as an important feature of the Coal-Measure vegetation. Apart from this, his chief contributions to the subject were a detailed account of a primitive type ('Physostoma elegans') of 'Stephanospermum' and, with E. J. Salisbury, an account of the seeds of the genus 'Conostoma' ('Annals of Botany', 1911). For his contributions to palaeobotany Oliver was elected FRS in 1905. 
From 1904 to 1908 Oliver organized September visits to the Brittany coast to study salt-marsh vegetation, and after 1910 he annually took his honours students for a fortnight to Blakeney Point, Norfolk, to study plant life in relation to habitat conditions and raised the funds to erect the field laboratory there. In his later years Oliver turned his attention increasingly towards the dynamic aspects of ecology, studying in particular the physiography of shingle beaches and salt marsh development in relation to their vegetation. As an outcome he became interested in the value of cord grass ('Spartina townsendii') as a reclaimer of mud flats and subsequently in collaboration with a marine engineer, A. E. Carey, published a book on 'Tidal Lands' (1918) which emphasized the role that plants could play in coastal conservation. 
From 1929 until 1935 Oliver was professor at Cairo University. In the latter year he went to live on the edge of the desert and studied the changing aspects of its vegetation. He returned finally to England in 1950. Robust physically, with a strikingly well-cut physiognomy, Oliver had only one serious illness. He was fundamentally shy and reserved, with a marked capacity for silence, but he evoked the affection of his close associates. His sense of humour was reflected in his 'Who's Who' entry, where he listed his recreations as 'once mountaineering, now washing up'. He died at his home, Ballards Barn, Limpsfield, Surrey, on 14 September 1951. 


@@@@@


doc= 35305


Oliver, Frederick Scott (1864-1934), draper and polemicist, was born on 20 February 1864 in Edinburgh, elder son of John Scott Oliver, merchant, and Catherine (died 1869), daughter of Duncan McLaren. Nephew of John McLaren, Lord McLaren, and Charles McLaren, first Baron Aberconway, he was educated in Edinburgh at George Watson's College, before going on first to Edinburgh University and then to Trinity College, Cambridge. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1889, but found that on a barrister's earnings he could not afford to marry, as he wished, Lord McLaren's daughter Katherine Augusta. 
Oliver therefore accepted an offer from his Cambridge contemporary Ernest Debenham, and in 1892 entered the firm of Debenham and Freebody, drapers with a shop in Marylebone, and also wholesalers, manufacturers, and shippers. He trained for business by spending a year with a firm of chartered accountants, and having equipped himself on the financial side, entered the shop, and worked in each of the departments before taking on its general management. In 1893 he was able to marry his cousin, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. He was a superb organizer and delegator whose orderly intelligence was never overstretched by Debenhams's highly ramified retail, wholesale, agency, and commission business. He and Ernest Debenham were successful modernizers who became joint managing directors when the firm was reconstructed as Debenhams Ltd in 1905. The store was rebuilt in 1906-7, and in 1908 the company's capital was increased to $1 million. The profit earned in 1910 alone exceeded $100,000, and by 1914 both partners were rich men. 
After the war Oliver and Debenham launched a policy of expansion. In 1919 Debenhams merged with Marshall and Snelgrove, Oxford Street drapers, and the firm also bought the Knightsbridge department store Harvey Nichols for $217,040. Oliver retired as managing director in 1920 and as deputy chairman in 1926. He was also a member of the committee of the Hudson's Bay Company (1917-25). 
Reared in a radical household, Oliver espoused the policies of Joseph Chamberlain, and became a brilliant, provocative correspondent of imperial-minded politicians, editors, and officials. He delighted in close, compact argument, and after the publication in 1904 (under the pseudonym of John Draper) of 'The Statesman and the Bishop', he was regarded as the ablest pamphleteer in Britain. His first book, 'Alexander Hamilton' (1906), had an influence comparable to Burke's 'Thoughts on the Present Discontents' or Disraeli's 'Lord George Bentinck'. It described the advent of organic unity into the newly fledged United States, and presented a model for British imperial federation. Oliver was a founder of the Compatriots' Club in 1904, and after 1909 was an active member of the Round Table movement. During the constitutional crisis in 1910 he wrote eight letters to 'The Times', printed under the alias Pacificus, successfully calling for an inter-party conference to break the deadlock and, less successfully, for a federalist convention. He published three cognate books between 1913 and 1917. 
An ally of Lord Milner, Oliver disdained what he considered to be the drowsy comforts and factious corruption of parliamentary democracy; he refused to seek a candidature. Though as a great-nephew of John Bright he had been forbidden as a child to play with toy soldiers, he became a fierce supporter of Field Marshal Roberts in his campaign for compulsory military service. He extolled Roberts as a man of plain, unerring instincts; for Oliver hated what he described as the gibbering pedantic subtleties of intellectuals or the grovelling of peacemakers. ''Nothing' will save us except the sight of red blood running pretty freely; but whether British 'and' German blood, or only British, I don't know -- nor do I think it much matters', he wrote to Milner. 'Blood is the necessity.' (letter of 31 March 1911, Bodl. Oxf., MS Milner 13). He thought British public life mired in cowardice and indolence, and greeted the declaration of war in 1914 with relief. The excuse for these ebullitions must be that Oliver contracted tuberculosis around 1906; ill health made him excitable and induced an extravagant admiration of manly fortitude. 'He was very, very clever and very, very superior, and very spoilt -- and he was a dilettante in finance' (Crow, 76-7) according to George Macaulay Booth who tried to recruit him in 1914 to an official committee on wartime supplies. Oliver declined Booth's approach, and instead wrote 'The Ordeal of Battle' (1915), a critical examination of the origin and conduct of the war comparable to Swift's 'Conduct of the Allies'. He treated war as an eternal human necessity, and contended that under modern conditions the whole nation rather than the armed forces must be conscripted. 
Oliver described his choices in 1913 as 'to be a third-rate sermonising litterateur; an officious, mischievous and ignorant puller of wires; or a moderately efficient journalist' (letter to Lord Milner, 1 March 1913, Bodl. Oxf., MS Milner 13). He resembled a seer -- imaginative, intuitive, transfiguring facts into visions -- and was by turns satirical, farcical, vehement, seductive, and debonair. G. M. Trevelyan wrote of his 'matchless conversation' that 'its intellectual power was tempered with a quaint, sweet humour, testifying to the breadth and kindliness that underlay his revolt against sentiment' ('The Times', 6 June 1934). He also had a roving eye for pretty women. 
From 1905 until 1928 Oliver owned Checkendon Court in the Chiltern hills, but latterly settled on estates which he had bought in 1916 in the Cheviots. His reflections on statecraft in 'The Endless Adventure', a three-volume study of the parliamentary system in the age of Walpole (1930-35), influenced Conservative leaders of the period, particularly Stanley Baldwin. A selection of his wartime letters was posthumously published as 'The Anvil of War' (1936). Oliver died on 3 June 1934 at Edgerston, Jedburgh, Roxburghshire, and was buried at Edgerston churchyard on 6 June. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 35306


Oliver, Sir Henry Francis (1865-1965), naval officer, born in Lochside, near Kelso, on 22 January 1865, was the fifth child in a family of seven sons and three daughters of Robert Oliver and his wife, Margaret Strickland. To his father, who came from sound yeoman stock and farmed 2000 acres of good border land, and to his talented mother, he owed a strong constitution and a vigorous approach to life. 
Entering the 'Britannia' in 1878 Oliver joined a navy in which sail, still dying hard, developed fine seamen. More than once his quick reactions averted disaster. On promotion to lieutenant in 1888 he volunteered for surveying. This service offered better pay and unusual activities abroad, but slender prospects, and in 1894 he returned to general service and qualified as a navigator. 
After varied service in cruisers Oliver was promoted to commander in 1899. As navigating commander of the 'Majestic', wearing the flag of Vice-Admiral A. K. Wilson, he became widely known when they took the squadron at high speed from Northern Ireland to the Isles of Scilly in thick fog -- a severe test of skill and nerve with the navigational aids then available. He was promoted to captain in June 1903, unusually early for a navigator. 
Selected by Sir John Fisher, second sea lord, to improve the training and status of navigation specialists, Oliver established a school first in the 'Mercury', an old cruiser, and then in the old Royal Naval College in Portsmouth Dockyard, with the torpedo gunboat 'Dryad' as name ship and floating tender. In 1905 he was appointed MVO, and in 1907, in the new armoured cruiser 'Achilles', led the navy in gunnery skill. Fisher, now first sea lord, summoned him to become his naval assistant, a strenuous post which he retained when Wilson succeeded Fisher in 1910. Returning to sea, Oliver again made gunnery history in the new battleship 'Thunderer' in 1912. 
Appointed director of naval intelligence and soon promoted to rear-admiral in 1913, Oliver faced increasing responsibilities as war approached. On the outbreak of war, he established wireless interception stations, staffed to decipher enemy messages. In September he preceded Winston Churchill to Antwerp to prevent the advancing enemy from making use of German ships moored there. Working long hours with a small Belgian staff he personally disabled the engines of thirty-eight ships with explosive charges. 
He was Churchill's naval secretary for a short while, but on Fisher's return as first sea lord in November Oliver became chief of Admiralty war staff with the acting rank of vice-admiral. In this capacity he favoured the Dardanelles operations, introduced taut-wire measuring gear which greatly improved mine-laying accuracy, and was a general source of sound advice. In June 1916 he was prompted KCB, having been appointed CB in 1913. In January 1917 Sir John Jellicoe assumed the dual role of first sea lord and chief of naval staff and Oliver became deputy chief of naval staff, with board status. 
Like many of his senior contemporaries Oliver was temperamentally unable to delegate responsibility, even in detail -- a major difficulty in creating an effective naval staff -- and his 'extraordinary power of continuous mental toil', remarked on by Churchill, was now becoming strained. He was relieved in January 1918, whereupon he was appointed KCMG. In March he became rear-admiral commanding the 1st battle-cruiser squadron, Grand Fleet, in the 'Repulse', and saw the German fleet surrender off the Firth of Forth in November. When the Grand Fleet dispersed in 1919 he became commander-in-chief, Home Fleet, as a vice-admiral in the 'King George V'. The Reserve Fleet was later merged with his force. 
In 1920 Oliver received an honorary LLD (Edinburgh) and became second sea lord and chief of naval personnel, which gave him the painful task of reducing the navy list to peacetime needs. The drastic measures taken in 1922 were generally considered as fair and liberal as might be. Promoted to admiral in 1923, in 1924 he declined the Portsmouth command in favour of the Atlantic Fleet, which he commanded with customary efficiency until 1927. He was promoted to admiral of the fleet and to the GCB in 1928 and retired in 1933. He was restored to the active list in 1940 but was denied wartime employment. 
Oliver had married in June 1914 Beryl Carnegy White (1882-1972) ['see 'Oliver, Dame Beryl], the only daughter of Francis Edward Joseph Carnegy, of Lour in Forfarshire. In the Second World War, Dame Beryl's Red Cross work kept the Olivers much in London, but the admiral regularly visited Scotland for shooting and fishing, his main recreations, together with carpentry. Among his other interests, the foremost was the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, of which he became deputy chairman. The verbal economy which gave him the nickname Dummy (derived presumably from 'Dumby') Oliver did not conceal his solid worth from those who served him. His integrity, justice, foresight, judgement, and seamanship were evident throughout his career. He died at his home, 20 South Eaton Place, London, on 15 October 1965. 
A portrait painted by J. Blair Leighton, presented by the officers of the Navigation School to mark his seventieth birthday, was hung in a later 'Dryad', home of the School of Maritime Operations, the successor to Oliver's school. 
P. W. Brock', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 35307


Oliver, Samuel Pasfield (1838-1907), geographer and antiquary, born at the rectory, Bovinger, Ongar, on 30 October 1838, was the eldest and only surviving son of William Macjanley Oliver, rector of Bovinger, and his wife, Jane Weldon. He entered Eton College in 1853, and after passing through the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he received a commission in the Royal Artillery on 1 April 1859. In 1860 he went out to China, where he served at Canton (Guangzhou) before visiting Peking (Beijing) and touring Japan. In the following year he was transferred to Mauritius, and went thence to Madagascar, where he spent some months exploring. The history and ethnology of the island interested him, and he made a close study of them. On his return to Mauritius he studied the flora and fauna of the Mascarene Islands. Oliver married on 10 September 1863 at Port Louis, Mauritius, Clara Georgina Dick (1842-1899), second daughter of the Hon. Frederic Mylius Dick, councillor of Mauritius, with whom he had five sons and four daughters, including the purity activist and Southcottian, Ellen Frederica Oliver ['see under 'Barltrop, Mabel]. In 1864 the volcanic eruption on the island of Reunion gave him the opportunity of recording some interesting geological phenomena. 
Oliver returned to England with his battery in 1865; but his love of adventure led him in 1867 to join Captain Pym's expedition to Central America. A route was cut and levelled across Nicaragua from Monkey Point to Port Realejo; and at a meeting of the British Association at Dundee on 5 September 1867 Oliver argued that this route might be more practicable than the one projected by M. Ferdinand de Lesseps for the Panama Canal. His adventures in Nicaragua were included in his reminiscences, entitled 'On and Off Duty' (1881). 
Oliver now turned to archaeology. From Guernsey, where he was appointed adjutant in 1868, he visited Brittany, and drew up a valuable report on the prehistoric remains at Carnac and other sites ('Proceedings of the Ethnological Society', 1871). His visits in 1872 to archaeological sites in Asia Minor, Greece, and Sardinia were recorded in 'Nuragghi Sardi, and other Non-Historic Stone Structures of the Mediterranean' (1875). Meanwhile Oliver, who had been promoted captain in 1871, was appointed superintendent of fortifications on the Cornish coast in 1873, and there he wrote the history of two castles, 'Pendennis and St Mawes' (1875). 
After serving on the staff of the intelligence branch of the quartermaster-general's department Oliver was sent to St Helena on garrison duty. There he made a valuable collection of ferns, which he presented to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Impatience of professional routine induced him to resign his commission in 1878. For a time he acted as special artist and correspondent of the 'Illustrated London News' in Cyprus and Syria, but his health had been seriously affected by his travels in malarial countries, and he soon settled down to write, first at Gosport and later at Worthing. He was elected FRGS in 1866, became fellow of the Ethnological Society in 1869, and FSA in 1874. He died at his home, Bovinger, Byron Road, Worthing, on 31 July 1907, and was buried at Findon. 
Oliver's sympathetic volumes about Madagascar long remained important English sources on the subject. His works included 'Madagascar and the Malagasy' (1866); an ethnological study in French, 'Les Hovas et les autres tribus caracteristiques de Madagascar' (1869); 'The True Story of the French Dispute in Madagascar' (1885), in which he criticized the treatment of the Malagasy by French colonial officials; and 'Madagascar' (2 vols., 1886). 
Oliver also edited accounts of the travels of Robert Drury (1890), Francois Leguat (1891), the Count de Benyowsky (1893), and the Sieur Dubois (1897). In addition he helped to prepare 'The Life of Sir Charles MacGregor', published by MacGregor's widow in 1888, and from notes and documents collected by MacGregor he compiled the abridged official account of 'The Second Afghan War, 1878-80' (1908). His 'Life of Philibert Commerson', published posthumously (1909), was edited by G. F. Scott Elliot and prefaced with a memoir of Oliver. To the 'Dictionary of National Biography' Oliver contributed articles on Francois Leguat and Sir Charles MacGregor. Oliver's interests were too varied for him to achieve eminence in any one, but his many works were carefully compiled, often from personal experience, and were valued in his lifetime and beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 35308


Oliver, Sir Thomas (1853-1942), physician and authority on industrial hygiene, was born at St Quivox, Ayrshire, on 2 March 1853, the second of the nine children of James Oliver (1824?-1904), grocer, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Thomas McMurtrie. He was educated at Ayr Academy and at Glasgow University, where he graduated MB, CM, with commendation (1874), and MD with honours (1880). He visited Paris for postgraduate study and worked under Jean Martin Charcot, whose lectures on disseminated sclerosis he edited and translated for publication in the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' in 1876. He acted for a short period as assistant pathologist at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, but in 1875 he set up in practice at Preston, Lancashire. Here he remained until 1879 when he moved to Newcastle upon Tyne. He was elected physician to the Royal Victoria Infirmary and to the Princess Mary Maternity Hospital. In 1880 he was appointed lecturer in physiology in the medical school at Newcastle, which was attached to the University of Durham. He was promoted to a chair in 1889, which he held until 1911 when he became professor of medicine. Oliver married first, in November 1881, Edith Rosina (1852-1888), daughter of William Jenkins, of Consett Hall, co. Durham; and second, in 1893, Emily Octavia (1853/4-1912), daughter of John Anthony Woods, of Benton Hall, Newcastle upon Tyne. There were three daughters and a son from the first marriage and a daughter and a son from the second marriage. 
At Newcastle, Oliver came into practical contact with industrial disease and developed an abiding interest in this area of medicine. He was elected FRCP in 1890 and his Goulstonian lectures in the following year were devoted to the subject of lead poisoning. He soon became closely involved in the investigation, exposure, and regulation not only of occupational lead poisoning, but also of a variety of health hazards in the so-called dangerous trades. Oliver served on a number of official inquiries, the first of which was the departmental committee on white lead in 1893, which successfully recommended restrictions on female employment. In 1898 he was appointed with T. E. Thorpe to inquire into the extensive poisoning from the glazes used in various industries in the Potteries, an inquiry which necessitated visits to similar industrial bases in France and Germany. In spite of much opposition from pottery manufacturers, their recommendations helped to bring about reforms which materially reduced the danger to operatives. Also in 1898 Oliver represented the Home Office at the Madrid International Congress on Hygiene. He was the medical expert during the Home Office inquiry on the use of phosphorus in the manufacture of lucifer matches in 1898-9, and a member of the important dangerous trades committee from 1896 to 1899. The extent of Oliver's participation in official inquiries was such that he deserves to be seen as a pioneer figure in the creation of a healthier workplace. 
Oliver's most important publications were 'Lead Poisoning in its Acute and Chronic Forms' (Goulstonian lectures, 1891); a translation of work by Charles Jacques Bouchard, 'Lectures on Auto-Intoxication in Disease' (1894); 'Dangerous Trades', a valuable survey which he edited in 1902; 'Diseases of Occupation from the Legislative, Social, and Medical Points of View' (1908); 'Occupations from the Social, Hygienic and Medical Points of View' (1916); 'The Health of the Workers' (1925); and 'The Health of the Child of School Age', which he edited in 1927. He also published extensively in the medical press. 
Oliver's work for the improvement of industrial conditions took him to the United States, where he received the freedom of the city of Boston (1923); to France, where he was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur (1929) and was given the gold medal of the Assistance Publique (1924); and to Belgium, where he was given a medal of honour by the University of Brussels (1920). In 1921 he was a delegate of the Australian commonwealth to the International Labour Conference at Geneva. In 1931 at Geneva he was honorary president of the International Congress of Accidents and Industrial Diseases. He was president of the Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene from 1937 to 1942. Oliver, who was knighted in 1908, was a JP for Newcastle upon Tyne and a deputy lieutenant for Northumberland. He was awarded the honorary degrees of LLD, Glasgow (1903), DSc, Sheffield (1908), and DCL, Durham (1921). During the First World War he helped to raise the Tyneside Scottish brigade of which he became honorary colonel. 
Oliver retired from the chair of medicine in 1927, but he continued as president of the Durham College of Medicine (1926-34). He was vice-chancellor of the University of Durham from 1928 to 1930. At the age of eighty-six he had a leg amputated. Although he made a good recovery, with the help of an artificial limb, he spent much of his final years in a wheelchair. Oliver was a serious and dignified man who cut an imposing figure. His main leisure activities were fishing and shooting. He was chairman of the Tyneside Geographical Society for over thirty years and for many years he was also president of the Tyneside Sunday Lecture Society. He died at his home at 7 Ellison Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 15 May 1942, and was buried on 19 May at Jesmond old cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 35309


Olivier, Sydney Haldane, Baron Olivier (1859-1943), civil servant, politician, and author, was born at Colchester on 16 April 1859, the second son and the sixth of the ten children of Henry Arnold Olivier (died 1912), then curate of All Saints, Colchester, and his wife, Anne Elizabeth Hardcastle (died 1912), the daughter of Joseph Arnould MD, of Whitecross, Wallingford, Berkshire, and the sister of Sir Joseph Arnould. He was descended from a family of French Huguenots. One of his younger brothers was the painter Herbert Arnould Olivier; another brother, the Revd Gerard Kerr Olivier, was the father of the actor Laurence Olivier. 
Olivier was educated at Tonbridge School and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner and was awarded a second class in 'literae humaniores' in 1881. There he became a close friend of Graham Wallas. With another undergraduate friend, Hubert Campion, he wrote a volume of light verse, 'Poems and Parodies', published in 1880. After leaving Oxford he read for the civil service competitive examination, and in 1882, having headed the list of successful competitors, he entered the Colonial Office. On 21 May 1885 he married Margaret ('c'.1862-1953), the eldest daughter of Homersham Cox, a county court judge, and the sister of Harold Cox; they had four daughters. 
In London Olivier became seriously interested in politics and reform, and in 1885 he joined the Fabian Society, serving as its honorary secretary from 1886 to 1889. Sidney Webb, then a colleague in the Colonial Office, George Bernard Shaw, and Graham Wallas joined about the same time, and it was mainly under the influence of the four friends that the Fabians made their distinctive contribution to the development of modern socialism. In 'Fabian Essays in Socialism' (1889), perhaps the most important of the society's publications, Olivier wrote on the moral basis of socialism. He came to socialism through Auguste Comte, and remained a socialist during the rest of his life. 
Olivier was colonial secretary of British Honduras in 1890-91, auditor-general of the Leeward Islands in 1895-6, and secretary to the royal commission on the West Indies in 1896-7. In 1898 he was appointed CMG and spent five months in Washington, DC, assisting on behalf of the West Indian colonies in reciprocity negotiations with the United States. From 1900 to 1904 he was colonial secretary of Jamaica, on three occasions acting as governor. In 1907 he was appointed captain-general and governor-in-chief of Jamaica and advanced to KCMG. His most urgent task was to repair the havoc caused by earthquake and fire a few months earlier, the work including the reconstruction of Kingston on a new plan, in which he obtained the services of his brother-in-law Sir Charles Nicholson. He was a highly popular governor. His six years of office formed a memorable period of development in the island's history, one of his many reforms being the introduction of Jamaica's first comprehensive sanitary code. 
Olivier returned to England in 1913 as permanent secretary to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries and entered the Treasury in 1917 as assistant comptroller and auditor of the exchequer; he was appointed CB the same year. He retired from the civil service in 1920. In 1924 he joined Ramsay MacDonald's first Labour government as secretary of state for India, was sworn of the privy council, and created Baron Olivier of Ramsden. Ten months later his tenure of office was ended by the resignation of the government, the prime minister having, so Olivier told him, needlessly thrown in the sponge. 
Olivier proved to be an uncomfortable and unsatisfactory cabinet minister. He was an advocate of peasant self-sufficiency, and his open criticism of Labour's colonial policies, coupled with his inability to defend the party line, precluded his participation in the 1929 Labour government. However, MacDonald's second administration did find ways to employ his expertise in colonial economic affairs, and in 1929-30, as chairman of the West Indian sugar commission, he paid his last official visit to Jamaica. 
Olivier was a member of a remarkable generation who came of age in the 1880s imbued with a spirit of humane reform. Often they were, as was Olivier himself, the children of clergymen. In his case the spirit manifested itself in imperial reform, and he displayed a keen insight in issues of race and ethnicity within the empire. His deep interest in these problems found expression chiefly in two books of international repute: 'The Anatomy of African Misery' (1927) and 'White Capital and Coloured Labour' (2nd edn 1929); he discussed such questions also in contributions to periodicals and in two later books: 'The Myth of Governor Eyre' (1933) and 'Jamaica: the Blessed Island' (1936). His studies led him to reject what he called 'the short-sighted theory that the dividing habits of race are permanently stronger than the unifying power of humanity'. 
Tall and handsome, Olivier was a striking figure in any assembly, 'looking', wrote Shaw, 'like a Spanish grandee in any sort of clothes, however unconventional'. He was a man of great energy and commanding intellect, and he could, and did, 'labour terribly', demanding a high standard of performance from himself and those who worked with him. He had a remarkable literary talent and was a frequent contributor to periodical literature. His philosophical articles and his short story, 'The Empire Builder', won the admiration of William James, whose guest he was on one of his visits to America. His prose style was distinguished and individual, and he had a felicitous turn for light verse. His writings include three plays, one of which, 'Mrs Maxwell's Marriage', was performed by the Stage Society in January 1900. In 1911 the honorary degree of LLD was conferred upon him by the University of Edinburgh. Baron Olivier died at his home, Wychwood, Selsey Avenue, Bognor Regis, on 15 February 1943, when his peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 35310


Olpherts, Sir William (1822-1902), army officer, was born on 8 March 1822 at Dartry, near Armagh, the third son of William Olpherts (died 1876) of Dartry House, Blackwatertown, co. Armagh, and his wife, Rosanna, daughter of Dr Macartney. He was educated at Gracehill School and Dungannon Royal School, and then at Addiscombe College, from which he passed out as a cadet in 1839. He joined the headquarters of the Bengal artillery at Dum-Dum on 24 December 1839. Following the outbreak of disturbances in the province of Tenasserim in Burma, he was sent with four guns to Moulmein in October 1841. Nine months later he returned and immediately went on field service to subdue an insurrection that had broken out near Saugor. For his conduct during an engagement at Jhirna Ghat on 12 November 1842 he was mentioned in the dispatch written by the officer commanding the artillery. Olpherts qualified as an interpreter in Indian languages, and in April 1843 was given command of the 16th Bengal light field battery stationed at Nowgong in Bundelkhand. Later that year he joined General Sir Hugh Gough's expedition against Gwalior in north central India. His battery formed part of the wing of the army commanded by General Gray; it was heavily engaged in the fighting at Punniar on 29 December 1843, and Olpherts was mentioned in dispatches. 
For his services in the Gwalior campaign Olpherts received the bronze decoration, and was selected by Lord Ellenborough, the governor-general, to raise and command a battery of horse artillery for the Bundelkhand Legion. He was at once detached with the newly raised battery to form part of Sir Charles Napier's army in Sind, which he joined after an arduous march of 1260 miles across India. He then participated in several engagements with the warlike tribes inhabiting the hills bordering Sind. In 1846 he took part in the capture of the hill fort at Kot Kangra during the First Anglo-Sikh War, attracting the attention of Sir Henry Lawrence, and was later appointed to raise a battery of artillery from the men of the disbanded Sikh army. He then commanded a battery of artillery in the service of the nizam of Hyderabad in the Deccan, but was soon recalled in February 1845 to take the lucrative post of commandant of artillery with the Gwalior contingent. In 1851 he joined the Peshawar garrison, under the command of Sir Colin Campbell, and participated in an expedition against the trans-border Pathan tribes, for which he was later awarded the frontier medal. Olpherts returned to England on furlough in May 1852 and was appointed an orderly officer at Addiscombe College. 
Following the outbreak of the Crimean War, Olpherts volunteered in January 1855 to fight against the Russians and was selected to join Sir William Fenwick Williams at Kars. He visited the Crimea 'en route' for Kars, and then travelled via the Black Sea and the Zigana Mountains to join his new command. He escaped capture at Kars as he was placed in command of a force of 7000 Turkish troops detached to guard against a possible Russian advance from Erivan by the Araxes River. He was recalled to the Crimea and took command of a brigade of Bashi-Bazoukhs serving in the Turkish contingent. When hostilities ended in 1856 he returned to India and took command of a horse artillery battery at Benares. 
Olpherts served throughout the suppression of the Indian mutiny (1857-9) and was heavily involved in the fighting in northern India. On 4 June 1857 his battery, acting under the orders of General James Neill, opened fire on the 37th native infantry regiment which mutinied while being disarmed at Benares. Olpherts's battery was charged on three occasions during the confused fighting which ended with the complete rout of the sepoys. He then accompanied Sir Henry Havelock's column during the advance on Cawnpore and in the relief of the city of Lucknow, when he greatly distinguished himself in action. On 25 September he fought on horseback with the 90th regiment when it entered the city of Lucknow during a difficult engagement in which two guns were captured from the enemy. Despite intense musketry fire, Olpherts displayed great gallantry when he succeeded in bringing up horses and limbers to carry off the captured ordnance. Two days later he once again demonstrated his considerable personal bravery when, along with Colonel Robert Napier, he led a small party which rescued the wounded with the embattled rearguard and brought several guns into the security of the residency. Sir James Outram, commanding the residency at Lucknow, wrote: 'My dear Heroic Olpherts, bravery is a poor and insufficient epithet to apply to a valour such as yours'. Until Sir Colin Campbell relieved the defenders on 21 November 1857 Olpherts acted as brigadier of artillery, and following the evacuation of the residency shared, under Outram, in the defence of the advance position at the Alambagh. In March 1858 he took part in the siege and capture of Lucknow by Campbell, and was once again mentioned in dispatches for conspicuous bravery. Following the end of the campaign he received the brevets of major and lieutenant-colonel, was awarded the Victoria Cross for his distinguished conduct on 25 September 1857, and was made a CB. His dash and valour in action had also earned him the sobriquet of Hell-Fire Jack from the men under his command. 
Olpherts volunteered to serve under Brigadier Sir Neville Chamberlain during the 1859-60 punitive expedition against the Wazirs on the north-west frontier, completing twenty years of continuous active service. He married Alice Maria, eldest daughter of Major-General George Cautley of the 5th Bengal European light cavalry, on 3 June 1861; they had one son, William Cautley, and three daughters; Lady Olpherts survived her husband. Between 1861 and 1868 he commanded the artillery at Peshawar and Rawalpindi, and then returned home on furlough; while there he was presented with a sword of honour by the city and county of Armagh. In 1872 he returned to India and commanded successively the Gwalior, Ambala, and Lucknow brigades. He finally left the subcontinent in 1875, on attaining the rank of major-general. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 October 1877, general on 31 March 1883, and in 1888 became colonel commandant of the Royal Artillery. He was made KCB in 1886 and GCB in 1900. Olpherts died at his residence, Wood House, Hamlet Road, Upper Norwood, London, on 30 April 1902, and was buried with full military honours at Richmond cemetery, Surrey. 


